Church History OF THE GOVERNMENT OF BISHOPS AND THEIR COUNCILS ABBREVIATED.

Including the chief part of the Government of Christian Princes and POPES, and
a true account of the most troubling Controversies and Heresies till the
REFORMATION.

Written for the use especially of them: I. Who are ignorant or misinformed of
the state of the Ancient Churches. II. Who cannot read many and great Volumes.
III. Who think that the Universal Church must have one Visible Sovereign,
Personal or Collective, Pope or General Councils. IV Who would know whether
Patriarchs, Diocesans, and their Councils, have been, or must be the cure of
Heresies and Schisms. V. Who would know the truth about the great Heresies
which have divided the Christian World, especially the Donatists, Novatians,
Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites, etc.


By RICHARD BAXTER, a Hater of false History.

LONDON: Printed by B. Griffin, for Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in
Ludgate Street. MDCLXXX.

THE PREFACE.
THE great usefulness of History needs not many words to prove it, seeing
natural inclination it self is so much for it, and reason and experience tell
men, that they cannot spare it, as to Natural, Civil, or Religious use. God
himself has highly commended it to us, by writing the Sacred Scriptures so
much Historically; yea and making some of it part of the necessary Articles of
our Creed. Children that yet understand not the Doctrinal part of the Bible, do
quickly take delight in the Historical part; which prepares them for the rest.
Ignorant and ungodly persons that have no true sense of Sacred Doctrine, can
yet understand and with less aversness and weariness read the history.
Melancholy and sad persons who can hardly bear long Doctrinal studies, are
often eased and recreated with useful History.

Man is a part of the Universe, and every man is a part of the world of
mankind, and therefore thinks the case of the whole to be much of his
concern. And were not narrow selfishnes much of our Pravity, we should take
the universal and public good, and Gods Love to it and Pleasedness and Glory
in it, to be much more our end, and the object of our desire and delight, than
any personal felicity of our own; It is a Monster of inhumanity in the Doctrine
of the Sadducees, Spinosa, Hobbes, and their brutish followers, that they set
up Individual self interest as a man's chiefest end and object of rational Love
and desire; and own no Good, but that which Relatively is Good to me, that is,
either my personal life and pleasure as the end, or other things as a means
thereto: Though Grace only savingly cure this base inhumane malady, yet common
reason bears witness against it, and only sense, and reason captivated by
sense do patronize it. Put not the question to a reasonable man, though wicked,
what he can do or does: But what in reason he should do, and he cannot deny but
that he should think of a more excellent person at the Indies, that never will
do anything for him, as more amiable than himself, much more many thousands
such; And as Goodness and Amiableness are all one, so that which is best,
should be loved best: And he that would not die to save his Country is worse
than sober Heathens were. And he that would not rather be annihilated than all
or half the world should be annihilated, is so basely selfish, that I should
sooner believe that analogical Reason rules some bruites, than that true
Reason determines this man's choice.

Spinosa takes the Knowledge of our Union with Universal nature (which he
calls God) to be man's perfection and his chief good, in comparison of which
sensual Pleasure, Riches and Honor are but troubles further then they are a
means hereto: And if he had better known God, as the Creator and Governor and
end of the material Universe which he took to be God, and had joined [holy
Uniteing Joyful Love to the Universe, and specially to the Heavenly Society,
and above them all to God himself] unto this Knowledge, and extended it to the
perpetuity of an Immortal state, he had been happily in the right, which
missing, he became a pernicious seducer of himself and others.

But thus nature and Grace do loudly tell us, that each part should be greatly
concerned for the whole, and therefore every one should desire to know as much
of the whole, as he is capable, and as tends to his duty and delight. And how
small a parcel of Time, or Men, or Actions are present or in our days? How
little knows he that knows no more than he has lived to see? What Religion
can he have who knows not the History of Creation, Redemption or the giving
of the Holy Ghost, or the planting and propagating the Church, and also what
will be when this life is ended?

But it is not all History that is needful or useful to us: There are many
things done which we are not concerned to be acquainted with. But the History
of the Church, of the propagation of the Christian faith, and what the Doctrine
was that was then received, and how it was practiced, promoted and defended,
and how it was corrupted invaded and persecuted, is of so great use to
posterity, that next to the Scripture and the illumination of Gods Spirit, I
remember nothing more needful to be known.

When Philip Nerius set up his Oratorian exercises at Rome, as to win the
people, they found it necessary to use large affectionate extemporate prayers
and expositions and Serm^^s, so the next thing found necessary was, to bestow
constantly one exercise in opening Church History to the people. And this did
both entice their attentions by delight, and also by fitting reports more to
the Papal interest than to the truth, did greatly bewitch them into a confident
belief, that the Papal sect was all the true Church, and all other Christians
were but sectaries and branches broken off and withered, and therefore to be
burned here and hereafter (abusing Joh. 15. 5. etc.)

And I have often thought that the right use of such an Historical exercise, in
an ordinary congregation would be of great use to the ignorant vulgar and
unlearned zealous sort of Christians: For I find that for want of the knowledge
of Church History, and how things have gone before us in all former times, many
errors and sins are kept up that else would more easily be forsaken. To
instance in some few.

I. As it was the craft of Baronius (who performed that exercise in Nerius his
Conventicles at Rome,) to write afterward his Church History in Latin so
voluminously, that few but the Clergy biased by interest would read it, and
so the Clergy might be the credited reporters of all to the vulgar; so to this
day, the Papist-Priests contrive to be the Masters and reporters of
Church History as well as of unwritten Tradition, and to keep the Laity so far
ignorant of it, that when they tell men confident stories for their advantage,
few or none may be able to contradict them, and so their report must pass as
undenyed truth. And thus false History is made the chief foundation of the
Roman Kingdom.

Thus they will face you down that you are ignorant or impudent, 1. If you
question whether Peter was a true Bishop at Rome, (yea or ever there, which
Nilus has showed to be somewhat uncertain) 2. Or that he settled the Roman
Bishop as his successor in a supremacy over all the Christian world, 3. Or
that the Popes Primacie was over all the Churches on earth, which indeed was
but (as Canterbury is in England,) in one Roman Empire only. 4. They will
persuade you that this Primacie was settled by Christ or his Apostles, which was
done only by Councils and Emperors of Rome, 5. They would make you believe
that this was from the Apostles days, which began long after, 6. They would
persuade you that all the Christian world submitted to it, even Abassia, and
all the extra-imperial Churches, which is no such matter, 7. Yea, that before
Luther none contradicted the Papal power and claim, but all the Christian
world were Papists. By many such lies they deceive thousands of the ignorant:
And when they challenge men to dispute, by word or writing, their last refuge
is to bring them into a wood of History, that there they may either win the
game or end the chase: And if a Minister of Christ be not armed here, to
confute their historical forgeries, they will take it for a victory and
triumph, which made me write my last book against Johnson (or Terret) to show
Historically the Antiquity of our Church, and the novelty of theirs (which I
could wish young Ministers unacquainted with Church History would peruse.)

But if our people were truly acquainted how things have gone in the Church
from the beginning, it would be one of the most effectual, preservatives
against Popery, when now the falsifications are become its strength. I have often
thought that it had been greater policy in the Papists, if they could, to have
burnt all Church History, but specially of the Councils, that the credit might
have depended on their bare word: For verily once reading of Crab, Binnius,
Surius, or Nicolinus would turn against them any stomach, that is not confirmed
in their own disease. But they have overdone Baronius, and now made so great
and costly a load of the Councils, as that the deficiency of money, time, wit
and patient industry, shall save the most, even of the Priesthood from the
understanding of the truth: And such Epitomes as Caranza's leave out most of
the culpable part: and yet even such they can hardly tolerate.

II. The more moderate French Papists who magnify Councils above Popes, would
make us believe, that though Popes are fallible and may miscarry, yet General
Councils, have been the universal Church-representative, which have a
Legislative and Judicial Universal power, and that our concord must be by
centring in their decrees; and all are Schismatics at least, that take not
their Faith and Religion upon their trust: But if men knew that there never was
a General Council of all the Christian Churches but only of the Empire, and how
woefully they have miscarried, it would do much to save them from all such
temptations.

III. The overvaluers of Church grandeur, and wealth, and maintainers of the
corrupt sort of Diocesane Prelacy, Patriarks, etc. write books and tell the
ignorant confident stories, how such a Prelacy has been in the Church ever
since the days of the Apostles, and that all the Churches on earth consented
to it: But if the people were acquainted with Church. History they would know,
that the primitive fixed Episcopacy was Parochial, or every Church associated
for personal present Communion had a Bishop, Presbytery and Deacons of their
own: (unfixed Itinerant General Pastors, indefinitely taking care of many
Churches): And that it was the Bishops striving who should be greatest, and
turning single Churches into an Association of many Churches, and to be but
Chapels or parts of the Diocesan Church (that their power and wealth might be
enlarged with their Territories) and the turning of Arbitrating Bishops into
the Common Indicatures, which must govern all Christians, and such like, which
poisoned the Church, and turned the species of particular Churches, Episcopacy,
Presbytery and Discipline, quite into another thing. And to speak freely, it
was the many blind volumes and confident clamours of some men, that rail at us,
as denying an Episcopacy, which the universal Church has always agreed in,
which drew me to write this abridgement of the Church History of Bishops,
Councils and Popes.

IV. And those that make the Ignorant believe that seditious disobedient
Presbyters have in all Ages been the dividers of the Church, and the Bishops
the means of Unity, concord and suppression of such Schismatics and Heretics,
could never thus deceive the people, were but so much Church History commonly
known, as I have here collected. Read Church History and believe that if you
can.

V. And many that take up any new opinion or dotage which is but newly broached
among them, would have been saved from it, if they ^a^ but known how that same
opinion or the like, was long ago taken up by Heretics, and exploded by the
faitbful Pastors and people of the Church.

VI. And the sectaries who rashly separate from some Churches, because of some
forms, opinions or ceremonies, which almost all Christians on earth have used,
in the former purer ages, and still use, would be more cautelous and fearful in
examining their grounds, and would hardly venture to separate from any Church
for that, which on the same reason would move them to separate from almost all
Christians in the whole world; if not Unchurch the Church of Christ: And
ancient errors and crimes would affright us from imitating them.

VII. And those that make new ambiguous words or unnecessary practices to
become necessary to Church Communion, and hereticate all that differ from them,
or persecute them at least, would be more frightened from such pernicious
courses, if they well knew what have been the effects of them heretofore.

VIII. And it is not unuseful to Princes and Magistrates to see what has
corrupted and disturbed the Churches in f^rmer times: and what cause they have
to keep the secular power from the Clergies hands, and to value those that for
knowledge and piety are meet for their proper guiding office, and use of the
Church Keys: but not to corrupt them by excess of worldly wealth and power, nor
to permit them by striving, who shall seem GREATEST, WISEST and BEST, to become
the incendiaries of the Church and world, and the persecutors of the best that
cannot serve their worldliness and pride.

The Reader must Note, 1. That though much of the History be taken from others,
the Councils are named and numbered according to Binnius and Crabbe: 2. And that
because so much evil is necessarily recited, I thought it needful in the
beginning and end to annex a defense of the Pastors and their office and work,
lest any should be tempted to think hardly of Religion and the Church for men's
abuses. 3. And if Micrelius, Gutlerbeth, Phili Pareus, Funcius, Carrion,
Melancthon, Buchotzer, Scultetus, Pezelius, Helvicus, or any other that I have
seen, had answered the ends which I here intend, I should have gladly saved my
self this labor and have referred the reader to them.

The Councils are now published voluminously, and many young students want
money and time to read them at large. To such this abridgement may not be
unuseful; especially to men that have mistaken the case of the great heresies
and hereticators, and would know what Prelacy and Councils have done to the
concord or discord of the Churches. The Description of the State of Alexandria
recited in the beginning as a Letter from a friend, was from Mr. Clerkson a
Learned and worthy Minister (though silenced) now in London.

The Lord pardon and heal our common faultiness, and give better Teachers to
his Churches when we are dead and gone, who will take warning by all our
errors and miscarriages, especially to escape a wordly spirit, pride,
Church-tyranny and schism, and serving the world, the flesh and the Devil, by
pretense of Authority from Christ. Amen.

March 31. 1680. London*
What History is Credible, and what not.
AS the Holy Ghost says, Believe not every spirit; I may say, Believe not all
Reports, or History. It was not only Ahabs Prophets, in whose mouths Satan was
a lying spirit: As lying and deceiving is his work in the world, for the
destroying of Holiness, and of Souls, even when he turns himself into an
Angel of Light; so is it the work of his Ministers, when they seem to be
Ministers of Righteousness; when it is often said (Be not deceived) and [Let no
man deceive you with vain words;] it is more necessary advise, and hardlier
followed, than most men understand. As Truth is Gods means to work the will to
holy love, and lead us in a holy life, so Lying is the Devils means to oppose
them: and of all Liars, none are more pernicious than lying Historians, and
lying Preachers. It is a sad perplexity to the world, that when men read and
hear, even the more confident and plausible Histories and Reports, they know
not whether they are true or false; and if they believe that to be true which
is not, the effect is worse than this perplexity. I will tell you what I take
to be credible, and what not.

I. It is presupposed that a man must believe his senses, if sound, about their
proper objects: Papists that tell us that all men's senses are deceived, when
they seem to perceive Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, do but tell us that no
man then is to be believed, and therefore not they themselves.

II. The History of the Gospel is certainly credible, because it was confirmed
by multitudes of uncontrouled Miracles wrought by Christ, and by his Apostles,
and multitudes of Christians; as the Doctrine it self bears the Image and
Superscription of God.

III. The Prophets that had Divine Inspiration and Vision, had that Evidence
which gave themselves a certainty, though not to others.

IV. When History delivers a matter of fact and sense, by the common consent
of all men that knew it, though of contrary minds, dispositions, and interests,
it gives us a certainty which may be called Natural; because Nature has
nothing in it that could cause such a Conspiracy in Lying: That it is so
credible as to be a Natural certainty, that there is such a place as Rome,
Paris, Jerusalem; that the Statutes of the Land are not Forgeries, while all
Contenders plead them against each other, and hold by them their Estates and
Lives: And so that there was such a Person as Jesus Christ, and that the
Scriptures were written by the Prophets and Apostles, etc.

V. When the History of any person and action is proved by continued or visible
effects: as that William of Normandy conquered England, while so many of the
effects of that Conquest in our Laws and Customs are still visible: And that
the Welsh were the Ancient Britains, driven by the Saxons into Wales, while
their Language, Habitation, etc. show it: And so that Christ instituted
Baptism, and Church Communion, and the Apostles separated the Lords Day for
holy worship, when the Christian World has used all these publicly in all
places ever since, and do (...) them: And so that Temples were built for holy
worship, and endowed, when we still see and possess them.

VI. That History is credible which consentingly speaks against the known
interest of the Author; for man's corrupt nature is apte^ to false boasting,
than to false Confessions of Sin; against a Confessor there needs no Witnesses:
And this is much of the credibility of the harsher part of the Church History
which I here recite: What I say of the miscarriages of Bishops and Councils, is
mostly in their own words, and what I say against Popes, is but the recital of
what is said by the greatest Defenders or Flatterers of Popes: I give you no
Reports against the pride, contentions and corruptions of Patriarchs and
Prelates, out of the supposed Heretics, or Protestants; I give you not a word
out of Lut^er (who de Conciliis) has very much; and especially speaks much
like as I here do of Cyril and Nestorius; nor out of Illyricus his Catalogus
Testium Veritatis, nor out of the Magdeburgenses, Osiander, Sleidan, Carrion,
Melancthon, Mornay's Mystery of Iniquity, no nor out of the Collections of
Goldastus, Marquardus, Freherus, Ruberus, Pistorius, etc. But the substance of
the common History is taken out of the commonly received Church-Historians
(Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomene, Cassiodorus, Theodorite, Ruffinus, Evagrius,
Nazianzen, Hierom, Victor, Ni^ephorus, Liberatus, Nicetas, and such others; and
the sum of the Councils and Popes is out of Baronius, Anastasius, but most out
of Binnius, and Platina, and Aeneas Sylvius (a Pope,) Petavius, and such other
as are the greatest Papal Zealots: When these speak for their Cause, I leave
you to just suspicion; but when they speak against it, by way of confession or
lamentation, they are not to be suspected.

VII. The next degree of credibility depends on the Veracity or credible
fitness of the Reporter; some men are much more credible than others: For
instance.

1. One that was upon the place, and saw what was done, or lived near, where he
had full information, is (caeteris paribus) more credible than one that
follows uncertain reports, or hearsay.

2. A wise man is much more credible than a proud self-conceited Confident Fool.

3. One that has made a matter his long and hard study, is (caeteris paribus)
more to be believed in that matter, than many ignorant men.

4. One that is impartial, a lover of peace, and not engaged by faction or
interest to one side against the other, is caeteris paribus much more credible
than a factious interested man.

5. A sober, calm, considerate man, that will stay and try before he judges,
is more credible than a passionate or hasty judger.

6. A man of manifest honesty, conscience, and the fear of God, is much more to
be believed than a worldly, wicked, bloody, unconscionable man.

7. Caeteris Paribus many agreed honest impartial men are more to be believed
than one, or a few odd and singular persons, who have no more advantage than
the rest to know the truth.

8. The young and unexperienced owe some eoverence to the judgment of their
Seniors, as more credible by age and experience than their own.

9. Accordingly Children to their Parents, and Scholars to their Masters and
Tutors owe such belief as is answerable to their difference, and the use of
their learning of them.

By this you may see on the contrary who is not worthy of belief.

I. One that pretends Inspiration, Vision, Revelation, and gives the hearer
no sufficient proof of it.

II. One that pretends to tell you things beyond his reach; as many
Philosophers do about the mysteries of Nature, spiritual and corporeal,
Elements or mixed bodies, above and below, of which the Books of many are full,
and malignant men, that take on them to tell you other men's hearts, without
just proof, that they are hypocrites, and intend that which they never did, or
meant ill, when they said or did well; and when false Historians will tell you
with what (unproved) ill purposes or deceits, persons a thousand miles off, and
perhaps a thousand years past, whom they never knew, did say and do all that is
reported of them.

III. When there are but few reporters of things pretended to be known
publicly in the world, especially when more credible persons contradict them.

IV. When the person is deeply engaged in a Party, and carrying on all for the
interest of his Party, does give you but his word, or the report of his own
Party for what he says; so that you may perceive that interest byasseth him to
partiality.

V. When the Historian shows a malignant spirit, that extenuateth or denies
all the good that was in his Adversaries, and fasteneth on them as much Odium
as he can without just proof, and justifies all the reproach that is used
against them.

VI. When the Historian lives so far off from the place and time, that he is
no competent reporter, having all his notice but by the fame of his own
Faction, as incapable as himself.

VII. When the sober moderate men of his own party contradict him, and speak
well of the persons whom he reproacheth.

VIII. When the reporter is manifestly a proud, worldly, wicked, unconscionable
man, especially of a bloody hurtful disposition: For as Gods threefold
Influence, or the Understanding, Will and Life is but one, so the Devil does
usually vitiate together the Understanding, Will and Life; and he that is from
the beginning an Enemy, and a Murderer, is also a Liar: Though a wicked,
malignant, and cruel man, may yet have an opinionative faith and knowledge, and
preach the truth, when it is for his carnal interest; yet when his malice and
interest tempts him against it, there is no trusting his word.

IX. When an ignorant proud man thinks that he must be believed merely for
the reverence and authority of his place.

X. When the reporter lives in a time and place where carnal interest has got
the major Vote for falsehood, and it passes commonly for truth, especially
where Tyranny, Civil or Ecclesiastical, silenceth the truth in Press, Pulpit,
and Discourse, that it dare not be spoken; by which the Papists have not only
made their own writings and reports incredible, but by their Indices
Expurgatorios, and base corrupting of ancient Writers, have weakened our
certainty of much of the old History and Fathers.

XI. When the reporter is a weak and silly man, that has not wit to sift out
the truth.

XII. When he is passionately rash, and of hasty judgment, and has not
patience to stay and suspend his judgment till he hear all.

XIII. When it is a Novice or raw Student, that has not had time, helps and
experience to know what he pretends to know, and yet contradicts wiser men of
more advantage and experience.

XIV. When present experience tells us, that the party that he writes
against as unlearned or wicked, are men of Eminent Learning, and the fear of
God; and that the party that he magnifieth as such, are contrary; by such marks
incredible History may be discerned.

Qu. But how can we know men's wisdom, and piety, and honesty, and
impartiality, when we never knew the men? Ans. Though hypocrites may much
counterfeit truth and goodness, its hard so to do it, but the contrary which
rules in them will break out, as a s^ink will get through narrow passages: and
though truth and honesty may be much clouded, they have, like light, a
self-revealing power.

To give you some instances; as among Physicians Hypocrates, and Galen, and
Celsus of old; and of late Montanus, Crato Fernelius, Platerus, Hildanus, and
such others, do speak with that self-evidencing honesty, and many Paracelsians
with that palpable vanity, that one of them will constrain belief, and the
other unbelief, even in them that never heard what they were: So among
Historians, Eusebius, though counted an Arrian, and Socrates, and Sozomen,
though called Novatians, and Theodoret, and Liberatus, and some others, do
write so as to constrain belief of things which were within their notice, and
with honest impartiality: Among the Papists, what clear footsteps of
understanding, honesty, and impartiality, and so of truth, is there in Thuanus,
and much in Commines, Guicciardine, Father Paulus Servita Hist. of Trent
Council, and diverse others: Though Doctor James bid us keep Crab, because the
later Councils are corrupt, and all of them must be taken with due Antidotes,
yet because most of the matter is fetched from public Acts and Records, they
are more credible than most single History; Acosta speaks impartially of the
West Indies, and Godignus of the Abassians, Matthew. Paris of England, and the
Pope, and so of some others: Of Protestants, some do but recite recorded
testimonies, or public acts, and the very writings themselves of the times
they speak of, when others do but tell you stories on their bare word:
Goldastus, Ruberus, Freherus, and Pistorius, do but give us Collections of the
writings of those former Ages, and nothing of their own: So does Mr. Rushworth
now in his three Volumes of Collections; and Mr. Fuller has partly done so,
and writes moderately; Mr. Gilbert Burnet thus writes the History of the
Reformation, laying not the credit on his word, but on his Evidences; and
Cambden impartially thus writes of Queen Elizabeth, and in his Brittania:
Usher has done the like, de succes. Eccles. of the Waldenses; and in his de
Primordiis Eccl. Brit. of the Pelagians, not saying, but proving by Records,
and old Evidences, what he delivers, besides the advantage of his known
extraordinary learning, honesty, and impartiality; so does Fox for the most
part in his Martyrology give you but the public Record, or proved Histories
(though Cope call him liar) Melancthon and Bucholtzer were men of such known
sincerity, as constrains credit to their reports.

On the other side, who can believe such palpable Railers as Tympius, Cochleus,
Genebrard, and many such, that lie contrary to certain evidence? such as make
the Vulgar believe, that Luther learnt his Religion of the Devil, and was
killed by him; that Oecolanpadius was killed by the Devil; that Bucer had his
guts pulled out, and cast about by the Devil; that Calvin was a stigmatized
Sodomite and Sensualist; that Beza died a Papist (who lived long after to write
a Confutation) and abundance such. Melchior Adam gathers his History of Lives
from the Pens of those that most intimately knew the persons, what able, holy,
laborious, and excellent servants of God were Calvin, Beza, Daneus, Knox, and
many such, as described by Adamus, and in the judgment of those that were their
most knowing observers: But what vile rebellious wretches were they in the
judgment of Doctor Heylin, and such as he? what excellent persons did God use
for the beyond sea Reformation? even as in France; and Holland; Jewel, Bilson,
and other Bishops, defend that which Heylin describes as the most odious
Rebellions: He makes the Geneva Presbyterians to do that against their Bishop,
which Dr. Pet. Moulin in his Answer to Philanax Anglicus, shows was done
before, while they were Papists. Some things in Heylins History of the
Reformation, and the Presbyterians, I believe, which he brings Records for;
but upon his own word I can scarce believe any thing that he says, so palpably
partial is he, and of so malicious and bloody a strain, representing excellent
persons as odious intolerable Rogues, and the Reformation, even of the
Lutherans* as too bad, but that in France, Belgia, Friesland, the Palatinate,
Hungary* Transylvania, Scotland, to be but a series of the most odious
Rebellions, Murders, and horrid Sacrilege; and ours in England to be much the
Spawn of King Henry's Lust, and thinking King Edward 6. his death a seasonable
mercy; and odiously representing such excellent Bishops as Grindall, Abbot, and
Usher, and such excellent Divines as we sent to Dort, Davenant, Hall* Ward,
Carlton, etc. It pleases the Prelatists to say truly of me, that I am no
Presbyterian, and th^^fore speak not for the persons in partiality, as one of
their party; but I (...) say, as in Gods sight, that in my own acquaintance, I
have found that sort of men, whom Dr. Heylin and such other reproach as
Presbyterians and Puritans, to be the most serious, conscionable, practical,
sober, and charitable Christians that ever I knew, yea verily the knowledge of
them has been a great help to the stedfastness of my Faith in Christ: Had I
known no Christians but carnal, worldly, and formal men, who excel not Heathens
in any thing but Opinion, it would have tempted me to doubt whether Christ were
the Savior of Souls, as I should think meanly of the Physician that does no
cures: But when I see holy mortified persons, living in the love of God and
man, I see that Faith is not a dead fancy: And when I have lived in intimate
familiarity with such, from my Childhood, to the sixty fifth year of my age,
and known their integrity, notwithstanding their infirmities; and then read
such Histories as represent them as the most odious, flagitious persons, I see
it is not for nothing that some men are called (...) in the Scripture, and the
Children of their Father the Devil, who was from the beginning a lying
malignant Murderer.

Two Crimes I have long ago heard the Rabble charge on those whom they called
Puritans, Lying and Covetousnes; whereas near two thousand Ministers are cast
out, and suffer, which they could mostly escape, if they durst but lie; and if
I ask money for the Poor (of what party soever) I can sooner get a Pound from
those called Puritans, than a Shilling from others far richer than they. Can I
take any men to be other than malignant liars who would make men believe that
such men as Hildersham, Dod, Rogers, Ball, Paul Bagne, Ames, Bradshaw, etc.
were Rogues and seditious Rebels, or that revile such as Usher, Hall, Davenant,
etc.? Reader, believe not a word of any of the revilings or odious characters
and stories, which any aspiring worldly factious Clergy man writes of such as
are his Adversaries: lying is their too common language; yea, if they do but
once set themselves eagerly to seek Preferment, I will never trust them, or
take their words: It has been so of old, the same man that was a Saint to his
Acquaintance, has been described as wicked, or a Devil by others: How bad were
Origin and Chrysostom to Theophilus, Alexand. and Epiphanius? And how bad was
Theophilus to the Historians that write his actions? How excellent a person was
Cyril Alex. to the Council of Colcedon, and how bad a man was he to Theodoret,
Isidore, Pleus. etc. Ignatius Constable. was a Saint to Nicetas, and many others,
and to Photius he was an Antichrist, and wicked limb of the Devil: Photius was
a holy man to his Party, and a wicked wretch to Nicetas, and others: Yea, see
the credit of worldly Prelates; the same Bishops one year cry down Ignatius as
a wicked man, and call Photius a holy person, and the next year, or shortly
after, cry down Photius for a Rogue, and cry up Ignatius; yea, and upon the
next turn cry up holy Photius whom they had anathematized: These doings were
familiar with carnal Prelates.

But as Gods Spirit in his servants is so suited to the Doctrine of the same
Spirit, that they relish it where they find it; so their piety and honesty is
such a self-evidencing thing, that pious and honest-men that knew them, cannot
believe their lying slanderers.

And when Satan has done his worst, the very writings of such men as Calvin,
Bez^, Melancthon, Hildersham, Ames, Dod, Burges, Gataker, Usher, D^venant,
H^ll, etc. will not suffer men to believe their odious revilers: Even among
Papists, when I read the works of Bernad, Gerson, Kempis, Th^ulerus, Sales, and
the Lives of Nerius, Renti, etc. I cannot believe him that would tell me they
were wicked men* though faulty: And the Lives written by Adam, Clerk, Fuller,
etc. shall be believed before Calumniators.

Alas, how little are most Histories to be believed, where they prove not what
they say; there are about sixty that say there was a Pope Joan, and near as
many that say no such thing. Hildebrand to one half of the Bishops was the holy
Restorer of the Church, to the other half the vilest Rebel. We are not agreed
here ^n London who burnt the City in 1666. nor what parties began the late War,
nor what party brought the King to death, while we are alive that saw these
public facts: Not only Lads that knew it not, but Heylin (the great Reproacher
of the Reformers) would make men believe that it was Presbyterians in England
that began the strife and War, when yet he had himself laid so much of it on
Archbishops, and Bishops, and on the Parliaments complaints of Popery,
Arminianism, and Arbitrary Illegalities; and after says (Hist. Presb. p. 465.
470.) The truth is, that as the English generally were not willing to receive
that yoke; so neither did the Houses really intend to impose it on them, though
for a while to hold fair quarter with the Scots, they seemed forward in it.
This appears by their Declaration of April 1646 -- Nor have they lived to see
their dear Presbytery settled, or their Lay Elders entertained in any one Parish
of the Kingdom (that is false on the other side) and yet all must be done by
this Parliament, as Presbyterians, four years before, when they were Episcopal,
distasting only the persons and actions of Bishop Laud, Wren, and some other
present Bishops.

If I find a man like Schlusselburgi^s, fall Pell-mell with reproach on all
that differ from him, or Dr. Heylin, speak of blood with pleasure, and as
thirsty after more (as of Thacker, Vdall, etc.) or as designing to make
Dissenters odious, as he and most of the Papists Historians do, (as the Image
of both Churches, Philanax Anglicus, the Historical Collections out of Heylin)
I will believe none of these revilers, further than they give me Cogent proof.

I hear of a Scots Narrative of the Treasons, Fornications, Witchcrafts, and
other wickedness of some of the Scottish Presbyterians; and as for me, the
Author knows not what to call me, unless it be a Baxterian, as intending to
be a Haeresiarcha, being neither Papist, nor of the Church of England, nor
Presbyterian, nor Independent, etc.

To this I say, I have no acquaintance with any Scots Minister, nor ever had in
my life, except with Bishop Sharp that was murdered, and two other Bishops (and
two or three that live here in London) therefore what they are I know not, save
by Fame: But though I have heard that Country asperst, as too much inclined to
Fornication, I never before heard the Religious part and Ministers so accused:
Either it is true, or false; if false, shame be to the reporters; if true, what
does it concern us here, or any that are innocent, any further than to abhor
it, and lament it, and to be thankful to God that it is another sort of men
that are called Puritans in England; and that in all my acquaintance with them
these 56 years (which has been with very many in many Countries) I remember
not that ever I heard of one Puritan, man or woman, save one, accused or
suspected of fornication; and that one yet living, though openly penitent, has
lived disowned and shamed to this day; but I have heard of multitudes that
revile them, that make a jest and common practice of it: Try whether you can
make the Inhabitants of this City believe, that the Nonconformists or Puritans
are fornicators, drunkards, or perjured, and that their accusers and haters are
innocent men that hate them for such Crimes! But its possible that you may make
men of other Countries or Ages believe it, and believe that we wear Horns, and
have Cloven Feet, and what you will; but I fear not all your art or advantages
on those that are acquainted with both sides: But the misery is, that faction
ingageth men to associate only with their party where they hear reproaches of
the unknown dissenters, from whom they so estrange themselves, that the
Neighbors near them are as much unknown to them, save by lying same, as if
they lived an hundred miles from them. I remember Mr. Cressey once wrote to me,
that he turned from the Protestant Religion to the Roman, because there was
among us no spiritual Books of Devotion for Soul Elevations, and affectionate
Contemplation: And I told him it was Gods just Judgment on him, that lived so
strange to his Neighbors, because they are called Puritans, and to their
Writings, which Shops and Libraries abound with; had he read Bishop Halls, Mr.
Greenhams, Mr. Ri. Rogers, Mr. Io. Rogers, Mr. Hildershams, Mr. Boltons, Mr.
Perkins, Mr. Downhams, Mr. Reyners, Dr. Sibbes, etc. yea or no better than my
own (the Saints Rest, the Life of Faith, the Divine Life, the Christian
Directory, etc.) or had he read the Lives of Divines called Puritans (or but
such as two young men (published partly by my self) Joseph Allen, and John
Ianeway) he would never have gone from the Protestants to the Papists, because
of our formality and want of an affectionate spiritual sort of devotion,
especially knowing what excess of formality is among the Papists, and how much
it is of the Clergies accusation of the Puritans, that they are for too little
form, and too much pretense of spiritual devotion.

But if any called Religious, or Puritans, or Presbyterians be vicious, I know
no men that so heartily desire their punishment and ejection, as those that are
called by the same names: I thank God that these twenty years, while neither
Wit, Will, nor Power has been wanting against them, I have scarce heard of two
men (if one) that have been judged and proved guilty of any such immorality, of
all the ejected silenced Ministers in this Land: I would I could say so of
their Adversaries.

II. And now I must speak to the Accusers speeches of my self; I thank you Sir
that you feigned no worse against me; if I am an Haeresiarcha, why would not
you vouchsafe to name that Heresy which I have owned: I have given you large
Field-room, in near 80 Books; and few men can so write, as that a willing man
may not find some words which he is able to call Heresy: A little learning,
wit, or honesty, will serve for such an hereticating presumption. 2. I never
heard that Arminius was called an Arminian, nor ^^ther a Lutheran, nor Bishop
Laud a Laudian; but if you be upon the knack of making Names, you best know
your ends, and best know how to fit them to it. 3. But seriously, do you not
know my Judgment? will not about 80 Books inform you? how then can I help it?
4. No, but you know not what Party I am of, nor what to call me; I am sorrier
for you in this than for my self; if you know not, I will tell you, I am a
CHRISTIAN, a MERE CHRISTIAN, of no other Religion; and the Church that I am of
is the Christian Church, and has been visible where ever the Christian
Religion and Church has been visible: But must you know what Sect or Pa^^y I
am of? I am against all Sects and dividing Parties: But if any will call Mere
Christians by the name of a Party, because they take up with mere Christianity,
Creed, and Scripture, and will not be of any dividing or contentious Sect, I am
of that Party which is so against Parties: If the Name CHRISTIAN be not enough,
call me a CATHOLIC CHRISTIAN; not as that word signifies an hereticating
majority of Bishops, but as it signifies one that has no Religion, but that
which by Christ and the Apostles was left to the Catholic Church, or the Body
of Jesus Christ on Earth.

And now Sir, I am sorry that you are not content with mere Christianity, and
to be a Member of the Catholic Church, and hold the Communion of Saints, but
that you must needs also be of a Sect, and have some other Name: And how shall
I know that your Sect is better than another? Were not the Papists Sectaries
and Schismatics, damning most of Christ's Body on Earth* for not being subject
to their Pope, I should not be so much against them. I find promises of
Salvation in Scriptures to Believers, that is, Christians as such (if such
sincerely,) but none of the salvation of men as Papists, Diocesans, Grecians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, etc. I would say also [nor as Protestants] did I not
take the Religion called Protestant (a Name which I am not fond of) to be
nothing but simple Christianity, with opposition to Popery, and other such
corruption. And now you know your own designs, your tongue is your own, and who
can control you, whatever you will call us; but I, and such others, call our
selves MERE CHRISTIANS, or CATHOLIC CHRISTIANS, against all Sects and
Sectarian names, and haters both of true Heresy, Schism, and proud,
unrighteous, hereticating and Anathematizing. Psalm. 4. O ye sons of men, how
long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity, and seek
after lying? But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for
himself: Psalm. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Help Lord, for the godly man cease; for the
faithful fail from among the children of men: They speak vanity every one with
his Neighbo^r, etc. See the rest.

I will add, that if to be serious in the belief of the Christian Faith, and
the Life to come, and in seeking it above this world, and in constant
endeavors to please God, whoever be displeased by it, is it that makes a man
a Puritan, because he is not a formal Hypocrite, then I would I were worthy of
the Titles which your Pseudo Tilenus and his Brother give (...), who say, I am
Purus Putus Puritanus, and one qui totum Puritanismum totus spirat: Alas I am
nor so good and happy. But Readers when this so^ of men have described the
Purit^ns as the most ^^toverable Villains, you that knew them not may conclud^,
that they were men no more erroneous, or worse than I, how much better soever;
for Bishop Morley says of me, Ab uno disce omnes: And of my Doctrine, I ^ave
left the world a full account; and must shortly be accountable for it and my
life to God, whose pardon and grace through Christ I daily beg and trust to.

A Notice concerning Mr. Henry Dodwell.
MR. Dodwell having written a copious Discourse, asserting, that we have no
right to salvation, but by Gods Covenant validly sealed by the Sacrament; and
that the Sacrament is not valid, unless delivered by one that has Ordination
by such a Bishop as has his Ordination by another Bishop, and so on by an
uninterrupted succession from the Apostles, with much more such Schismatical
stuff, which I fully confuted in my Books called, [The true and only terms of
the Concord of all the Christian Churches] and I aggravated his Schismatical
condemnation of the Reformed Churches, and most others (as having no true
Ministry, Sacraments, nor Covenant-title to salvation, and as sinning against
the Holy Ghost, because he professes himself a Protestant: The said Mr.
Dodwell says, that these words would persuade men that I take him for a
Papist, and expects that I therein right him: Be it therefore known to all
men, that I never meant by that word to accuse Mr. Dodwell of being a Papist,
but to aggravate his abuse of Protestants; and that I take my self bound to
charge no man to be of a Religion which he denies: And what his Religion
really is, his Books may best inform him that would know.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. WHat Order and Government Christ and his Spirit settled in the
Churches; and what was the appointed work of Bishops. That particular Churches,
that had every one a Bishop, were associated for personal Communion of
neighbors: That none on earth for about two hundred years, and none but Rome
and Alexandria for longer time, can be proved to be more numerous than our
greater Parishes, no nor half so big. The Case even of Rome and Alexandria
examined, and the like proved even of them against the contrary arguments. How
the change was made; and what change it is. How Prelacy became the diseasing
tumor of the Church. Many Reasons against an ill use of the History of
Councils and Prelates usurpations; that no man thence dishonor Christ,
Christianity, the Ministry or Church. Chap. 2. Of Heresies: What Errors are not
damning, and what are. How the most Erroneous come to cry out against Errors:
Instanced in all wicked Men, and in Papists, Arrians, Nestorius, Dioscorus,
etc. What horrid Work blind Zeal against Error has made, many instances, even
good Men, as Hillary and Popes and Councils. The History of all the Councils
begun. The first Councils about Easter contrary to each other. The second being
at Carthage erroneous, and Tertullian, Novatus and Novatian. The Roman
Presbiters govern the Church and call a Council, having no Bishop, and are said
by Binius to have the care of the universal Church. Cyprians Council condemns
a dead man Victor, for making Faustinus a Presbi^iter, Guardian of his Sons,
and so entangling him in worldly business. The Council Iconie^se is said to
err, and all those Oriental Bishops excommunicated by the Pope (about
Heretics Baptism). Many other Councils for rebaptizing, with Cyprian's
pleading Tradition. Bishops of Bishops there censured. Cyprian's Conversion. A
sad Hereticating Council at Cirta against Traditions. The Concilium Eliber
Novatiani: And against Images in Churches, etc. approved by Pope Innocent. The
beginning of the Donatists Schism for a Bishop. Constantines reproof of
Alexander and Arius silencing their disputes. Council. Laodic. Silvesters
strange Roman Council. Chap. 3. The Council of Nice: Constantine keeps them
in peace. The strange Schism between Peter Alex. and Meletius: Two Bishops and
Churches in the same Cities. The sad story of Alexanders troubling the
Meletians, and driving them to seek help of the Arrians, and so to strengthen
them. Epiphanius good character of Constantius and Valens. His notable
Character of Audius, and how the violence of dissolute Bishops forced him to
separate; and of Alexander and of Crescentius's strife: and of some Confessors
and Martyrs great faults. Audius banished converteth the Goths. The Slander of
Eustathius Antioch. Notes of the Nicene decrees: The ordination of scandalous
incapable men nullified by them. Council. Romans the people united at the making
of Bishops and Priests. Arius's Creed and restoration at a Council. Jerusil.
Marcel. Ancyr. ^oudemned at Constable. as denying Christ's Godhead, by the Arrians
whom he was for the same cause against. A Council. Antioch deposed Athanasius
and made Canons for Conformity. Anno 344 a fourth Creed reconciling at Antioch:
The General Council of Sardica divide: The Oriental Bishops at Philippolis
strange charge against Athanasius, Paulus Constable. etc. and their plea for peace.
The Donatists unjust justice. The slander and fall of Bishop Euphratas. Anno
355 a General Council at Milan where the Arrians prevail. Hilary banished by
the Semiarian Bishops as a separatist. The Council of Sirmium curse Arius,
Photinians, and condemn Athanasius, pretending to reconcile. Constantius
labors union: The General Council divided at Ariminum and Selcucia: The
Arians, Orthodox, and Reconcilers fall into more Sects: Ten creeds, sometimes
one, sometimes another liked or condemned: The Bishops deposing and damning
each other. Of Meletius Antiochenus, the dissension, danger and reconciliatior
about hypostasis and persona, at a Council of Alexandria. Julian. Jovian for
peace: Valentinian and Valens charge the Asian Bishops to giveover persecuting
any of Christ's Laborers. Valens a zealous Arrian Persecutor. Damasus bloody
Election against Sisinnius. The Schism at Antioch how ended. Chap. 4 Why Rome
was yet Orthodox. 1. Valens persecution. 2. Gratian and Valentinian Junior,
Theodosius. The Council at Constance. 4. Greg. Nazianzens case. 5. His sad
description of the Councils and madness of the Prelates of his time. 7. 8. The
(...) Schism again. Nectarius a Bishop and Pa^riark before he was a baptized
Christian. 10. The Councils decrees * 11. The History of the Bishops that
prosecuted the Priscillanists, and St. Martins. 18. 19. A Council at Capua
decreed that the two Bishops and Churches at Antioch live in love and peace.
20. Bishop Bonosus heresy denying Mary's perpetual virginity. 21. Jovinians
heresy described. 23. A wise Novatian Council. 24. Carthage good Councils. 31.
32, 33, 34. The History of Melania, and the Bishops persecution of the friends
of Origene. 36. etc. Theophilus Alex-story. 37. 38. 39. Chrysostomes History.
40. And the Joannites.. 43. Those that believe the Astrologers and
Mathematicians cursed at Tolet. 47. The Melivitane Councils against Appeals to
Rome, and of Liturgies to be approved. 55. Pelagius and Celestius absolved by
one Council and one Pope and condemned by others, * 53. etc. Pelagius
Confession, 57. Boniface and Eulalius schism at Rome, 59. P. Boniface's decree
that no Bishop be brought or set before any Civil or Military Judge, 60. The
sixth Council of Carthage that resisted the Popes, 61. P. Celestines decree,
that no Bishop be given to the unwilling. Chap. 5. Atticus Constable.
peaceableness: The pretty story of the people deposing Theodosius Bishop of
Synada, 2. Cyrils violence; the Monks assault of Orestes, and the peoples cruel
usage of Hypatia, 3. Alexand. Antioch. and Atticus Constable. by his Council are
for restoring the Non-conformists Joannits: Cyrils reason against it, * 4.
Whether Cyril repented, 5. Isidore Pelus. words of him, 6. Proclus refused
Bishop at Cyzicum by the people, 7. Nestorius chosen, 8. He is a persecuter of
Heretics. His opinion 9. The first Ephesians Council, 10. They divide and condenmn
and depose each other and fight, and Nestorius, Cyril and Menmon, are desposed
by the Emperors Command, but the two last restored. Whether Nestorius or Cyril
was the Heretic. The issue of that Council, 12. 13, 14. Derodon prooves that
Cyril was an Eutychian and Nestorius Orthodox, 18. 19. The truth, 20. The
present Churches of the Nestorians. That these Bishops set the world on fire
about a word while they agreed in sense, 20. 21, etc. The Emperor ^orceth the
Bishops to Comminion, and sets Simeon Stilletes to pray down their horrid
discord, 23. Bowing Eastward forbidden, because the Manichees bowed to the Sun
among them, 29. Leo's Roman Council of Bishops, Priests and Laymen: Another
against Hilary* Arelatensis, 31. 32. Chap. 6. Of the Eutychians, etc. The true
case of the Controversy, 2. Unity taken by one sids for undivided, and by the
other for undistinguished, and so the world set again on fire: The
Constantinople Council about Eutychius, 5. Another Constantinople Council
contrarily clears him, 8. Ibas cleared at Council Beryt, 7. The second
Ephesine Council, under Dioscorus. Eutyches justified there. Flavianus, Eusebius.
Dor. Ibas and Theodorite condemned and deposed. All the Patriarks else and
Bishops subscribe, save the Popes Legates. Flavianus hur* and dies, 9. Leo in
a Roman Council condemns this, Ephesians. 2. 10. Dioscorus in a Syned at Alexandr.
excommunicateth Leo, 11. Theodosius virtue and miraculous Victory, 15. His
praise of the second Ephesians. Council, 16. Martians reign, and the Council of
Calcedon, 14. 17. Turnings, mutual condemnings, recantings and rigor there, 17.
18, 19. The cry of the Egyptian Bishops, 24. The Abbots protestation to cleave
only to the Nicene Creed (as Pioscorus did to the Nicene Council and Ephesians. 1.)
and not to subscribe Leo's Epistle, and to contemn excommunications, 25.
Dioscorus not condemned for heresy, says Anatolius, 26. Theodorites usage by
the Bishops, 27. The Canon equalling Constable. and Rome, 30. The doleful issue of
this Council, 31. The woeful work at Alexandria. The murder of Proterius, 33.
34. The bloody Tragedy against the Calcedon Council and Juvenal (as betrayers
of the Nicene Faith) by the Monks at Jerusalem, 36. Eudocia and Pulcheria the
Spring of all. Leo is Emperor, and for the Council of Calcedon. He desposeth
Timothy Aelu^us at Alexandria, Peter Gnapheus usurpeth Martyrius Seat at
Antioch: Martyrius renounceth his rebellious clergy and people. Gnapheus
banished by Leo. Stephen that is for the Council is put in: The boys kill him
with sharp Quills, and cast him into the River, 37. Zeno Emperor, Basiliscus
usurping commands the Bishops to renounce the Council of Calcedon. Three
Patriarks and five Hundred Bishops subscribe against it (before most were for
it) Basiliscus changing his mind commands that the Council be owned. The
Bishops obeyed this, 38. Zeno restored, and being for the Council, the Asian
Bishops said they subscribed to Basilicus first Orders for fear and asked
pardon. Zeno by his Henoticon silenceth the controversy, leaving it free to
all to own or disown the Council. The Bishops and people are still worse, at
Alexandria and Antioch, etc. Acacius Constable. and Faelix Rom excommunicate each
other, 39. Flavitas Constable. cheateth the Emperor that would have God by an
Angel choose the Bishop, 40. The Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch successively
curse the Council: And the Bishop of Rome and Constable: curse them for it, 41.
Anastatius Emperor is for toleration: Three parties of Bishops there
condemning each other in East, West and Lybia, some strict for the Council;
some cursing it, and some for the henoticon or peace. He desposeth Euphemius
Constable. and would have deposed Macedonius that came ^ext, but the people rose
for him, and forced the Emperor to submit, 43. Cruel bloodshed in Antioch of
Monks and others, 44. Xenaias an unchristened man made Bishop, forces the
Bishops to curse the Council, 45. Severus at Antioch makes men curse the
Council: some Bishops repent and condemn Severus, 45. The Emperor against all
blood for this Cause, and the Monks in Palestine for it, 45, 46. Helias Bishop
of Jerusalem and the Monks resist the Emperors Soldiers, once and again, 46.
Timothy Constable. on both sides, 46. Rome under Theodorick; their Schism or two
Popes with blood three years, 47. Anastatius wearied with the Orthodox
rebellions, offers to resign his Crown: In remorse they desire his
continuance, 48. Valentinian makes a Law, that Bishops (except chosen by both
Parties) shall no more be Judges in any Causes, save of Faith and Religion.
Binius reproacheth this, as being absurd, that the Sheep judge the Shepherd, ^
49. Fully confuted. The Pope excommunicateth Acacius Constable. with a [nunquam
Anathematis vinculis exuendus] 58. Leo Romans his Decree against the Ma^ichees;
and all other that take the Bread without the C^p, 60. Gelasius: The Popes
Separatists, condemn Euphemius and Acacius: Gelasius says any Bishop may
excommunicate an Heretic Bishop (though a Patriach) his Catalogue of
Apocrypha, and canonizing Leo's Epistle, 62. The Pope excommunicateth the Greek
Emperor and Patriarch of Constantinople, but not King Theodorick the Arri^n at
home, 64. Ordination resolved on against the Kings commands 65. Council Agath.
decrees that if a Bishop excommunicate any wrongfully, another Bishop may
receive him, etc. That if any Citizen on the days of great solemnity refuse to
meet where the Bishop is, he is three years denied Communion (which shows,
that the Bishops Church was no greater than our Parishes) Lay-murderers
punished with denying them the Communion, and Deacons put in Monasteries, etc.
67. Council Apannens says Heretics Temples cannot be purged nor applied after
to Holiness, 68. Council Sydon curse the Calcedon Council, 69. Bishops having
the third (or fourth) part of all Church profits shows how big their Diocese
or Churches then were 72. Council Gerund of seven Bishops ordered Litanies, and
that the Metropolitanes Liturgy be used in other Churches 73. Justine the
Emperor against Eutychians restores the names of Euphemius and Acacius
against the Pope, their Case opened 75. Justine an Orthodox murderer. Antioch
cast down by an Earthquake, the Bishop killed, the rest burnt by the lightning,
76. Euphremius the Lieutenant relieving the People is chosen their Bishop. The
Bishops turn to the Council of Calcedon again, under Justine, 77. etc. Popes
prosecute the d^ad Bishops of Constantinople. 79. Justine violent against
Arrians. Theodorick makes Pope John go beg for them, least Italy suffered as
much: He kills Symmachus and Boethius, imprisoneth John and makes Felix Pope,
80. Clergy murderers suspended from the Sacrament, etc. 81. Theodorick
subjecteth the Clergy to Civil Judicature. Athalaricus freeth them again 85.
Justinian his Laws, he is against the Eutychians, and his Wife for them, 87,
88. Thirty thousand killed by insurrection in Constantinople, 89. The
miraculous speaking of Preachers, when their Tongues were cut out by the Kings
command, 90. King Theodorus a lover of Books gives up Rome, 91. In Justinians
time three Countries converted: The Persians prevail: A dreadful Plague, 92.
Pope Boniface chosen by the Arrian Athalaricus, 96. Pope Hormisda denying that
[one of the Trinity was crucified] Justinian sending to Pope John who said the
contrary; Binius excuse is [Weapons must be changed with changed enemies.] Many
Notes on the excellent disputation of Hypatius with the Eutychians caused by
Justinian, opening fully Cyrils weakness, and that the difference was but
verbal, 99. A Council at Constantinople under Menna called him Patriarcha
Occumenicus, and set Leo after the before cursed Bishops. Macedonius the
Orthodox Bishop put out, the People that were Orthodox separate, 103. Silverius
made Pope by an Arrian, P. Vigilius the Antipope imprisoneth and famisheth him,
105. The Schism between two Bishops and their Parties in Alexandria; one for
the corruptibility of Christ's body called Corrupticol^; the other for the
incorruptibility called the Phantasiastae; and the bloody fight between them,
107. Paulus Alexand: Murder of a Deacon, 108. P. Vigilius denies two natures,
109. P. Vigilius excommunicateth Menna, and is dragged with a Rope, till he
repented, 110. Justinian called a Heretic and damned by Evagrius, 111. CHAP.
7. Of the Controversy de tribus Capitulis, and the fifth General Council, etc.
of the heresy of the Apthardocitae, and Justinians piety and heresy; and the
Bishops appeal to Anastasius Antioch.. 1, 2. The conversion of the Auxumites:
Justinian's punishing the Sodomitical Heresy of some Bishops.. 3. The People
dye rather than eat Flesh in Lent* The Council at Orleance Decree that Qui
omnibus praeponendus est ab omnibus eligatur: Of Incest, Too strict keeping the
Lord's Day.. 4. Council. Avernens. Decree that men seek to be Bishops by Merits,
and not by Votes or Favor, yet be chosen by all.. 6. All Citizen Christians to
be in the Bishops Meeting at Easter, etc. by Council. Aurelian.. 7. And the
Bishop to be Ordained in that Church which he must oversee. Theodor. Caesar's
project to condemn the tria Capitula (Theodor. Mopsuest. Theodorite and Ibas:)
Justinians endeavors.. 9. An Orleance Council decree that King, Clergy and
Laity agree, and none be made Bishop, Populo invito, or forced to consent, and
that the Bishop else be deposed. The Bishop to relieve all the Poor.. 12. Null
the former living. Its Emperors that call Councils, says Justinian.. 13. The
fifth Constant. Council to cure the doleful separations of the Bishops. 13. P.
Vigilius difficulty: dare not join with the Council: Their slighting him: only
two or three Western Bishops at the four first Generals Councils.. 15. Theod.
Mops. accused. Theodorite accused for saying that Mary begat not God in the
nature of God, but Man as united to the Godhead: that Christ was forsoken,
suffered, hungered, slept, etc. as Man and not as God.. 17. Theodorites virulent
Ep. against dead Cyril, and the Theopathitae.. 17. The tria Cap. condemned
Vigilius's sober judgment of it.. 18, 19. Instead of healing, this Council set
all on fire, and Justinian on persecution.. 21. Vigilius changes; and
condemns again the tria Capitula.. 22. Vigilius is by Binnius called, homo
perditus, the buyer of another place, a violent Invader, a Wolf, a Thief, a
Robber, not entering by the Doors, a false Bishop, and quasi Antichristus, that
the lawful Pastor yet living did add pernicious Heresy to his Schism: Yet
sanctissimus Papa as soon as he had murdered his Predecessor, and had sole
possession*. 24. A Jerusalem Council received the Conc. Constable.. 25. A Council
at Aquileia condemn it, and the Western Bishops are separated near 100 years
from the Cath. Church (about the words of three dead men.). 26. Justinian made
Pelagius Pope; two Bishops and a Presbyter ordain him, the Western Bishops
disobey him and reject him, and so reject the Council Constable. V. confirmed by a
Pope: He gets Narses to persecute them.. 28. The Romans for this incline to the
Goths again Justinians Laws censured by Binnius.. 30. A Council Paris.
confirms the free Election of Bishops by the People and Clerks.. 31. All
Heretics that refused to eat Herbs boill'd with Flesh.. 34. Whether only the
Bishop must say the Pax vobiscum, (and to have but one Church.). 35. King
Clotharius forces the Bishops to receive a Bishop of his choice.. 37. Not
Popes, Councils nor Bishops, but Kings divided Diocesses and Parishes, as Bin..
38. A Council at Tours that Bishops may keep their Wives as Sisters for
Housekeepers, so they lie not with them. All condemned Malefactors that are
penitent and will obey the Preacher, to be pardoned.. 39. The Villainies of two
Bishops quit by the Pope.. 40. A Canon against reading Apoery plia or any thing
but Canon Scriptures in the Church.. 42. Pope Pelagius the second, got
Smaragdus to force the Western Bishops to condemn the tria Capitula.. 45. King
Gunthram represseth the Murders and Adulteries of Bishops against the Clergies
Sentence.. 47. A Council at Constantinople calls John Constable. Universal
Bishop, Pope Pelagius the second damneth the Title as unlawful in any, and
commands them rather to dye than yield it. Some queries hereupon.. 51. King
Gunthram finding all grow worse and all long of the Bishops, calls a Council at
Mascon, where the stricter keeping the Lords day is Decreed.. 54. The Bishops
of Venice, Istria and Liguria continue separate from Rome and chose Paulinus
Bishop of Aquileia their Patriarch, and supreme Bishop instead of the Pope..
55. Often Penance to embolden often Sinning.. 57. Philoponus against the Council
of Calcedon.. 60. The Factions now called Jacobites and Melchites, and why..
61. The Armenians plead Tradition for their Error.. 62. The Partarchs of
Aquileia persecuted by Mauritius and Pope Gregory.. 65. Dead Gregory fights
with Sabinian his Successor that would have burnt his Books.. 68. Boniface the
third chosen by Phocas,. 70. CHAP. 8, Councils about the Monothelites and
others: Cyrus Alex. by the word [Deivirilis] would heal the Divisions (in
vain). 1, 2. Pope Honorius called a Monothelite, for his good Council,. 2, 3.
The Emperor Heraclius a Monothelite censured by Binnius for using his own
judgment in matters of Faith,. 4* A Constantinoplitane Council for the
Monothelites,. 12. The Emperor condemned, and Pope Honorius commended for
forbidding the names of [One] or [Two] operations and Wills,. 15. The Popes
Agents beaten at Constantinople,. 18. Pope Martin imprisoned, banished and dead
by the Emperor for condemning his Act of silencing [One and Two] called
Typus.. 19. His Laterane Council asserteth two Operations and Wills.. 20. The
King of Spain finding all Laws fail against Priests and Bishops Leachery,
decrees that the children of their women servants be incapable of inheritance,
and be the Churches servants, and the Co^eubines whipped with an hundred
stripes.. 23. Kings Preach to Bishops.. 24. 21. Ordination without Election of
Clergy and People null.. 25. The Bishop of Ravenna reconciled to Rome, after
long separation.. 30. A Millan Council, and the third Constantinople, (6
General) condemn the Monothelites, and Macarius Antioch, that would have
silenced [one] and (two] but not assert [two]. 34. Their partiality.. 35. Pope
Leo confirms the Constantinopolitan Council which damned Pope Honorius as an
Heretic.. 36. A new controversy, whether Christ has three substances,
Divinity, Soul, and Body.. 40. A Toletane Council defends it, and that Voluntas
genuit voluntatem.. 45. The Council. Trull. called Quini Sextum: Railed at by
Papists: Notes hereon.. 47* 48. Called by Binnius Monothelites: The same men
that were in the 5th Council. It forbideth Priests to put away their Wives..
50. It deposes Bishops and Priests that were not duly Examined and Elected..
50. It equaleth the privileges of Constantinople with Rome.. 53. It (ill)
orders, that whatever alteration the Imperial power makes on any City, the
State Ecclesiastical follow it.. 54. Other notable C^nons.. 55. etc. Every
Parish of twelve Families must have their proper Governor (in Spain.). 57.
Paul contradicted as to the believer and unbeliever staying together. 58. A
Council at Aquileia condemns the 5th General at Constantinople.. 60. K.
Wiliza and the Spaniards forsake Rome.. 65. A General Council of innumerable
Bishops at Constantinople under Philippicus are for the Monothelites.. 67. They
condemn the 6th General Council that was for two Wills and Operations. Binnius
note of the Bishops temporizing. CHAP. 9. Councils about Images and others.
Images how introduced in England.. 2. etc. Spelmans proof that the old Saxons
prayed not to Saints.. 3. A Parliament Role recited, proving the old Popish
Worshipping of Images.. 4. Leo Isaurus puts down Images: Gregory the second
rebels for it, and confederates with Charles Martell against his Prince, and
absolveth his subjects from their allegiance. Binnius records it as an
excellent example to posterity, not to permit pertinacious Heretical Princes to
reign.. 5. The consequents of this doctrine: How the Pope ruined the Eastern
Empire, and betrayed Christianity.. 5. Wilfrids Oath to the Pope.. 6. Councils
pro Imaginem cultu, Al^onsus first calls himself The Catholic King.. 9. P.
Zachary, and Charles Martell against the Emperor: Pipin and the Popes Treason
in France, and Baronius and Binnius treasonable doctrine.. 11. Twenty Queries
hereupon.. 12. P. Zachary and Bishop Boniface Excommunicate Virgilius for
holding Antipodes: Queries hereupon.. 14, 15. Philastrius of the stars.. 16. A
caution against misapplying all.. 17. When Lard must be eaten. P. Zachary's
decree.. 18. Caroloman's Council to recover Christianity, and save men's souls
from false Priests.. 19. Boniface finely made Archbishop of Mentz: accuses
Bishop Adelbert and Clemens.. 21, 22. Pipin helps the Pope and Desiderius
Traitors, and makes a Donation of Cities to the Pope.. 23. A General Council
at Constantinople condemn Image Worship as Idolatry, and swear men against it,
and against praying to the Apostles, Martyrs, and Virgins (I suppose before
Images.). 24. This Council and the Council of Nice second, determine that
Christ glorified body is not flesh (with Anathema.). 26. Noted as to
Transubstantiation and other Errors.. 26, 27. Pipins Council decrees every
City a Bishop, and joyneth the sword or force to Excommunication, banishing the
despisers of it.. 28. The Greeks accuse the Latins for adding [Filioque.]. 30.
The People still choose Popes.. 29, 31. Three Popes fighting for it: one
putting out the eyes and cutting out the tongue of the other, and of his
adherents.. 31. Constantines Acts invalid, except Baptizings and Consecrating..
33. Christophers eyes and life taken away through the Pope that he set up.. 35.
Desiderius fights against the Pope, Charles M. overcomes him, and makes
Pope Adrian grater than any before him.. 37. Why Deacons mostly made Popes: No
Bishop might be made Pope, or removed.. 39. The terms of Papist Writers
expounded.. 40. Putting penance on Murderers for hanging, filled the Church
with Rogues.. 41. The Historians give the lie to each other about the power
given Carol. M. in making Popes and Bishops. Baronius Argument against it vain.
That the People and Clergy by the French Constitutions still choose Bishops..
42. Irene set up Images again; Women and Rebels set up Popes.. 46. The Fable of
Sylvesters baptizing Constantine, and the Images showed him.. 48. Pope Adrian
owneth the whole Council of Calcedon.. 47. Many notable old Canons sent by
Adrian to Carol. M. A Bishop neglecting to convert Heretics* he was to have
them that delivered them, etc.. 51. Chapter Mag. forces the Saxons to profess
themselves Christians and swear perseverance, which they often broke.. 52. Eight
more old Canons collected by Adrian, e. g. The Bishops sentence void, not
confirmed by the presence of the Clergy. The judgment of a Bishop in another
Parish void, for none is bound by the sentence of any but his own Judge.
Foreign Judgments forbidden: All to be judged by Men chosen by themselves. No
Clergyman to be judged without lawful accusers present, and leave to defend
himself. Bishops tyrannical judgments null: Constitutions contrary to good
manners of no moment. Delators, that is, qui ex invidia produnt alios, to have
their tongues cut out, or their heads cut off. The danger of the Judge greater
than of the judged, etc. And let no man receive a Lay-mans witness against a
Clergyman (No wonder if the Clergy were unpunished and wicked.). 53. Irene
calls a Council at Constantinople for Images. The old Soldiers of the former
Emperors not enduring it, routed them. She and Tarasius agreeing call them to
Nice. The Bishops that were sworn against Image Worship, presently turn
generally for it, by a Woman's and a Patriarchs known will.. 49. 54. How could
the Iconoclast Emperors be Heretics, unless the use of such Images were an
Article of Faith?. 55. The Empress and Emperor called The Governors of the
whole World: They are the callers of that Council.. 56. Basil Ancyr. and other
Bishops that were Leaders against Images in the former Council, lament it, and
curse all that are not for Images, and all that favor such, etc. Theodosius
Bishop of Amoricum also curses himself, if ever he turn again, and curses
those who do not from their hearts teach Christians to venerate Images of all
Saints, praying for their intercession, etc. Queries hereon. When General
Councils curse each other, is the whole Church cursed? etc.. 59. A crowd of
changling Bishops crying mercy, Tarasius puts them hard to it, what made them
of the contrary mind heretofore, and what reason changes them?. 60. Whether
these penitent Heretics should be restored to their Bishoprics. Tarasius
says, Arians and these against Images and all Heresies and Evils are alike.
But another, That this was greater than all other Heresies, subverting Christ's
Economy. The instance of the Calcedon peccavimus omnes prevails.. 62, 63. A
shrewder doubt raised, Whether all these were truly ordained by former
Heretics (Iconoclasts^) The Popes Vicar denies it. Tarasius durst not so
unpriest almost all the Christian world of the East, and is contrary. By a
cunning argument he prevailed; Viz. The Fathers agree among themselves: Ergo,
all the rest are of the same mind with some before cited.. 64. Gregory Bishop
of Neocaesaria next recanteth, a Leader of the Iconoclasts.. 67. Yet Tarasius
and this Council disclaim giving Latria to Images of creatures. ^ea honor them
but ^s memorative.. 67, 70. The Constantinopolitan Councils Arguments against
Images.. 68. etc. Bread not Transubstantiate.. 72. The two Councils contrary
about Tradition of Images.. 73. The Nicene Council curses from Christ all that
are not for saluting and adoring Images.. 76. Bishops and Priests made by
Magistrates Election, or that use the Magistrate to get the place, are void. A
Canon against silencing Preachers and shuting up Churches.. 77. A sober Council
at Horojulium.. 80. Foeliy Urgelitanus, and Elepandus, condemned, for saying
Christ was Gods natural Son in the Deity, and his adopted in his Humanity.. 81.
Claudius Taurinensis against Images.. 82. Car. Mag. Book, and the Council of
Franckford against Images.. 82, 84. Foelix and Elepandus condemned, for saying
Christ was a Servant.. 85. The Frankford Council decrees that Christ was not a
Servant subject to God by penal servitude.. 89. Pope Leo's eyes put out, and
tongue cut out, and restored, and he made great by Charles the Great.. 92.
Kissing the Popes Foot.. 93. Irene kills her son, and is banished her self..
94. Filioque added by the Spanish and French Bishops without the Pope.. 96.
Carol. Mag. being dead the People Rebel against the Pope. till Ludovicus
subdued them.. 97. A Council at Constantinople for the Emperors Adultery: And
another against Plato and Theodorus Studita, that were against it; which says
Binnius passed the sentence of Anathema on the whole Catholick-Church* And
decreed that Gods Laws can do nothing against Kings, nor is any man a Martyr
that suffers (as Chrysostom) for opposing them for truth and justice.. 98. A
Council at Arles, and another at Tours have good Canons, One that is for the
old prohition of genuflexion on the Lords days.. 104. Charles M. restores
Learning: A Council at Chalones decreed against the Oath of Canonical
obedience.. 105, 106. Another against Archdeacons ruling Presbyters, and
taking Fees of them.. 107. Others for the old Excommunication, and about
Confession to God and Man, and against trust in Pilgrimages.. 108, 109, 110.
Another Council at Constantinople curses that at Nice, ^d, and pull down
Images, and the Bishops turn again.. 113. The murder of Bishops punished by
^ayments at last.. 114. Ludovicus Pius, Emperor, Bishops with Bernard rebel,
Stephen made Pope without him, pardoned.. 115. His care of lost Learning: A
pious Treatise out of the Fathers; against Bishops domination, and for their
equality with Presbyters in Scripture-times.. 116. Against Clergy sins, and
Women's company. Against ge^^flection on the Lords days: Augustines contempt of
appeals to Councils and Rome: A strange temperance of the Canonical Monks, that
were tied to four pound of Bread and five pound of Wine in a day; or in
scarcity, to three pound of Wine and three pound of Beer; or in greater
scarcity, to one pound of Wine and five of Beer.. 118. Ludovicus Pius makes
the Pope greater than ever.. 120. Michael Balbus murdering Leo, Armenus ^endeth
to Ludovicus Pius about Images: An Assembly at Paris called by him judge the
judge of the World, and the Nicene second Council says Bellarmine.. 124. Now
both East and West judged the Pope and his General Council to err; yea this
Emperor that made him Great.. 125. A book of concord by the Pope and Emperor,
that Images are neither to be contemptuously broken, nor adored. Bellarmines
words against it. He revileth the Popes words, that Princes are Governors of
the Church.. 127, 128. Confuted. Faith and Love may be without Images.. 129. It
was the right of the Empire to consent or not, to the chosen Pope.. 132.
Platina wishes for a Ludovicus to reform the luxurious Clergy then.. 133. A
Paris Council write an excellent Book: They tell of some struck with
Thunderbolts, Convulsions, etc. for and as working on the Lords day. And say
Beati Petri vicem gerimus.. 136. The Emperor making his three Sons Kings, they
Rebel: He conquereth Pipin, Lotharius rebelleth again. Ebbo and a Council of
Bishops wickedly depose him absent and unheard, and force him to resign his
Scepter on the Altar, and thrust him into Prison: Thus was the best of Princes
that most advanced the Clergy used by them, on Religious pretense Ludovicus
restored the second time. Lotharius rebelleth still, till pardoned. Ludovicus
dies.. 137. The form of his condemnation by the Bishops at large; with all the
Articles of Accusation and his penance at the Bishops high Court of Justice..
139. The Emperor restored by force, the Bishops recant and he forgiveth them,
Ebbo resigning.. 140. The Wars between Ludovicus Sons: Lotharius justly
conquered.. 145. The Bishops depose him upon impeachment as they did his Father
by his will.. 146. Images restored at Constantinople by Theodora a Woman: she
sped as Irene. Photius Patriarch. 148, 149. The Bishops suddenly turn again..
150. Strife for the Popedom. 151. Lotharius and his brothers agree.. 153. The
Archbishop of Rhemes fled and the seat vacant was ten years Governed by two
Presbyters.. 152. Carolus Calvus alienateth Churchlands.. 153. Pope Leo and his
City Leonina: He writes Massing Rules, and deposes Priests that cannot read
till they amend.. 154. Singing Liturgies the occasion of imposed forms.. 155. A
Council at Mentz punishes murder even of Priests, but with putting them from
the communion.. 157. CHAP. 10. Councils about Ignatius and Photius, with
others. Hin^marus's description of Godescalcus and his Heresy.. 1. Canons,
that Arch-Presbyters examine every Master of a Family personally, etc. That
none denied Communion have any Office civil or Military,. 3. Whether
unconstrained sufferers are Martyrs.. 4. A hard case about the nullity of Ebbos
Ordinations: Two Popes differ.. 5. Ignatius case.. 8. Remigius and eleven more
at Valence make notable decrees about Predestination, Redemption, Perseverance,
and choice of Bishops.. 9. The Clergy and People to choose Bishops.. 9, 10.
Lotharius turns Monk.. 11. No Pope Joan.. 12. Two strive for the Papacy:
Anastasius against Images, repulst.. 13, 14. Thunderbolts in the Church.. 16.
John Bishop of Ravenna forced to submit to the Pope.. 17. The Schism between
Ignatius and Photius.. 18. Bishops for the Emperors divorce, censured by the
Pope, despise him.. 19. Pope Nicolas, against Hincmarus: Against the Greek
Emperor: His notable Epistle: He makes the greater number of Bishops and
People no sign of truth; nor fewness of error.. 21. Baptism valid by one that
is no Priest nor Christian.. 22. None proper Patriarchs but Apostles
Successors.. 22. All other Churches and Dignities made by Rome, and Rome by
Christ.. 24. Peter had the Empire of Heaven and Earth. Ill. chosen Popes not
Apostolical, 25. Many other Papal Usurpations, against Oaths, Princes, etc. 26,
etc. People still choose Bishops, 29. None may hear Mass of a fornicating
Priest, 30. Lay men must not judge or search the lives of Priests. K. Charles
says none but the Bishops may depose him, 32. Photius settled by Councils, 31,
33, 35. Diverse Councils for K. Lotharius divorce against the Pope, 38, 39, 40.
The Pope curses them, 41, and curses his Legates at Constable. 42, and at Metz,
46. Hincmarus and the Pope's Contention, 43, 44. Historians say the Papacy was
void eight years, and others but seven days, 50. Photius and his Counsels
despised the Pope. His deposition by Basilius a Murderer, 51. Basilius craveth
the Popes pardon for the Bishops, because they had almost all been deceived or
false, by following the upper Powers, and the Churches would else be left
destitute, 52. What nullifying Ordinations has done, 53: Men wrongfully
excommunicated to be received by other Bishops: Presbyters to anoint the sick,
because the Bishops cannot visit all, 56. A Constable. Council ejecteth Photius;
where the Bishops that were for him, turn again and condemn him, crying
peccavimus; save some few: Subscriptions denied, and why,. 57. This eighth
General Council decrees equal honor to Christ's Image as to the Gospel:
Forbids Patriarchs to require Bishops to subscribe to them, but only to the
Faith, and deposes them that do it, 58: Curses them that say man has two
Souls: All Bishops to be worshipped by Princes, and not go far to meet them,
nor light from their Horses to them, nor Petition them, on great Penalties, 58.
Princes as profane may not be present at Councils; nor have been, (impudent!)
58. No Lay man may dispute Ecclesiastical Sanctions, be he never so wise or
good: But a Bishop must not be resisted though manifestly destitute of all
virtue of Religion, 59. They decree that Photius be not called a Christian, 60.
Bishops above Kings, as Heaven above Earth, 61. The Pope but one Patriarch
cannot absolve them that many Patriarchs condemn, 62. Nicetas Life of Ignatius
in brief, 63. The Pope deposed by a Constable. Council. The Bishops wrote not
Photius condemnation with Ink but with Christ's blood, and yet restored him and
honored him as the Emperor turned. Photius deposes and re-ordaineth, and
requires subscription to him, 63. Votes hereon, 64. The Contention between
Rome and Constable. for ruling the Bulgarians, and the effects, 65. The Pope's
Monarchy then unknown, 66, 68. The French Bishops against the Pope gave
Ludovicus's Kingdom to Charles Calvus, 70. The King, Hincmar. and Bishops
against the Pope, 71, 72. Deposing and blinding Hincmaru's Laudunensis. The
Romans imprison Pope John, 75. His Acts; decree for perjury, 76, 77. Going to
Rome merits the pardon of Murder, 77. Service in the Sclavonian Tongue
forbidden them, 78. Auspertus Bishop of Milan refuses to obey the Pope:
Sclavonian Service yielded to: The Bishop of Vienna rejects a Bishop of
Geneva (Aptandus) sent by the Pope, because he was never baptized, made Clerk,
nor Learned: The Pope tells him that he himself had none of these when he was
consecrated Bishop of Vienna, 77. Whether the Right of Emperors was only by
the Pope's Gift, 78. Binius resolution: One Church had two Bishops, 81. A
General Council at Constant. restores Photius, expungeth filioque condemns
the last General Council there; yet both approved by Popes, 83. The Council
accuse Rome, 87. Rome's jurisdiction excluded, 87. Adders to the Creed
(filioque) anathematized: Pope Martin and Hadrian condemn Photius, and enrage
the Greek Emperor against them, 89, 91. Bishops and Lords depose Carolus
Crassus; he is put to beg his bread, 92. The Pope above Emperors as Heaven
above Earth; Kings are Servants, and not above the Clergy their Masters, 93. A
King ruling ill decreed to be a Tyrant: Bishops and Priests lying with their
own Sisters, restrained: but no Bishop is to be accused by a Presbyter, nor
judged under seventy two Witnesses, nor Priests under forty two, etc. He that
would lie with his Sister before so many deserved blame: Murderers of Priests
denied Flesh, Wine, Coaches, etc. 96, 97. Formosus perjured; was the first
Bishop that ever was made Pope, 99. CHAP. 11. The Progress of Councils, till
Leo the 9th, especially in the West.

The Bishops depose Odo, and set up Charles.. 1. The Virgin Mary's Smock works
wonders.. 2. Blood and confusion in Italy.. 3. Bishops to be obeyed before
Earls and Magistrates. Clergymen must not be put to swear. No Presbyter to be
deposed, but by six Bishops,. 5. Two wicked Popes at once: Stephen Judges,
Dismembreth, and drowneth dead Formosus, and re-ordaineth those ordained by
him,. 7, 8. The Bishops in Council approve it; yet now Papists detest it.. 9.
When Popes are Infallible.. 10. Popes undo what their Predecessors did.. 12,
13, 14, 15, 17. Platina's description of a Malignant Pope.. 14. Popes Crown for
fear, and uncrown, and Crown others.. 15. Bishops turn and return, and cry
Peccavimus, Reordinations forbidden.. 16. Bad Princes the cause of bad
Bishops.. 17. Wicked Christians on whom the Pope durst not use Discipline.. 17.
Schisms and violence on Popes.. 18, 19, 20. Sergius made Pope the third time,
keeps it; by Whores and Whoredom the most wicked of men, says Baron. and Bin..
22. Formosus again executed dead,. 23. Questions to the Papists of their
holiness and Succession.. 24. Photius last deposition, and the Murders of
Emperors at Constant.. 26. A Whore Rules at Rome, 21. She makes her
Fornicator Pope; Baronius and Binnius. hard put to it. 62. Earl Heribert's Son,
not five years old, made Archbishop so Rhemes.. 30. Ratified by Pope John,
lamented by Baron. that by this Example other great men did the like: John's end
by a Whore,. 30. None to marry within the seventh degree, as incest.. 31.
Sergius bastard-Son under age made Pope John by a Whore, and destroyed after a
Monster says Binnius.. 35. None to fast privately, but by the Bishops
consent.. 36. The King of Denmark made Christian by Henry King of Germany.. 39.
St. Peter made the example for many Bishoprics to one Bishop.. 40. Albericus
rules, and mangleth the Pope.. 41. The Bishops judge the Infant before the
perjured Monk to be Bishop of Rhemes, 43. The treasons and changes in France,
44. Tryphon illiterate finely cheated of his Patriarchate Constable. 46. Councils
do and undo between the two Bishops of Rhemes, 48, 49, 50. John XII Lawful Pope
wanted all things necessary to a Pope, say Baronius and Binnius, 51. Notes
hereon, 52. Pope John dismembreth his Cardinals, 53. He fled, 53. The Bishops
depose him, and make another by Otho's means, 54. The horrid charges against
Pope John sworn, 53. Baronius and Binnius against his condemnation answered,
56. Two Popes and Churches, 57. Not yet known who was the true Pope, 59. John
killed in Adultery, 60. Another Antipope perjuriously chosen, 61. A Martyr, 62,
64. An interruption of the Succession by Baronius and Binnius account, 65. Otho
saves them. The next imprisoned and strangled, 67. Boniface VII. runs to
Constantinople with the Church Treasure, 69. Two more Popes, 69, 70, 72.
Boniface murders another Pope, and gets in; dies, and is dragged about the
Streets, 74. John XV, durst not dwell at Rome, 75. Hu^o Capet turns the
Bishops, 78. Popes fighting. John XVII. blinded, mangled, disgraced, killed,
84. Seven Electors of the Emperor settled, 85. Gerbert how made Pope, 87. The
King of Hungary Converts the Transilvanians, 87. Good Kings, 90. Leutherius
Archbishop of Seus against Transubstantiation, 91. Two Popes fighting. The King
of Hungary converted by the Emperor Henry, 95. The first burning of Heretics
(Manichees) 97. Henry the Emperor leaves his Wife a Virgin, 100. Benedict.
IX. a deboist boy-Pope: put out again, 103. Gets in again: A third enters at
once. The Cerberus hired all out by dividing the Church-rents between them; do
resign; but the hirer as pacificator is made Pope, 103. Six that had been Popes
alive at once: One honest Pope that could not read made a fellow Pope to do it,
104. Gregory VI. The illiterate reconciling Pope variously described: put out
with the other three, and a Fifth chosen, 107. Benedict. gets in the third
time, 107. Another gets in by Poison, and dies the 23 day, 110. Baron.
answered, 111. The Monster Bened. 9. is he that condemned Berengarius, 112. Leo
9th. of the Resurrection: Renounceth the Title of Universal Patriarchs, as of
the bawd of Antichrist: Peter not Universal Apostle. Bishops equal; varied by
City privileges, save in Africa by seniority. The Romish Church usurped by no
Pastors, 205. Michael Patr. of Constable. Rebaptizeth Papists, says they had no
true Baptism, or Sacrifice, 205. A Roman Council pardon simoniacal Bishops and
Priests, lest the Church be utterly destitute, 206. The Popes hold a Council in
France against the King' s will: A Bishops horrid Crimes, and a miracle there.
Still Clergy and People must choose every Bishop 207.

CHAP. 12. The continuation till the Council of Constance: Councils against
Berengarius, 2, etc. Adulterous and Symoniacal. Bishops: A miracle, 4, 9.
Hildebrand, a Subdeacon, presideth in Councils, and deposes Bishops, and
Excommunicateth, 9, 10. Bishops by Excommunication rule K. Ferdinand, 12. Milan
separated from Rome 200 years, 16. Another Schism, 17, 18. Hildebrands new
Foundation of Popes (by Cardinals Election) 22. Notes hereon, 22. A Roman
Council forbids hearing a Fornicator Priest, 23. Bloody fights between two
Popes: Five years schism, 25. P. Alexander gives England to William the
Conqueror, 27. Councils. for each Pope, 28, 29. Gods word affirmed violable,
30. Hildebrands War in Rome: Italian Bishops against him. His hard work.
Obedience to the Pope forbidden by a Council at Mentz. He deposes the Emperor
for seeking to diminish the Majesty of the Church: and absolveth his sworn
Subjects: An Antipope made that sat 21 years, (the 23d schism.) The Emperor
barefoot in frost three days begs pardon, and promises obedience. He is again
cursed by the Pope in Council, as having power to take away Kingdoms, and all
that men have, 41, 42. The Siege of Rome: Two Popes: Gregory's death, 42. He
threatens to depose the King of France: claims Hungary, etc. 23. Binnius
record of THE POPES DICTATES, telling in 27 Articles WHAT POPERY IS, 44. He
claims Spain, 46: and Dalmatia, 49. A great part of the Bishops against him,
49. Pronounces unsincere repentance fruitless, 50. Denies Divine Service in
the Sclavonian tongue, 51. Ill weather imputed to the ill Lives of Priests: The
Armenians errors what, 51. Apulia, etc. the Popes, 51. One man turned an
hundred thousand men in Spain from the Pope. He threatens to Excommunicate and
depose the King of Spain, as an Enemy to the Christian Religion, 52. He newly
found St. Matthews body, 54. He will expose the Prince of Sardinia unless he
obey him in making all Priests shave their beards, 55. Notes hereon. The French
convert the Sweeds, and the Pope would reap the fruit, 56. His notable Epistle
to prove Popes, Priests, (and Exorcists) above Kings, 57. Answered, 58. Peter
pence, 59. An Archbishop suspended for not visiting Rome, 60. A pious Lie for
Peace is a sin, 61. The old Spanish Liturgy partly contrary to the Christian
Faith till now, 62. His respect to William the Conqueror, etc. 64, 66. The
German Bishops hereticate the Pope, for forbidding Marriage, 67. Matthew is
forsaken, 68. Philip King of France and many great Bishops excommunicate, 69.
Diverse Councils excommunicating contrarily; the Antipopes, 69, to 74.
Ordinations null that are made pretio, precibus vel obsequio, and not by the
common consent of Clergy and People, 75. He excommunicateth the Greek Emperor
usurping, 76. The Greek affairs summed up, 77. The power of Pope and Bishops to
depose Kings, 79. A Council Character of Gregory, 80. A Council make Loyalty to
be Haeresis Henriciana, 87. The Disciple is not above his Master, answered, 87.
Wecilo's heresy, that men obey not unjust Excommunications, but may by others
be received, 88. The 23d. Schism, 91. Victor's Soldiers conquer Clement's, 92.
Lay Princes presentations or Investitures are Heresy: every Heretic is an
Infidel: It Is better be without visible Communion than have it with such, 93.
Consectaries overthrowing Rome, ib. A new Pope marries Mathildis to Welpho on
condition they use not carnal Copulation, 94. A Jerusalem expedition causes
peace at home. Conrade rebelleth against his Father, 94. The Emperor commits
Fornication, 101, 103. Wrongs on Monday, Wednesday, or Thursday, no breach of
holy peace: No Bishop or Priest must swear or promise Allegiance to a King, nor
take Preferment from any Layman, 104. None to communicate in one kind, 105.
All the Bishops of England save Rochester renounce obedience and society with
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, because he would not renounce the Pope,
saying, he blasphemed the King, setting up any in his Kingdom without his
consent, 106. Time given the King of England to repent, 109. The Antipope
Clement dug up and burnt: Paschal 2. Council Decree that all Bishops of the
Henrician Heresy (Loyalists) if alive be deposed, if dead, dug up and burnt
(that is, most of the Western Bishops,) 112. The Schism continued, 113. The
Pope set up young Henry against his Father, who takes him Prisoner to the
death: He keeps his Fathers Corpse five years unburied, because Excommunicate.
Yet proves Hereticus Henricianus, Imprisoneth the Pope till he grant him
Investitures. The Pope absolveth himself, 114, 115. Cases on Binnius, 116. Note
that Investitures supposed the People and Clergies free choice of Bishops, 117.
The Bishops usage of old Henry to the last, 118. To take the Popes
Excommunications as not obligatory is a Heresy, 119. The dangerous Doctrine of
Fluentius Bishop of Florence (that Antichrist was come) 120. Only the Church
made Henry rebel, 121, 122. Tybur colored with blood: The Earl of Millans
Flesh given to Dogs: The Popes sacramental Covenant broken, 127. God will have
no involuntary service, 129. The same is a Henrician Heresy in others which is
none in the Pope, 132. He may forswear for the People of God. 132. Two Popes
contending and excommunicating: The Emperor gives up Investitures, 135 to
138. Four Doctrines of Guilb. Porretane condemned in Council; 1. That Divinitas
and Deus are not the same (in signification:) 2. That the three Persons are not
unum aliquid: 3. That there are eternal Relations besides the Persons: 4. That
it was not the Divine Nature that was incarnate. Two more Popes, 138, 142. A
Preacher murdered at Rome, 144. Two more Popes, the succession from the wrong,
145. They fight for it, 146. How Clergy and People first lost their Votes in
choice of Popes, 147. Two Popes still striving. 149, etc. Many Castles in
England built by two Bishops, 160. Abailard condemned unheard, 161. Caelestine
II. the first Pope without the Peoples election, An. 1143. Rome against the
Pope: Bishops are his strength, 168. Porretane again accused, and puzzled the
Council, 170. He is again accused by Bernard, whom the Cardinals accuse for
writing his Faith and getting Bishops hands to it, 171. The Roman people
excommunicate by Pope Adrian 4. They are for a Preacher called by him an
heretic, 174. Rome fights with Pope and Emperor: They fight again, and
expel the Pope, 174. The 27 pair of Popes: Wars between the Emperor Frederick
and Pope: The Crown of England held as from the Pope: Yet Rome receives him
not: The Emperor submits, being deserted, etc. 175. The settling the choice
of Popes by Cardinals: The Pope no Bishop by the Canons, 177. The Roman
Succession is from Alex. 3. when the Clergy, People, Emperor, Princes, and a
Council of innumerable Bishops were for Victor, 176. Parliaments called
Councils, 179. Ireland the Popes, 180. The Albigenses Henricians, 181. No
Bishop may suspend a Presbyter without the judgment of his Chapter: A perjured
Clergie-man perpetually deprived: Doubtful words to be understood as usually,
182. The Popes Party in Rome have their Eyes put out, 183. Frederick drowned in
Asia, 187. The Kingdom of France interdicted, 190. The Pope seus up an
Anti-Emperour, who prevails, 192. England interdicted six years and three
months, 194. The famous twelfth General Council at the Laterane under Inoc. 3.
for Transubstantiation, exterminating heretics, deposing Princes, absolving
Subjects, forbidding unlicensed Preachers, etc. 195. Almaricus burnt dead, 196.
Stephen Langton and King John, 197. Ten Queries upon this Council, 198. The
Canons of this Council true: Mr. Dodwel's 17 Arguments for it, 199. The Papists
excuses answered, 180. (misnumbred.) The bloody Execution, 181. Oxford Canons,
that every great Parish have two or three Presbyters, etc. 183. Against
Preaching when silenced, 184. The Pope twice banished by the Romans: The
Emperor excommunicate and deposed; fights it out: The Pope dies, 186. A
mortal sin to have two Benefices, if one will maintain him, 187. The Emperor
again excommunicate: A merry Excommunication, 191. Rebellions, 192. Conrade and
King Henry, 193. Bishop Grosthead's notable Letter to the Pope, and its
reception, 195, 196. Obedient disobedience: All Power for edification, ib. The
Pope calls the King of England his Slave, whom he can imprison, etc. 196. The
Cardinals Speech to quiet the Pope: A Defection foretold, 196. Grosheads death:
He takes them for Heretics that tell not great men of their sin, etc. The
Pope Antichrist, for destroying souls. The Popes pardoning Letter: The Pope
described, 198. Miracles at Robert Grosheads death: The Pope would have burnt
and damned his Corpse: In a vision he mortally wounds the Pope,. 198, 199. H.
III. pawneth his Kingdom to the Pope, 200. The 13th General Council at Lions
excommnnicateth and deposes the Emperor and absolveth his Subjects,. 202.
Guelphus for the Popes, Gibelius for the Emperor, 203. The English Parliament
demand the choice of the Lords Justice, Chancellor and Treasurer, 204. The
Plot of King Henry and the Bishop of Hereford, to get money by the Pope, 206.
The Parliament resist it: M. Paris talks too boldly of the King, 206. Buying
Bishoprics: Brancaleo at Rome mastereth the Pope, 208, 209. Sewale Archbishop
of York against the Pope: does Miracles, 212. Rome not ruled by the Pope, 214.
Near three years vacancy of the Papacy, 219. Cardinal Portuensis jest, 220.
The foolish Pope John sadly confuted, 224. King Peter of Arragon deposed, 226.
The Popes Tenth penny denied, 228. Two years more vacancy. The Greeks enmity to
Rome,. 229. Pope Celestine cheated to resign, and imprisoned, 233. Boniface the
VIII. his conflict with the King of France: taken prisoner, and dies:
Platina's good Counsel to all Rulers, 224. The Clergy not to be taxed by
Princes, 235. The Pope settled in France by Clement V. Continues 70 Years, 236.
Above 2 years vacancy, ibid. 40. Articles of the King of France against
Boniface VIII. Three Herisies of Petrus Joannis, 1. The rational soul, as such
is not forma corporis humani. 2. Grace habitual, not infused in baptism to
Infants. 3. The Spear pierced Christ before his death, 242. The Heresy of the
Beguines and Beguardes for perfection, ibid. Pope Clements Decrees, De fide. 1.
Of the form of the body (the soul.) 2. Infants infused Grace. 3. Usury a sin.
4. To be restored. The contrary to suffer as Heretics, ibid. The falsehood of
some of these new Articles of Faith, 243. Magistrates excommunicated that
disgrace wicked, Priests, 247. Or compel them to answer to them, 248. Popes and
Councils condemn each other as Heretics, 250. The Pope claims the Empire by
Escheate, 251. The Priest to take the name of every Parishoner, that being
confessed and confirmed they may communicate only by his counsel, 252. The
Greek affairs, 256. A Toletane Council Decree that their Provincial
Constitutions bind only ad poenam, not ad culpam, lest Christians Consciences
be burdened, 257. After seventy years residence at Avignion, forty years more
there were two Popes (and sometime more) one at Avignion and one at Rome.
Discord chooses an honest Pope, but Concord an Antipope. Their Wars: The Pope
drowneth Cardinals in Sacks, and makes twenty nine new ones in one day, 260.
Italy still the most unpeaceable warring place of the World, 262, 263. The
Popes bloody way of curing Schism. 263. The Council of Pisa thinking to have
but one Pope made a third, 267. Who Deposed King Ladislaus, 268. CHAP. 13. The
Councils of Constance, Basil, etc. That at Constance, called by Pope John 21
(alias 22 or 23 or 24) by Sigismund the Emperors means, Councils above the
Pope, 3. Wickliffs Articles, 6. One is, that they are Traitors to Christ, who
give over preaching, and hearing Gods word, for men's Excommunications, 6, 54.
heinous Articles against Pope John, commonly called The Devil incarnate: An
obstinate Heretic, denying the life to come, etc. 8. He ratifieth all himself,
and with other two Popes is deposed, 9. A decree against giving the Sacramental
Cup, though Christ and the Ancient Church used it, 10. Articles against John
Hus as Wickliff's; More as his own, 12, 13. Excommunication must not make us
leave off Preaching: Against Hierome of Prague breaking safe Conducts, 14, 15.
The third Pope deposed, 16. Decrees for frequent General Councils: Popes
Elections regulated: A new Pope chosen, 17. The Fate of P. John and the rest,
18, 19. Continued Wars at Rome, against the Pope, and in Italy, 23. The Council
at Basil. The Bohemians case: Their four Articles, 1. For the full Sac^ament.
2. For correcting public Crimes. 3. For liberty to preach Gods Word. 4.
Against the Clergies civil Power: all eluded, 24. Bishop Augustinus de Roma's
errors (Phanatick) Pardon of all sins confessed with a contrite heart, sold for
money and fasting, 27. Their Catholic Verities: 1. For Councils Supremacy. 2.
They may not be dissolved, removed, prorogued, but consenting. 3. Its Heresy
to oppugn these 28. P. Eugenins deposed as a pertinacious Heretic, etc.. 22.
Queries hereon, 30. The immaculate Conception decreed, 31. Two Popes again, 32.
Epistles of and against the Pope, 33. Four Treatises against the Bohemians four
great Articles, 34, 35. God only pardons the fault, and the Pope part of
Church Penances. Whether silenced Preachers must cease: Unjust Sentences not
regardable, confessed: The Council confirmed, 35, 36. A Council at Briges
confirms this, 37. The Council at Florence: Two General Councils at once, 38.
The Romans still fight against the Pope, 39. Constantinople lost, ib. P. Pius
2. his Character and Sentences: For Priests Marriage: Yet for Rome's Universal
Headship to be received as necessary to salvation, 44. P. Paul 2. a just and
clement Simoniast and Tyrant: Tormenteth Platina and many others: Accuses them
of Heresy for praising Plato and Gentile Learning, etc. Against Learning, 45.
P. Sixtus Wars and treachery, 46. Denying the Decrees of a General Council de
fide (of the immaculate conception of B. M.) no Heresy, 47. P. Inoc. 8. fights
to be King of Naples, 49. Pope Alexander the Sixth his ugly Character, and his
Son Caesar Borgia's Villainies: Both drinking the poison prepared for others:
The Pope dies of it, 50. Pius 3. 51. P. Julius 2. Italy in blood still by him,
52. Councils against the Pope: The King of France excommunicated, 53, 54. The
Anti-Council at Lateran, against the Pisane, against the French pragmat.
Sanction: The not able Titles of the Pope, 55. Decreed that Simoniacal Election
of Popes is null, and gives no Authority, (which nullifieth the Roman
succession) 56. Decrees about Souls, 57. Leo 10. a Cardinal at 13. and an
Archbishop in his Childhood: His Wars and bloodshed, 58. Luther: The
Reformation: The end of Charles 5. 59. Leo's death, 60. Reformers drive the
Papists to Learning, 61. All Papist Princes owe their safety, Crowns, and
deliverance from Papal deposition to the Reformation; and Italy its peace, 62.
The History of the Reformation, and of Papists Murders of Martyrs passed by,
63. Freder. of Saxony refuses the Empire and Money, and chose Charles, 64.
Thirty five cases for which men must be denied Communion in the Eucharist, 65.
Later Reforming Papist Councils, 66, etc. The Conclusion, what this History
specially discovers, 70. A Poem of Mr. George Herbert's, called The Church
Militant. CHAP. 14. A Confutation of Papists and Sectaries, who deny and oppose
the Ministry of the Reformed Churches. CHAP. 15. A Confutation of the profane
Opposers of the Ministry.
An Account of some Books lately Printed for, and to be Sold by Thomas Simmons,
at the Prince's Arms, in Ludgate Street.
A Supplement to Knowledge, and Practice: Wherein the main things necessary to
be known and believed, in order to Salvation, are more fully explained, and
several new Directions given for the promoting of real Holiness, both of Heart
and Life: To which is added a serious disswasive from some of the reigning and
Customary sins of the Times, viz. Swearing, Lying, Pride, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Discontent, Covetousness, and Earthly-mindedness,
Anger, and Malice, and Idleness; by Sam. Cradock, B. D. late Rector of
North-Cadbury, in Somersetshire: Useful for the instruction of private
Families: Price bound 4 s.

De Analogia, sive Art linguae Latinae Commentariolus: In quo omnia, etiam
reconditioris Gramaticae, Elementa ratione nova tractantur, and ad brevissimos
Canones rediguntur: In usum Provectioris Adolescentiae. Opera Wilhelmi Baxteri
Philistoris, Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

The lively Effiges of the Reverend Mr. Matthew Pool: So well performed as to
represent his true Idea, to all that knew him, or had a Veneration for him:
Designed on purpose to befriend those that would prefix it to his Synopsis
Criticorum, Price 6 d.

Moral Prognostications: 1. What shall befall the Churches on Earth, till their
Concord, by the Restitution of their Primitive Purity, Simplicity, and Charity:
2. How that Restitution is like to be made (if ever) and what shall befall them
thenceforth unto the end, in that Golden Age of Love: Written by Richard
Baxter, when by the Kings Commission, we in vain treated for Concord, 1661. and
now Published 1680, Price 1s.

The Nonconformists Advocate; or an Account of their Judgment in certain things
in which they are mis-understood: Written principally in Vindication of a
Letter from a Minister to a Person of Quality, showing some Reasons for his
Nonconformity, Price 1s.

There is Published every Thursday, a Mercurius Librarius, or A Faithful
Account of all Books and Pamphlets Published every Week: In which may be
inserted any thing fit for a Public Advertisement, at a moderate Rate.

Directions to the Binder of Baxter's Church History, etc.
After the Title Sheet follows a, b, c, d, e; then B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K,
L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S; then AA, BB, CC, DD, EE, FF, GG, HH, II, KK, LL, MM,
NN, OO, PP; then SS, TT, VV, XX, YY, ZZ, AAA, BBB, CCC, DDD, EEE; then GGG; and
so on to QQQ; which Signiture ends the Book.

Church History OF BISHOPS And their COUNCILS ABRIDGED, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the sacred Ministry, Episcopacy and Councils, necessary Premonitions: and
of the Design of this Book.
. 1. GOD that could have enlightened the Earth without the Sun and Stars, could
immediately alone have taught his Church, and communicated knowledge to
mankind: But as he is the most communicative good, he was pleased not only to
make his Creatures receptive of his own influx, but also to give them the use
and honor of being efficient sub-communicants under him, and causes of good to
themselves and to one another: And as his Power gave Being and Motion, his
Wisdom gave Order and Harmony, and his Love gave Goodness and Perfection,
felicity and love, as he is the creating and conserving Cause of Nature; and
this in much inequality, as he was the free disposer of his own* so in the
Kingdom of Grace he does by the Spirit of Life, Light, and Love* 1. Quicken and
strengthen the dead and weak souls, and awaken the slumbering and slothful; 2.
Illuminate the dark with Faith and Knowledge; and 3. Sanctify the malignant
Enemies of holiness, by the power of his communicated love, making them friends
and joyful lovers: This Spirit first filled the Humane Nature of Christ our
Head; who first communicated it to some chosen persons in an eminent manner and
degree, as Nature makes the heart and brain and other principal parts to be
organical, in making, preserving, and governing the rest. To these he gave an
eminence of Power to work Miracles, of Wisdom to propagate the Word of life,
and infallibly by Preaching and Writing promulgate and record his sacred
Gospel, and of holy love to kindle the like by zealous holiness in the hearts
of others. To these organical persons he committed the Economy of being the
witnesses of his words and actions, his resurrection and ascension, and of
recording them in writing, of planting his first Churches, and sealing the
truth of their testimony by many Miracles, promising them his Spirit to perform
all that he committed to their trust, and to bring all to their remembrance,
and to lead them into all truth, and to communicate instrumentally his Spirit
to others, the sanctifying gifts by blessing their Doctrine, and the miraculous
gifts by their imposition of hands.

. 2. By these principal Ministers the first Church was planted at Jerusalem,
(fitliest called the Mother Church) and after by those that were sent thence
many Churches were gathered in many Kingdoms of the world, darkness being not
able to resist the light. The Apostles and Evangelists and Prophets delivered
to them the Oracles of God, teaching them to observe all things that Christ had
commanded them, and practically teaching them the true Worship of God, ordering
their Assemblies, and ordaining them such Officers for sacred Ministration as
Christ would have continued to the end of the world, and showing the Churches
the way by which they must be continued, and describing all the work of the
Office appointed them by Christ.

. 3. The Apostles were not the Authors of the Gospel, or of any essential part
of the Christian Religion, but the Receivers of it from Christ, and Preachers
of it to the world: Christ is the Author and finisher, or perfecter of our
faith. But they had besides the power of infallible remembering, knowing and
delivering it, a double power about matters of Order in the Church: 1. By the
special gift of the Spirit's inspiration, to found and stablish such Orders as
were to continue to the end, and none that came after them might change, they
being the Ordinances of the Holy Ghost in them. 2. Temporarily, pro re nata, to
make convenient mutable Constitutions, in matters left by the great Legislator
to humane prudence, to be determined according to his general regulating Laws.
In this last the Apostles have Successors; but not in the former: No other have
their Gift, and therefore not their Authority: No men can be said to have an
Office that gives them Right to exercise abilities which they never had nor
shall have.

. 4. Christ summed up all the Law in LOVE to God and Man, and the works of
Love; and all the Gospel in Faith, and Hope, and Love by them kindled and
exercised by the Spirit which he gives them; even by the Belief and Trust of
his Merits, Sacrifice, Intercession and Promises, and the prospect of the
future Glory promised, fortifying us to all holy duties of obedience, and
diligent seeking what he has promised, and to patient bearing of the Cross,
conquering the inordinate love of the world and flesh and present life, and
improving all our present sufferings, and preparing for his coming again, and
for our change and entrance into our Masters joy.

. 5. Christ summed up the Essentials of Christianity in the Baptismal Covenant,
in which we give up our selves in Faith, Hope, and consenting Love, to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and in
which God receives us in the Correlations as his own. And all that are truly
thus baptized are Christened, and are to be esteemed and loved as Christians,
and to be received into Christian Communion in all Christian Churches where
they come, until by apostasy or impenitency in certain disobedience to the
Laws of Christ, in points necessary to Christian Communion, they forfeit that
privilege. Nor are men to deprive them of the great benefit thus given them by
Christ, on pretense of any wit or holiness, or power, to amend Christ's terms,
and make the Church Doors narrower, or tie men to themselves for worldly ends.
Yet must the Pastors still difference the weaker Christians from the stronger,
and labor to edify the weak, but not to cast them out of the Church.

. 6. The sacred Ministry is subordinate to Christ in his Teaching, Governing,
and Priestly Office, and thus essentiated by Christ's own institution, which man
has no power to change: Therefore under Christ they must teach the Church by
sacred Doctrine, guide them by that and sacred Discipline, called The power of
the Keys (that is of judging who is fit to enter by Baptism, to continue, to
partake of the Communion, to be suspended or cast out) and to lead them in the
public Worship of God, interceding in Prayer and speaking for them, and
administering to them the Sacraments or holy Seals of the Covenant of God.

. 7. The first part of the Ministers O^^ice is about the unbelieving world, to
convert them to the Faith of Christ; and the second perfective part about the
Churches. Nor must it be thought that the first is done by them as mere private
men.

. 8. As Satan fell by pride, and overthrew man by tempting him to pride (to
become as Gods in Knowledge) so Christ himself was to conquer the Prince of
pride by humility, and by the Cross, by a life of suffering; contemned by the
blind and obstinate world, making himself of no reputation, despising the shame
of suffering as a Malefactor (a Traitor and Blasphemer:) And the bearing of the
Cross was a principal part of his Precepts and Covenant to his Disciples,
without which they could not be his Followers. And by Humility they were to
follow the Captain of their Salvation, in conquering the Prince of pride, and
in treading down the Enemie-world, even the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and pride of life, which are not of the Father but of the world.

. 9. Accordingly Christ taught his chief Disciples, that if they were not so
converted as to become as little children, they could not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18. 3. His School receives not masterly Disciples,
but humble teachable Learners, that become fools that they may be wise.

And when they were disputing and seeking which of them should be greatest, he
earnestly rebuked all such thoughts, setting a little child before them,
telling them that the Princes of the Earth exercise authority, and are called
Benefactors (or by big Names) but with them it should not be so; but he that
would be the greatest must be servant of^ all, Luke 22. showing them that it
was not a worldly grandeur, nor forcing power by the Sword (which belongs to
Civil Magistrates) which was to be exercised by the Pastors of the Church: But
that he that would be the Chiefest, must be most excellent in Merit, and most
serviceable to all, and get his honor and do his work by meriting the respect
and love of Volunteers. The Sword is the Magistrates, who are also Christ's
Ministers; (for all Power is given him, and he is Head over all things to the
Church.) But they are eminently the Ministers of his Power; but the Pastors and
Teachers are most eminently Ministers of his Paternal and saving love and
wisdom. And by wisdom and love to do their work. The Word preached and applied
generally and particularly (by the Keys) is their Weapon or Arms, and not the
Sword.

The Bohemians therefore knew what they said, when they seemed damnable
Heretics to the worldly Clergy that destroyed them, when they placed their
Cause in these four Articles: 1. To have the whole Sacrament, Bread and Wine.
2. To have free leave for true Ministers to preach the word of God (without
unjust silencing of proud worldly men that cannot stand before the truth.) 3.
To have Temporal Dominion (or Government by the Sword, and power over men's
Bodies and Estates) taken from the Clergy. 4. To have gross sin suppressed by
the lawful Magistrate by the Sword.

. 10. Had it been necessary to the Churches Union against Schism or Heresy for
Christians to know that Peter or some one of his Apostles must be his
Vicar General, and Head of his Church to whom all must obey, who can believe
that Christ would not only have silenced so necessary a point, but also at a
time when he was desired or called to decide it, have only spoken so much
against it, to take down all such Expectations. Yea we never read that Peter
exercised any Authority or Jurisdictions over any other of the Apostles, nor
more than other Apostles did; much less that ever he chose a Bishop to be Lord
of the Church, as his Successor. Nay he himself seems to foresee this
mischief, and therefore says, 1. Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. The Elders which are among
you I exhort, who am also an Elder and a Witness of the Sufferings of Christ,
and also a Partaker of the Glory that shall be revealed. (These are his
Dignities.) Feed the Flock of God which is among you, (not out of your reach
and hearing in a vast Diocese) taking the oversight, not by constraint, but
willingly (and on willing men) not for filthy lucre, but of a ready wind;
neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage, but being Examples to the Flock; and
when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that
fades not away.

. 11. Nothing is more certain than that the Church for above 300 years had no
power of the Sword, that is, forcibly to meddle with and hurt men's Bodies or
Estates, (except what the Apostles had by miracle): And to this day no
Protestants, and not most Papists claim any such Power as of Divine
Institution, but only plead that the Secular Powers are bound by the Sword to
destroy such as are judged Heretics by the Bishops, and to punish such as
contemn the censures of the Church.

. 12. He that would see more for the Power of Princes vindicated from the
Clergies Claim and Usurpation, may find much in many old Treatises, written for
the Emperors against the Pope, collected by Goldastus de Monarch. and in Will.
Barclay, but much better in Bishop Bilson, of Obedience, and in Bishop Andrew's
Tortura Torti, and in Bishop Buckridge Roffensis of the Power of Kings, and
much in Spalatensis de Repub.

. 13. The Universality of Christians is the Catholic Church, of which Christ
is the only Head or Sovereign; but it is the duty of these to worship God in
solemn Assemblies, and to live in a holy Conversation together; and to join in
striving against sin, and to help each other in the way to life; therefore
Societies united for these ends are called, Particular Churches.

. 14. When the Apostles had converted a competent number of Christians, they
gathered them into such Assemblies, and as a Politic Society, set over them
such Ministers of Christ, as are before described, to be their Guides.

. 15. These Officers are in Scripture called sometime Elders, and sometimes
Bishops, to whom Deacons were added to serve them and the Church subordinately.
Dr. Hammond has well described their Office in in his Annotat. which was to
preach constantly in public, and private, to administer both Sacraments, to
pray and praise God with the People, to Catechize, to visit and pray with the
sick, to comfort troubled Souls, to admonish the unruly, to reject the
impenitent, to restore the penitent, to take care of the poor, and in a word,
of all the Flock.

. 16. The Apostles set usually more than one of these Elders or Bishops in
every Church, not as if one might not rule the Flook where no more was
necessary, but according to their needs, that the work might not be undone for
want of Ministers.

. 17. They planted their Churches usually in Cities, because Christians
comparatively to the rest were few (as Sects are among us) and no where else
usually enough for a Society, and because the Neighbour-scattered Villages
might best come to the Cities near them; not but that it was lawful to plant
Churches in the Country, where there were enough to constitute them, and
sometimes they did so, as by Clemens Roman. ad Corinth by History appears.

. 18. Grotius thinks that one City at first had diverse Churches and Bishops
and that they were gathered after the manner of the Synagogues; and Dr. Hammond
thinks that for some time there were two Churches and Bishops in many Cities,
one of Jews and one of Gentiles; and that in Rome Paul and Peter had two
Churches, whom Linus and Cletus did succeed, till they were united in Clemens.

. 19. There is great evidence of History that a particular Church of the
Apostles settling was essentially only [a Company of Christians, Pastors and
People associated for personal holy communion and mutual help in holy Doctrine,
Worship, Conversation, and Order.]

Therefore it never consisted of so few or so many, or so distant as to be
incapable of such personal help and Communion: But was ever distinguished as
from accidental Meetings, so from the Communion of many Churches or distant
Christians, which was held but by Delegates, Synods of Pastors or Letters, and
not by personal help, in presence.

Not that all these must needs always meet in the same place: but that usually
they did so, or at due times at least, and were no more nor more distant than
could so meet: Sometimes Persecution hindered them; sometimes the Room might be
too small: Even Independent Churches among us sometimes meet in diverse places:
and one Parish has diverse Chapels for the aged and weak that are unfit for
travel.

. 20. Scotus began the opinion (as Davenport, Fr. a Santa Clara intimates) and
Dion Petavius improved it, and Dr. Hammond has largely asserted it, that the
Apostles at first planted a single Bishop in each Church, with one or more
Deacons, and that he had power in time to ordain Elders of a different Order,
Species, or Office, and that the word Elder and Bishop and Pastor in Scripture
never signify these subject Elders, but the Bishops only, and, says he, there
is no evidence that there were any of the subject sort of Presbyters in
Scripture-times: Which concession is very kindly accepted by the Presbyterians;
but they call for proof that ever these Bishops were authorized to make a new
Species of Presbyters which were never made in Scripture-times? and indeed they
vehemently deny it, and may well despair of such a proof.

. 21. But for my part I believe the foundation unproved (that then there was
but one Elder in a Church) and think many Texts of Scripture fully prove the
contrary. But I join with Dr. Hammond in believing that in Scripture-times
there was no particular Church that had more stated meetings for public
Communion than one: For if there was so long but one Elder, there could be but
one such Assembly at once; for they had no such Assemblies which were not
guided by a Presbyter or Bishop, in Doctrine, Worship, Sacraments and
Discipline: And they used to have the Eucharist every Lords day at least, and
often much more. And one man can be at once but in one place.

. 22. I have elsewhere fully proved, that the ancient Churches that had Bishops
were no bigger than our Parishes (and few a quarter so big as the greatest of
them) and consisted of no more than might have such present personal Communion
as is before described; the proofs are too large to be here recited. Ignatius
is the plainest, who says, that this was the note of a Churches Unity, that
[To every Church there was one Altar, and one Bishop, with his Fellow
Presbyters and Deacons:] And elsewhere charge the Bishop to take account of
his Flock whether they all come to Church, even Servant-men and Maids.

Clemens Romanus before him intimates the like, mentioning even Country
Bishops.

Justin Martyr's Description of the Christian Assemblies plainly proves it.

Tertullian's Description of them and many other passages in him prove it more
fully. He professes that they took not the Lord's Supper save only from the
hand of the Bishop (Antistitis manu) who could give it but to one Assembly at
once.

Many Canons also fully show it (elsewhere cited) some appoint all the people
to join with the Bishop on the great Festivals of the year, even above 300
years after Christ.

The Custom also of choosing Bishops shows it, where all the people met and
chose him: Yea in Cyprian's time the Exercise of Discipline proves it, when
even in such great Churches as Carthage it was done in the presence of the
people, and with their consent.

. 23. The only Churches in the World, that for about 200 years after Christ, if
not more, had more than one ordinary Assembly, for Church Communion, though but
like our Parish Chapels, were Rome and Alexandria, as far as I can learn in
any History: For that at Jerusalem for all the numbers had no more stated
Members than often met in one place (excepting occasional absents). And I find no
reason to believe that ever these two (the chief Cities of the Empire,) had so
long more than some London Parishes (which have above sixty thousand souls as
is supposed) no nor near (if half) so many. And because elsewhere I have only
excepted these two Cities, I will yet add somewhat to show, that even there the
case was not as many now imagine.

. 24. Cornelius in an Epistle to Fabius of Antioch (in Eusebius. Hist. l. and c.
43. alias 42.) says that in the Church of Rome were 46 Presbyters, 7 Deacons,
and of other Officers 94. that is, 42 Acolites, 52 Exorcists and Readers, with
Porters, Widows, and impotent persons above 1050 souls, who are all relieved by
the grace and goodness of Almighty God, etc.] This is the chief testimony in
the third Age to prove that this one Church had more than could either meet in
one place, or hold personal Communion.

. 25. But let it be considered, 1. That partly for the honor of qualified
persons, and partly that all the Church might in season have the help of all
men's gifts, they were so far in the ancient Churches from having so few as Dr.
Hammond and Petavius imagine, that they multiplied Officers, and dignified, and
so employed a great part of the Church that had useful gifts: Insomuch that a
most credible Witness shortly after, even Gregory Nazianzen, says, Orat. 1.
Page 45. that by the intrusion of men for dignity and maintenance, The
Church-Rulers were almost more than the Subjects. The words are (...), etc. Of
others I am ashamed, who when they are no better than others, (and I wish they
were not much worse) thrust themselves upon the most holy Mystories, as we say,
with unwashen hands and profane minds, and before they are worthy to approach
to holy things, ambitiously enter the Vestry it self (or Chancell) and press
and thrust themselves about the holy Table, as if they judged this Order not to
be an example of Virtue, but an occasion and help of getting maintenance, and
not to be an Office liable to give Account, but a Command in which they may be
free from Censure: Who being miserable (or pitiful persons) as to Piety, and
unhappy as to Splendor, that is, low in the World and Parts) do now in number
almost exceed those whom they are over (or are to govern). [This would make one
suspect that there were then many Ruling Elders that preached not; but it is
plain they had an Office about the Sacraments.] Therefore this Evil increasing
and getting strength with time, it seems to me that they will have none under
them to rule, (or guide) but that all will turn Teachers and will Prophecy,
instead (as was promised by God) of being all taught of God: So that of old the
History and Parable said, Saul also is among the Prophets. For there neither
now is nor ever was so great plenty of any other thing as there is now of these
frequent Shames and Criminals; for other things, as they have their flourishing
time, have also their decay. And though to repress their impetuousness be a
work above my strength, yet certainly to hate it and be ashamed is not the
least part of Piety.

Judge by this, what numbers of Officers of Clergymen then the Church had.

. 26. Next for the Poor, consider their proportions in and by other Churches;
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Edit Savil. p. 421. supposes the Poor of the Church of
Antioch (whence he came) to have been about the tenth part and dividing the
City into three Ranks, he accounts a tenth part rich, and a tenth part poor,
and the rest of a middle Estate between both. Now in Chrysostom's time the
Church was so high, being owned by the greatest Emperors as we may well
suppose almost all or most of the rich came in: Whereas at Rome in the time of
Cornelius it being under reproach and cruel persecution, we may well conclude,
that most of the rich stood out, and they might say with Paul, not many Great,
not many Noble are called; few rich men comparatively receiving the Gospel,
it is most likely that the poor were then far more than a tenth part, if not the
greater part of the Church. But suppose them a tenth part, which is not
probable, the whole Church of Rome then would be but 10500 Souls, which is
about the fifth part or sixth as big as Martins Parish, and about a quarter as
big as Stepney Parish, and about a third or fourth part as big as Giles
Cripplegate Parish, and not half so big as Giles in the Fields and other
Parishes. Moreover Chrysostom, Hom. 11. in Act. p. 674. computes the poor at
Constantinople to be about half as many as all the other Christians, and this
in the most flourishing City and Age: And by this measure they would yet fall
further short.

It may be you will say, that these were not the poorest of all that were kept
by the Church: But it is known that ever since the times of extraordinary
Community, the Churches relieved all the needy according to the several degrees
of their wants; and these were such as were in want, though not equally, and
they are such poor as were distinguished not only from the Rich, but also from
the middle sort; and such as the Church took care to relieve.

. 27. And as for Alexandria, the greatest City of the Empire next Rome (as
Josephus says, de bello Iud. l. 5. c. ult. it is certain that in the third
Century the Christians had more Meeting Places for Divine Worship than one, and
in the fourth Century had many: Epiphanius names diverse, Haeres. 69. p. 728.
Arius having one wherein he preached, had that advantage to propogate his
Heresy. But all know that the building of Temples began after Emperors were
Christians, and the fair Churches which, Eusebius says, they had in
Dioclesians time (till he destroyed them) were but like our Tabernacles or
private Churches, and grew to Number and Ornament but a little before, as
Eusebius intimates. It was a good while before there were two Churches, even
in Constantinople. Indeed, it is noted, as a singularity, that they had two
Churches: But they mistake, that apply that to two Meeting Places, which is
spoken of two Societies, because in Meletius time they had two Bishops.

. 28. But yet let us see how big the Christian Church was in this great City,
even when it had many Chapels; even in Athanasius time, in the fourth Century,
Tom. 1. Ed. Commel. p. 531. in his Apology to Constant. you may find (in words
too large to be all transcribed) that he being accused for assembling the
People in the Great Church, makes this part of his Defense, [The confluence of
the People at the Easter Solemnity was so great, that if they had met in
several Assemblies (or by parties) the other Churches were so narrow or small
that they would have been in danger of suffering by the Crowd; nor would the
universal Harmony and Concord of the People have been so visible and
efficacious if they had met in Parcels; Therefore he concludes it better for
the whole Multitude to meet in that great Church, (being a place large enough
to receive them altogether) and to have a concurrence of the People all with
one Voice (in Symphony:) For if according to Christ's promise where two shall
agree of any thing it shall be done for them -- how prevalent will be the
One-voice of so numerous a People assembled together, and saying, Amen, to God?
Who therefore would not admire? Who would not count it a happiness to see so
great a People met together in one place? And how did the People rejoice to see
one another, whereas formerly they assembled in several places.] Thus plainly
Athanasius.

I do not hence gather that every Man, Woman, and Child was present: In our
Parish Churches that hold the Assembly, some are there, and usually some stay
at home and come by turns: But it seems hence plain that even in Alexandria
the Christians were no more than that the main Body of them at great
Solemnities could meet and hear in one Assembly. Which in many of our Parishes
they cannot do.

. 29. Add to this, that Athanasius tells them that his Predecessor Alexander
did as much as he had done, on such occasions assembling their whole Multitude
in one Church before it was dedicated, page 532.

. 30. I add a further Argument from the City it self, as offered me also while
I was writing this, by a learned Friend in his own Words.

This City was, by Strabo's description of it, like a Soldiers Coat, whose
length at either side was almost thirty furlongs, its breadth at either end
seven or eight Furlongs, Geogr. li. 17. p. 546. So the whole compass will be
less than ten Miles. A third or fourth part of this was taken up with public
Buildings, Temples, and Royal Palaces, ibid. Thus is two miles and a half, or
three and a quarter taken up. I take this to be that Region of the City which
Epiphanius calls (...) (where he tells us was the famous Library of Ptolomy
Philadelphus) and speaks of it in his time as destitute of Inhabitants, de
ponder, and mensi^r. n. 9. p. 166. A great part of the City was assigned to the
Jews. So Strabo indefinitely, as Josephus quotes him, Antiqu. Jud. l. 14. c.
12. Others tell us more puncutally that their share was two of the five
Divisions (Vshers Annals Lat. p. 859.) Though many of them had their
habitations in the other Divisions, yet they had two fifth parts entire to
themselves: And this is I suppose the (...) which Josephus says the
Successors of Alexander set apart for them, Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 21. Thus we
see how six or seven miles of the ten are disposed of. The greatest part of the
Citizens (as at Rome and other Cities) is the beginning of the fourth Age were
Heathens. Else Antonius had wronged their City, who in Athanasius time is
brought in thus, exclaiming by Jerome, Vit. Paul. p. 243. Civitas meretrix in
quam totius orbis Daemonia confluxere, etc. A charge thus formed supposes the
prevailing Party to be guilty. But let us suppose them equal and their
proportion half of the five or four miles remaining. Let the rest be divided
between the Orthodox, and the Arians, and Novatians, and other sorts. And if we
be just, a large part will fall to the share of Heretics and Sectaries. For
(not to mention others) the Novations had several Churches and a Bishop there,
till Cyrils time, Vid. Socrat. Hist. l. 7. c. 7. The Arians were a great part
of those that professed Christianity, Sozom. Hist. li. 1. c. 14. And if we may
judge of the Followers by the Leaders, no less than half: For whereas there were
nineteen Presbyters and Deacons in that Church (Theodor. Hist. li. 4. c. 20.)
(Twelve was the number of their Presbyters by their ancient Constitution, and
seven of their Deacons as appears by Eutychius, here and at Rome, and
elsewhere) six Presbyters with Arius, and five Deacons fell off from the
Catholics, Sozom. Hist. li. 1. c. 14. But let the Arians be much fewer, yet
will not the proportion of the Catholic Bishops part in this City be more than
that of a small Town, one of eight or twelve Furlongs in compass. And so the
number of Christians on this account will be no more than might well meet for
Worship in one place.

If the Reader will peruse Epiphanius History of the Fraction between Alexander
and the Followers of Meletius in Alexandria, how Alexander was impatient with
their separate Meetings, when Meletius was dead (though till then two Bishops
and Churches lived quietly in one City) because they came not to his Church;
with the rest of the story, he will easily see what a Church was then even in
Alexandria.

Thus you see the difference of a just computation, and the hasty accounts of
men, that judge of Places and Persons as they are in their misled imaginations,
and not as they were indeed and truth. Mr. Dodwell in a Letter to me lays so
much on the number of the Officers and Poor before mentioned, as if it proved
undoubtedly a Diocesane Church, when the conclusion arises from an erroneous
comparing their Cities and times with ours, and their Presbyters with our
Parish Priests and Curats.

And when all is done a grand Patriarchal Church is not the measure of a
Diocesane, or of every Bishops Church: their Presbyters had other work than our
Curates have: They met in the same Assembly with the Bishop, and sat in a
Semicircle on each side him, and were as a College of Governors to rule one
Church, and that only by the Word (applied by the Keys) and not by the Sword,
till Cyril first usurped it, for which by Historians he is noted. If our times
tempt you to marvel how so many Officers or Clerks were maintained by so few
People, Church History affords you matter enough to resolve your doubt.

. 31. But if these two great Cities had indeed had yet more Altars and
Churches, Orbis major est Vrbe, says Hierome: Two singular Cities may not
over-weigh the contrary case of all the Churches: If any other had been like
them it would have been Antioch the third Patriarchate, when as in Ignatius
time, as is aforesaid, the Churches unity there and elsewhere was notified That
(...) local Altar is here meant, I elsewhere prove against them that say it is
but one communicating Body adhearing to one Bishop.
by [(...), One Altar (or Altar-place) and One Bishop with his Presbyters and
Deacons.]

And hence came it to be the note of a Schism, to set up Altar contra Altar
because one Bishop and Church had but one Altar. Mr. Mede (no injudicious nor
Factions man) saw this, and asserteth it from the plain words of Ignatius.

. 32. How the case came to be altered it is easy to know: But whether it was
well or ill done, is all the controversy, or the chief.

I confess there want not some that think that the Apostles had their several
assigned Provinces, and that they left them to twelve Successors, and this is
the foundation of Patriarchal or Provincial Churches, with such unproved
Dreams: 1. We doubt not but that the Apostles wisely distributed their Labors:
But we believe not that they divided the Countries into their several Dioceses,
or Provinces: nor that two of them (e. g John and Paul, Peter and Paul, James
and other Apostles) might not and did not do the work of an Apostle in the same
Country and City. Much less do we believe that one of them (e. g. James at
Jerusalem, whether an Apostle or not I contend not) was a Bishop over the
Apostles when they resided there.

2. Nor do we believe that they left any such divided Provinces to their
Successors: If they had, it is strange that we had not twelve or thirteen
Patriarchal or Provincial Churches hence noted. Which were they, and how came
they so soon to be forgotten and unknown? And why had we first but three
Patriarchs, and one of those (Alexandria) accounting from no Apostle, but from
S. Mark, and the other two reckoning from one and the same Apostle, save that
Rome reckoned from two at once, Peter and Paul, when as one City must (say
they) have but one Bishop?

. 33. The case is known; that, 1. When Christians so multiplied, that one
Assembly would not serve, but they became enough for many, the Bishops
greatness and wealth increasing with the People, they continued them all under
their own Government, and so took them all to be their Chapels, settling diverse
Altars but not diverse Bishops in one Church. 2. And herewith their work also,
by degrees, was much changed; and they that at first were most employed in
Guiding the whole Church in Gods public worship, and exercised present
discipline before them, and were the sole usual Preachers to them all, (the
rest of the Elders Preaching but when the Bishop could not, or bid them,) did
after become distant Judges, and their Government, by degrees, degenerated to a
similitude of Civil Magistracy. 3. And then they set up the old exploded
question, which of them should be the chief or greatest: And then they that had
the greatest Cities being the richest and greatest Bishops in interest, because
of the greatness and riches of their Flocks, they got the Church Government to
be distributed, much like the Roman Civil Government within that Empire; And
where the Civil Magistrate had most and largest command, they gave the
Ecclesiastical Bishop the like: And so they set up the Bishops of the three
chief Cities as Patriarchs, Rome being the first, because it was the great
Imperial Seat, as the Chalcedon Council gives the true reason. Afterward
Constantinople and Jerusalem being added, they turned them into five: And
Carthage and other places, not called Patriarchal Seats, had exempt peculiar
Jurisdictions with a power near to Patriarchs. And the rest of the Bishops
strove much for precedence, and got as large Territories as they could, and as
numerous Flocks and many Parishes, though still the name Paroeciae was used for
the whole Episcopal Church when it was turned into a Diocese.

. 34. I conceive that this Change of One Altar into a Diocesane Church of many
Altars and Parishes was not well done, but is the thing that has confounded
the Christian World, and that they ought to have increased the number of
Churches as the number of Christians did increase, as the Bees swarm into
another Hive. My Reasons are, 1. Christ and the Holy Ghost in the Apostles
having settled a Church Species and Order (like that of the Synagogues, and not
like that of the Temple,) no man ought to have changed that Form: Because they
can prove no power to do it: and because it accuses the Institution of Christ
and the Holy Ghost of insufficiency or error, which must so soon be altered by
them. Perfective addition, as an Infant grows up to Manhood, we deny not. But
who gave them power to abrogate the very Specices of the first Instituted
Churches? That the Species is altered, is certainly proved by the different
uses and Termini of the Relation. For a Church of the first Institution was a
Society joined for personal Communion in Doctrine, Worship, and holy living:
But a Diocese consisting of many score or hundred Parishes that never see or
know or come near one another, are incapable of any such present personal
Communion, and have none but Mental, and by Officers or Delegates.

2. By this means, all the Parish-Churches being turned into Chapels and
un-Churched, are all robbed of their Right; seeing each one ought to have a
Bishop and Presbyters, and the benefit of that Office and Order, which is now
denied them, and many hundred such Parishes turned into Chapels have no Bishop
to themselves but one among them all to the Diocese.

3. Because by this means true Discipline is become impossible and
unpracticable; by the distance and multitude of the people, and the distance
and paucity of Bishops: What Christ commands, Mat. 18. being as impossible to
be done in many hundred Parishes, by one Bishop and his Consistory, as the
Discipline of so many hundred Schools by one Schoolmaster (though each School
have an Usher) or the care of many hundred Hospitals by one Physician, perhaps
at twenty, or forty, or eighty, or an hundred miles distance.

4. Because it alters the ancient Office of a Bishop and of a Presbyter, and
sets new ones in the stead: As a Bishop was the Bishop of one Church, so a
Presbyter was his Assistant, Ejusdem Ordinis, in the Government of the Church,
who now is turned into a mere Usher, or Worshipping-Teacher, or Chaplain.

5. Because it certainly divides the Churches: For Christians would unite in a
Divine Institution, and the exercise of true Discipline, that will never unite
in a humane Policy which abrogateth the Divine, and certainly destroys
commanded necessary Discipline.

. 35. The very work also of the Bishop, and so the Office came thus to be
changed: Christ having appointed no other Church Governors (besides
Magistrates) but such (as Philosophers in their Schools) who were appointed to
set up Holy Societies for Divine Doctrine, Worship, and Holy Living, and to
Guide them accordingly, by Teaching, Worship, and Government by the Word,
forbidding them the Sword or Force, they are said to have the Keys of the
Church and the Kingdom of Heaven, because as Grace is Glory in the seed, the
Church is Heaven in the seed, and the Pastors were the Administrators of
Sacraments and Church Priviledges, and therefore the Judges who were fit for
them, who should be Baptized, who should Communicate, and in what rank, and who
should be denied these, admonished or excluded, and who should, as far as
belongs to others, be judged meet or unmeet for Heaven: And so the Christian
Societies were to be kept clean, and not to be like the polluted World of
Infidels. And the Pastors had no other power to use; but were to judge only
those within, and leave them without to Gods own judgment, and to the
Magistrate, who was not to punish any one for not being in or of the Church, or
for departing from it, which is a grievous punishment it self.

But Magistrates being then Heathens, the Christians were hard put to it for
the decision of their quarrels: For the love of the world and selfishness were
but imperfectly cured in them. They went to Law before Heathen Judges with each
other; and this became a snare and a scandal to them. S. Paul therefore
childeth them for not ending differences by Christian Arbitrators among
themselves, as if there were none among them wise enough to Arbitrate. Hereupon
the Churches taking none to be wiser or trustier than their Pastors, made them
their Arbitrators, and it became a censurable scandal for any to accuse a
Churchmember to a Magistrate, and to have Suits at Law. By this means, the
Bishop becoming a Stated Arbitrator, thereby became the Governor of the
Christians, but with his Presbyters and not alone. But because Bishops had no
power of the sword, to touch men's bodies or estates, but only to suspend them
from Church Communion, and Excommunicate them, or impose penitential
Confessions on them, therefore they fitted their Canons (which were the Bishops
Agreements) to this Governing use, to keep Christians under their Government
from the Magistrates. And so they made Canons, that a Fornicator or Adulterer
should be so long or so long suspended, and a Murderer so long, and so of the
rest.

. 36. And when Constantine turned Christian, he had many reasons to confirm
this Arbitrating Canonical power to the Christian Bishops by the Civil
Sanction. 1. Because he found them in possession of it as contracters by mutual
consent; and what could a Christian Prince do less than grant that to the
Christians which they chose and had. 2. Because the advancement and honor of
the Teachers and Pastors he thought tended to the honor of their Religion, and
the success of their Doctrine upon the Heathens with whom they dwelled.
Grandeur and Power much prevail with carnal minds. 3. Because he had but few
Magistrates at first that were Christians, and none that so well knew the
affairs of Christians as their own chosen Bishops. And he feared lest the power
of Heathen Magistrates over the Christians might injure and oppress them. 4. He
designed to draw the Heathens to Christianity by the honoring of Christians
above them. 5. And withal his interest lay most in their strength; For they
were the fastest part of his Soldiers and Subjects, that for Conscience and
their own Interrest, rejoiced to advance and defend him to the utmost, (when he
lost many of the Pagans) and they were not of the spirit of the old Pretorian
Soldiers, that set up and pulled down Emperors at their pleasure. Had
Constantine fallen, the Christians had much fallen with him, and had the Christians
been weakened he had been weakened: They were become his strength. And he fore
saw not the evils that afterward would follow. Some must govern, and there
were then no wiser nor better men than the Bishops and Pastors of the Churches.
And their interest in the Christian people (that chose them) was greatest: As
now all differing parties of Christians among us (Papists, Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists) would desire nothing as more conducing to their
ends, than that the King would put the greatest Power (especially of Religion)
into the hands of those Teachers whom they esteem and follow; even so was it
with the Christians in the days of Constantine: And hereupon Laws were made,
that none should compel Christians to answer in any Court of Justice, saving
before their own Bishops, and so Bishops were made almost the sole Governors
of the Christians.

. 37. By this means it is no wonder if multitudes of wicked men flocked into
the Church and defiled and dishonored it: For the Murderer that was to be
hanged if he were no Christian, was but to be kept from the Sacrament if he
were a Christian, and do some confessing penance; which was little to hanging
or other death; And so proportionably of other Crimes. Bad Christians by this
device were multiplied. The Emperor also being a Christian, worldly men are
mostly of the Religion of the Prince or highest powers.

. 38. And no man that can gather an effect from an effectual cause could doubt,
if neither Nazianzen, or any Historian had told it him, but that proud and
worldly men would strive then to be Bishops, and use all possible diligence to
obtain so great preferment: Who of them is it that would not have Command and
Honor and Wealth, if he can get it? While the great invitation to the sacred
Ministry was the winning and edifying of Souls, those that most valued Souls,
desired it (yet desired it to be kept from such Poverty and Persecution as
exposed them to hinderance and contempt). But when Riches, Reputation and
Dominion were the Baits, who knows not what sort of Appetites would be the
keenest? Christ tells us, how hardly Rich men are good and come to Heaven.
Therefore when Bishops must be all Great and Rich, either Christ must be
deceived, or it must be as hard for them to be honest Christians as for a^
Camel to go through the Needles eye. And thus, Venenum funditur in Ecclesiam.

. 39. The World being thus brought into the Church without the cure of the
worldly mind, and the Guides being so strongly tempted to be the very worst, no
wonder if the Worldly Spirit now too much rule the Church, and if those that
are yet of the same Spirit, approve, plead, and strive for what they love and
despise the business of the Cross, and Christian Humility, and Simplicity to
this day: And if Bishops have done much of their work accordingly, ever since
Constantine (and much before) it has been the Devils Work to carry on his War
against Christ and Piety, under Christ's own name, and the pretense of Piety,
as an Angel of Light and Righteousness and Unity, and to set up Pastors over
the Church of Christ, that hate the Doctrine and Life, and Cross of Christ,
that by pleading for Godliness and Concord, may be the effectual Enemies of
both, and may fight against Christ in his own Livery, under his Colors, and
with his own Arms. Whose God is their Belly, who glory in their shame, who mind
earthly things, being Enemies to the Cross of Christ: The History of whom you
will find in the following part of this Treatise.

. 40. But here I must above all remember the Reader, that he is not for this
Corruption of the Clergy, and Government of the Church, to think that the
Church here ceased to be a true Church, or that the Ministry was lost, or that
it became unlawful to hold Communion with any such Churches; much less to think
hardly of Christianity it self, as if it were no better than false Religions,
because so many of its Pastors were so bad. None of God's Counsels were
frustrate by man's sin: None of his Promises to his Church have failed. For all
this Christ is the Savior of the World, the Prince of Righteousness and Peace,
that came to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to save his people from their
Sins; and all that are given him of the Father shall come to him, and he will
cast none of them out, nor shall any take them out of his hands?

. 41. I. Let it be still remembered, that as the Chronicles of Kingdoms mention
only the public Actions of Princes and great Men, but name not the poor and
private sort, so also our Church History of Councils and public things, say
little of godly private Christians, but of Patriarchs and great Prelates, who
yet are themselves but a very small part of the Christian World.

II. Note also that every Bishop had many Presbyters; whose work was not to
strive for superiority, nor trouble the world in Councils (where usually they
came not) and so had not a quarter of the temptations that the Bishops had: And
though we find mention sometimes of the Presbyters also that were naught, yet
the number so reproved and proved bad, is not proportionable to the number of
Prelates compared among themselves, that miscarried in Councils. The Presbyters
that staid at home and followed their work in private with the Flock, and came
not on the Stage in public affairs, kept up the substance and practice of
Religion.

III. And the private Christians had yet less temptation, and were not so
overwhelmed with worldly things, nor carried away by pride and ambition and
covetousness, as the ruling party were.

IV. And the Monks, and other retired Christians, that saw the Prelates sin and
s^ares, (though many of them had their failings too, yet) no doubt kept up much
serious piety, and a holy life.

V. And no doubt but very many of the Bishops themselves were humble holy
faithful men, that grieved for the miscarriages of the rest. Though such
excellent persons as Gregory Neocesareae, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen,
Basil, Chrysostom, Augustine, Hillary, Prosper, Fulgentius, etc. were not very
common, no doubt but there were many that wrote not Books, nor came so much
into the notice of the world, but avoided contentious and factious Stirs, that
quietly and honestly conducted the Flocks in the ways of piety, love, and
justice. And some of them (as S. Martin) separated from the Councils and
Communion of the prevailing turbulent sort of the Prelates, to signify their
disowning of their sins.

VI. And often times, when the Prelates were at the worst, God raised up some
very Godly Princes, that maintained Religion more than the Clergy, and were an
honor to it when the Bishops dishonored it.

VII. And it is not to be contemned, that much piety was kept up among great
numbers of Christians, whom (for some mistake) the rest reviled and condemned
as Schismatics or Heretics. Little know we how many holy souls were among
those that are in Epiphanius Catalogue. Of the Audians and some others he
seems to confess as much himself. The Novatians were tolerated in almost all
the Empire, and had their Churches and Bishops, having the testimony of the
Orthodox that they were usually of sound faith and upright lives, and stricter
than other Christians were. And God pardons the infirmity of a small mistake
in judgment, when men are sincerely addicted to his service. Now and then a
cruel Prelate did prosecute them, but so did not the gentler sort (as Atticus,
Proclus, etc. at Constantinople, etc.) nor the Emperors themselves, save when
so instigated.

VIII. And though the Churches in the Roman Empire kept up this grandeur of
Patriarchs, Metropolitans, and rich Prelates, that after over-topped Kings, it
was not so in other parts of the Christian world, but the Clergy lived more
humbly and quietly. The Scots under Columban^s and their other Presbyters, See
Mr. Jones Hearts Sovereign, excellently describing the English Succession.
long lived in great piety without any Bishops. And when the Scots Presbyters
Finan, Aidan, etc. ordained Bishops in Northumberland, they were commonly
humble, holy men, like themselves. And both Scots and Britains so much misliked
the Romane-grandure and way, that when Augustine the Monk came in, they would
not subject themselves to the Pope, or any Foreign Prelates, nor so much as eat
and drink with the Missionaries. And the like we may say of some other
Extra-imperial Churches. The Spaniards themselves not only while Arian Goths
(of whom see the testimony of Salvian, to the shame of the Orthodox) but after
Recaredus days, for many ages, lived in great quietness, while Italy, France,
and Germany were employed in Hereticating, Cursing, Excommunicating, or bloody
Wars. The great Empire of A^assia (as the crediblest History says) never had
Bishops to this day, but only one called the A^u^^, while the whole Clergy are
exercised (though in too much ignorance) in their Priestly Office. Brocardus,
that lived at Jerusalem, testifies that those Eastern Christians, called by
the Papists, Nestorians, Iacobites, Eutychians, were commonly plain honest
Religious people, free from Heresy, and of better lives than even the
Religious of the Church of Rome, and that there were not worse men at Jerusalem
than the Roman Catholics. The Armenians have many Bishops, and one chief, but
live (though too ignorantly and superstitiously, yet) in great austerity of
life.

IX. In all ages since Prelacy swelled to the corruption of the Churches, and
annoyance of the Peace of Kings and Kingdoms, there have been still a great
number of pious lamenters of the Corruptions of the Church, that have groaned
and prayed for reformation: Insomuch, that Dr. Field maintains, that even in
the Church of Rome there have been still considerable numbers of Doctors, that
owned truth and piety, and misliked the Papal usurpations and errors. The
Waldenses and Albigenses (exceeding numerous) said, they had continued from the
Apostles, and so from the days of Sylvester (or Constantine) had dissented from
the Roman pride, and corruptions. And God has made the Protestant Churches
since the Reformation, as his Vineyard, where truth and piety have prospered,
though Satan has been still at work, and here also had too much success.

X. And it must be remembered, that God has made use of many proud and
turbulent men, to propogate and defend the truth of the Gospel: And their Gifts
have served for the good of the sincere. As the husk or chaff and straw is
useful to the Corn; so many worldly Prelates and Priests have been learned
Expositors and useful Preachers, and taught others the way to life, which they
would not go in themselves. Besides that, their very Papal power and grandeur,
which has corrupted the Church, has yet been a check to some, that would have
assaulted it by force; and as a hedge of thorns about it. Worldly interest
engages Pope, Patriarchs, and Prelates, to stand up for the Christian
Religion, because they gain by it (as Leo the 10th is said to have odiously
confessed.)

. 42. And the old Fathers, till Constantines time, did most of them think that
the last thousand years would be a time of fuller glory to the Church; as many
yet think, though I confess my self unskilful in the Prophesies.

But I make no doubt, but though this earth be so far de^erted by God, the
Glorious Kingdom which we shall shortly see, with the new Heaven and Earth,
wherein dwells righteousness, will fully confute all our present temptations
to think hardly of God or the Redeemer, because of the present corruptions and
dissentions of this lower world.

. 43. We may conjecture at former times by our own: We see now, that among the
most Reformed Churches, too often the most worldly part are uppermost, and
perhaps are the persecuters of the rest, and though they may be the smaller
part, it is they that make the noise, are the noted part that carry the name,
and that Histories write of. A few men got into places of power, seem to be all
the Church, or Nation, by the prevalency of their actions, which few dare
contradict: They may give Laws; They may have the power of Press and Pulpit, so
that nothing shall be published but what they will; They may call themselves
the Church, and call all that obey them not Schismatics and Sectaries, and
strangers may believe therefore, that it is but some few inconsiderable fellows
that are against them, when yet the far greatest part may utterly dissent and
abhor their pride. I have lived to see such an Assembly of Ministers, where
three or four leading men were so prevalent as to form a Confession of Faith in
the name of the whole party, which had that in it which particular members did
disown. And when about a controverted Article, One man has charged me deeply,
for questioning the words of the Church, others that were at the forming of
that Article, have laid it all on that same man, as by his impetuousness
putting in that Article, the rest being loath to strive much against him, and so
it was he himself that was the Church, whose authority he so much urged, at
least the effectual signifying part. We cannot judge what is commonest by what
is uppermost, or in greatest power. In diverse Parishes now, where the Minister
is conformable, perhaps ten parts of the people do dislike it; and sometimes
you may see but three or four persons with him at the Common Prayers; And yet
all know, that Dissenters are talked of as a few singular Fanatics. I compare
not the Causes, but conclude, that so also for the Numbers, humble Godly
persons might be very numerous, though only the actions of worldly Prelates do
take up most of the History of the Church.

Yea, I believe, that among the Papists themselves, five to one of the people,
were they free from danger, would declare their dislike of a great part of the
actions and Doctrines of their Prelates, and that the greatest part that are
named Papists, are not such thoroughly and at the heart.

When the Rulers, Scribes, and Pharisees were against Christ, and persecuted
him and the truth, the common people so much adhered to him, that the
persecutors durst not seize on him openly by force, but were fain to use a
Traitor, to apprehend him in the night, and in a solitary place, lest they
should be stoned by the people, who said, Never man spoke as this man speaks.

. 44. Let us not therefore turn Church History into a temptation, nor think
basely of the Church, or Christianity, or Christ, because of Papal and
Prelatical pride and tyranny. God can make use of a surly porter to keep his
doors; yea, a mastiff-dog may be a keeper of the house; and his Corn has grown
in every Age, not only with straw and chafe, but with some tares: And yet he
has gathered, and will gather, all his chosen.

. 45. Nor is the Ministry it self to be therefore dishonored: For as at this
day, while a few turbulent Prelates persecute good men, and much of the
Ministry is in too many Countries lamentably corrupted, yet is Religion, piety,
and honesty kept up by the Ministry, and never was well kept up without it: For
the Faithful Ministers labor still, and their very sufferings, further the
Gospel, and what they may not do publicly they do privately.

Yea, their very Writings show, that still there are such as God does qualify
to do his work, even among the Papists, he that reads the pious Writings of
such men as Gerson, and Gerhardus Zutphaniensis, and Thaulerus, Thomas a
Kempis, Ferus, and many such others, will see that Gods spirit was still
illuminating and sanctifying souls. And he that reads such Lives as Philip
Nerius, persecuted by the Bishop as an ambitious Hypocrite, for setting up more
serious Exercises of Religion than had been ordinarily used among the
Formalists, (to say nothing of such privater men as M. de Ren^y and many
others) will see that it is not all Church-tyranny and corruption, though very
heinous, that will prove that Christ has not a Holy Generation whom he will
save.

. 46. Yea among the very corrupted sort of the Clergy, many that are overcome
with temptations in that point, and take usurpation and tyranny, and worldly
pomp and violence for Order, Government, and the interest of the Church, have
yet much good in other respects: Even among the Cardinals there have been such
men as Charles Boromaus, Baronius (Nerius's companion) Bellarmine, and others,
that would Preach and practice the common Doctrines of serious piety: Yea,
among the Jesuits there have been diverse that have Preached, Written, and lived
very strictly; much more among their Friars: and such Bishops as Sales: And
though their times and corruptions blemished their piety, I dare not think they
nullified it.

. 47. And it shows the excellency of the Sacred Office, 1. That Christ did
first make it as the noble Organical part of his Church, to form the rest. 2.
That he endued the first Officers with the most noble and excellent gifts of
his spirit. 3. That he founded and built his Church by them at first. 4. Yea,
that he himself preached the Gospel, and is called The Minister of the
Circumcision, the chief Shepherd, and the Bishop of our Souls. 5. That he has
used them to enlarge, confirm, preserve, and edefie his Church to this day. 6.
That he makes the best of them to be the best of men. 7. That he puts into
the hearts of all good Christians a special love and honor of them. 8. That he
uses even the worser sort to do good, while they do hurt; especially some of
them. 9. That Satan striveth so hard to corrupt them and get them on his side.
10. That Religion ordinarily dies away, or decays, when they fail and prove
unable and unfaithful. 11. That Christ commands men so much to hear, receive
and obey them, and has committed his Word and Keys to them, as his Stewards.
12. And has promised them a special reward for their faithfulness: and
commanded all to pray for them and their preservation and success. And the
nature of the things tells us, that as knowledge in lower things is not
propagated to mankind, but by Teachers (man being not born wise;) so much less
is heavenly wisdom. And therefore it is; that God is so regardful of the due
qualification of Ministers, that they be not blind guides, nor novices, nor
proud, nor careless sluggards, nor self-seeking worldlings, but skilful in the
word of truth, and lovers of God and the souls of men, and zealous, and
diligent, unwearied, and patient in their holy work. And when they prove bad,
he makes them most contemptible and punishes them more than other men the
corruption of the best making them the worst.

. 48. Therefore let us make a right use of the pride and corruption of the
Clergy, to desire and pray for better, and to avoid our selves the Sin which is
so bad in them, and to labor after that rooted Wisdom and Holiness in our
selves that we may stand, though our Teachers fall before us. Let every man
prove his own Work, and so he shall have rejoicing in himself, and not in
others only, Gal. 6. But let us not hence question the Gospel, or dishonor the
Church and Ministry; no not any further separate from the Faulty than they
separate from Christ, or than God allows us, and necessity requires: As we
must not despise the needful helps of our Salvation, nor equal dumb or wicked
men with the able faithful Ministers of Christ, on pretense of honoring the
Office; so neither must we deny the good that is in any, nor despise the Office
for the Persons Faults.

. 49. Especially let us take heed that we fall not into that pernicious Snare
that has entangled the Quakers and other Schismatics of these times, who on
pretense of the faults of the Ministers, set against the best with greatest
fury, because the best do most resist them, and that revile them with false and
railing language, the same that Drunkards and Malignants use, yea worse than
the prophanest of the Vulgar; even because they take Tithes and necessary
Maintenance, charging them with odious covetousness, calling them Hirelings,
deceivers, and what not. Undoubtedly this Spirit is not of God, that is so
contrary to his Word, his Grace, and his Interest in the World. What would
become of the Church and Gospel, if this malignant Spirit should prevail to
extirpate even the best of all the Ministry? Would the Devil and the Churches
Enemies desire any more? The very same Men that the Prelates have silenced
(near 2000) in England these fifteen or sixteen years together, are they that
the Quakers most virulently before reviled, and most furiously opposed.

. 50. Nor will the Clergies corruption allow either unqualified or* uncalled
Men to thrust themselves into the Sacred Office, as if they were the Men that
can do better, and must mend all that is amiss. Such have been tried in
Licentious Times, and proved, some of them, to do more hurt than the very
Drunkards, or the ignorant sort of Ministers, that did but read the holy
Scriptures. Pride is too often the reprehender of other Men's Faults and
Imperfections, and would make other Men's Names but a stepping-stone to their
own aspiring Folly: As many that have cried out against bad Popes and Prelates,
that they might get into the places, have been as bad themselves when they have
their Will: No wonder if it be so with the proud revilers of the Ministry.

. 51. There is need therefore of much Wisdom and holy care, that we here avoid
the two extremes; that we grow not indifferent who are our Pastors, nor
contract the Guilt of Church-corruption, but mourn for the reproach of the
solemn Assemblies, and do our best for true and needful Reformation, that the
Gospel fail not, and Souls be not quietly left to Satan, nor the Church grow
like the Infidel World; and yet that we neither invade nor dishonor the sacred
Office, nor needlessly open the nakedness of the Persons, nor do any thing that
may hinder their just endeavors and success; we must speak evil of no man
either falsely or unnecessarily.

. 52. I thought all this premonition necessary that you make not an ill use of
the following History, and become not guilty of diabolism or false accusing of
the Brethren, or dishonouring the Church: And that as God has in Scripture
recorded the Sins of the ungodly, and the effects of Pride and of malignity,
and Christ has foretold us that Wolves shall enter and devour the Flock, and
by their Fruits (of devouring, and pricking as Thorns and Thistles) we shall
know them, and the Apostles prophesied of them; I take it to be my duty to give
you an Abstract of the History of Papal and aspiring Prelacy, usurping, and
schismatical, and tyrannical Councils, as knowing of how great use it is to all
to know the true History of the Church, both as to good and evil.

. 53. Yea Bishops and Councils must not be worse thought of than they deserve,
no more than Presbyters, because of such abuses as I recite; The best things
are abused, even Preaching, Writing, Scripture, and Reason it self, and yet are
not to be rejected or dishonored. There is an Episcopacy whose very
Constitution is a Crime, and there is another sort which seems to me a thing
convenient, lawful, and indifferent, and there is a sort which I cannot deny to
be of Divine Right.

. 54. That which I take to be it self a Crime, is such as is aforementioned,
which in its very constitution over-throweth the Office, Church, and
Discipline, which Christ by himself and his Spirit, in his Apostles,
instituted: such I take to be that Diocesane kind which has only one Bishop
over many score or hundred fixed Parochial Assemblies; by which, 1. Parishes
are made by them no Churches, as having no Ruling Pastors that have the Power
of Judging whom to Baptize, or admit to Communion or refuse, but only are
Chapels, having preaching Gurates. 2. All the first Order of Bishops in single
Churches are deposed, as if the Bishop of Antioch should have put down a 1000
Bishops about him, and made himself the sole Bishop of their Churches. 3. The
Office of Presbyters is changed into semi-Presbyters. 4. Discipline is made
impossible, as it is for one General without inferior Captains to Rule an
Army: But of this before.

. 55. Much more does this become unlawful, 1. when deposing all the Presbyters
from Government by the Keys of Discipline, they put the same Keys, even the
Power of dec^etive Excommunication and Absolution into the hands of Laymen,
called Chancellours, and set up Courts liker to the Civil than Ecclesiastical.
2. And when they oblige the Magistrate to execute their Decrees by the Sword,
be they just or unjust, and to lay Men in Goals and ruin them, merely because
they are Excommunicated by Bishops, or Chancellours, or Officials, or such
others, and are not reconciled: And when they threaten Princes and Magistrates
with Excommunication (if not Deposition) if they do but Communicate with those
that the Bishop has Excommunicated. 3. Or when they arrogate the power of the
Sword themselves, as Socrates says Cyril did: Or without necessity join in one
person the Office of Priesthood and Magistracy, when one is more than they can
perform aright.

. 56. And it becomes much worse by the tyrannical abuse, when (being unable
and unwilling to exercise true Discipline on so many hundred Parishes) they
have multitudes of Atheists, Infidels, gross ignorants, and wicked livers in
Church Communion, yea, compel all in the Parishes to Communicate on pain of
Imprisonment and ruin, and turn their censures cruelly against godly persons,
that dare not obey them in all their Formalities, Ceremonies, and Impositions,
for fear of si^^ing against God. And when conniving at ignorant ungodly Priests
that do but obey them, they silence and ruin the most faithful able Teachers,
that obey not all their imposing Canons, and swear not, and subscribe not what
they bid them.

. 57. Undoubtedly Satan has found it his most successful way, to fight against
Christ in Christ's own name, and to set up Ministers as the Ministers of Christ,
to speak indirectly against the Doctrine, Servants, and interest of Christ, and
as Ministers of Light and righteousness, and to fight against
Church Government, Order, Discipline, and Unity, by the pretenses of Church
Government, Order, Discipline, and Unity: and to cry down Schism to promote
Schism, and to depress Believers by crying up Faith, and Orthodoxness, and
crying down Heresy and Error: Yea, to plead God's Name and Word against
himself, and to set up Sin, by accusing Truth and Duty as Sin.

. 58. II. That which I take for Lawful Indifferent Episcopacy is such as
Hierome says, was introduced for the avoiding of divisions, though it was not
from the beginning: When among many Elders in every single Church, one of most
wisdom and gravity is made their President, yea, without whom no Ordinations or
great matters shall be done. The Churches began this so early, and received it
so universally, and without any considerable dissent or opposition, even before
Emperors became Christians, that I dare not be one that shall set against it,
or dishonor such Episcopacy.

. 59. Yea, if where ^^t men are wanting to make Magistrates, the King shall
make Bishops Magistrates, and join two Offices together, laying no more work on
them than will consist with their Ecclesiastic work, though this will have
inconveniences, I shall not be one that shall dishonor such, or disobey them.

. 60. III. The Episcopacy, which I dare not say is not of Gods institution,
(besides that each Pastor is Episcopus Gr^gis,) is that which succeeds the
Apostles in the Ordinary part of Church Government, while some Senior Pastors
have a supervising care of many Churches, (as the Visiters had in Scotland,)
and are so far Episcopi Episcoporum, and Archbishops, having no constraining
power of the Sword, but a power to admonish and instruct the Pastors, and to
regulate Ordinations, Synods, and all great and common circumstances that
belong to Churches. For if Christ set up one Form of Government in which some
Pastors had so extensive work and power, (as Timothy, Titus, and Evangelists as
well as Apostles had) we must not change it without proof, that Christ himself
would have it changed.

. 61. But if men on this pretense will do as Rome has done, pretend one
Apostle to be the Governor of all the rest, and that they have now that
Authority of that Apostle, and will make an Universal Monarch to rule at the
Antipodes, and over all the World, or will set up Patriarchs, Primates,
Metr^politans and Archbishops, with power to tyrannize over their Brethren,
and cast them out, and on pretense of Order, and imitating the Civil
Government, to master Princes, or captivate the Churches to their pride and
worldly interests, this will be the worst and most pernicious tyranny.

. 62. And as it is not all Episcopacy, so it is not all Councils that I design
this History to dishonor. No doubt but Christ would have his Church to be as
far One, as their natural political and gracious capacities will allow: And to
do all his work in as much love, peace, and concord as they can: And to that
end, both seasonable Councils, and Letters, and Delegates for Concord and
Communication, are means which nature it self directs them to, as it does
direct Princes to hold Parliaments and Dyets. In the multitude of Councillors
there is safety: Even frequent converse keeps up amity* In absence slanderers
are heard, and too often believed: A little familiarity in presence confuteth
many false reports of one another, which no distant defenses would so
satisfyingly confute. And among many we may hear that which of few we should
not hear. How good and pleasant is it for Brethren to dwell together in Unity?
And the Concord of Christians greatly honors their holy profession, as
discord becomes a scandal to the world. But all this, and the measures and
sort of Unity and Concord which we may expect, and the true way to attain it* I
have fuller opened in a Treatise entitled, The true and only t^rms of the
Concord of all Christian Churches.

. 63. When Christians had no Princes or Magistrates on their side, they had no
sufficient means of keeping up Unity and Concord for mutual help and strength,
without meetings of Pastors to carry on their common work by consent* But their
meetings were only with those that had nearness or neighborhood* And they did
not put men to travel to Synods out of other Princes Dominions, or from Foreign
Lands, much less did they call any General Councils out of all the Christian
Churches in the world. But those that were capable of Communion by proximity,
and of helping one another, were thought enough to meet for such ends.

. 64. And indeed neither nature nor Scripture obliges us to turn such
occasional helps into the forms of a State Policy, and to make a Government of
friendly consultations. And therefore though where it may be done without fear
of degenerating into tyranny, known times of stated Synods or meetings of
Pastors for Concord are best, (as once a month in lesser meetings, and once a
quarter in greater,) yet where there is danger of such degeneracy, it is better
to hold them but pro re nata, occasionally, at various seasons and places.

. 65. The lesser Synods and correspondency of Pastors before there were
Christian Magistrates were managed much more humbly and harmlesly than the
great ones afterward: Because that men and their interest and motives differed.
And even of later times, there have been few Councils called General, that have
been managed so blamelesly, or made so many profitable Canons, as many
Provincial or smaller Synods did. Diverse Toletane Councils, and many others in
Spain, England, and other Countries have labored well to promote piety and
peace: As did the African Synods, and many others of old. And such as these
have been serviceable to the Church. And the Greater Councils, though more
turbulent have many of them done great good, against Heresy and Vice;
especially the first at Nice: And nothing in this Book is intended to cloud
their worth and glory, or to extenuate any good which they have done: But I am
thankful to God that gave his Church so many worthy Pastors, and made so much
use as he did of many Synods for the Churches purity and peace.

. 66. But the true reason of this Collection, and why I have besides good
products, made so much mention of the errors and mischiefs that many Councils
have been guilty of, are these following.

1. The carnal and aspiring part of the Clergy, do very ordinarily, under the
equivocal names of Bishops, confound the Primitive Episcopacy with the
Diocesane tyranny before described: And they make the ignorant believe, that
all that is said in Church-Writers for Episcopacy, is said for their Diocesane
Species: And while they put down an hundred or a thousand Bishops and Churches
of the Primitive Species, they make men believe that it is they that are for
the old Episcopacy, and we that are against it, and that it is we and not they
that are against the Church: while we are submissive to them as Archbishops,
if they would but leave Parishes to be Churches (or Great Towns formerly called
Cities at least) and make the Discipline of all Churches but a possible
practicable thing.

. 67. II. And to promote their ends, as these men are for the largest Diocesses
and turning a thousand Churches into one only, so they are commonly for violent
Administration; ruling by constraint, and either usurping the power of the
sword themselves, or persuading and urging the Magistrate to punish all that
obey not their needless impositions, and reproaching or threatening (at least)
the Magistrates that will not be their Executioners. And making themselves the
Church snuffers, (or made without the Churches consent) their Office is
exercised in putting out the Lights, sometimes hundreds of faithful Ministers
being silenced by their means in a little time. And they take the sword of
Discipline or power of the Keys as the Church used it 300 years to be vain,
unless prisons or mulcts enforce it. And to escape the Primitive poverty, they
overthrow the Primitive Church, Form, and Discipline, and tell men, All this is
for the Churches honor and peace.

. 68. Yea all that like not their arrogances and grandeur, they render odious
as Aerian Heretics or Schismatics, provoking men to hate and revile them, and
Magistrates to destroy them, as intolerable. And by making their own numerous
Canons and Inventions necessary to Ministry and Church Communion, they will
leave no place for true unity and peace, but tear the Churches in pieces by the
racks and engines of their brains and wills.

. 69. III. Yea worse than all this, there are some besides the French Papists,
who tell the world, That the Universal Church on Earth is one visible political
body, having a visible Head or Supreme vicarious Government under Christ, even
a Collective Supreme, that has universal Legislative, Judicial and Executive
power. And they make this Summa Potestas Constitutive of the Church Universal,
and say that this is Christ's body out of which none have his Spirit nor are
Church Members, and that there is no Unity or Concord but in obeying this
supreme visible power; And that this is in General Councils and in the
intervals in a College of Bishops Successors of the Apostles, (I know not who
or where, unless it be all the Bishops as scattered over the earth) and that
they rule per literas formatas: (as others say, It is the Pope and Roman Clergy
or Cardinals.)

. 70. And when our Christianity, Salvation, Union and Communion, yea, our
Lives, Liberties and mutual forbearances, and Love, is laid upon this very form
of Church-policy and Prelacy, and Christ is supposed to have such a Church as
is not in the World, even constituted with a Visible Vicarious Collective
Sovereign, that must make Laws for the whole Christian World, it is time to do
our best to save men from this deceit.

. 71. I must confess, If I believed that the Whole Church had any Head or
Sovereign under Christ, I should rather take it to be the Pope than any one,
finding no other regardable Competitor. He is incapable of ruling at the
Antipodes and all the Earth; but a General Council is much more incapable, and
so are the feigned College of Pastors or Bishops, (none knows who.)

. 72. IV. And a blind zeal against error, called Heresy, does cry down the
necessary Love and toleration of many tolerable Christians; And some cry, down
with them, and away with them that err more themselves, and by their measures
would leave but few Christians endured by one another in the World: Thus do
they teach us to understand Solomon, Eccl. 7. 16. Be not righteous and wise
overmuch: so much are these men for Unity, that they will leave no place for
much Unity on earth. As if none should be tolerated but men of one Stature,
Complexion, etc.

. 73. Briefly, they do as one that would set up a Family Government, made up of
many hundred or thousand families dissolved and turned into one, and ruled
supremely by a Council of the Heads of such enlarged Families, and then tell
us, that this is not to alter the old Species of Families, but to make them
greater that were before too small: Keep but the same name, and a City is but a
Family still. And when they have done, they would have none endured, but cast
out, imprisoned or banished, as seditious, that are for any smaller Family than
a City, (or any lesser School than an University:) And these City Governors
must in one Convention rule all the Kingdom, and in a greater all the World.

. 74. I shall therefore first tell you, what error must not be tolerated, and
then by an Epitome of Church History, Bishops and Councils and Popes, show the
ignorant so much of the Matter of Fact, as may tell them who have been the
Cause of Church-corruptions, Heresies, Schisms and Sedition, and how: And
whether such Diocesane Prelacy and grandeur be the Cure, or ever was. And, if
God will, in a Second Volume shall prove the sinfulness and novelty of that
sort of Prelacy, and answer the chief that have defended it.

CHAP. II.
Of Heresies, and of the first Councils.
. 1. THe Apostle James says, chapter 5. 19, 20. Brethren, if any one of you do
err from the truth, and one convert him, Let him know that he that converteth
a sinner from the error of his way, does savea soul from death, and hide a
multitude of sins. By which it is employed, that Error tends unto Death: But
what Error is it? Is it all? Who then can be saved? It is of great use to
know, what Errors are mortal, and what not.

. 2. There are errors that are no sins, and errors that are sins. Those which
are not voluntary either in themselves, or in their antecedent causes, are no
sins: Those which are not voluntary either by the act or by the omission of the
will, are no sins. Those which are unavoidable through a necessity which is not
moral but natural, are no sin: As if Infants, Idiots, Madmen, err in matters
of which they are incapable: Or if any err for want of any revelation of the
truth. As if the Papists did rightly charge those with errors whom they burnt
for denying Transubstantiation, yet it could be no sinful error, because it is
necessary and unavoidable. For the first discerning principle is sense: And if
we are deceived while we judge that to be Bread and Wine, which all the sound
senses of all men in the World perceive as such, we have no remedy. For whether
sense be fallible or infallible, it is certain that we have no other faculties
and organs to perceive immediately sensible things by. I can see by nothing but
my eyes, nor hear any other way than by my ears. If they say, that we must
believe that all men's senses are deceived when God tells us so? I answer, If
we do not presuppose that by sense we must perceive things sensible, it is in
vain to talk of Gods telling us any thing, or of any of his Revelations, or
faith therein: For I know not but by sense, that there is a Bible, or a Man, or
a Voice or Word, to be believed. And as humanity is presupposed to
Christianity, so is sense and reason to faith and the objects accordingly. And
to say, that all men's sound senses about their due placed objects are fallible,
is but to say, that no certainty can be had.

. 3. Of those errors that are sins; it is not all that are effectively mortal
or damning sins: Else no man could be saved. There is no man that has not a
multitude of errors, that has any actual use of reason.

. 4. Errors are of three sorts. 1. Errors of Judgment (to say nothing of
sense and imagination.) 2. Of Will; 3. Of Life, or practice. The Judgment is to
Guide the Will; and the Will is to command our practice. Therefore those
errors are least dangerous that least corrupt the Will and practice, and those
most dangerous that most corrupt them. But every error contrary to any useful
truth is bad, as it is a corruption of the judgment, tending to corrupt the
will and practice.

. 5. 1. No error is effectively damning which turns not the Heart or Will in
a predominant degree from the Love of God to the Love of the Creature, from the
Love of Heaven and Holiness to the prevalent Love of Earth, and sinful
pleasure, riches or honor therein; from things Spiritual to things Carnal: For
God has prepared unconceivable glory for them that Love him: The Kingdom of
God consists not in meats and drinks, but in righteousness, peace and joy in
the holy Ghost: And he that in these things serves Christ, does please God,
and is acceptable to (good) men, Romans 14. 17, 18.

. 6. 2. I think no error is effectively damning which a man does sincerely
desire to be delivered from at any rate, and when he that has it does
faithfully endeavor to come to the knowledge of the truth, in the use of such
means as God vouchsafes him: He that searches the Scripture with a Love to
truth, and sincerely prays for Gods illumination, and sincerely practiceth
what he already knows, and is willing to hear what any man can say to his
Further information, God will hide nothing necessary to his salvation from such
a man. For this is a work of such dispositive Grace, as shall not be received
in vain.

. 7. Obj. But may not one that believes not in God, or Christ, or the Life to
come, say all this, that he desires and endeavors to know the truth?

Ans. 1. These things are so Great, so Evident, and so Necessary, that they
cannot be unknown to one that has the Gospel, who has the foresaid sincere
desires and endeavors. And as for them that have not the Gospel, I have spoken
to their case before. 2. God that gives so much grace does thereby signify
his willingness to give more.

. 8. Obj. This intimateh that Grace is given according to Merits.

Ans. 1. Not the first Grace: But to him that has (and improveth it) shall be
given, and from him that has not (such improvement) shall be taken away even
that which he has. 2. No Grace or Glory is given according to Merits in point
of Commutative Justice, as quid pro quo, as if it did profit God. But to him
that asks it shall be given. We must have a Beggars Merit: Begging and
thankful accepting; And yet that also is of antecedent Grace.

. 9. On the contrary, 1. All error is damning which excludes the life of
faith, hope, love and sincere obedience: For these are of necessity to
salvation: without holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. The wisdom from
above is first pure, and then peaceable, and must be shown out of a good
conversation by works with meekness of wisdom, Iam. 3. 13, 17. He that Loves
not God, Heaven, and Holiness, with a predominant Love,' does damnably err.

. 10. Secondly, Therefore all error of judgment which effectively excludes
the belief of any of the Essentials of Godliness, or of Christianity where the
Gospel is, is damning error: Because a Man's Will and Life can be no better
than his belief or judgment is. No man can love that God that he believes not
to be amiable, nor obey him whom he believes not to be his Governor; nor
seeks for a happiness which he believes not; And it is in the face of Christ,
a Redeemer, and Savior of lost Sinners, that Gods amiableness suitably
appears unto man: And it is by his Word and holy Spirit that Christ renews
Souls.

. 11. And an ungodly carnal worldly man (though he be a learned Preacher of the
Truth) is damnably erroneous, and has really the sum of manifold Heresies: 1.
He erreth about the greatest and most necessary things: He takes God to be
less amiable than the Creature, and Heaven than Earth, and Holiness than the
Pleasure of Sin. 2. His error is practical and not only notional: 3. It
excludes the contrary truth, and is predominant; so that what contrary truth
he acknowledges, he does not soundly, practically, and prevailingly believe.

. 12. Were it not besides my present purpose I might manifest that every carnal
ungodly man among us, 1. Does not truly believe any one Article of the Creed
with a serious practical belief; 2. Nor does he consent to the Baptismal
Covenant; 3. Nor sincerely desire and put up one Petition of the Lords Prayer,
rightly understood; 4. Nor sincerely obey one of the Ten Commandments; 5. Nor
can sincerely receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; Nor, 6. Is a sincere
Member of the holy Catholic Church, nor can sincerely hold Communion with the
Saints: He is an Hypocrite and damnably erroneous, even while he seems to be
Orthodox and pleads for the Truth, and cries out against Heresies and
Errors; which he may easily and ordinarily do.

. 13. It has still been one of Satan's effectual Snares to deceive and damn
ungodly men by, to hide their own practical error and wickedness from their
Consciences, by seeming to be Orthodox, and crying down Errors and Heresies in
others: But alas, how unfit persons are they for such Work? And how dreadfully
do they condemn themselves? It is a pitiful thing to hear a man that is false
to the very essence of his Baptismal Vow, to revile and prosecute a poor
Anabaptist (though erroneous) for holding that Baptism should be delayed till
years of discretion that it may be the better kept: Or to hear a man that
obeys not God himself, but his fleshly Lust, to cry out against every
Dissenter, how conscionable soever, for not obeying the Church in some
questionable points: or to hear a man that sticks not at any wickedness that
makes for his worldly ends or pleasure, to cry out against those that in fear
of Perjury or Lying or other sinning against God, dare not take some Oath,
Subscription, Profession, or Covenant which is imposed: As these notorious
Hypocrites who live quite contrary to the Christian Religion which they
profess, do use to call those Hypocrites that labor in all things to please
God, if they do but mislike any thing in their Lives. So also while they are
drowned in damnable Error, they cry out against Error in those that
practically hold all the Essentials of Christianity, and are certainly in the
way of Life, if they do differ in any thing from them, or are ignorant of any
thing which they know. He that never puts up a sincere Prayer to God for his
Grace, nay, that would not have it, to make him holy, and deprive him of his
sinful pleasure, will yet call others erroneous and Schismatics, if they pray
not by his Book, or in all his Circumstances; while his Heart and Family are
prayerless, and God's Name ofter heard in Oaths and Curses than in Prayer.

. 14. Because bare opinion may consist with worldliness and fleshly lusts,
therefore it has long been the trick of the ungodly to seem zealous for the
true Church, and for right opinions, and to over do here to quiet their
Consciences in Sin: And it has been a Snare to many conscionable People, to
tempt them to suspect and dislike the Truth, because ungodly Men thus stand for
it; and to think it must be some bad thing which wicked men seem so zealous
for: when as they do it but for a cover for their Sin, as Hypocrites and
Oppressors use long Prayers, which would not serve their turn if there were not
some good in it.

. 15. And yet Error is such a blinding thing, that it is very usual even for
grossly erroneous men, to cry out most fiercely against Error: For they know
not themselves, and they are proud and self conceited, and often by malignity apt
to suspect and condemn others. What did the Jews persecute the Christians for?
For supposed Heresy and Error: What did the Heathens cast them to wild Beasts
and Torments for? For supposed Impiety and Error: because they would not err
in their Idolatry as they did. What has disquieted and torn in pieces the
Christian World, but erroneous and worldly Popes, Patriarcks, and Prelates
inordinate out-crys against supposed Errors? For what have they silenced
hundreds and thousands of faithful Ministers of Christ? for Error. For what
have they racked, tormented, burnt to ashes, and slain by the Sword so many
thousand, and hundred thousands? O, it was for Heresy or Error. And are not
these men perfectly free from Error themselves, that have so great a zeal
against it? No, so grossly erroneous are they, that they deny credit to all men's
Senses, and know not Bread and Wine when they see, and touch, and taste it; and
would have all those destroyed that will not deny belief to sense as well as
they: So erroneous are they, that they pretend a mortal man to be the Church
Governor of all the Earth; so erroneous, that they think God well Worshipped
by praying in words not understood; and dare deny half the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper to the People, which they confess that he instituted, and all the
Church did use; so erroneous, that they think the flames of Purgatory will help
them the better to love that God that does torment them. How foul and many are
their Errors that kill, and burn, and damn others as erroneous? But S. James
has told us, Iam. 3. That the Wisdom is not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, and devilish, which has an envious striving zeal; and that if it
work not by ^eakness of wisdom, and be not pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and hypocrisy,
sowing the fruit of righteousness in peace, by peacemaking, but has bitter
contention, it is not of God, but brings confusion and every evil work.

. 16. The Arians were cruel Persecutors, on pretense of zeal against Error, as
they accounted it: They banished godly Pastors; they killed them, they cut out
the Preachers Tongues; they reproached them. The Emperors Valens and
Constantius were more fierce than the Arian Goths themselves.

Macedonius that denied the Deity of the Holy Ghost, was a great pretender to
Orthodoxness, and a great decryer and persecuter of others, as erroneous and
Heretics.

Nestorius (though somewhat worse judged of by Cyril than he deserved) was
justly condemned, were it but for his heat and fierceness against others: He
fell presently upon the Novatians and other Parties, and began with this
overdoing zeal at his entrance, O Emperor, give me a Church without Heresy,
and I will give-thee Victory over the Persians: that is, Destroy all these
dissenting Parties and God will prosper thee: And very quickly was he deposed,
condemned, and at last banished even to misery and death as an Heretic
(whether justly or no I shall say more anon.)

The Eutychians were as great Zealots against Error and Heresy as any of the
rest: They took Cyril for their Captain whom Theodoret and Isydore Pelusiota
that knew him, describe as heynously proud and turbulent, and Socrates as the
first Bishop that himself used the Sword. Dioscorus raged at the second Council
of Ephesus against dissenters, and all in Zeal against Nestorian Heresy. But
what dreadful work his Eutychian Party and Successors made, I have elsewhere
showed: And all as against Heresy.

The Anthropomorphite zealous Egyptian Monks thought it was Error and Heresy
which they so furiously opposed, when they forced Theophilus Alexand to
dissemble to save his Life.

It was zeal against Origens Heresy and Error which set Epiphanius and
Theophilus Alexand. upon their irregular and inhumane opposition to Chrysostom.

What abundance of gross Errors does Philastrius vend while he thinks that he
recites other Men's Errors: I have given a Catalogue of them elsewhere.
Besides the inconsiderable Errors which he calls Heresies.

It was zeal against the Arian Heresy which made Lucifer Calaritanus occasion
the Schism between two Bishops at Antioch, and after become the Head of a
separating Party, because he would not receive the returning Arians into
Communion as others did.

And it was zeal against Heresy that made others for this account him a
Heretic, and call his Followers Luciferians.

It was zeal against Error which made both the Novatians and the Donatists run
into Error, and keep up their Parties as more pure from the Crimes of
Idolaters, Traditors, Libellaticks, and other Criminals.

Sulpitius Severus describes Ithacius as a man that cared not what he said or
did, and the rest of the Synod of Bishops about him as unfit to be communicated
with; that would bring Christianity it self into reproach by their furious
opposition to Heretics: And who would have thought but these Bishops had been
very good men themselves, that were so zealous against the Priscillianists, as
to procure the Death of some, and the Banishment of others, and bring Martin
himself, and other strict abstemious people into the suspicion of
Priscillianism?

It was a zeal for Christ, and against supposed Error, which raised the
doleful contention about the corruptibility of Christ's Body; one Party calling
the others Phantasiasticks, and the other calling them Corrupticolae; into
which Error the Emperor Justinian himself did lapse and become a zealous
Heretic, as the Orthodox Party called him.

And even S. Hilary Pictav. l. 10. de Trinit. seems not free, when, p. 205.
he says [In quem quamvis aut ictus incideret, aut vulnus descenderet, aut nodi
concurrerent, aut suspensio elevaret, afferrent quidem haec impetum passionis,
non tamen dolorem passionis inferrent, ut telum aliquod aut aquam perforans,
aut ignem compungens, aut era vulnerans: Omnes quidem has passiones naturae
suae infert, ut perforet, ut compungat, ut vulneret; sed naturam suam haec
passio illata non retinet; dum in natura non est vel aquam forari, vel pungi
ignem, vel ^ra vulnerari, quamvis natura teli sit vulnerare and compungere and
forare: Passus quidem Dominus Jesus Christus dum caeditur, dum suspenditur, dum
crucifigitur, dum moritur; sed in Corpus Domini irruens passio, nec non fuit
passio, nec tamen naturam passionis exercuit: Cum and poenali ministerio illa
desaevit, and virtus corporis sine sensu poenae vi^^ poenae in se desaevientis
excepit.] Yet it was against Heresy that the good Father defended this (worse
than many of Philastrius, yea or Epiphanius' s Heresies.) Page 208. says he,
Metum Domino haeresis ascribit: -- Timuisse tibi, O Haeretice, Dominus gloriae
passionem videtur -- Page 216. Non vis, impie haeretice, ut transeunte palmas
clave Christus non doluerit, neque vulnus illud nullam acerbitatem teli
compungentis intulerit. Interrogo, cur pueri ignes non timuerint nec doluerint
-- So p. 217, 218. you see how little heed is to be given often to good men's
outcries against Heresy: He spoke much better, ibid. page 231. In simplicitate
fides est; in fide justitia est; in confessione pietas est: Non per difficiles
nos Deus ad beatam vitam quaestiones vocat; nec multiplici eloquentis facundiae
genere solicitat. In absoluto nobis ac facili est aeternitas, Iesum suscitatum
a mortuis per Deum credere, and ipsum esse Dominum confiteri.] And Lib. 11. p.
332. initio [Non enim ambiguis nos and erraticis indefinitae doctrinae studiis
dereliquit, vel incertis opinionibus ingenia humana permisit, statutis per se
and oppositis obicibus in libertatem intelligentiae voluntatisque concludens,
ut sapere non nisi ad id tantum quod praedicatum a se fuerat, nos sineret, cum
p^r definitam fidei indemutabilis constitutionem, credi aliter atque aliter non
lic^ret.]

. 17. And it is not only particular persons, but many General Councils, that
have erred and persecuted others; as if all the while they were but cleansing
the Church of the most odious Heresies.

The many Councils of the Arians I may after touch upon, viz. at Tire,
Ariminum, Syrmium, etc. I will before its time here mention that of Sardica:
What horrid Heresies and Villainies do they lay to the charge (not only of
Marcellus, but) of Athanasius, of Paulus Constant. of Julius Bishop of Rome, of
Prothogenes, and others, whom they excommunicate as if they had been the very
plagues of the earth? See the Copies of their Epistle in Hilary Pict.
Fragments, p. 434, etc.

. 18. And because Papal Approbation is made by the Papists the mark of an
unerring and infallible Council, note that even the Arian Council of Syrmium
was expressly approved by Pope Liberius in his Exile, as you may see in Hilary,
ibid. p. 426, 427. saying, [Itaque amoto Athanasio a communione omnium nostrum,
cujus nec Epistolia a me suscipienda sunt, dico me parem cum omnibus vobis, and
cum Vniversis Episcopis orientalibus, seu per universas provincias pacem and
unitatem habere: Nam ut verius sciatis me vera fide per hanc Epistolam ea
loqui, Dominus and frater men's communis Demo^ilus, qui dignatus est pro sua
benevolentia fidem and catholicam exponere quae Syrmium a pluribus fratribus
and co-episcopis nostris tractata, exposita, and suscepta est, ab omnibus qui
in praesenti fuerunt, hanc ego libenti animo suscep^* in nullo contradixi;
consensum accommodavi, hanc sequor, haec a me tenetur; sane petendum credidi
Sanctitatem Vestram, quiae tam pervidetis in omnibus me vobis consentaneum
esse, dignemini communi auxilio ac studio laborare, qu^tenus de exilio
dimittar, and ad sedem, quae mihi divinitus credita est, revertar.] In reciting
of which Hilary thrice says [Anathema tibi, Liberi praevaricator] -- If they
say that Liberius did this in his Exile through fear or suffering, I answer,
his Sufferings were small; and Hilary annexeth another of his Epistles to the
Arian Bishops, in which he swears or calls God himself to witness, that it
is not for his Sufferings which are not great, but for the Peace of the Church,
of which he knew those Bishops to be Lovers, and which is better than
Martyrdom, that he did what he did.

. 19. I. Before these there were many Provincial Councils called to decide the
Controversy of the time of Easter; and as that at Rome, in Palestine, Pontius,
and one in France went one way; so that of Asia, under Polycrates Ephesians. went
another way, professing to stick therein to the Gospel, and the Tradition of
their Fathers: For which Victor would needs excommunicate them, which Irenaeus
sharply reprehendeth. Its worth the noting, That as the wrong party pleaded
Tradition, so the right party pleaded Reason and Scripture, as you may see in
Beda's Fragment of the Palestine Council, sub Theoph. Caesar. Bin T. 1. p. 132.
And that the main argument used was the Divine Benediction of the Lords day:
which they may note, that question the ancient observation of that day.

. 20. II. The next Council recorded (Bin. p. 135.) is one at Carthage, under
Agrippinus, which decreed the re-baptizing of those that were baptized by
Heretics: For which they are commonly now condemned.

. 21. And Binnius notes that they had this from their Countryman Tertullian,
whose zeal against Heretics was so hot, that he would have nothing, no not
Baptism, common with them; so Baron. an. 217. n, 1, 2, 3. and an. 258. n. 19,
20. Yet is this man now numbered with Heretics.

. 22. III. The Concilium Labesitanum is the next in order, where one Privatus
was condemned for an Heretic (mentioned by Cyprian, Epist. 55.) But, says
Binnius, what his Heresy was is not known nor mentioned.

. 23. IV. Next we have an Arabian Council, in which the Error of the Souls
Mortality (allowing it only to rise again with the Body at the Resurrection)
was excellently oppugned and expugned by Origin; but it was by that Origin who
himself is called a blasphemous Heretic.

. 24. V. The next mentioned Council (Bin. p. 158.) was at Rome, about the
restoring of the Lapsed upon Cyprian's motion. A business that made no small
dissension, while Lucianus and some others made the Church-door too wide, and
Novatus, and Novatianus made it too narrow, and Cyprian and the Roman Clergy
went a middle way: bitter and grievous were the Censures of each other, and
long and sad the Schisms that did ensue, the rigor of the Novatians being
increased by their Offense at other men's sinful latitude and tepidity.

. 25. By the way it is worth the considering by some Papists, who make both a
Bishop Essential to a Church, and a Pope to the Church-Universal, and deny
Church Government to Presbyters, that this Council is said to be called by the
Roman Clergy (the Presbyters and Deacons) when the Church had been a year or
two without a Bishop (through the sharp persecution of Decius upon Fabian's
Death). And it is to the Roman Clergy (Presbyters and Deacons) that Cyprian at
this time wrote diverse of his Epistles, as they wrote to him; insomuch that
Binnius sticks not to say, that in this interregnum the Roman Clergy had the
care or charge of the Universal Church.

Quaer. How far their Government, even of Bishops (whom they Assembled in this
Council) was Canonical or valid?

. 26. VI. After this there was another Council at Carthage, and two at Rome,
and one in Italy, and another at Carthage, about the same Controversy; where
it was determined that the Lapsed should be received to Repentance, and after a
sufficient space of Penance, should communicate, but not sooner: And that the
Bishops that lapsed should be incapable of Episcopacy and communicate only with
the Laity upon their penance: Yet Cyprian in time of a renewed Persecution
thought meet to relax this, and take in the Penitent presently, lest they
should be discouraged under Suffering. But Foelicissimus one of his Deacons
made himself the Head of a Faction, by taking men in by his own Authority too
soon, and Novatus and Novatian, as is said, being against their taking into
Communion at all, the Councils excommunicated them all as Schismatics. Where
note, that Novatus an African Priest, that went to Rome and got Novatian
ordained Bishop, did not deny them Pardon of Sin with God, but only
Church Communion. 2. Nor did he deny this to other great Sinners repenting, but
only to those that lapsed to Idolatry or denying Christ. But the Novatians long
after extended it to other heinous Crimes, as upon supposed parity of Reason.

. 27. VII. Next this we have Cyprians African Council in which (after the
censuring of some that reproached a Pastor) they condemn a Dead Man called
Victor, because by his Will he left one Faustinus a Presbyter the Guardian of
his Sons, which the Canons had forbidden, because no Ministers of God should be
called from their sacred Work to meddle with Secular things: Therefore they
Decree that Victors Name shall not be mentioned among the Dead in Deprecation,
nor any Oblation made for his Rest. (Non est quod pro dormitione ejus apud vos
fiat oblatio, aut deprecatio aliqua nomine ejus in Ecelesia frequentetur.) The
case of the Clergy is much altered since then; And whether the penalty had more
of Piety, as to the end, or Error in the rigor, and the matter (as if it were
a Punishment to the Dead, not to be offered for, or prayed for) I leave to
further consideration, Cypr. li. 1. Epist. 66.

. 28. VIII. The next Council we meet with is Council. Iconiense an. 258. where
the Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia, Galatia, and other Oriental Provinces at
Iconium in Phrygia, Decreed that the Baptisms of Heretics, their Ordinations,
Imposition of Hands, and other sacred Actions were invalid. For which, says
Baronius an. 258. n. 14, 15, 16. Pope St^phen Excommunicated all these Oriental
Bishops, and Reprobated the Council, and would not receive or hear their
Legates: Of which Firmilianus Caesar. Cappad. writes to Cyprian against him.

. 29. IX. At the same time, Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 6. tells us, there was also a
Synod at Synadis, yea, diverse in other places, that all decreed the same thing,
for rebaptizing those that were baptized by Heretics; and that this had been
the Bishops opinion of so long time before, that Eusebius durst not condemn it.
Vid. Baron. Anno 258. n. 17. But it is now commonly condemned.

. 30. X. If they had confined their opinion of rebaptizing to such Heretics as
are strictly so called, that renounce any essential Article of the Faith, they
might have made the Controversy hard; But as Hereticating increased, so their
own difficulties increased. And now the Novatians were pronounced Heretics, it
grew a hard question, whether all that the Novatians had baptized must be
rebaptized. And for this an African Council, Anno 258. concluded affirmatively:
Because all that are baptized are baptized into the Church: But Heretics are
not in the Church, and so baptize not into the Church: therefore such must be
rebaptized. Cyprian and many very Godly Bishops consented in this error.

. 31. XI. To try this business further, Cyprian gathered another Council of
above 70 Bishops out of A^rick and Numidia, and all were desired to declare
what was the Tradition of their Fathers; And they all agreed that according to
Scripture, and Tradition, the Baptism of Heretics was a Nullity, and it was no
rebaptization to baptize such as they baptized: (see here what strength is in
the Papists argument of Tradition in such cases.) But this Council and their
Doctrine Pope Stephen condemned: But they never the more altered their
judgments, not believing his Infallibity or power to judge between them in such
matters of Faith.

In this Council is set down every Bishops Reason of his Judgment.

. 32. XII. When Pope Stephen had condemned these Bishops, Cyprian calls yet a
greater Council of 87 Bishops, who confirmed the same Doctrine, and rejected
the Popes opinion and his arrogancies, that would make himself to be a Bishop
of Bishops, and by tyrannical terror and abuse of Excommunication, force
others to his opinion. And with the Africans in this judgment joined Firmilian,
with 70 Asian Bishops, and says Binnius, Dionysius Alexandrinus also.

. 33. But I must here tell the Reader, that I mention not these instances to
breed ill thoughts in him of these African and Numidian Bishops: For as far as
I can discern by their Writings and by History, they were the Godliest,
Faithful, Peaceable company of Bishops that were found in any part of the World
since the Apostles times: Cyprian's style and the testimony of all just History
which concerns him, as well as his Martyrdom, declare him to be a Saint
indeed. (Nazianzen declares the strange occasion of his Conversion; viz. That
he loved or lusted after a Christian Virgin, and when he could not obtain his
will, being given to Magic, he agreed with the Devil to procure his desire;
but when he saw that the Devil confessed himself unable to do it, and so that he
was too weak for Christ, he forsook the Devil and turned Christian:) The
Papists (Binnius, Baronius, etc.) conjecture that Cyprian before his death
reformed this Error, but their conjecture merely tells us what they wish,
without any reason, but that he dyed a Martyr and his Successors honored him.
As if none might so die and be honored that had any error, which no man
living is without. 2. And this may be said to excuse their error. 1. That the
strictest men oftener err on the stricter side against sin, than the complying
Carnal Clergy. 2. That they thought it the safer way to baptize such again, (on
the same reason as we do in case of uncertain baptism, with a si non
baptizatus es, baptizo te;) not knowing why there should be any danger in the
mistake: Much like as in England now, the Bishops are for the re-Ordaining of
all such as were Ordained by others that were not Diocesanes, and yet do not
call it re-Ordaining. 3. That in those times of Heathenisme and persecution,
the Christians had no way to maintain their strength but by the Churches
Concord; nor could they otherwise have kept up so strict a discipline as they
did, having no forcing power of Christian^Magistrates: Therefore they were
necessitated to be severe with dividers. 4. And the ambiguity of the word
[Heresie] was not the least occasion of their error. The Nicene Council
afterward rebaptized such as those Heretics Baptized, who corrupted the
substance of baptism it self, but not others. And Christians at first had more
wit and charity than to call every error a Heresy, (else there had been none
but Heretics:) such as denied some essential point of faith or practice, and
drew a party to maintain it, were called Heretics in the former times; but
afterward every Schism or Party that gathered by themselves, and set up altar
contra altar upon the smallest difference, was called a Heresy. And so the
same name applied to another thing, deceived them. The Bishops were men of
eminent piety and worth.

. 34. XIII. Anno 263. They say there was a Council at Rome to clear Dionysius
Alexand. of the imputation of Heresy, occasioned by some doubtful words which
he wrote against Sabellius.

. 35. XIV. Anno 266. They say there was another at Antioch against their Bishop
Paulus Samosatenus, a gross Heretic: But he renounced his error in words, and
for that time kept his place.

. 36. XV. Paulus returning to his Heresy and a bad life, Anno 272. another
Council at Antio^h deposed him; but he would not go out of the Bishops house,
and the Emperor Aurelian a Heathen put him out.

. 37. XVI. Anno 303. The next Council was at Cirta in Numidia, Secundus
Tigisitanus being chief and calling them. Here Secundus accused the Bishops one
by one as Traditors (delivering the sacred books to be burnt in persecution to
save themselves, which was then judged perfidiousness.) The Bishops partly
excused, partly confessed it, and asked pardon; Till at last Secundus ready to
judge them, accused a Bishop Purpurius of murdering his own Sisters Sons: who
told him that he should not think to terrify him as he had done the rest; He
had killed, and would kill those that make against him; and asked him whether
he had not been a Traditor himself, and beginning to evince it, bid him not
provoke him to tell the rest: Whereupon Secundus his Nephew told his Uncle, You
see that he is ready to depart and make a Schism, and not he only but all the
rest, and you hear what they say against you: And then they will join and pass
sentence on you, and so you will remain the only Heretic (Hereticating went
then by the Vote) Secu^dus was nonplust, and asked two others, what it was best
to do? And they agreed to leave them all to God, and so the Bishops kept their
places. Augustine. cont. Crescon. l. 3. c. 26, 27.

. 38. XVII. Next they deliver us Consilium Sinuessanum, whether true or forged
is too hard a controversy. It was of three hundred Bishops (how big were their
Diocesses think you above our Parishes?) who all came secretly together to a
Town now unknown, and met in a Gave that would hold but 50 at a time, for fear
of persecution: The business was to Convict Pope Mare^llinus of Idolatry* for
offering sacrifice to Hercules, Jupiter, and Saturn: which he confessed.

. 39. XVIII. Anno 305. Was held a Council of 19 Bishops at Illiberis in Spain:
where many good things were agreed on: But not only to the Idolat^o^* L^psed,
but to other heinous crimes they denied Communion to the death, notwithstanding
repentance. And that these Bishops should be Orthodox, Alpaspinaeus learnedly
makes the best of it. But of Can. 34. confesses a wors^ sense than this of
Binnius.
and yet the Novatians Heretics, it is not easi^ to give a reason of. Their
distinction of Penance, Sacrament, and Communion, will not well perform it.
Therefore Melch. Canus charge them with Error lib. 5. c. 4. and Bella^mine
much more, lib. 2. de Imag. c. 9. That it is Concilium non confirmatum,
frequenter errasse, etc. A Bishop, Priest or Deacon in Office, that has
committed Fornication, was not to have Communion, no not at death: and diverse
others. No Bishop was to receive any Gift from any one that did not
Communicate. It poseth the Papists themselves to expound Can. 34. Cereos per
diem placuit i^ Coemiterio n^n incendi: Inquietandi enim Sanctorum spiritus non
sunt: Binnius will have it to be the Spirits of the living Saints, that are not
to be disquieted with trouble about Lights set up by day. But I wish that be
the meaning. But the 36 Can. more troubles them, Placuit picturas in Ecclesia
esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur. Can.
38. A Layman, in case of necessity, is enabled to Baptize. Can. 39. Gentiles
unbaptized may be made Christians at last, by Imposition of hands. Can. 65. If
a Clergy-man's Wife play the Whore, and he do not presently cast her out, he
must not be received to the Communion to the last. Can. 73. If a Christian turn
Accuser (Delator) and upon his accusation any one be banished or put to death,
he is not to be received to Communion, no not at last. Can. 75. Nor he that
falsely accuses a Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon, and cannot prove it. Can. 79.
He that plays at Dice, or Tables, was to be kept from the Communion. Many
other Canons savor, some of Piety, and some of the Novatians. Thirty six
Presbyters sat with these Nineteen Bishops. Pope Innocent approved these
almost Novatian Canons, and Binnius excuses them, p. 246.

. 40. XIX. Anno 306. A Council at Carthage of about 70 Bishops began the Schism
of the Donatists, contending who should have the Bishopric of Carthage: One
party had chosen Caecilianus to succeed Mensurius; The other party accusing him
as being a Traditor, and Ordained by Foelix a Traditor, and had forbidden
bringing food to the Martyrs in prison, they ordained one Majorinus Bishop in
his stead: Caecilianus had the countenance of the Bishop of Rome, and stood it
out, and kept the place: Hereupon the Church being divided, the division run
through all Africa, and Numidia, while the accusing party renounced Communion
with Caecilianus; so that for many years after (two hundred at least) they did
with plausible pretense claim the title of Catholics, though they were after
called Donatists (from Donatus a very good Bishop of Carthage heretofore, whom
they praised, and not from Donatus a Casis nigris, as some think.) Secundus
Tigisitanus Primate of Numidia, furthers the breach, and the Ordination of
Majorinus fixed it. Thus the doleful Tragedy of the Donatists began by Bishops
divided about a Carthage^Bishop.

. 41. XX. Anno 308. Another Council was held at Carthage, where no less than
270 Donatist Bishops, for moderation, agreed to Communicate with penitent
Traditors, without rebaptizing them, and so did for 40 years.

. 42. XXI. Anno 313. The Schism continuing, the Donatists cleaving to
Majorinus, appealed against Caecilianus to Constantine (now Emperor.) He first
appoints three French Bishops to judge the Cause, but after 19 Bishops
(called a Roman Council) met at Rome to hear both Parties: where Melchiades and
the rest acquitted Caecilianus, and condemned Donatus a Casis nigris (a
promoter of the Donatists Cause) as guilty of Schism. But the Donatists
accusing Melchiades also as a Traditor, the Schism was never the more ended: A
motion was made that both the Bishops should remove (Caecilianus and Majorinus)
to end the Schism; But the Donatist Bishops were so very many in number, that
they thought they were to be called the Church, and the Caecilianists the
Schismatics, and therefore would not so agree. Thus Bishops about Bishoprics
set all the Country on a flame.

. 43. XXII. Next Constantine would hear the Cause of these contending Bishops
at a Council at Arles in France, (before 200 Bishops at least) where
Caecilianus was again acquitted, and the Donatist Bishops cast, by the witness
of their Scribe Ingentius, who (being racked) confessed that he was hired to
give false witness in the Case. Several good Canons were here made for
Church Order.

. 44. I have heard many Popish Persons liken the Separatists among us to the
Donatists: But so unlike them are they, That, 1. The said Separatists are
against all Episcopacy, but the Donatists were Bishops, and contended for the
highest Places of Prelacy. 2. The Separatists are confessedly a Minor Part
departing from the Major Part. But the Donatists were the Major Part of the
Bishops casting out the Minor Part as Delinquents. The Truth is, in those times
the Bishops being usually in contention and Church-Wars among themselves,
(especially when Constantine had given them peace and prosperity,) the strife
was, Who should get the better, and have their will: 1. Sometime the strife was
about Opinions, who was in the right, and to be called Orthodox, and who was to
be accounted the Heretic. 2. The other part quarrel who should be the Bishop,
or who should have the highest places. 3. And the next quarrel was whose side
should carry it in setting up any Bishops, or in judging and deposing them, and
who should have their Heads or Friends brought in. And the way to get the
better, was, 1. At the first, by the majority of the peoples Votes in choosing
Bishops, and of the Bishops in deposing them. 2. But after, most went in
choosing and deposing by the majority of the Bishops Votes in the greater Seats,
(the peoples consent still required,) at least if a Council did interpose. 3.
And at last, it went by the favor or displeasure of the Court; either the
Emperor, or the Empress, or some great Officers. The African Bishops it seems
were far the greatest number against Caecilian, (when 270 met at one Council,
and M^lchiades Council at Rome had but 19, and that at Illiberis 19, and that
at Ancyra 18 Bishops.) Therefore the Bishops thought that majority of number
gave them right to the Title of Catholick^, that those Dissenter^ must be
called Heretics, as was too usual. And seeing they lived in the Country where
many Councils under Agrippinus and Cyprian, And no General Council had judged
against them, for there had been none.
and Firmilian, had voted that Heretics were not of the Church, and those that
they had baptized, were to be rebaptized; they thought that they did but keep
up this Tradition; and so they said that they were all the Church of Africa,
and that the Cecilians were Heretics and Separatists from the Church, and that
all that they baptized were to be rebaptized, as was formerly held. So that
indeed the Donatists did but as the Papists, and their worldly Clergy still
have done, who take the advantage of a Majority to call themselves the Church
and Catholics, and to call the Dissenters Schismatics and Heretics, save that
they added Cyprian's rebaptizing. And when it was for their advantage they
communicated 40 years with Traditors; but when the power of the Court and the
Bish. of Rome bore them down, they kept up their party by pretended strictness,
and reproaching the others as a Sect, and as Heretical and persecuters of the
Church. So that it was the Multitudes and Councils of the Prelates that set up
Donatism.

. 44. XXIII. The next was an. 314. at Ancyra in Galatia of eighteen Bishops,
who met to determine how many years the Lapsed should repent (or do penance)
before they were admitted to Communion. Can. 17. forbad those, that were
ordained Bishops to any people and were not accepted by the Parish to which
they were ordained, to thrust themselves on other Parishes, or raise Sedition,
but allowed them to continue Presbyters. Can. 21. Wilful Murderers were to
communicate at last only.

. 45. XXIV. The Churches having now peace under Constantine a Council of 13
Bishops that had been before most at Ancyra met at Neocesarea; but the small
number did better work than many greater Councils did, making some good Canons
against Adultery and Fornication; Though the 7th Can. that forbids Priests to
dine at the second Marriages of any, because such must repent, be of doubtful
sense and truth: The first Can. is against Priests marrying and Fornication.
The last, that the number of Deacons must be just seven, be the City never so
big.

. 46. XXV. Next a Roman Council is mentioned by Binnius p. 279. for a
Conference with Jews before Constantine, but he says the Acts that now are
extant are full of falsehoods.

. 47. XXVI. An. 315. They place us a Council at Alexandria in which Alexander,
with many Bishops, condemned Eusebius Nicomed* with Arius and that the rest
adhered to them, especially as holding that Christ was not Eternal, but was a
Creature that had a beginning, and that the Wisdom and Word of God was not the
Son, but made the Son.

. 48. XXVII. Another Council at Alexand. they tell us of, against the Arians,
and the Meletian Schismatics: but the Acts are not known. To this is annexed
an Epistle of Constantine to Alexander and Arius, recorded by Eusebius. C^sar in
vita Constant. in which Constantine chideth them both for their Contention, and
seems to take the Question for unsearchable and to be disputed, saying, I
understand that the foundation of the Controversy was hence laid, that thou
Alexander did ask questions of the Presbyters about a certain Text of
Scripture; yea, about a certain idle Particle of a Question ^idst enquire, what
every one of them thought? And thou Arius did inconsiderately blurt out that
which thou had not before thought of, or if thou had thought of it, thou
ought to have past by in silence: Whence discord was stirred up among you,
and the meeting hindered which is wont to be made in the Church, and the most
holy people distracted into several parts, is divided from the compagination of
the whole body of the Church. Therefore both of you, forgiving one another,
approve of that which your fellow servants does not without cause exhort you to:
And what is that? That to such Questions you neither Ask, nor Answer, if asked:
For such Questions as no Law or Ecclesiastic Canon does necessarily prescribe,
but the vain strife of dissolute idleness does propose, though they may serve
to exercise acuteness of wit, yet we ought to contemn them in the inner thought
of the mind, and neither rashly to bring them out into the public Assemblies
of the People, nor unadvisedly to trust them to the Ears of the Vulgar. For how
few are they that can accurately enough perceive the force of things so
weighty, and so involved in obscurity? But if there be some one that is
confident that he can easily do and reach this, yet I pray you, how small a
part of the multitude is it, that he can make to understand him? Or who is
there, that in the curious search of such Questions, is not in danger of a fall?

The rest is well worth the Reading, as to the common case of Theological
Controversies, though it seems that Constantine made too light of the Arian
error. But I dare not be so injurious to Eusebius as to question whether he
faithfully recited the Epistle, when Binnius himself backs his doubt with a
dicere non auderem: And if we give away the credit of that one Historian, it
will leave much of Church History under doubt, that now goes for certain:
Perhaps Peter's being ever at Rome, etc.

. 49. XXIX. The next mentioned is the Council of Laodicea in Phrygia Paccat,
(not Syria) of 32 Bishops, gathered by Nunechius a Bishop of Phrygia. They were
so few that without contention they made diverse good Canons: The 46 Canon
requires that the baptized should learn the Creed, and on the Friday of the
last week repeat it to the Bishop or Presbyters. (By which you may conjecture
how large a Bishopric then was.) And Can. 56. The Presbyters were not to go
into the Church before the Bishop, but with him. (For then every Church had a
Bishop, though some Chapels far off had Presbyters only.) And Can. 57. It is
ordered, that Bishops should not be Ordained in small Villages and Hamlets, but
Visitors should be appointed them. But such (Bishops) as had been heretofore
there Ordained, should do nothing without the Conscience of the City-Bishop.
Which shows that before Bishops were made in Villages; as Socrates says then
they were in Arabia, and the Phrygian Novatian^, etc. The last Can. recites
the same Canonical Scriptures that we receive, save the Apocalypse* which is
left out.

. 50. XXIX. Next we have a great Roman Council of 275 Bishops, says Crab,
under Sylvester, which has 7 Canons: The last says, That no Bishop shall
Ordain any, but with all the Church united. But whether this was before or
after the Nicene Council, is uncertain.

And another he mentions under Sylvester at Rome, which Binnius has, where
Constantine baptized of Sylvester was present and 284 Bishops. (Whether it be
true or a fiction is uncertain.) But if true, it was a very humble Council: For
they all professed only patience, renounced giving their judgment at all, but
only heard what Sylvester would say, professing none fit to judge but he. But
they all with Presbyters and Deacons subscribed what he said (if true.) What he
said I do not well understand, supposing much of it to be scarce sense: I am
sure it is far from Cicero's Latin. 139 Bishops came, ex Vrbe Roma vel non
long ab illa, Out of the City of Rome, or not far from it: (How big were their
Diocesses?) Here, Cap. 2. three men are cursed, (anathematized:) One was a
Bishop, Victorinus, that being ignorant of the course of the Moon, contradicted
the right time of Easter. It Is well the Makers and Approvers of our Imposed
English Liturgy fell not under Sylvester's severity, who have (alas,
mistakingly) told us, that [Easter-day, on which the rest depend, is always the
first Sunday after the first full Moon, which happens next after the one and
twentieth day of March: And if the full Moon happen on a Sunday, Easter- day is
the Sunday after.] This is one of the things that about 2000 Ministers are
silenced, for not Declaring Assent, Consent and Approbation of; yea to the use
of it, and so to keep Easter at a wrong time. But how Sylvester came to have
power to say all, and to banish men, and Constantine sit by and say nothing, I
know not: Dedit eis anathema and damnavit eos extra urbes suas.

Cap. 3. He Decreed, that no Presbyter shall accuse a Bishop, no Deacon a
Presbyter, etc. and no Layman, any of them: And that no Prelate shall be
condemned but in 72 Testimonies, nor the chief Prelate be judged of any one,
because it is written, The Disciple is not above his Master. And no Presbyter
shall be condemned but in 44 Testimonies; no Cardinal Deacon but in 36, etc.
And what may they not then do or be?

Cap. 5. He Decreed clara voce, tha^ no Presbyter should make Chrisme, because
Christ is so called of Chrisme.

The 12. Cap. is, Nemo det poenitentiam, nisi quadraginta annorum petenti: Let
no man give repentance (or penance) but to one that seeks forty years.

Cap. 14. Let no man receive the witness of a Clergyman against a Layman.

Cap. 15. For no man may examine a Clergyman but in the Church.

Cap. 16. Let no Clerk, Deacon, or Presbyter, for any Cause of his enter into
any Court, because Omnis Curia a Cruore dicitur, every Court is so called from
blood, and is an offering to Images; For if any Clergyman enter into a Court,
let him take his Anathema, never returning to his Mother the Church.

Cap. 17. Let no man put a sunning Clergyman to death, no Presbyter, no
Deacon, no Bishop, that is over a Clerk or Servitor of the Church, may bring
him to death. But if the Clergy man's cause so require, let him be three days
deprived of honor, that he may return to his Mother Church.

Cap. 18. No Deacon may offer against a Priest a Charge of filthiness.

Cap. 20. No man shall judge of the Prime seat; because all seats desire
justice to be tempered of the first seat. The Subscribers were 284 Bishops
(what did the other 57?) 45 Priests, and 5 Deacons, and the two following, and
Constantine and his Mother Helena. O brave Pope and Clergy! O patient Council
that subscribed to one man, and pretended to no judgment! O humble Constantine,
that subscribed to all this, and said nothing! And a woman's subscription
perfecteth all. And O credulous Reader that believes this!

CHAP. III.
The Council of Nice, and some following it.
. 1. XXX. WE come now to the first General Council: General only as to the
Roman World or Empire, as the History and Subscriptions prove, and not as to
the Whole World, as the Papists with notorious impudence affirm: which I have
elsewhere fully proved. This Council was called, as is probably gathered, Anno
325* in the 20th year of Constantine (though others assign other years.) That
they were congregate about the Arian Heresy and the Eastern Controversy is
commonly known: As also what wisdom and diligence Constantine used to keep the
Bishops in peace: Who presently brought in their Libels of accusations against
each other; which he took and burnt without reading them, earnestly exhorting
them to peace, and by his presence and prudent speech repressing their heats
and contentions; whereby the Synod was brought to a happy end as to both the
controverted Causes: And Eusebius Nicomed* and Arius were brought to
counterfeit repentance and consent to the Nicene Faith; which Constantine
perceiving, being set upon the healing of the divided Bishops and Churches, he
commanded that Arius should (as reformed) be received to Communion; which
Athanasius refusing caused much calamity afterward.

. 2. Because the Case of the Meletians is brought in by this Council, I think
it useful (for our warning in these times) to recite the sum of their story out
of Epiphanius, p. 717, etc. Haer. 63.

Meletius (says he) was a Bishop in Th^bais in Egypt, of sincere Faith even to
the death. In Diocletians Persecution, Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and he, were
the chief of the Bishops that were laid in Prison, as designed to Martyrdom;
while they were there long together with many fellow prisoners, many called to
Trial before them were put to death, and many for fear subscribed to Idolatry,
or denied Christ: And when they had done, professed repentance and craved peace
of the Church: As it had been in Novatus his Schisms, so it fell out here;
Peter Bishop of Alexan. was for peace and pardon; Meletius and most of the
other suffering prisoners were against it, and said, If they may thus revolt to
save themselves, and be presently pardoned, it will tempt others to revolt:
Peter seeing his opinion was rejected, rashly took his Cloak and hanged it like
a Curtain over the midst of the prison-room, and said, Those that are for me,
come to me on this side, and those that are for Meletius go on that side to
him: Whereupon far most of the Bishops, Priests, Monks, and people that were in
prison went to Meletius, and but few to Peter. (A ^ouler Rupture than that of
the English Fugitives at Frankford.) This unhappy word and hour began the
misery, among good men, expecting death: From that hour they keep all their
meetings separate. Shortly after Peter was Martyred, and Meletius was judged to
the Mines: As he went thither through the Country, he every where made new
Bishops and gathered new Churches, so that there were two in the several
Cities:
Those old ones that followed Peter called their Meeting, The Catholic Church;
The other called theirs, The Martyrs Church: But yet they held a Unity of
Faith. Even the sufferers that labored in the Mines divided,
and did not pray together. At last Meletius and the rest were restored unto
peace, and at Alexandria, Alexander and he lived in familiarity, and Meletius
was he that detected Arius and brought him to Alexander to be tried. But when
Meletius was dead,
Alexander grew impatient at the private separate Meetings of his followers,
and troubled them, and vexed them, and began to use violence against them, and
would not have them depart from his Church: They refused still, and this bred
stirs and Tumults. Alexander persecuting them, and following them yet more
sharply, they sent some men, eminent for piety and parts, to the Emperors
Court, to Petition for Liberty for their private Meetings, without impediment.
Of these Paphnutius and John their Bishop, and Callinitus Bishop of Pellusium
were chief: who when they came to Court, being named Meletians, the Courtiers
rejected them and drove them away, and they could not get access to the
Emperor. On this occasion being put to wait long at Constantinople and
Nicomedia, they fell into acquaintance with Euschius, Bishop of Nicomedia, the
Head of the Arians, who pretending repentance was become great with the
Emperor, who was all for the Clergies peace and concord. To Eusebius they open
all the matter: He craftily took the advantage of their suffering and long
waiting, and promised his help, on condition they would but Communicate with
Arius,
who seigned repentance. The temptation over came them, and they yield; They
that had gathered separate Churches, because they would not Communicate with
the repenting Lapsed (to Idolatry;) yet yielded to Communicate with Arius, that
they might be delivered from the persecution of a Godly Bishop, and keep their
Meetings. They are brought to Constantine, who being all for peace, though
against Schism, grants them the freedom of their Meetings; And thus joining
with the Arians for the liberty of their Assemblies, this became the greatest
support to the Arians, without which (says Epiphanius) they could not have
stood. (So much does Bishops tyranny or severity cross its own ends, and
destroy the concord which they think by such tearing means to force; And so
hard is it for men that could suffer Martyrdom from Heathens, innocently to
bear the persecution of their Brethren, and so greatly does it tempt them to
use unwarrantable means for their preservation: Just as if the Non-conformists
at this time should seek, by the favor of the Papists, to be delivered from
the silencing and destroying Prelates, upon condition of a common liberty: The
Cases are not much unlike.) Neque enim (says Epiphanius) consistere Arius, dut
fiduciam ullam habere potuisset, nisi eam esset occasioncm nactus, quae
pessimam inter illos ad hodiernum usque diem concordiam devinxit. (But O,
Father Epiphanius, why took you not warning by this, when you un-Bishoplike and
un-Canonically set your self against holy Chrysostom?)

Alexander being dead, and Athanasius shortly succeeding him, he could not bear
the Meletian Churches in his City: And after fair means he used foul: And going
himself to look after such Meetings, with his Retinue, one of his Deacons in
the Meletian Meetings broke a certain Vessel, which occasioned some chiding and
fighting, which occasioned Accusations of the Meletians, and Calumniations of
the Arians against Athanasius as a Man of Violence and Tyranny; which
Constantine abhorring in a Bishop, and Eusebius. Nicomed. representing the Matter
as worse than it was, the Emperor (having granted the Meletians liberty for
their Meetings, which Athanasius violently denied them) in great anger
commanded a Synod to be held at Tire to examine the Matter, and Eusebius
Caesariens. with some others to preside or order it: Where Potamo Bishop of
Heraclea seeing Fus^bius Caes. sit as Judge and Athanasius stand, with Passion
and Tears inveyed against Eusebius,
saying, Who can endure to see thee, Eusebius, sit and judge innocent
Athanasius? Were not thou and I in Prison together in time of Persecution, and
when I lost an Eye for the Truth, thou came out unmaimed? And how came that
to pass, if thou did not promise some wicked deed or other to the
Persecutors, or do some? Eusebius hearing this, suddenly rose and dismissed the
Council, saying, If you dare carry it thus here, your Adversaries Accusations
are to be believed: For if you play the Tyrants here, you do it much more in
your own Country. Hereupon two Arian Bishops Vrsalius and Valens are sent into
Egypt to enquire after the Truth of the Matter, who coming back with Calumnies
against Athanasius, he fled from the Council by Night to the Court to the
Emperor to give him information; who taking Athanasius for false and
Tyrannical would not believe him, but upon Letters from the Council, and upon
the provocation of Athanasius, who told him God would judge him for believing
his Accusers, banished him, where he remained (in Italy) twelve or thirteen
years, even till after Constantins Death. And when Constans had compelled his
Brother Constantius to restore him, he was again banished; For George that had
been made Bishop by the Arians (and by Constantius) was killed by the Heathen
People in Iulians time, and his Corpse burnt, and the Ashes scattered into the
Wind, which increased the suspicion of Tyranny against Athanasius: But in
Iovians Reign he was again restored; And after his Death, he conflicted with
Infamies again: And when Athanasius was Dead, the Emperor Valens set Lucius
over them, who afflicted the People that had followed Athanasius, and Peter
whom they had chosen for their Bishop, and by Banishment, Death and Torments,
made them know what Church-Tyranny was indeed.

Thus far Epiphanius gives us the History of the Meletian Schism, and the
effects of good Bishops impatience with Dissenters.

. 3. But I must not conceal from the Reader that Baronius and Dion. Petavius
say, that Epiphanius is deceived in all this History, and makes the case of
the Meletians better than it was; and that some Meletian knave beguiled him:
But, 1. They give us no proof of any such knaves beguiling him at all: 2. And
he that was so apt to over-do in suspecting and aggravating Heresies, (as in
Origen's and Chrysostom's Case,) was not likely to make the Case here so much
better than it was: 3. And how much nearer was Epiphanius in time and place,
than Baronius and Petavius? and how easy was it then for him to have true
notice of such public things? 4. And if they make Epiphanius so fallacious in
such a story as this, so near him, what a shake does it give to the Credit of
his copious History of the many other Heresies, which he had less opportunity
to know: and consequently to the Credit of much of Church History? Yet I
confess, that the man seems not to be very accurate in his Disputes, nor all
his Narratives; But rather by far to be suspected of making things worse than
they were, than better. And I believe that some passages in this History are
mistaken by him (as that the Meletians joined with the Arians before the death
of Alexander:) but that makes their Case the better. Petavius says also, p.
286. Animad. in Epiph. Multum in Historia Meletii lapsum esse supra vidimus;
Largius in Arianae Haeresis descriptione peccavit vir alioqui diligentissimus.
And in his instance of the time of Arius death it is undeniable. But if in such
famous Histories, we must read him with such suspicion and allowance, how much
more in the many little ones that were more obscure?

. 4. As to the Arians Heresy, the two Epistles of Arius recorded by Epiphanius
tell us much of the truth of his mistake: And the Arians Arguments by him are
at large recorded and answered. He that denies the Deity of Christ, denies
his Essence: And he that denies his Essence, denies Christ, and is no
Christian. But the Samosatenians, the Photinians, and our late Socinians, are
far more perniciously Heretical than the Arians. For the Arians maintained,
that Tres sunt hypostases, Pater, Filius and Spiritus Sanctus; and that God did
ante sempiterna tempora unigenitum filium gignere, per quem and saecula and
reliqua procreavit omnia; viz, subsistentem illum suapte voluntate condidisse,
ejusmodi ut neque converti neque mutari possit, perfectam Dei creaturam, sed
non tanquam rerum creatarum aliquam; foetum itidem, sed non tanquam unum e
caeteris. They thought that before God made the rest of the creatures, he made
one super-angelical perfect Spirit, by which he made all the rest, and that
this is Christ; and that he received no other soul but a body only at his
Incarnation, and this super-angelical spirit was his soul. This was the
dangerous heresy of Arius.

. 5. Dion. Petavius truly tells us, that his great advantage was, that many
of the Fathers of that Church had spoken in such kind of words before him, the
Controversy being not then well considered: p. 285. ad Haeres. 69. having
spoken of Lucian, the Martyr's giving advantage to A^ius, he adds, Quod idem
plerisque veterum Patrum cum in hoc negatio, tum in aliis fidei Christianae
capitibus usu venit, ut ante errorum atque haereseon, quibus ea singillatim
oppugnabantur, originem, nondum satis illustrata ac patefacta rei veritate,
quaedam suis scriptis asperserint, quae cum orthodoxae sidei regula minime
consentiant. (And yet the Papists swear, not to expound Scripture, but
according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.) Ne ab hoc Trinitatis
mysterio ac quaestione discedam, observavimus jamdudum Justinum Mart. Dialogo
cum Tryph. de filio Dei idem propemodum cum Arians sentire. And in his Books,
De Trinit. he at large cites the very words of him and many other Fathers. But
he here gives them this gentle excuse, Sed ab omni culpa tam hic quam Lucianus
aliique liberandi sunt, qui nondum agitata controversia, panem de ea commode
pronunciasse videntur. Simile quiddam de Dionys. Alex. tradit. Basilius, Ep.
41, etc. But it is enough to think charitably, that they were saved, without
going so far as to say, they were without all fault. For Christianity is the
same thing before such Controversies and after: And it is hard to think how he
can be a Christian, that denies Christ's Essence: But God is merciful, and
requires not knowledge alike in all, that have not equal means of knowledge.
Which charity must be extended to others as well as to these Fathers. Yet the
same Petavius cannot endure Camerarius, for saying, that Athanasius, though a
valiant Champion of the truth, did sometime indulge his own desires, and mix
some ill with sacred things: But if he were not at all to be blamed,
Constantine was much the more to be blamed for banishing him; And why should
not his honor be of some regard? The truth is, the Alexandrian Bishops and
People were long more violent and troublesome than others, as not only
Socrates, but many other Historians note: And as it was noted with dishonor in
Theophilus and Cyril, and Dioscorus, etc. so it can hardly be believed by them
that read the History throughout, that Alexander and Athanasius wanted not
something of the humble patience, meekness, and healing tenderness and skill
that their Case required: For who is perfect? And how apt are great Bishops to
be too violent against Dissenters, instead of healing them with Love and clear
convincing Evidence?

. 5. Happy had it been if Prudence had silenced this Heresy betimes, for never
any one did so great mischief to the Church. The badness of it, was the honor
of the Niccne Council that suppressed it, as far as in them lay. But alas, the
Remedy seemed quickly conquered by the Disease: As Constantine had work enough
to keep Peace among the Bishops in the Council, by his presence and reproofs;
so when the Arians professed repentance, his peaceableness caused him too far
to indulge them; by which some of them got such interest in his Court, as
proved the following Calamity of the Church. And it is the sadder to think on,
that the two great Emperors, Constantius and Valens, that were deceived by
them, and drawn into violent Persecution, are noted to be otherwise none of the
worst men. Epiphanius says, p. 737. Accessit and Imp^ratorum favor cujus
initium a Constantio Imperatore profectum est: Qui cum caeteris in rebus
perhumanus ac bonus esset, -- and alioquinpius ^c multis probitatis ornamentis
praeditus, hac unare a^e^ravit, quod non impressa a parente fidei vestigia
seq^utus est: Quod ipsum tamen non illius culpa factum, sed nonnullorum fraud,
qui in die Iudicii rationem reddituri sunt; qui specie and nomine tenus
Episcopi, sinceram Dei fidem labefactarunt. -- Et beati Constantii in errorem
ab illis inducti, qui rectae fidei regulam ignoravit, eademque ignorantia ad
illorum se utpote sacerdotum Authoritatem accommodavit, quod ipsum error
illorum, ac caecitas, dep (...) ataque fides and ex diaboli profect a consilio,
lateret. Accessit and alia causa quae huic serpentum officinae plurimum adjecit
virium, Eusebius scilicet, qui callide se insinuans, Valentis aures pii ac
religiosi Imperatoris, ac Divini numinis amantissimi, corrupit. Qui quod ab
illo baptismo sit initiatus, ea causa fuit cur haec factio stabilis ac firma
consisteret. If Epiphanius say true, we see what men these Persecuting
Emperors were.

. 6. As to the other part of the Councils work, the fixing of Easter Day, had
not the Bishops been sinfully fierce about it, against each other, it had never
been taken for a Heresy to mistake the time, nor had it been a work so
necessary and great to determine it: seeing as Socrates, Sozomen, etc. tell us,
many Churches differed in this, and matters as great as this, without
condemning or separating from each other: And the Asians erred by the Motive of
Tradition, and Irenaeus had long before censured the Roman Bishop for his
violence in condemning them. And many good Christians even after the Councils
determination, durst not forsake their old Tradition, nor obey them: Among
whom, how long our Britains and the Scots stood out, Beda tells us. And
though the Audians, that also disobeyed, were called Heretics, I would all
Adversaries to Heretics were no worse men.

. 7. And because these Audians rose about that time, I think it worth the
labor to add the sum of their History out of Epiphanius, that the World may
better perceive what spirit the Hereticating Prelates were then of, and how
some called Heretics were made such, or defamed as such, and who they were
that did divide the Churches and break their peace.

Epiph. l. 3. Tom. 1. p. 811. Of the Schism of the Audians, which is the 50th
or 70th Heresy: The Audians live in Monasteries, in Solitudes, etc. Audius
their Founder arose in Mesopotamia, famous for his integrity of life, and
ardent zeal of Divine Faith. Who often seeing things ill carried in the Churches,
feared not to their faces to reprove and admonish the Bishops and Priests, and
say, These things should not be so done: You should not thus Administer: As a
Lover of Truth, he used to do such things as these, which are familiar with men
of exquisite honesty, who through their excellent study of Godliness, use this
great liberty of Speech: Therefore when he saw things ill carried in the
Churches, he sometimes spoke his thoughts, and could not forbear blaming them.
As if he saw any of the Clergy over covetous of Money, be it Bishop or Priest,
he would reprehend them: or if any abounded in luxury and pleasures; or if they
corrupted any part of the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church, he would not
bear with them, but blame them. Which was troublesome to men of a dissolute
life: And therefore he underwent the greatest contumelies, being exagitated by
the hatred and malicious words of them all. But he being thus tossed about, and
beaten and reproached, did bear it all with an equal mind; and thus long
continued in the Communion of the Church; Till some that were more vehemently
offended with him for these Causes, cast him out: But yet he patiently bore all
this, but being more earnestly intent for the promoting of the Truth, he still
studied not to be drawn away from the Conjunction and Society of the Catholic
Church. But when he and his friends were still beaten, and suffered unworthy
usage, groaning under these evils, he took Counsel of the violence of these
calamities and contumelies: And so he separated himself from the Church, and
many falling away with him, a new Divorce was hereby made. For he did not in
any thing depart from the right faith, but he with his partakers held in all
things sincere Religion. Though in one small matter they are too stiff. About
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost they judge excellently, and as the Catholic
Church, and swerve not a jot: and the rest of the order of their Lives is truly
most excellent and admirable; so that not only He himself, but even the
Bishops, Priests, and all the rest of them, live by the labor of their hands.

Indeed they had a conceit that the Body did partake of the Image of God, and
they thought that to please Constantine, the Nicene Council had altered the
Custom and Tradition of the Church about Easter: But these were not the causes
of their departure from the Church, but the violence of dissolut^ Bishops, that
cast them out, as being impatient of their strictness and opposition to their
sin.

. 8. About Easter, says Epiphanius, p. 821. Neque ^ruditis ignotum est, quam
saepe diversis temporibus de illius festi celebritate varii Ecclesiasticae
disciplinae tumultus ac contentiones obortae sint: praesertim Polycarpi ac
Victoris aetate, cum Orientales ab Occidentalibus divulsi, ^acificas a se
invicem literas nullas acciperent. Quod idem and aliis temporibus accidit:
velut Alexandri Episcopi Alexandrini and Crescentii; quemadmodum contra se
mutuo scripserint and acerrime pugnaverint. Quae animorum opinionumque
distractio, ex quo semel post Episcopos illos qui ex circumcisione ac Iudaeorum
secta ad Christum se converterant, agitari coepit, ad nostra usque tempora
eodem est tenore perducta. By which we see, 1. With what caution Tradition must
be trusted: 2. How early Bishops began to divide the Church about things
indifferent.

. 9. That men that all, in the main, fear God, should thus contend, abuse, and
persecute one another, is sad, and has even been a hardening of Infidels: But,
alas, the remnant of corruption in the best will somewhat corrupt their
conversations. It is a sad note of Epiphanius, ib. p. 816. [I have known some
of the Confessors, who delivered up Body and Soul for their Lord, and
persevering in confession and chastity, obtained greatest sincerity of faith,
and excelled in piety, humanity, and Religion, and were continual in fastings,
and in a word, did flourish in all honesty and virtue: yet the same men were
blemished with some vice; as either they were prone to reproach men, or would
swear by the name of God, or were over talkative, or prone to anger, or got
gold and silver, or were defiled with some such filth, which yet detract
nothing from the just measure of virtue.]

. 10. But as God made a good use of the falling out of Paul and Barnabas, so he
did of Audius his unhappy case. Being cast out of the Church, he took it to be
his d^ty to Communicate with his own party, and a Bishop that suffered for the
like made him a Bishop, and the Bishops accused him to the Emperor, that he
drew many people from the obedience of the Church, and hereupon the Emperor
banished him into Scythia. Dwelling there, he went into the inner parts of
Gothia, and there instructed many of the barbarous in the principles of
Christianity, and gathered many Monasteries of them, w^o lived in great
religious strictness, p. 827. But it is hard to stop short of extremes, when
men are alienated by scandal and violence: They ca^^e to so great a dislike of
the Bishops of the common Churches, that they would not pray with any man, how
blameless soever, that did but hold Communion with the Church. Vranius a Bishop
and some others joining with them, made Bishops of the Goths. (Note out of
Epiphanius, p. 827, 828. what Country was called Gothia in those times.)

. 11. It is not to be past over that at the Nicene Council, the first speaker,
and one of the chief against the Arians, was Eustathius Bishop of Antioch; And
when Eusebius Nicomed. was made Bishop of Constantinople, he pretended a desire
to see Jerusalem, and passing through Antioch secretly hired a Whore to swear,
that Eustathius was the Father of her child: and getting some Bishops of his
Faction together, they judged Eustathius to be deposed, as an Adulterer; and
got the Emperor to consent and banish him: And after, the Woman in misery,
confessed all, and said, that it was one Eustathius a Smith, that was the
father of her child.

. 12. In Pisanus's Con^il. Nic. Bin. p. 332. this Eustathius is made the first
Disputer against a Philosopher: And whereas the great cause of the Arians
Error was, that they could not conceive how the Son could be of one substance
with the Father, without a partition of that substance, Eustathius tells the
Philosopher that took their part and urged, Faciamus hominem ad Imaginem, etc.
that The Image of God is simple, and without all composition, being of the
nature of fire: but he means sure but analogically:

. 13. In the same Pisanus, lib. 3. p. 345. Bin. the description of the Church
is, There is one Church in Heaven and Earth; in this the Holy Ghost rests;
But Heresies that are without it -- are of Satan. -- Therefore the Pope was not
then taken for the Head of the Catholic Church; For he pretends not to be
the Head of them that are in Heaven. See what the Catholic Church then was!

. 14. Note that, 1. the Council of Nice names none Patriarchs. 2.
They nullify the Ordination of scandalous and incapable men. Can. 9. and 10.
Which will justify Pope Nicholas forbidding any to take the Mass of a
Fornicating Priest. 3. That Rural Bishops were then in use, and allowed by the
Council, Can. 8. 4. That no Bishop was to remove from one Church to another,
Can. 15. (which Eusebius. Nicom. soon broke.) 5. Even in the Arabic Canons the
4th. si populo placebit, is a Condition of every Bishops Election. 6. The 5th
Arab. Canon, in case of discord among the people, who shall be their Bishop or
Priest, it is referred to the people to consider which is most blameless: And
no Bishop or Priest must be taken into another place, if the former was
blameless. (So that if Pastors be wrongfully cast out, the people must not
forsake them, nor receive the obtruded.) 7. Those Ordained by Meletius were to
be received into the Ministry where others dyed, If by the suffrage of the
people they were judged fit, and the Bishop of Alex. designed them. Sozom. l.
1. c. 23.

. 15. XXXI. The next Council in Binnius (and in Crabs Order) is said to be at
Rome under Sylvester, with 275. Bishops: But this is confessed to be partly
false, if not all: And is the same that is before mentioned; which ordered that
no Bishop should ordain any Clerk nisi cum omni adunata Ecclesia,
But with all the Church united, or gathered into one: (Which Canon seems
made when a Church was no more than could meet together, and when the People
had a Negative Voice.)

But the Council. Gangrense is Binnius's next (though Crab put afterward some of
the forementioned also) said to be in Sylvesters days; (and yet Sozomen and
some others, say that the Council of Nice was in Julius days, though most say
otherwise.) Here were sixteen Bishops, who condemned some Errors of Eustathius
of Armenia, or rather one Eutactus, as Bin. thinks, who was too severe against
Marriage, as if it were sinful, and against eating Flesh, and against receiving
the Sacrament at the Hands of a married Priest; he made Servants equal with
their Masters, he set light by Church Assemblies, he drew Wives to leave their
Husbands for Continency, and on pretense of Virginity despised married Persons;
These superstitions they here condemned.

. 16. XXXII. An. 335. The Council at Tire was held for the Trial of Athanasius,
where he was unjustly condemned, and thereupon by Constantine banished, though
his innocence was after cleared: Had not his severity against the Meletians
driven them to join with the Arians against him, Epiphanius says, they had not
been able to make head thus against him.

Constantines Epistle to the Alexandrians, lamenting and chiding them for their
Discords, is well worth the translating, but that I must not be so tedious: See
it Bin. p. 391.

. 17. XXXIII. The next is a Council at Jerusalem, An. 335. where Arius Faith
was tried, approved, and he restored to Alexandria and the favor of
Constantine: The Creed which he gave in, was this.

We believe in one God the Father Almighty, and in the Lord Jesus Christ his
Son, begotten of him before all Ages, God, the Word, by whom all things were
made which are in Heaven and in Earth: Who came down, and was Incarnat^; and
Suffered, and Rose again, and Ascended to the Heavens, and shall come again to
Judge the Living and the Dead: And in the Holy Ghost: The Resurrection of the
Flesh: The Life of the World to come, and the Kingdom of Heaven: In one
Catholic Church of God, extending it self from one end of the Earth unto the
other.

Arius with this, protesting against vain Subtilties and Controversies,
desires the Emperor to accept of this as the Evangelical Faith; and the
Council and the Emperor receive him, as for the joyful restoration of Unity
and Peace, and so would undo what was done at Nice. The Emperor was so greatly
troubled at the continued divisions of the Bishops, that he was glad of any
hope of Unity and Peace: But this proved not the way.

. 18. XXXIV. An. 336. A Council was called at Constantinople; in which they
accused, condemned, and banished Marcellus Ancyranus, an Adversary to the
Arians, as if he had denied the Godhead of Christ, (upon some wrested word)
though it was their denying it that offended him: Here also Arius was justified
and Athanasius condemned: But Arius dyed shortly after.

. 19. XXXV. The next is a Council of 116 Bishops at Rome, in or about An. 337.
under Julius; in which the Nicene Creed was owned, and the Arians condemned,
and nothing else down that is recorded.

. 20. XXXVI. The next was a Council at Alexandria which vindicated Athanasius
from his Accusations, when Constantinus junior sent him home from his
Banishment.

. 21. XXXVII. The next was a Council at Antioch of near 100 Bishops (of which
36 were Arians) the most Orthodox (and the holy James of Nisibis one:) yet they
deposed Athanasius, and the Arians (it is like by the Emperors favor) carried
it; In his place they put George a Cappadocian suspected to be an Arian, whom,
(as I said before) the People murdered, burnt, and scattered his Ashes in the
Wind, and he was one of the Arians Martyrs. (Unless England had ever been
Arian, I cannot believe them that say that this is the St. George, that the
English have so much honored.)

. 23. This Arian Council finding that the Emperors favor gave them the Power,
made many Canons against Non-Conformists. The first Can. is against them that
keep not Easter at the due time. The second against them that come to the
hearing of the Word, but communicate not publicly in the Lords Supper and
Prayers, and against them that keep private Meetings, and that communicate with
them. Can. 4. Was to make their Case hopeless that exercise the Ministry after
they are Silenced, or Deposed, be they Bishops, Priests, or Deacons. Can. 5.
Was that if any Priest or Deacon gathered Churches or Assemblies against the
Bishops Will, and took not warning, he was to be Deposed: And if he go on, to
be oppressed by the exterior Power as Seditious. (There is their Strength.)

Can. 6, and 7. None suspended by his own Bishop was to be received by another,
nor any Stranger without Certificates. Can. 8. Country-Priests may not write
Canonical Epistles, but Rural Bishops may. Can. 9. No Bishop must do any thing
without the Metropolitan, save what belongs (by Ordination and Guidance) to
his own Church. Can. 10. Though the rural Bishops are consecrated as true
Bishops, yet they shall only govern their own Churches, and Ordain such lower
Orders as they need, but not Ordain Presbyters or Deacons without the
City-Bishops, to whom they are subject. Can. 11. Casts out all Bishops or
other Clergymen, that go to the Prince without the Metropolitane's Counsel or
Letters. Can. 12. Deposed or silenced Ministers must not go to Princes for
relief, but appeal to a Synod. Can. 13. Bishops must not go or ordain in other
Diocese, unless sent for by the Metropolitan; else their Ordinations there to
be null. Can. 15. A Bishop condemned of all may not appeal. Can. 16. A vacant
Bishop leaping into a vacant Bishopric without a Council (the Metropolitan
present) is to be ejected, though all the people choose him. Can. 17. If any
Bishop be ordained to a Church, and refuse or neglect the Office, let him be
excommunicate till he receive it. Can. 18. If any Bishop ordained to a Parish
neglect it, because the people will not receive him, let him enjoy the honor,
and be heard in a full Synod. Can. 19. The Ordination of a Bishop is null,
which is done without a Synod, and the Metropolitan. etc.

. 24. XXXVIII. Another Council at Rome under Julius undid what this former did,
and acquitted Athanasius, Marcellus, and other injured Bishops: (perhaps
Eustathius, says Bin.)

. 25. XXXIX. Athanasius being sent back when Gregory was put in his place, the
City being ready to be in an uproar, Athanasius retired to Rome (or hid
himself) foreseeing it; till fire and blood had proclaimed the Calamity of this
Episcopal strife. And Pope Julius called another Council at Rome, to answer the
Letters of the Oriental Synod, which charged him with usurpation and despised
him.

. 26. XL. Anno 344. Another Council was held at Antioch, by those called Arians
by some, Reconcilers by others, and Orthodox and Catholics by themselves; in
which they renounce Arius and his sayings, but yet leave out the word (...) [of
one substance.] This they did in a new-made Creed; fitted purposely, as they
said, to reconcile; as others, to deceive: To which end four had been made
before, and not availed.

. 27. XLI. A Council at Milan examined this Creed, and rejected it, for leaving
out [of the same substance] and because the Nicene Creed was sufficient.

. 28. XLII. The next is called an Universal Council, of 376 Bishops at Sardica,
which cleared Athanasius, Marcellus, and others. And yet Augustine, and many
others, reject this Council. It has diverse good Canons, but one among them for
Appeals to Rome; which three Popes urged to Aurelius, Augustine and the other
Africans, as a Canon of the Council of Nice: And whenas neither any of these
Popes, nor the African Bishops once took notice that those words were in the
Council of Sardica; the Papists answer, 1. That the Africans knew not of this
Councils Canons, but had lost them, (though Gratus Bishop of Carthage was one.)
2. And that the Popes took the Canons of Sardica to be but Explications of the
Nicene, and for they were but as one. (But why did they give no such answer?)

Bishops are here condemned that remove to any other Church; and they that are
above three days non-resident; and especially they that go ad Comitatum, to the
Palaces of Princes or great Prelates; but if they have just business they are
ordered to send it by a Deacon.

. 29. XLIII. The Oriental Bishops departing from Sardica came to Philippopolis,
and gathered a Council by themselves, and condemned those whom the other had
absolved, and others for Communicating with them.
Yet they renounced Arius, but also cast out the word [(...), of the same
substance] as not Scriptural; and are called Semi-Arians.

The Persons excommunicated by them were Athanasius, Osius, Marcellus,
Protogenes, Asclepas, Gaudentius, Maximinus, Paulus Constable. and Pope Julius.
They write a circular Epistle, specially sent to Donatus Carthag. in which they
so vehemently speak for peace and piety, and lay such Crimes to the charge of
Athanasius, Paulus, and Marcellus, as would astonish the Reader, and confound
his judgment, whom to believe. Cruel Persecution, bloody Murders, Profaneness,
burning a Church, and such like they charge on Athanasius; and say that they
offered the Western Bishops of Sardica to send five of their Bishops with six
of theirs to the place where these things were done, and if they prove not true
they yield to be condemned. On Marcellus they charge written Heresy (which
Basil, Chrysostom, and others believed.) On Paulus Constable. they charge that he
was guilty of flames and Wars, and that he caused Priests to be dragged naked
into the Marketplace, with the Body of Christ tied about their necks; and that
before a concourse of people he caused the consecrated Virgins to be stripped
naked in the open Streets, unto horrid shame. And for such Reasons they require
all good Christians to abhor their Communion. Thus the Reader is called to
grief and shame to hear Bishops thus odiously reviling each other, and tempting
Infidels to take them all for wicked and utterly unpeaceable men.

. 30. XLIV. An. 348 or 349. was a Council at Carthage (called the first:) It
was gathered against the Donatists, whose Bishops pretended to be the only
Catholics; and their Circumcellions being violent Reformers, taking from the
rich that they thought had wronged any, and righting the injured, and unjustly
doing justice; and resisting the Emperor Constans his Officers, so that they
were fain by Soldiers to suppress them, and cast out Donatus Carth. and by
gifts reconciled the people that followed them.

Many good Canons for Church Order were made by this and most of the African
Councils, no Bishops being faithfuller than they. Several passages in their
Canons show that their numerous Bishops had Churches of no more people than our
larger Parishes. And Can. 12. of this Council orders that where the Bishops
by Contract divide their several People, one take not from the other.

. 31. XLV. Anno 350. A Council at Milan received the repentance of Vrsatius and
Valens that had accused Athanasius, and gave them Letters of reconciliation.

. 32. XLVI. Constans constrained Constantius to recall Athanasius, but was
himself murdered by Magnentius before he came thither: But at Jerusalem a
Council was held in the way, which judged his reception, and wrote to
Alexandria to that end.

. 33. XLVII. Among the friends of Athanasius, Euphratas Bishop of Collen was
one, that was sent on a Message into the East; where Stephen an Arian Bishop of
Ant. got a Whore to go in to him: When she saw an old man, instead of a young
one, which she expected, she immediately confessed all, and Bishop Stephen was
cast out for it. But Euphrata^t after all, turned Photinian and denied Christ
to be God, and a Council at Colen deposed him.

. 34. XLVIII. They talk of 3 Concilia Vasensia, or Vasatensia, and that they
ordered [As it was in the beginning] to be added to the doxologie: But there is
nothing of moment certain of them.

. 35. XLIX. Anno 352. Liberius had a Council at Rome about Athanasius, and
sending a Message to Constantius.

. 36. L. Anno 353. At a Council at Arles, Athanasius is condemned, and the
Popes Legate forced to subscribe it, with other Bishops, and some banished that
refused it.

. 37. LI. Pope Liberius desired a General Council, which the Emperor grants,
and it is held at Milan. Above 300 Western Bishops were there, most of the East
(where the Arians reigned) could not come (an. 355.) Athanasius his
Condemnation (Vrsatius and Valens revolting, and again accusing him) and
Communion with the Arians, were the things there urged by the Emperor: Lucifer
Calaritanus (after called a Heretic) and E^sebi^s Vercellensis, and a few
more, refused to subscribe, and were banished; as Liberius after was; and
Foelix made Pope: But most of the Bishops for fear, and desire of peace,
subscribed. The Emperor himself wrote to Eusebius. V^rcel. to be there (who had
refused) with great profession of zealous piety, and desire of the Churches
peace. But this scandal and miscarriage of the Bishops, and success of the
Arians, was the effect of this General Council.

. 38. LII. The Semi-Arians pretending to Universal Concord, thus prevailing by
the Emperor and a General Council, Hilary Pictav. (a Married Citizen made
Bishop) drew some Orthodox Bishops of France to separate from the Arian
Bishops, and renounce their Communion; The Arians (or Semi-Arians) taking these
for separatists, and injurious to them, (especially Saturninus) procured a
Council (...) Byterris, to condemn them as Schismatics; where Hilary was
condemned and banished, an. 356.

. 39. LIII. The General Council at Sirmium I out of order began with. Anno 357.
Constantius resolving by all means to bring all the Bishops to one Communion,
was present himself; There were above 300 Bishops out of the West, besides all
the Eastern Bishops: The confusion was so great, that men knew not who were or
were not Heretics. Photinus denying the Godhead of Christ, the Bishops called
Arian, desired this Council to accuse and condemn him, as they did: They drew
up two or three Confessions themselves: The first was not Heretical directly,
save by the Omission of the
[(...):] which some persuaded the Emperor, being new and no ancient
Scriptural or Symbolical word, was the Cause of all the divisions of the
Bishops, and were that left out, all would be healed. This Council called
Arian, passed 27 Anathema's against the Arians and Photinians: Pope Liberius
subscribed to it and approved it, as the forcited words of his Epistle in
Hilary show. (And yet many Papists call it a Reprobate Council:) Old Osius,
that presided at Nice, was forced by stripes, to subscribe to it, and to the
condemnation of Athanasius. [That the Son was in all things like the Father,]
was the substitute Form here used. In their second Form they say, that [Quia
multos commovet vox, substantia, vel (...), hoc est, ut diligentius cognoscatur
illud quod (...) dicitur, aut (...), nullam earum vocum mentionem debere fieri
neque de iis sermocinandum in Ecclesia censemus, quod de iis nihil scriptum sit
in sacris literis, and quod illa hominum intellectum and mentem transcendant,
and quod nemo posset generationem filii enarrare, ut scriptum, Generationem
ejus quis enarrabit? solum enim Patrem scire quomodo filium suum genuerit,
certum est -- and nemo ignorant duas esse personas Patris and Filii, ac proinde
Patrem majorem, Filium ex Patre genitum, Deum ex Deo, Lumen de Lumine -- ] Many
thought this a necessary reconciling way: The words [Person] and [Substance]
stumbled the Arians: For they knew not how to conceive of three persons that
were not three substances; nor how the Son could be of the same substance with
the Father, unless that substance were divided: And at last wearied with
contending, they thought thus to end all, by leaving out the name [substance,]
and professing the Generation of the Son unsearchable.

The third Sirmian Creed had, [in unigenitum filium Dei, ante omnia secula and
initia and ante omne tempus quod in intellectum cadere potest existentem; and
ante omnem comprehensibilem substantiam, natum i^passibiliter ex Deo, solum ex
solo Patre, Deum de Deo, similem Patri suo qui ipsum genuit, cujus generationem
nemo novit nisi solus qui eum genuit, Pater. Vocabulum vero substantiae quia
simplicius a Patribus positum est, and a populis ignor atur, and scandalum
affert, eo quod in scripturis non contineatur, placuit ut de medio tolleretur,
and nullam posthac de Dei substantia mentionem esse faciendam.

. 40. LIII. The Oriental Bishops offended at the second Confession at Sirmium,
for leaving out the word substance, gathered in Council at Ancyra, an. 358. and
rejecting the Arians, were called Semi-Arians, because yet they were not for
[(...)] but the [(...);] Not [the same substance,] but [Like substance.] These
after turning Macedonians (for Macedonius was one of them) deny the Holy Ghost
to be God.

. 41. LIVE. Constantius finding that all his endeavors missed their end, and
that instead of bringing all the Bishops to Concord and one Communion, the very
Arians, and the Semi-Arians, divided and subdivided among themselves, did
summon another General Council at Nicomedia: But the City suddenly perishing,
he called the Western part to Ariminum, and the Eastern to Scleucia, taking
them yet but as one Council. Above 400 Bishops met at Ariminum, who were to
determine first Doctrinal and then Personal Controversies, and then send ten
Legates of each part to the Emperor, with the results: The most were Orthodox,
but the Arian Legates were better speakers, and prevailed; so that the Emperor
delayed them because of an Expedition that he had in hand against the
Barbarians; In the mean time some Assembled at Nice, and drew up Another
Confession: And when the Legates returned to Ariminum, the Arian Party of
Bishops, by the Emperors countenance, so far prevailed, as that almost all the
Orthodox subscribed to them. (Gaudentius Bishop of Ariminum was murdered by the
Soldiers.) Binnius and some others, would have this Council at Ariminum to be
two; the first Orthodox, the second Arian: Bellarmine and others called it but
one: which was Orthodox in the beginning, but for fear and compliance fell off
at the last.

. 42. LV. Whether the Council at Seleucia shall be taken for one of it self, or
but for part of that at Ariminum, though far distant, I leave to the Reader.
But here the Heterodox Bishops carried all, but so as to divide among
themselves; One party called Acacians were for forbearing the word [substance.]
The Semiarians condemned both them and the Arians, and were for [Like
substances.] They excommunicated and deposed many Arians, who appealed to the
Emperor, and craved yet another Synod. So that the further he went for
concord, the further he was from it, the Bishops dividing and subdividing more
and more; and the Emperors and Bishops, by diversity of Judgment, and by
Heresy, became now to the Church what Heathen Persecutors had been heretofore.

Sulpitius Severus tells us, that one thing that drew many to subscribe to the
Arian and Semiarian Creeds, was a certain liberty of their own Additions or
Interpretations, which was granted the Orthodox to draw them in. [Subscribe in
your own sense. q. d.] And so conditional subscriptions quieted their
Consciences, and when the Arians thought they had the Victory,
and had made the rest Conformists, it proved otherwise, for they did not in
sense and with approbation subscribe.

But though the Filth of the Arian Heresy justify all just care and
endeavors to keep it out, the multitudes of new Creeds, then made by one and
the other Party became such a snare and shame to the Church, that Hilary, among
others, greatly lamented it, even in these sad expressions.

Post Nicenam Synodum nihil aliud quam Fidem scribimus; dum in Verbis pugna
est; dum de novitatibus quaestio est; dum de ambiguis, dum de authoribus
querela est; dum de studiis certamen est; dum in consensu difficultas est;
dumque alter alteri Anathema esse coepit, prope jam Nemo est Christi. Proximi
anni fides quid immutationis habet? Primum decretum Homousion decernit taceri:
sequens rursus Homousion decernit and praedicit: Tertium usiam simpliciter a
Patribus praesumptam per indulgentiam excusat; Postremum quartumque non excusat
sed condemnat: Tandem eo processum est ut neque penes nos, neque penes quenquam
ante nos sanctum exinde aliquid atque inviolabile perseveret. Annuas atque
Menstruas de Deo Fides decernimus: decretis poenitemus; poenitentes defendimus:
defensos Anathematizamus; aut in nostris aliena, aut in alienis nostra
damnamus, and mordentes invicem jam absumpti sumus ab invicem.

Is not this a doleful description of the Bishops so soon after their wonderful
deliverance and exaltation?

The cause of all he tells us was partly forsaking the simple Form of Baptismal
Faith as not sufficient, and partly following Votes and worldly Powers. Dum a
quibus ea requiritur sua scribunt and non quae Dei sunt praedicant, orbem
aeternum erroris and redeuntis in se semper certaminis circumtulerunt.
Oportuerat humanae infirmitatis modestia omne cogitationis divinae sacramentum
illis tantum conscientiae suae finibus contineri quibus credidit: Neque post
confessam and juratam in baptismo fidem in nomine Patris, Filii and Sp. sancti,
quicquam aliud vel ambigere vel innovare. And speaking of men's perverting the
sense, he adds. Scribendae and innovandae fidei exinde usus inolevit: Qui
postquam nova potius coepit condere, quam accepta retinere, nec vetera
defendit, nec innovata firmavit, and facta est Fides temporum potius quam
Evangeliorum: dum and secundum annos scribitur, and secundum confessionem
baptismi non tenetur. Periculosum admodum nobis and miserabile est tot nunc
Fides existere, quot voluntates: and tot nobis doctrinas esse quot mores, and
tot causas blasphemiarum pullulare, quot vitia sunt; dum aut ita fides
scribuntur, ut volumus, aut ita ut volumus intelliguntur. Et cum secundum unum
Deum, and unum Dominum and unum baptisma fides una sit, excidimus ab ea fide
quae sola est; and dum plures siunt, ad id coeperunt esse ne ulla sit:
(referring to Nice.)

Fides enim quaeritur quasi fides nulla sit: Fides scribenda est quasi in cord
non sit:
Regenerati per fidem nunc ad fidem docemur; quasi regeneratio illa sine fide
sit: Christum post baptisma discimus, quasi baptisma aliquid esse possit sine
Christi fide: Emendamus; quasi in spiritum sanctum peccasse sit venia. Sed
impietatis ipisus hinc vel praecipue causa perpetua est, quod fidem Apostolicam
septuplo proferentes, ipsitamen fidem Evangelicam volumus confiteri; dum
impietates nostras nobis in populis multiloquis defendimus magniloquentiae
vanitate aures simplicium verbis fallentibus illudimus, dum evitamus de Domino
Christo ea credere, quae de se docuit credenda; and per speciosum pacis nomen
in unitatem perfidiae subrepimus, and sub rejiciendis novitatibus rursum ipsi
novis ad Deum vocibus rebellamus and sub scripturarum vocabulo non scripta
mentimur. Tutissimum nobis est primam and solam Evangelicam fidem confessam in
baptismate, intellectamque, retinere nec demutare quod solum acceptum atque
auditum habeo been credere: Non ut ea qua synodo Patrum nostrorum (the Nicene)
continentur, tanquam irreligiose and impie scripta damnanda sint; sed quia per
temeritatem humanam usurpantur ad contradictionem; quod ob hoc sub nomine
novitatis, Evangelium negaretur impericulose, tanquam sub emendatione
innovetur. Quod emendatum est, semper proficit; and dum omnis emendatio
displicet, emendationem omnem emendatio consequuta condemnet, ac si jam,
quicquid illud est, non emendatio aliqua sit emendationis, sed coeperit esse
condemnatio.

And as to the second Cause, he says, Ac primum misereri licet nostrae ^tatis
laborem and praesentium temporum stultas opiniones congemiscere; quibus
patrocinari Deo humana creduntur, and ad tuendam Christi Ecclesiam ambitione
saculari laboratur. Oro vos, Episcopi, qui hoc vos esse creditis: quibusnam
suffragiis ad praedicandum Evangelium Apostoli usi sunt?
Quibus adjuti potestatibus Christum praedicaverunt, gentesque fere omnes ex
idolis ad Deum transtulerunt? Anne aliquam sibi assumebant e palatio
dignitatem, hymnum Deo in carcere inter catenas and post flagella cantantes? --
At nunc proh dolor! divinam fidem suffragia terrena commendant; inopsque
virtutis sua Christus, dum ambitio nomini suo conciliatur, arguitur.

Add what he says of the Causes of Error, Lib. 10. de Trin. initio. Non est
amiguum omnem humani eloquii sermonem contradictioni obnoxium semper fuisse,
quia dissentientibus voluntatum motibus, dissentiens quoque fit sensus
animorum: Cum adversantium judiciorum affectione compugnans, assertionibus his
quibus offenditur, contradicit. Quamvis enim omne dictum very ratione perfectum
sit, tamen dum aliud aliis aut videtur aut complacet, patet veritatis sermo
adversantium responsioni: quia contra veritatem aut non intellectam aut
offendentem vel stultae vel vitiosae volun^^tis error obnitetur. Immoderata
enim est omnis susceptarum voluntatum pertinacia, and indeflexo (...)
adversandi studium persistit, ubi non rationi voluntas subjicitur, nee studium
doctrinae impenditur, sed his quae volumus rationem conquirimus, and his quae
studemus doctrinam coaptamus. Iam^; nominis potius quam naturae erit doctrina
quae fingitur, and jam non very manebit ratio, sed placiti. Caetera ibi videat
Lector.

But having been long in this Citation of Hilary, I return to the History, of
what followed these Councils and Creeds aforesaid.

. 43. LVI. In the mean time Constantius calls a Council of 50 Bishops to
Constantinople, where Aetius was condemned, and a ninth Creed since the Nicene
formed, which excluded both the word substance and hypostasis or subsistence.
The Semi-Arians detesting this, condemned and banished the Authors. But another
Form sent from Ariminum was preferred, and imposed to be subscribed on all the
Bishops of East and West.

. 44. LVII. An. 360. Meletius Bishop of Antioch being put in by the Acacians
proved Orthodox contrary to their expectation: And being preaching for the
Trinity his Archdeacon stopped his Mouth, and he preached by his Fingers, holding
forth One and Three: And for this was ejected, contrary to some former
Covenants. Wherefore they were fain to call a Council at Antioch to justify
his ejection. Here they made yet another Creed^^ the worst of all before it.

. 45. LVIII. Constantius being dead, Julian the Apostate is made Emperor
(would not this end the Quarrel of Christian Bishops?) Athanastus returns to
Alexandria after the third (...) years hiding, an. 362. Gregory the Bishop
being (...) by the Heathen, and burnt to Ashes. He calls (...) Here besides the
receiving of those that unwillingly (...) to the Arians, diverse new
Controversies are judged. 1. Eunemius, Macedonius, and the Semiarians denied
the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, which was here asserted. 2. Apollinaris thought
that Christ took but a Body at his Incarnation, his Divine Nature being instead
of a Soul, which was here condemned. 3. The Orthodox Greek: and Latins could
not agree by what name to distinguish the Trinity: The Greeks said there were
three hypostases, which the Latins rejected, as signifying three substances:
Hierome himself could not away with the word Hypostasis. The Latins used the
word [Person.] The Greeks rejected that as signifying no real distinction, (and
are the Schoolmen for a real distinction yet?) For they thought Persona
signified but the relation of one in Authority or Office. And thus while as
Jerome said, Tota Gr^corum prophanorum Schola discrimen inter hypostasin and
usiam ignorabat (Ep. 57.) and the sense of the word [Person] was not well
determined, the danger was so great of further dissension among the Orthodox
Bishops themselves, that as Greg. Naz. says (de laud. Athanas.) The matter
came to that pass, that there was present danger, that together with these
syllables the ends of the World (East and West) should have been torn from each
other, and broken into parts. But the Synod agreed that the Greek hypostasis
and the Latin Persona should henceforth be taken as of the same signification.
(But what that signification is, it was not so easy to tell.) Yet (says
Binnius) Augustine de Trinit. l. 5. c. 8, 9. and the Latins afterward, were
displeased with this reconciliation, and Hierome himself, who yet obtained of
Damasus, Ep. 57. that the conciliation being but of a Controversy de nomine,
might be admitted.

. 46. LIX. An. 362. Julian reigning (several French Councils besides) one then
at Paris, were employed in receiving the repentance of the Bishops that under
Constantius had subscribed to the Arians.

. 47. LX. At Iulians death Athanasius calls some Bishops to Alexandria,
betimes to send to the Emperor Iovianus their Confession, to prevent the
Arians, and other Heretics.

48. LXI. A Council also was called at Antioch on this occasion. The Semiarians
petitioned Iovianus that the Acacians, as Heretics, might be put out, and they
put in their places: The Emperor gave them no other Answer, but that he hated
contention, but would love and honor those that were for concord: They feeling
his pulse, got Meletius to call a Council at Antioch, where they seemed very
sound, and twenty seven Arian Bishops without any stop subscribed the Nicene
Creed: So basely did these Bishops follow the stronger side; and, says
Binnius, of so great consequence with Bishops is the Emperors mind.

. 49. LXII. An. 364. Valentinian being Emperor left the Bishops to meet when
and where they would themselves* And a Council was held at Lampsacus, where the
Semiarians condemned the Arians* And though some call it Orthodox (Busil, and
some good men being there) Binnius says, that the Macedonians here vented
their denial of the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, and that the Heretics
pretending to own the Nicene Faith were recieved by Liberius.

. 50. LXIII. A Council in Sicily owned the Nicene Creed.

. 51. LXIV. Some Bishops at Illyricum restored the Nicene Creed, the Emperor
being now for it. And Valentinian and Valens wrote to the Asian Bishops to
charge them to cease Persecuting any of Christ's laborers.


. 52. LXV. An. 365. At a Synod in Tyana Cappadoc. Eustathius Sebast. by Pope
Liberius Letters was restored to his Bishopric; and after cursed the
Homousion, (the Nicene Creed and denied the Godhead of the Holy Ghost: By their
means Basil returned from his Wilderness to Caesarea, whence he fled to avoid
the enmity of Eusebius the Bishop; who received him upon his professed
resolution for Peace, which he would buy at any rates.

. 53. LXVI. The Emperor Valens (unhappily taken in to Valentinian) after the
conquest of Procopius, desired Baptism, and having an Arian Wife, was baptized
by Eudoxius Constant. an Arian Bishop; who engaged him to promote the Arian
Cause; which he did with a blind religious zeal, persecuting not only the
Orthodox and Novatians, but also the Semiarians and Macedonians. And a Council
of Bishops in Caria, rejected [Consubstantial,] and restored the Antiochian and
Seleucian Creed as the best.

. 54. LXVII. An. 366. Some Arian Bishops at Singedim in Mysia, restored the
Ariminum Creed [of Like substance] and solicited Geminius the Semiarian Bishop
to consent, but prevailed not.

. 55. LXVIII. Two Councils were held at Rome by Damasus; one to condemn Valens
and Vrsatius, old Arian Bishops: Another to condemn Auxentius Bishop of Milan,
and Sisinius as a Schismatical Competitor with himself: For when Damasus was
chosen, the people were divided, and Damasus his Party being the more valiant
Warriors, they fought it out in the Church, and left one day an hundred thirty
seven dead Bodies behind them, to show that they had no Communion with them.
And because Sisinius and his Party still kept Conventicles, he was banished,
and many with him, and now again condemned.

. 56. LXIX. Another Council at Rome he had to condemn Vitalis and the
Apollinarians (that took Christ's Godhead to be instead of a Soul to his Body)
and the Millenaries.

. 57. LXX. A Council was called at Antioch to end a Schism, there being three
Bishops, two Orthodox, Meletius and Paulinus; and one Arian, Euzoius: They
ended the Schism, by agreeing that Meletius and Paulinus should both continue,
till one dyed, and then the other alone should succeed him; the Presbyters
being sworn not to accept it while one of them lived. But Meletius dying first,
Flavianus a Presbyter was said to break his Oath, and was chosen in his stead,
while Paulinus (an excellent person) lived: And so the Schism was continued.

CHAP. IV.
The First General Council at Constantinople, and some following.
. 1. THe reason why the West with Rome was freer from the Arian Heresy than
the East, was not, as the Papists say, because Christ prayed for Peter that his
Faith might not fail, but because the Emperors of the West were Orthodox,
while those in the East were Arians: And the Bishops much followed the
Emperors Will. That this last was the Cause, is notorious in the History: That
Christ's foresaid promise was not the Cause, is certain. Because whatever
promise Christ makes, he fulfilleth: But he has not kept all the Bishops of
Rome from failing in their Faith: Therefore he never promised so to do. The
minor is certain by History: To pass by Marcellinus and Liberius and Honorius
falls, (which were but like Peter's) all those wicked men whom Councils deposed
as Infidels, or Heretics, Simoniacks, Murderers, Adulterers, one as a Devil
Incarnate, and all those that Baronius and Genebrard stigmatize as Apostatical,
and not Apostolical, (50 together) had not this promise fulfilled: Nor Sixtus
Quintus, if Bellarmine judged truly, that he was damned: For it was not a dead
faith, but a saving faith, which Christ promised Peter should not fail; such a
says as had the promise of life; He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved: Whoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life: a
faith that works by love: Else Peter might have been a wicked man, and
damned, notwithstanding this Prayer of Christ, and Promise. If the faith of
Constantine senior and junior, Constans, Valentinian, Theodosius, Honorius,
Gratian, etc. had failed, the General Councils at Milan, and Ariminum, tell us,
how failing the Bishops faith was like to be; when Jerome said, that the whole
world groaned to find it self turned Arian.

. 2. The blind zeal of Valens made him restless in Persecuting the Orthodox in
the East: At Antioch he vexed those that would not Communicate with Euzoius the
allowed Arian Bishop: At Cyzicum Eunomius was put in Eleusius place; but his
followers built them a separate Church without the Walls. (Socrat. lib. 4. c.
6, 7.) He Persecuted the Novatians, and exiled Agelius their Bishop at Constable.
He banished Eustathius Antioch. and Evagrius, chosen by the Orthodox Bishop of
Constable. against Demophilus the Arian. Fourscore Bishops ^ent to crave Justice of
him, were put to Sea in a Ship there set on fire, and were both burnt and
drowned together. (Socr. l. 4. c. 13.) In all the East he deposed, abused,
murdered many that would not for sake the Nicene Creed. He set his Officers to
suppress their Conventicles. At Alexandria he imprisoned Peter that succeeded
Athanasius, and banished his Presbyters, and set up Lucius an Arian Bishop. He
persecuted the Monks of the Wilderness of Egypt (Nitria and Scitis) and
destroyed their Houses: Banished Macarius of Egypt, and Macarius of Alexandria,
their Leaders. He persecuted Basil at Caesarea: He went in person at Antioch,
to disturb and scatter the Conventicles of the Orthodox; And when he had
banished one of their Bishops (Meletius, enduring Paulinus) the Presbyters kept
the Meeting: when he drove them away, a Deacon kept it up: At last Themistius,
a Philosopher, made an Oration before him, bidding him not marvel that the
Christians had such differences, for they were nothing to those of the
Philosophers, who were of three hundred different Opinions; and that God would
be honored even under diversity of Opinions: This somewhat assuaged him; and
shortly after in the 50th year of his age, he was slain.

. 3. Gratian (and Valentinian junior) coming to the Empire, Liberty of
Conscience and Restoration was given to all Sects, except the Eunomians,
Photinians, and Manichees (Socrat. l. 5. c. 2.) He took Theodosius into the
Empire with him: And so the Orthodox Party got up again: and the Arians after
this went every where down, save among the Goths.

. 4. LXXI. Theodosius called a General Council at Constantinople, where the
chief things done, were, 1. the setting up of Gregory Nazianzene as Bishop, 2.
The condemning of the Macedonians, 3. The giving of the second Patriarchate to
Constantinople, because it was the Imperial Seat; putting under him the
Diocesses of Pontu^, Heraclea and Asia: 4. The putting down of Nazianzene
again, and putting Nectarius in his stead. 5. The settling Flavianus at Antioch.

. 5. Some would persuade us that it was two Councils and not one that did these
things: But the question is but de nomine. In the beginning they dispatched
part of their work; and before they departed Meletius the Bishop of Antioch
dying, the Bishops returned to Council, and more Egyptian Bishops came and did
the rest.

. 6. The Case of Gregory Naz. was thus: A Council at Antioch in the reign of
Arianisme, sent him, with three more able speakers to go visit the Churches,
and draw them from Arianisme. He came to Constantinople, and an Arian being in
possession, he got into a little empty Church, and there so long Preached, till
he had recovered much of the City from Arianisme. Hereupon Peter, Bishop of
Alexandria, signified by Letters, that he would have him be Bishop of
Constantinople (against the Arian Bishop:) The Orthodox Party chose him: One
Maximus, that of a Philosopher turned Christian, and insinuated into Gregory's
familiarity; by money first, and threats after, gets Peter of Alexander, and
the Egyptian Bishops, to make him Bishop of Constant* supposing Gregory not yet
lawfully settled: Meletius Antioch: being at Constable. Ordains Gregory Bishop.
The Council, when Convened, Confirm him, and cast out Maximus (that never had
possession:) Theodosius owneth Gregory, and puts out the Arian Bishop, and
possesses him of the Great Church. The Antiochian Controversy falling in at
the death of Meletius, Gregory was against Flavian; The Egyptian Bishops being
for him, set against Gregory, and resolved to cast him out and choose another:
He seeing their resolution, and offended at their furious carriage in the
Council, resigneth to the Emperor, and departs: some make it, as if his
resignation was unconstrained; but his own words show, that he did it but to
prevent the deposition which they resolved on: Else he durst not have deserted
his Flock that lamented his departure. In his place they chose Nectarius a
Praetor, that was no Christian, in foro Ecclesiae, as being not yet baptized;
and so was indeed incapable, and the choice null: But the man was honest; And
Nicephorus says, that they put down his name in a Paper with others, leaving
it to the Emperor to choose one of them, and that he chose Nectarius.

. 7. The description of this Council, and the good Bishops of his time, by
Gregory Naz. in his Poems and his Orations, is very doleful; How implacably
factious and contentious they were, how fierce and violent, leaping and
carrying themselves in the Council like madmen. He describes the People as
contentious, but yet endued with the love of God, though their zeal wanted
knowledge: Page 528. Orat. 32. The Courtiers, he says, whether true to the
Emperor he knew not, but for the most part perfidious to God: And the Bishops
as sitting on adverse thrones and feeding adverse opposite Flocks, drawn by
them into factions, like the clefts that earthquakes make, and the pestilent
diseases that infect all about, and distracting and dividing all the World,
separating the East from the West, by the noise of meus and tuus, Antiquus and
Nov^s,
nobilior and ignobilior, multitudine opulentior aut tenuior; raging like
furious horses in battle, and like madmen casting dust into the air, and under
their several Heads (or Leaders) fulfilling their own contentions, and becoming
the determiners of wicked ambition and magnificence, and unrighteous and absurd
judges of matters: The same men (says he) are to day of the same throne and
judgment as we are, if so our Leaders and chief men carry them; Tomorrow, if
the wind do but turn, they are for the contrary Seat and Judgment: Names (or
Votes) follow hatred or friendship: And which is most grievous, we blush not to
say contrary things to the very same hearers; Nor are we constant to our
selves, being changed up and down by contention: You would say we are tossed
like the waving Euripus. Therefore he professes, that it is unseemly for him
to join with them, in their Councils; as it were to leave his studies and
quietness, to go play with the Lads in the Streets, Page 524.

The like he has in his Poem, De vita sua, Page. 24, 25, 26, 27. (...), etc.

Etenim Magistri Plebis atque Antistites
Sancti datores Spiritus, and qui thronis
Fundunt ab altis verba queis patitur salus,
Cunctisque pacem jugiter qui praedicant,
In aede media vocibus clarissimis
Tanto furore se petunt sibi invicem,
Tumultuando, contrahendo copias,
Carpendo sese mutuo lingua effera,
Saliendo, mentis ut solent sanae impotes,
Praedando quos quis ante praedari queat
Rabida Imperandi dum tenet mente sitis
(Quinam ista verbis, and quibus digne eloquar?)
Orbem universum prorsus ut divulserint;
Ortumque jam and Hesperum scindit magis
Ardens simultas, quam loci vel climata:
Namque illa si non finis, at media uniunt;
At hos ligare vinculum nullum potest?
Non Causa Pietas (Bilis hoc excogitat,
Ad mentiendum prona,) sed Lis ob Thronos:
Quidnam hoc vocarim? Praesules? Non praesules: etc:
Are not these lamentable descriptions of the Bishops of those happy times, and
excellent Councils: Even in the days of good Theodosius; when the Church
recovered from under Arianisme, and came newly out of the fire of Persecution?
The truth is, All times have had some few such excellent persons as Nazianzene,
Basil, Chrysostom, etc. But they have ordinarily been born down by the violent
stream of a more ignorant, selfish, worldly sort of men.

All this here cited out of Gregory, is much less than he says in his last
Oration, De Episcopis, Vol. 2. too large and sharp to be now recited: Therefore
I leave it to the perusal of the Learned Reader.

One Papist says to me, that it was the Arian or Macedonian Bishops that
Gregory meant: But the whole tenor of his writing speaks the contrary; and
that he spoke of this first Council at Constantinople, one of the four which is
equalled to the four Evangelists: And in his 59th Epist. to Sophronius, Page
816. he says, Si eos inveneritis non ob fidei doctrinam, sed ob privatas
simultates inter se distractos and divulsos, quod quidem ipse observavi, etc.

But some may say that passion moved him to the satirical exaggeration of his
own received injuries: But, 1. He speaks not of this Council only, but of
others also: 2. He acknowledged, that till the Egyptian Bishops came, he had
the Council Vote for his place. 3. His spirit and all his endeavors were for
peace, and not to make things worse than they were; And for peace he quit his
Seat. 4. And in his Epistles to the Civil Magistrates ^e afterward wrote
earnestly to them to keep the Bishops at the next Council in peace, lest they
should make Religion a contempt and scandal. So that few men could worse be
charged with abusive invectives than this Pious, Learned, peaceable Bishop.

. 8. In his 55th Epist. to Procopius, page 814. refusing to come to their
Council, he says, If I must write the very truth, I am of the mind to fly from
(or avoid) every Meeting of Bishops: For I never saw a joyful and happy end of
any Council; nor any that gave not more addition and increase to evils, than
depulsion (or reformation:) For pertinacious contentions and the lusts of
Domination (or Lording,) (Think me not (says he) grievous and troublesome for
writing this,) are such, as no words can express: And a man that will (there)
be a Judge of others, shall sooner contract dishonesty himself, than repress the
dishonesty of others.

They that say he speaks only of Heretical Councils defy the light, and will
be believed by none that know the History.

. 9. The Case of Antioch, briefly, was this: Meletius was a good man, but of a
healing disposition, made Bishop by the Arians mistaking him, and put out by
them when they knew him, yet he held Communion with repenting Arians. Euzoius
an Arian was put into his place, and he kept Conventicles. The grand
Controversy of all the foregoing Ages, was about Communion with the Lapsed,
that yielded to Idolatry, or Heresy: some over zealous were too proud of their
own sufferings, and were very rigid against receiving such Penitents, saying
they were Time servers, and receiving them would encourage others to save
themselves in suffering, and then repent. Others were too wide in receiving
them upon unsatisfactory professions of Repentance: The Wisest went a middle
way. Many Antiochians separated from Meletius, because the Arians chose him,
and he received penitent Arians: And Lucifer Calaritanus, and Eusebius
Vercellensis of France going to settle the Peace at Antioch, Eusebius disliked
their opposition to Meletius, and left them. Lucifer a good Man, but rigid and
hot against the Arians, said that Meletius could be no Bishop, and ordained
them Paulinus (and so there were three as is aforementioned.) The Bishop of
Rome who would have a singer in all, encouraged Lucifer; Paulinus was a man of
extraordinary goodness: but yet the Canon nullified the Ordination of a Bishop
into a fore possessed Seat; And when half cleaved to Meletius, and half to
Paulinus (both very good Men,) a Synod (as is aforesaid) ended the difference,
by tolerating both till the death of one, and then making him sole Bishop: The
Presbyters (it is said) were sworn to this. Meletius dies first; yet Flavianus
a Presbyter that had stuck to them in Valens Persecution, is chosen Bishop by
the Meletians, who will not join with Paulinus as a Schismatic. The Pope
owneth Paulinus: The Council at Constantinople own Meletius first, and
Flavianus after: Gregory Nazianzene and others were against Flavianus, because
they said he came in by Perjury, having sworn not to accept it: Some say he did
not Swear. Lucifer Calaritanus that Ordained Paulinus, forsook the Party called
the Catholic Church, and gathered separated Churches, and became the Head of a
Schism, called since Luciferian Heretics, merely because the Churches received
the confessing returning Arians to Communion, and he owned Elavianus. And thus
even good Bishops could not agree, nor escape the imputation of Heresy.

. 10. Baronius and Binnius after him, say, Nazianzenus hunc discordiam sua
abdicatione compositum iri arbitratus, sedi Constantinopolitanae cum consensu
Imperatoris, non sine magno Bonorum ac populi fletu renun^iat, atque statim
post habitas in Synodo aliquot actiones, comitantibus optimis quibuscunque
Orientalibus, in Cappadociam discedit. Tum qui supererant ibi Episcopi ac
Sacerdotes Nundinarii, in locum Christiani perfectissimi, Theologi
absolutissimi, Monachi castissimi, Nectarium hominem nondum Christianum sed
adhuc Catechumenum, rerum Ecclesiasticarum penitus imperitum, in voluptatibus
saeculi and carnis hactenus versatum, suffecerunt.

. 11. This Council added to the Nicene Creed some words about the Holy Ghost.
The advancement of the Constantinopolitane Bishop by this Synod with the
reasons of it, bred such a jealousy in the Bishops of Rome, as has broken the
Churches of the East and West, which are unhealed to this day.

. 12. LXXII. Two Bishops, Palladius and Secundianus, complained to Gratian,
that they were unjustly judged Arians, and desired a Council to try them.
Ambrose persuaded him not to trouble all the World for two Men. A Council of 32
Bishops is called for them at Aquileia. They refuse to be accountable to so
few, and are condemned.

. 13. LXXIII. An. 381. Twelve Bishops met at Caesaraugusta against the
Priscillianists: These Men had diverse other Councils in those times. Ithacius
and Idacius were the Leaders. The whole Story you may find in Sulpitius Severus
in the Life of Martin, etc. The sum is this: Priscillianus, a rich Man, of much
Wit and learning, was infected with the Heresy of the Gnostics and Manichees.
Many followed him; his party was much in Fasting and Reading: The Bishops in
Council excommunicated them. Yet they kept up. The Bishops in Council sought to
the Emperor Gratian to suppress them by the Sword: A while they prevailed: But
the Priscillianists quickly learned that way, and got a great Courtier to be
their Friend, and Gratian restored them. Gratian being killed, when Maximus was
chosen Emperor by his Army, the Bishops go to Maximus for help: The Arians
having got Head against Ambrose at Milan, and these Sectaries troubling the
Churches in France, Spain, and Italy, Maximus (a Man highly commended for Piety
by most Writers, saw that being forced by his Army to accept the Empire, he was
a Usurper) being once engaged, thought the defense of the Orthodox would
strengthen him: So he forced Valentinian by Threats to forbear wronging
Ambrose; And to please the Bishops he put Priscillian to death, and banished
some of his Followers. Martin Bishop of Tome (being a Man of small learning,
but of great Holiness, and austerity of Life, living like a Hermit in the
poorest Garb and Cabin, lying on the Ground, faring hard, praying much, and
working more Miracles, if Sulpitius, his Scholar and Acquaintance may be
believed, than we read of any since the Apostles, even than Gregory
Thaumaturgus) did abhor drawing the Sword against Heretics, and dissuaded the
Bishops and Emperor but in vain: The prosecution was so managed by the
Bishops, that in the Countries, those that did but Fast and Read much were
brought under the suspicion of Priscillianism, and reproached: This common
injury to Piety from the Bishops grieved Martin yet more, so that he renounced
the Communion of the Bishops and their Synods: whereupon they defamed him to
the Emperor and People, as an unlearned Man, a Schismatic, suspected of
favoring Priscillianism! But Martins holiness and Miracles magnified him with
the Religious sort. At last a great Priscillianist being sentenced to death,
Martin traveled to the Emperor Maximus to beg his Life. Maximus told him, he
would grant his desire if he would but once communicate with the Bishops:
Martin preferring Mercy before sacrifice, yielded, and did once communicate
with them. But professed that in his way home, an Angel corrected him and
threatened him if he did so any more: and that from that time his gift of
Miracles was diminished: and so he never communicated with them more to the
Death: Sulpitius his Narrative puts the Reader to a great difficulty, either to
believe so many and great Miracles as he reports, or not to believe so learned,
pious, and credible an Historian, who professes to say nothing but what he
either saw himself or had from the Mouth of Martin, or those that saw them, and
who speaks his own knowledge of his eximious Piety. He speaks hardly of the
Bishops, not only as complying with an Usurper, but that Ithacius in particular
of his knowledge, was one that much cared not what he said or did The Bishops
would have denied that the death of Priscillian was by their means* Is it not
strange that the Church of Rome should Canonize Martin for a Saint, believing
his great Miracles, and yet themselves go an hundred times further against the
blood of Dissenters, than the Bishops did whom Saint Martin therefore opposed
and separated from to the death?

The Churches in Spain, and elsewhere, were disturbed and scattered or
endangered by Soldiers to please these Bishops, not (as some forge) that
Maximus did persecute the Christians for the Prey: For most Writers magnify
his Piety and Defense of Ambrose, and the Orthodox that condemn his Usurpation,
though he said, the Soldiers in Britain forced him to it.

. 14. LXXIV. A General Council was called to Rome by the Emperor and Damasus;
but the Oriental Bishops would not come so far, but met at Constantinople: Here
Damasus owned Paulinus at Antioch, as the Council of Constable. had owned Meletius:
And so neither would be obedient to the other; the General Council, nor the
Pope. But Damasus durst not excommunicate Flavianus, but permitted two Bishops
to continue at Antioch; accounted a Schism, which continued long.

. 15. LXXV. The Oriental Bishops that would not come to Rome, meeting at
Constantinople, wrote to Rome to tell them their Case and Faith, and minded
them that it was according to the Canons that Neighbor Bishops (and not
Strangers) should Ordain Bishops to vacant Seats (to justify their setting up
Flavianus when Rome set up Paulinus:) And they give account of the advancement
of Constable. and Jerusalem and call Jerusalem [The Mother of all other Churches.]

. 16. A Synod held at Syda against the Massalians, little is known of.

. 17. LXXVI. A Council at Bourdeaux condemned Instantius Priscillian. who
thereupon was slain at Trevers.

. 18. LXXVII. An. 386. A Council at Rome under Syricius, repeated some of the
old Canons.

. 19. LXXVIII. Theognostus having excommunicated Ithacius, and reprehended the
Bishops, as irregular and bloody for procuring the Death of Priscillian, a
Council called at Trevers did justify and acquit him: Unjustly, say, even
Binnius and Baronius: who here repeat out of Sulpitius Martins once
communicating with the Bishops there, to save two Men's Lives, and the Words of
the Angel to him [Merito, Martine, compungeris: Sed aliter exire nequisti:
Repara virtutem; resume Constantiam, ne jam non periculum gloriae,
sed salutis incurras: Itaque ab illo tempore satis cavit cum illa Ithacianae
partis communione misceri: Caeterum cum tardius quosdam ex ergumenis, quam
solebat, and gratia minore curaret; subinde nobis cum lachrymis fatebatur, se
propter communionis illius malum, cui se vel puncto temporis necessitate, non
spiritu, miscuisset, detrimentum virtutis sentire: sexdecim post vixit annos,
nullam Synodum adiit, etc.

Is it not strange that Papists blush not to recite such a History with
approbation, which expresses a testimony from Heaven against far less than
their Inquisition, Flames, Murders, Canons de heraeticis comburendis and
exterminandis, and Deposing Princes that will not execute them. And which
shows such a Divine justification for separation from the Bishops and Synods
of such a way, yea, though of the same Religion with us, and not so Corrupt as
the Reformation found the Roman Papacy and Clergy?

. 20. LXXIX. The two Bishops continuing at Antioch, Evagrius succeeding
Paulinus, and Rome owning him, and the East Flavianus, a Council is called at
Capua:
Flavian refuses to come: The Council had more wit than many others, and
Ordered that both Congregations (Flavian's and Evagrius's) being all good
Christians, should live in loving Communion. (O that others had been as wise,
in not believing those Prelates that persuaded the World that it is so
pernicious a thing for two Churches and Bishops to be in one City, as Peter and
Paul are said to be at Rome!) And they referred the Case to Theophilus Alex.

. 21. But this Council condemned a new Heresy (Hereticating was in fashion;)
viz. of one Bishop Bonosus, denying Mary to have continued a Virgin to the
death. And they condemned Re-baptizing and Re-ordaining, and the Translation of
Bishops.

. 22. LXXX. Next comes a Provincial Council (or two) at Arles, which does but
repeat some former Canons.

. 23. LXXXI. Next we have a strange thing, a Heresy raised by one that was no
Bishop: But the best is, it was but a very little Heresy: Hierome is the
describer of it, who writing against the Author, Iovinian a Milan Monk, no
doubt according to his sharpness, makes the worst of it: At the worst it
contains all these: 1. That Virgins, Widows and Married Women, being all
baptized (or washed) in Christ, and not differing in any other works, are of
equal merits. 2. That those that plena ^^de with a full faith are born again in
baptism, cannot be subverted by the Devil. 3. There is no difference of merit
between abstaining from meat, and receiving it with thanksgiving. 4. That
there is one Reward in Heaven for all that keep their baptismal vow. Siricius
catching Iovinian hid at Rome, sends him to Milan, where a Council Hereticateth
him.

. 24. LXXXII. It Is strange that Binnius vouchsafes next to add out of
Socrates, l. 5. c. 20. (when he Hereticateth him also) a Council of the
Novatians; Socrates and Sozomen are called Novatians, by the Papists, because
they rail not at them so valiantly as the Hereticators do; And it may be they
will call me one, if I say that I better like this Councils Canon, than burning
men for such a Heresy. They decree that as from the Apostles the different
time of keeping Easter was not taken for sufficient cause for Christians to
renounce Communion with each other, so it should be esteemed still, and it
should be so far left indifferent, that they live in love and Communion that
are herein of different minds.
And I would say, as loud as I can speak, If all the proud, contentious,
ambitious, hereticating part of the Bishops had been of this Christian mind, O
what sin, what scandal and shame, what cruelties, confusions and miseries had
the Christian world escaped! But yet men will scorn to be so far Novatians, in
despite of Scripture, reason, humanity and experience, whatever sin or misery
follow: (As I said before) in England the Convocation and Parliaments oversight
has determined of a false rule to know Easter Day, and silenceth Ministers for
not Assenting, Consenting to it, and approving the Use of it, even the Use
which consists in keeping Easter at a wrong time, which makes us Heretics.

. 25. LXXXIII. An. 393. A great Council was called at Hippo, where Austin, yet
a Presbyter was there. Good men will do well: Here was nothing but pious and
honest, for reformation of Discipline and Manners; And most of the African
Councils were the best in all the world. Their Bishoprics were but like our
Parishes, and they strove not who should be greatest, or domineer.

. 26. LXXXIV. Next a Council at Constant. decideth a Crontroversie between two
men striving for a Bishopric, Bin. p. 539.

. 27. LXXXV. Concilium Adrumetinum did we know not what.

. 28. LXXXVI. An. 394. A Council of Donatists was held at Cavernae, about a
schism between two men set up for Bishops against each other.

. 29. LXXXVII. At Bagai another Council was called by the Donatists, for the
same Cause, where Primianus Carthag. having 310. Bishops, condemned Maximianus
his Competitor, absent. Note here, 1. How great a number the Donatists were,
and on what pretense (as over-voting them) they called others Heretics and
Schismatics. 2. How small Bishoprics then were, the number tells us.

. 30. LXXXVIII. A Synod was held at Taurinum in Savoy, where a difference was
decided between the Bishops of Arles and Vienne, striving which should be
greatest: And he was judged to be the greatest, whose seat was proved to be the
Metropolitan: And a case of Communicating with one Foelix a Partner of Ithacius
and the bloody Bishops was debated.

. 31. LXXXIX. Another Carthage Council called the second, which Binnius says,
was the last, is placed next; which decreed several Church Orders, some of
which show, that a Bishops Diocese had then but unum altar;
As when reconciliation of Penitents, (as well as Chrisme, and Consecrating
Virgins) was to be done by the Bishop only, except in great necessity. And when
Christians were multiplied, they that desired a Bishop in a place, that had
none before, might have one. And the prohibition erigendi aliud altar, etc.
was repeated.

. 32. XC. Another Carthage Council called the third, has many good Orders: One
is Can. 26. That the Bishop of the first Seat, shall not be called the Chief
Priest (or Bishop) or any such thing, but only the Bishop of the first Seat. To
avoid all ambitious designs of superiority: Whence Binnius elsewhere notes,
that Carthage had not an Archbishop. No doubt they had a sense of the sin and
misery, that came by the Patriarchall and other ambitious strifes.

. 33. XCI. Another Carthage Council has the like Canons, adding to this
aforesaid, as Gratian cites it, [Vniversalis autem nec etiam Romanus Pontifex
appelletur.] To which Binnius has no better an answer than, 1. That it is only
swelling titles, and not the superior power that is forbidden. 2. That the
Africans had no power to make Laws for Rome; But, 1. Sure the Name is Lawful,
if the Power be Lawful. 2. They that could make no Laws for Rome, might declare
their Judgment of Gods Laws, and that Rome might make no Laws for them. This
Council also forbids going beyond Sea with Appeals.

. 34 XCII. The next Carthage Council has 104 Canons for Discipline: most very
good. Diverse Canons lay so much on the Bishop, as plainly show each Bishop had
but One Altar. Can. 14. That the Bishops Cottage be not far from the Church:
Can. 15. That the Bishop have but vile or cheap household stuff, and a poor
table and diet; and seek his authority or dignity by his faith and desert of
life. 16. The Bishop must not read the Gentiles Books; 19. Nor contend for
transitory things, though provoked. 20. Nor take on him the care of Family (or
common) business, but only be vacant to the Word and Prayer. 23. The Bishop
shall hear no Cause but in the presence of his Presbyters; else it shall be
void that is sentenced without them, unless confirmed by their presence. 28.
The unjust condemnation of Bishops is void. 30. And judgments against the
absent. 35. The Bishop to sit higher than the Presbyters at Church and their
Meetings, but at home know that they are his Colleagues. 51. A Clerk how
Learned soever in Gods Word, must get his living by a trade. 52. That is, by a
trade or husbandry, without detriment to his Office. 53. All Clerks that are
able to work, should learn both trades and Letters. 55. The Bishop must not
admit an accuser of the brethren to Communion; Nor to enter into the Clergy,
though he amend. Many against Clergymen that are flatterers, betrayers,
foul-tongued, quarrellers, at discord, scurrilous, of filthy jeasts, that swear
by creatures, that sing at feasts, of former scandal, etc. 83. The poor and the
aged of the Church to be honored before the rest. 88. He that goes to any
Shows or S^ghts, on public days, instead of going to the Church-assembly, let
him be Excommunicate. 98. A Layman must not teach when the Clergy are present,
unless they bid him. 100. A woman must not baptize.

. 35. XCIII. An. 398. Another Council was at Carthage of 73. Bishops for
Discipline.

. 36. XCIV. An. 399. Theophilus held a Synod at Alexandria, against a dead man,
Origin. The occasion Baronius and Binnius thus deliver: Melania, a Woman of
greatest Nobility in Rome in Valens the Arians Pesecution, hid five thousand
Monks, and a while sustained them, and when they were banished, with great
zeal, followed them to maintain them out of her substance (or estate:) When
they were restored from banishment, she built for her self a Monastery at
Jerusalem, in which, besides fifty Virgins that dwelt with her, she entertained
and maintained holy Foreign Bishops, Monks, and Virgins, twenty seven years:
Whereby it happened that both she and Ruffinus, were by Didymus Alexandrinus,
(a man blind, but of great learning and fame, too great an admirer of Origen's
works) entangled (as their accusers said) in Origen's errors, and received and
divulged his Book, called Periarchon: After 25 years absence in Egypt and
Palestine, returning to Rome with great fame of Holiness, and bringing with
them a piece of the Cross, they with fraud bring to Rome Origen's Periarchon,
(that is, Translated and Corrected by Ruffinus.) Another Woman, Marcella,
accuses them of Origen's errors, which they deny, and geting Communicatory
Letters from Pope Siricius, forsake Rome, (where such Merits and Holiness would
not procure an aged Lady a quiet habitation, without being Hereticated, because
she highly valued Origen's Works, which had diverse errors; and who has not?)
Hereupon Pamachius, and Oceanus, write to Hierome to publish Origen's
Periarchon entire, and detect his errors; which he did, showing that Ruffinus
had mended some, and left others unmended: This occasioned stirs against
Hierome, and a Council called at Alexandria, an. 399. where Origin is
condemned. Theophilus by his Legates expells Origen's followers out of Egypt
and Palestine: Being expelled they go to Chrysostom to Constantinople, and
complain of Theophilus as persecuting them that were innocent Catholics, and
desired his help: He undertaketh to reconcile them to Theophilus: Epiphanius
follows them to Constantinople, and requires Chrysostom to Excommunicate
them and Expel them; Chrysostom durst not do it, against people professing
truth and piety, without a Synod: Whereupon Epiphanius irregularly accuses
Chrysostom, and publicly inveyeth against him in his own Church; of the
process of which, more anon.

. 37. For the better understanding of these matters, I will insert somewhat of
Theophilus and Chrysostom, out of Socrates, because he is a most credible
Historian, and says, they were things done in his own days. Theophilus was
noted for a Lordly Prelate; Isidore Pelusiota says more: When Chrysostom was
to be Ordained Bishop of Constantinople, Theophilus refused to Ordain him,
because he would have preferred to it, one Isidore, a Presbyter of his own; But
Eutropius, a Courtier, having got Articles against Theophilus, showed them to
him, and bid him choose, whether he would Ordain Chrysostom Bishop, or stand
at the Bar and answer those crimes: Theophilus was so afraid at this, that he
presently Consecrated Chrysostom: Socr. l. 6. c. 2. But presently after began
busily to devise how he might work him mischief, which he practiced privately
by Word, and by his Letters into foreign Countries: But was vexed that his
malicious practices had not better success, for he thought to bring in this
Isidore (cap. 5.)

. 38. One of the Articles against Theophilus was this: When Theodosius was
going to fight against Maximus the Tyrant, Theophilus sent presents by this
Isidore to the Emperor, with two Letters, charging him to give the presents
and one of the Letters to him that should have the upper-hand. Isidore got him
to Rome, to hearken after the Victory: But his Reader that kept him company,
stole away his Letters: Whereupon Isidore in a fright took his heels presently
to Alexandria.

. 39. Another thing to be fore-known to this story is in Socrat. l. 6. c. 7.
The schism of the Anthropomorphites now rose from Egypt: some of the more
unlearned thought that God had a body and the shape of a man, but Theophilus
(and the Judicious) condemned them, and inveighed against them, proving that
God had not a body. The Religious of Egypt hearing this, flocking in blind zeal
to Alexandria, condemned Theophil^^s for a wicked man, and sought to take away
his life: Theophilus very pensive, devised how to save his life: He came to
them courteously, and said, When I fasten mine eyes on you, methinks I see the
face of God. These words allayed the heat of the Monks; who said, If that be
true that thou say, that the face of God is like ours, then curse the Works
of Origin which deny it: If thou deny this, be sure thou shall receive at our
hands the punishment due to the impious and open enemies of God: O brave
disputing! Were these mortified Monks? Theophilus told them, he would do what
they would, for he hated the Books of Origin.

But that which ripened the mischief was, that the Religious Houses of Egypt
having four brothers, excellent men, for their overseers, Theophilus was
restless till he got them away to him; one of them, Dioscorus, he made a
Bishop; others living with him perceived that he was set upon heaping and
hoarding money, and that all his labor tended to gathering, [Dr. Hanmer
translating this, puts in the Margin, This Bishop has more fellows in the
World. And noting how Theophilus to revenge himself persecuted his own
Opinions, says, This is a sin against the Holy Ghost.] would dwell with him no
longer, but returned to their Wilderness. Theophilus prone to anger and
revenge, endeavored by all means to work them mischief; And the way he took
was to accuse them to the Monks, for saying to him, that God had not a body,
nor humane shape: And he himself was of the same Opinion, yet to be revenged of
his Enemies, he stuck not to oppugn it; and sent to the Monks, not to obey
Dioscorus or his Brethren, for they held that God had no body, whereas
Scripture says, that he has eyes, ears, hands and feet, as men have; which
with Origin they deny: By this treachery he set them all together by the ears;
one side calling the other Origenists, and the other them Anthropomorphites; so
it turned to bickering among the Monks, yea, to a deadly battle: And Theophilus
went with Armed men and helped the Anthropomorphites.

So you see, if Socrates say true, how wickedly this Sainted Patriarch lived,
and how he came so much engaged against the Origenists, whose errors doubtless
were worthy blame: but many good persons who honored Origin for his great
worth, and owned not his errors, were called Origenists, because they honored
him: And that which was erroncous in him, was consistent with far greater
Learning, Piety, and Honesty, than Socrates, Isidore Pelus. and others thought
there was in Theophilus: Either credible Socrates, and others were gross Liars,
or this Patriarch and Saint was a downright knave, or acted like one.

. 40. Now we are upon it, let us prosecute Chrysostom's History ^urther. He
was a studious holy Monk of a House, near Antioch: After Nectarius death he was
chosen Bishop for his mere piety and worth: He was a man of great piety and
honesty and an excellent tongue, and as good a life, but bred in a Cell and not
to Courtship, knew not how to slatter Courtiers and Court-Prelates: He was
naturally sharp and choleric, and his conscience told him, that a Bishop must
not be a dawber, nor flatter the greatest wicked men: (For Bishops in that Age
were the Preachers,) not having a thousand Congregations to preach to.) He saw
even the Clergy addicted to their appetites: and he kept a Table for them, but
eating with great temperance he always eat alone; He rebuked the Luxury of the
Court, and particularly of the Empress, who conceived a deadly hatred against
him: And the Custom of the Court was, for the Women much to influence both
Emperor and Courtiers, and then what Bishop soever was too precise for them
and bold with their sins, to get a pack of the Worldly Clergy presently to meet
together and depose him: (For Synods of Bishops (not the Pope) had then the
power.) They would not be seen in it themselves, but a Patriarch of Alexandria
should call a Synod, and do it presently. Chrysostom was a man of no Courtship
to take off their edges; but the worse Courtiers, Bishops, and Priests were,
the worse he spoke of them; And all the honest plain people believed and loved
him; but the rich and great Prelates abhorred him. His own Clergy hated him,
because he would reform them: Those that would not amend, he Excommunicated:
Which they could not bear: so that one of his Deacons Serapion, openly said to
him, O Bishop, thou shall never be able to rule all these as thou would,
unless thou make them all taste of one whip. Every one was his Enemy who was his
own, and was engaged by guilt against his Discipline and Doctrine.

The Guilty hated him: His Hearers loved him: Swift-Writers took his Sermons,
which tell us what he was to this day: And it was honesty and policy in
Innocent Bishop of Rome to own him, who had worth to add to the reputation of
his defendants. Among other of his accusations, one was, that Eutropius an
Eunuch, Chamberlain to the Emperor, procured a Law against Delinquents taking
the Church for a Sanctuary. And shortly after being to be beheaded, for a crime
against the Emperor, he took the Church for a Sanctuary himself; And
Chrysostom from the Pulpit Preached a Sermon against him, while he lay
prostrate at the Altar. Also he resisted Gainas the Arian, who turned Traitor
and was destroyed*

Another cause of Chrysostom's disturbance was, that one Severianus Bishop of
Gabale in Syria, came into Constantinople, and Preached for Money, and drew
away the hearts of the People, while Chrysostom was about choosing a Bishop
for Ephesus: Serapion a turbulent Deacon quarrelled with the Syrian Bishop, and
would not reverence him: The Bishop said, If Serapion die a Christian, Chirst
was not Incarnate. Serapion tells Chrysostom the last words without the first:
Chrysostom forbids Severianus the City: The Empress takes his part, and
importuneth Chrysostom to be reconciled to Severianus. But the Core remained,
Socrat. l. 6. c. 10.

. 41. Socrat. c. 11. Shortly after Epiphanius (the Collector of Heresies) came
from Cyprus to Constantinople, and there irregularly in Chrysostomes Diocese
played the Bishop, ordained a Deacon, and called together the Bishops that were
accidentally in the City, and required them to Condemn the Books of Origin;
which some did, and some refused, says Socrates, cap. 12. Obscure men, odd
Fellows, such as have no Pith or Substance in them, to the end they may become
famous, go about most commonly to purchase to themselves Glory and Renown by
dispraising such men as far excel them in rare and singular Virtues.
Chrysostom bore patiently Epiphanius's fault and invited him to take a Lodging
at his House. He answered him, I will neither Lodge with thee, nor Pray with
thee, unless thou banish Dioscorus and his Brethren out of the City, and
subscribe with thy own Hand the Condemnation of the Works of Origin:
Chrysostom answered, that such things are not to be done without deliberation
and good advice. Epiphanius in Chrysostom's Church at the Sacrament, stands
forth and Condemns Origin, and Excommunicateth Dioscorus a Bishop, and
reproves Chrysostom as taking their part. Chrysostom sent word by Serapion
to Epiphanius that he did violate the Canons, 1. In making Ministers in his
Diocese; 2. In administering the Communion without his License, and yet refusing
to do it when he desired it. Wherefore he bid him take heed lest he set the
People in an uproar, for if ought came amiss, he had his remedy in his Hands.
Epiphanius hearing this, went away in fear, and took Ship for Cyprus: The
report goes (says Socrates, cap. 13.) that as he went he said of John, I hope
thou shall never dye a Bishop: And that Chrysostom answered him, I hope thou
shall never come alive into thy Country. And it so fell out: For Epiphanius
dyed at Sea by the way; and Chysostome dyed deposed and banished.

. 42. The Empress Eudoxia was said to set Epiphanius on work. Chrysostom being
hot, made a Sermon of the faults of Women; which was interpreted to be against
the Empress. She irritated the Emperor against him; and got Theophilus to call
a Council against him, at Quercus near Chalcedon, and Constant. Thither came
S^verianus, and many Bishops that Chrysostom had deposed, and many that were
his Enemies for his strictness; but especially time-servers that knew the will
of the Empress, if not the Emperors: When they summoned him to appear before
them, He answered, that by the Canon there must be more Patriarchs, and he
appealed to a General Council, yet not denying to answer any where, if they
would put out his Enemies from being his Judges, and that in his own
Patriarchate. But they sentenced him deposed, for not appearing: The People
were presently in an uproar, and would not let him be taken out of the Church:
The Emperor commanded his banishment: To avoid Tumult, the third day he
yielded himself to the Soldiers to be transported: The people hereupon were
all in an uproar, and it pleased God that there was an Earthquake that night:
Whereupon the Emperor sent after him to entreat him to return. When he came
back he would not have officiated, till his Cause was heard by equal Judges,
but the People constrained him to Pray and Preach; which was after made the
matter of his Accusation. Theophilus was hated as the cause of all, and
Severianus as the second. After this Theophilus turned his Accusation upon
Heraclides, Bishop of Ephesus, put in by Chrysostom: They condemned him
unheard, in his absence: Chrysostom said that should not be: The Alexandrians
said, It was just; They went hereupon together by the Ears, and some were
wounded and some were killed, and Theophilus glad to fly home to Alexandria;
but was hated by the People.

. 43. After this a Silver Image of the Empress was set up in the Street, and
Plays and Shows about it, which Chrysostom perhaps too sharply reproached:
This provoked the Empress to call another Council; which deposed Chrysostom,
for seizing upon his place before a Council restored him: He ceased his Office:
The Emperor banished him: His People in passion set the Church on Fire, which
burnt down the Senators Court; for which grievous sufferings befell them. Upon
this they forsook the Church and the new Bishop (Arsacius, an old useless man)
and gathered Conventicles by themselves,
and were long called Ioannites from his Name, and taken for Schismatics: But
they never returned till the Name and Bones of Chrysostom were restored to
Honor.

. 44. The Novatians quarrelled with Chrysostom as too loose in his Doctrine
and too strict in his Life, because he said in a Sermon, If you Sin an hundred
times, the Church Doors shall be open to you, if you repent. And Chrysostom
angry with Sisinnius the Novatian Bishop, told him, There should not be two
Bishops in one City, and threatened to silence him from Preaching: He told him
that he would be beholden to him then for saving him his labor. But
Chrysostom answered him, Nay, if it be a labor, go on.

. 45. XCV. A Council in Africa to renew the Privileges of Churches for
Sanctuary; that none that fled to them for any Crime, should be taken out by
force: Justice was taken for Wickedness.

. 46. XCVI. Two Councils met, one at Constable. to judge Antonius, Bishop of
Ephesus, for Simony, and many other Crimes: Another at Ephesus to judge six
Bishops for Simony.

. 47. XCVII. About An. 400. A Council of 19 Bishops at Toletum repress the
Priscillians; and make diverse Canons for Discipline; as that a Clergyman shall
have power over his offending Wife by force, but not to put her to death; that
a man that has no Wife but one Concubine shall not be kept from Communion
(though some think that this Concubine is truly a Wife, but not according to
Law, but private Contract, and more servile.) Many other better there be.

There is adjoined a Regula fidei of many Bishops approved by Pope Leo, in Bin.
p. 563. To which are adjoined Anathematisms against the Priscillians: One of
them is, If any one say or believe that other Scriptures are to be had in
Authority and Reverence, besides those which the Catholic Church receives,
let him be Anathema. (Yet the Papists receive more.) Another is,
If any one think that Astrology or Mathematics is to be believed (or trusted)
let him be anathema.

There are in Bin. diverse Fragments cited, as of the Tolet. Councils. One says
that Arch-Presbyters are under the Archdeacons, and yet have Curam animarum
over all the Presbyters. Another determines that there shall be but one
Baptismal Church, which is there called, The Mother Church, with its Chapels,
in the Limits assigned: And another distinguishes of Offerings made at the
Parish Church, and Offerings at the Altars; which shows that then there were
no Altars but where the Bishop was.

. 48. XCVIII. Two Councils were held at Carthage about 401. The later about the
Donatists.

. 49. XCIX. An. 402. Was the Council Melevitan* about certain Bishops quarrels,
and who should be the highest Bishop in Numidia.

. 50. C. An. 403. Was the Synod ad Quercum, which deposed Chrysosto^^.

. 51. C^. An. 403, 404, etc. There were seven Councils in Africa, against the
Donatists, to procure Honorius to suppress them by the Sword, not as a Heresy,
but because they rose up by Fire and Sword against the Catholics, and abused
and killed many. But when Attalus invaded Africa, the Emperor proclaimed
Liberty for them, to quiet them; which he after recalled. Another Synod was
held against them at Cyrta. One at Toletum about Ordinations; and one at
Ptolemais to Excommunicate Andronicus, an oppressing Governor.

. 52. CII. The Donatist Bishops held a Council, decreeing, that when a sentence
of banishment was passed on them, they would not forsake their Church, but
rather voluntarily die, as many did by their own hands: For they took
themselves to be the true Church and Bishops, and the rest persecuting
Schismatics.

. 53. CIII. The Concilium Diospolitanum of 14 Bishops in Palestine acquitted
Pelagius upon his renouncing his Errors.

. 54. An. 416. A Council at Carthage of 67 Bishops condemned Pelagius and
C^lestine; whom the former had absolved.

. 55. CV. A Council of 60 Bishops at Milevis condemn Pelagius. The 22. Canon
galleth the Pontificians: If Presbyters, Deacons, or other inferior Clergy,
shall in their Causes complain of the Bishops, the neighbor Bishops shall hear
them and end the business; being used by the consent of their Bishops: But if
they see cause to appeal from them also, let them appeal to none but to
Africane Councils, or to the Primates of their Provinces: But if any will
appeal to any places beyond the Seas, let none in Africa receive them into
Communion.

In this Council was Aurelius, Alypi^s, Augustinus, Evodi^s, and Possidonius,
and these very great with Pope Innocent, one of the best and wisest Popes (who
excommunicated Theophilus, Arcadius and the Empress, etc. for Chrysostomes
cause.) Yet did this pass then without contradiction. Can. 12. of this Council
Liturgies were made necessary approved by Councils lest any Heresy should be
vended.

. 56. C^lestine and Pelagius being condemned by the Africans, especially upon
the Accusations of Lazarus and Herotes Bishops, said to be holy men; Innocent
joined with the Africans, but after his death Pope Zosimus having a fair Appeal
of Caelestine, etc. to him, absolveth them both and condemns their Accusers.
He writes an Epistle, had the cause been good, very honest against rash
condemning innocent men, telling them how greatly they were rejoiced at Rome to
find them Orthodox; and what false and bad men Lazarus and Herotes were: It was
Lazarus custom to accuse the Innocent, as in many Councils he had done Saint
Britius a Bishop of Tours; that he got by Blood into the Bishops Seat, and was
the shadow of a Bishop, while a Tyrant had the Image of Empire, and then his
Patron being slain, voluntarily deposed himself. The like he says of Herotes;
and that neither of them would come personally to Rome, but lay in Bed and s^nt
false Letters of Accusation: Therefore he admonishes the Africans (among whom
was Augustine) to believe such whisperers no more against the innocent: But
Binnius out of Prosper makes the accusers holy men, and the other wicked: Bin.
p. 607.

. 57. Pelagius sent Zosimus a Confession of his Faith, and therein condemning
all the late Heresies, professes, That he so holds free will, as yet that we
always need the help of God; and that they err who say with the Manichees,
that a man cannot avoid sin, and they that say with Jovinian, that a man cannot
sin; for both deny the freedom of the will: But he holds, that always a man
can sin and can forbear sin, so as be still holds the freedom of the will.

But subtle Augustine and the rest, sent back many harder questions to put to
Pelagius and Caelestine for their trial, upon which they after past for
Heretics.

. 58. CVI. Therefore 217 Bishops in a Council at Carthage having received
Zosimus Letters, decreed to stand to their former judgment and Innocents,
against Pelagius and Caelestine, till they should confess certain points (for
Grace) drawn up by Paulus Diaconus.

. 59. CVII Zosimus being dead, Boniface and Eulalius strove for the Popedom:
Both were chosen: The Emperor Honorius was sent to for both: This Case being
too hard for him, he refers it to a Council at Ravenna: It proved too hard
for them. Therefore the Emperor commanded them both to remove from the City,
and another Bishop to officiate, till it was decided by another Council. But
Eulalius disobeying the Emperors Command, and coming into Rome at noonday,
occasioned a tumult, and the people were near to fight it out. Which the
Emperor hearing, expelled Eulalius, and a Council obeying him confirmed
Boniface.

. 60.
Among the Decrees of Boniface one is, That no Bishop shall be brought or set
before any Judge Civil or Military, either for any Civil or criminal cause. So
that a Bishop had the privilege of a bad Physician; he might murder and not be
hanged; For any crime, he was to answer but before Bishops, who could but
Excommunicate and Depose him. But another Decree is better, against Bishops
that fall out and desire to hurt their Brethren: But, alas, to how little
effect?

. 61. CVIII. Another Council at Carthage, (called the sixth, and by some the
fifth) had the famous contention with three Popes, Zosimus, Boniface, and
Caelestine, successively, against Appeals to Rome, and the Popes sending
Legates into Africa to judge. The Popes alleged the Council of Nice for it.
The African Bishops knew no such Canon: They take time for Trial, and send to
Constantinople and Alexandria, to Atticus and Cyril, for their true Copies of
the Councils: None of them have any such Canon: The Fathers write to the Pope
to take better heed what he affirms for the time to come, and to forbear such
pride and usurpation: alleging that by the Canons all strifes were to be ended
by their neighbor Bishops and Councils.

Here the Papists sweat about these answers and the event. Some say (as
Harding) that the Africans continued long, (some say almost 100 years) in
Schism: And an Epistle under the name of Pope Boniface the second to Eulalius
says the same: Others wiser (as Binnius) see that to lose Augustines authority
and have him and all the African Bishops (the best of the World) against the
Papal power, would be to heavy a burden for them: Therefore they say, that the
Africans were no Schismatics, that the Canon not found was in the Council of
Sardica; and that That went for the Council of Nice: That the Africans did not
deny the Popes power of judging them, but only of sending Soldiers and doing
it violently by force, and such other shifts, which the express words of the
African Council and Letters plainly confute: If any dispute it, I appeal to the
very words.

Either another Council or a second Session of the same is called the seventh
at Carthage.

. 62. CIX. All this while the Schism continued at Rome, and Eulalius partly
would not Communicate with the rest, each side saying, that theirs was the True
Bishop, and the other an Usurper and Schismatic. But Theodosius was for
Caelestine. In his time another Carthage Council made up their Canons 105.
Among which are: 6. That no Bishop be called the chief Bishop. 33. To deal
gentlier with the Donatists. 36. To send to them for peace. 53. That Bishops
latelier ordained may not dare to prefer themselves before those that were
Ordained before them. 68. For pacifying the Churches of Rome and Alexandria,
etc.

. 63. It fell out well for Austin against the Pelagians, that by the means of
Prosper and Hilary Pope Caelestine was wholly on Austins side, and condemned
the Pelagians. And among his own Decrees one was Nullus invitis detur
Episcopus: Cleri, plebis and ordinis Comm. sensus ac desiderium requiratur.
Many Canons of those times show that the Bishops Churches were no bigger, than
that All the Laity could meet to choose or accept the Bishop, and have personal
Communion.

. 64. CX. An Eastern Council against the Massalians.

. 65. CXI. Next comes the Nestorian War: Pope Caelestine provoked by Cyril
Alex. called a Council at Rome, and condemned Nestorius, unless he recanted in
ten days.

. 66. CXII. Cyril calls his Council at Alexandria, and passes the same
sentence, having got Caelestine to back him, and sends it with many
Anathematismes to Nestorius, calling for his abjuration. The whole cause is
opened at the next Council at Ephesus.

CHAP. V.
The First General Council at Ephesus, with the Second, and some other
following.
. 1. THe Church at Constantinople growing to be the greatest, by the presence
of the Court (which was the spring or poise of most of the Bishops courses, and
indeed did rule,) it became the envy and jealousy, especially or the two great
Patriarchs, Rome and Alexandria. Alexandria being under the same Emperor had
more to do with Constable. and made the greater Stirs; For when the Empire was
divided, Rome being under an Orthodox Emperor, had little trouble at home, and
little opportunity for domination in the East: Yet keeping up the pretense of
the prime Patriarchate, and the Caput Mundi Romani, the Pope watched his
opportunity to lay in his claim, and to keep under the stronger side, and while
they did the work in the East against one another, he sent now and then a
Letter or a Legate, to tell them that he was somebody still: And indeed the
hope of help from the Western Emperor by the countenance of the Pope, made the
Eastern Churches still vexed with Heresy and Persecutions and Divisions, to
seek often to Rome and be glad of their approbation, to strengthen them against
their adversaries.

. 2. When Arsacius was dead, Atticus succeeded him at Constantinople, a wise
and pious healing man, who greatly thereby advanced that Church and all the
Eastern Churches: He dealt gently with the Novatians and lived in peace with
them. He encouraged Heretics by kindness to return to the Communion of the
Church. At Synada in Phygia Pac. was a Church of Macedonians: Theodosius Bishop
of the Orthodox Persecuted them with great severity: And when he found that the
Magistrates of the place had not power to do as much as he expected, he got him
to Constantinople for greater power:
while he was there Agapetus the Macedonian Bishop turned Orthodox, and all the
Church adhered to him, S^crat. l. 7. c. 3.
and set him in the Bishops chair. When Theodosius came home with power to
persecute him, he found him in his place, and the people shut the doors against
Theodosius: Whereupon he went back to Constable. and made his complaint to Atticus
how he was used. Atticus knew that it fell out for the best, for the concord of
the Church, and he gave Theodosius good words, and persuaded him only to be
patient.

. 3. Cyril at that time succeeded his Uncle Theophilus at Alexandria, in place
and in unquiet domination, taking more upon him than Theophilus had done, even
the Government of temporal affairs: He presently shut up the Novatian Churches
in Alex. Socr. ib. c. 7.
rifled them of all their Treasure, and bereaved Theopemptus their Bishop of
his substance* The Jews at that time falling out with the Christians, murdered
many of them. Cyril executed some, and banished them all. Orestes the Governor
took this ill: Fifty Monks of Mount Nitria come to take Cyril's part, and
assault the Governor, and wound him in the head with a stone: The people rise
and put the Monks to flight, but take him that did the Fact, and he is
tormented and put to death: Cyril pronounced the Monk a Martyr, but the people
would not believe him one. Socr. c. 15.
At that time there was a Woman, Hypatia, so famous for learning, that she
excelled in all Philosophy, and taught in the Schools (which Plotinus
continued:) so that she had Scholars out of many Countries, and was often with
Princes, and Rulers, and for her modesty and gravity was much esteemed. Orestes
the Governor often talking with her, the people said, It was long of her that he
was not reconciled to Cyril: They laid hold of her; drew her into a Church,
stripped her stark naked; raze the skin, and tare the flesh off her body with
sharp shells till she dyed: they quarter her body and burn them to ashes: which
turned to the great dishonor of Cyril.

. 4. All this while the followers of Chrysostom remained Nonconformists and
Separatists at Constantinople, and were called Ioannites, and kept in
Conventicles of their own. Atticus knew that love was the way to win them, and
he purposing to take that way, writes to Cyril Alex. that the restoring of
Chrysostom's name in the Church-Office would tend to heal their sad division,
and give the Churches peace: He told Cyril, that Populus majori ex part per
factionem scissus extra muros conventus egerit, and plerique sacerdotes and
colleg^^ nostri Episcopi and a mutua communione discedentes, bonam plantationem
Domini parum abest quin avulserint, etc. Most of the people were gone and had
separate meetings without the Walls; Priests and Bishops separating from one
another were like to destroy the Church, and that if he consented not to
restore the name of dead Chrysostom, the people would do it without him, and
he was loath that Church administration should so fall into the hands of the
Multitude, and therefore he would take in Chrysostom's name.

Alexander, Niceph. l. 14. c. 17.
a good Bishop of Antioch put him upon this way: But Cyril did vehemently
oppose it (How did he obey Rome then, when the Pope had Excommunicated
Chrysotom's persecutors?) And first he pleaded, that the Schismatics were but
few (as if their own Bishop knew not better than he;) and that Chrysostom
being ejected dyed a Layman, and was not to be numbered with the Clergy, that
Atticus had the Magistrates on his side, that would bring them in by force
(Reader, there is nothing new under the sun: the things that have been are.)
And a little time would reduce most of them to the Church (though they
increased;) That by favoring the Schismatics he would lose the obedient
(Conformists,) and would get nothing by pleasing such disobedient men, but
strengthen them; That the Conformists (or obedient) were the far more
considerable part, even the Bishops and Churches of Egypt, Libia, etc. and
threatened that he would seek a remedy himself;
And reproaching Chrysostom, he tells A^ticus, That Conformity to the Canons
was more to be observed than the pleasing of such Schismatics, and that
violating the Canons would do far more hurt than pleasing such men would do
good; And that such men will never be satisfied by reasons, nor judge truly of
themselves: And he likened the restoring of Chrysostom's Name, to the putting
in the name of the Traitor Judas with Matthias. He added, That if ignorant
wilful fellows will forsake the Church, what loss is it? And therefore that a
few men's talk must not draw Atticas to pluck up the Church Sanctions. And as
for Alexander Antioch. who persuaded him to it, He was a bold-faced man that
had deceived many; but this disease must not thus prevail, but be cured. Thus
Cyril to Atticus: How often have I heard just such language? Reader, How hard is
it to know what History to believe, when it comes to the characterizing of
adversaries? How little is a domineering Prelates accusation of such men as
Chrysostom to be credited? And how ordinary is it with such, to call their
betters, not what they are, but what they would have them thought, if not what
they are themselves?

But Atticus was wiser than to take this Counsel; but obeyed the Wisdom which
is from above, which is first pure and then peaceable, gentle, etc. And God had
so much mercy on Constant. as to defeat the evil Counsel of Cyril, and turn it
into foolishness: For Atticus restored the name of Chrysostom, and used the
Nonconformists kindly, and they came into the unity of the Church: And when
Proclus, after him, fetched home his bones with honor, the breach was healed.

. 5. No credible History tells us, that either Theophilus or Cyril did repent
of this; (Though the Papists say, that the Pope Excommunicated Theophilus for
it; yet they are now honored, because the Pope did own the Cause against
Nestorius.) Theodoret's Epistle to Ioh. Antioch. upon the death of Cyril,
taking his death for the Churches deliverance from a turbulent enemy of Peace,
intimates, that he repented not: But (God only knows:) Nicephorus out of
Nicetas the Philosopher, tells us a report, that after all this, before he
dyed, a dream did cure him; viz. That he saw Chrysostom drive him out of his
own house, having a Divine company with him; and that the Virgin Mary entreated
for him, etc. And that upon this Cyril changed his mind and admired
Chrysostom, and repented of his imprudence and wrath, and hereupon called
another Provincial Synod to honor him, and restore his name. (O ductile
Synods! And O unhappy Churches, whose Pastors must grow wise, and cease
destroying, after so long sinning, and by an experience which costeth the
Church so dear!) And Nicephorus says, that Isidore Pelusiota's reproof
conduced much hereto, Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 28.

. 6. Isidore Pelus. words you may see at large in his Epistles: Nicephorus
recites thus much of them, lib. 14. c. 53. Cyrillum sane ut hominem
turbulentum refellens haec scribit: Favoris affectio acutum non videt: Hostilis
vero animi odium nil prorsus cernit: Quod si utroque hoc vitio te purgare ipsum
and liberare vis, ne violentas sententias extorqueto, sed justo judicio causas
commit: -- Multi qui Ephesi tecum congregati fuerunt, public te tr^ducunt,
quod inimicitias tuas persecutus sis, and non rite and ordine juxta rectae
fidei sententiam ea quae Jesus Christi sunt quaesiveris: Theophili, inquiunt,
cum ex fratre nepos sit, mores quoque illius imitatur: sicut ille apertam
insaniam in sanctum and Deo dilectum Joannem effudit, ita and iste gloriam
eodem affectat modo. And after other sharper words, he adds. Ne ego ita
condemner, and ne tu ipse etiam a Deocondemneris, contentiones sopto: Nec
injuriae propria vindicta quae ab hominibus provenit, videntem Ecclesiam per
astu^as actiones, fallas. And of Theophilus, he says. Eum quatuor administris
seu potius desertoribus suis circumvallatum, qui Deum amantem, Deumque
praedicantem virum (Chrysostom.) hostiliter opprimeret, quum occasionem and
caus^m impictatis suae arripuisset. Thus Isidore speaks of them.

. 7. Atticus dying, Socr. l. 7. c. 28.
the Clergy were for Philip or Proclus, but the Laity choosing Sisinnius
prevailed: He was a good and peaceable Man, and sent Proclus to be Bishop of
Cyzicum; but the People refused him and chose another.

. 8. After the death of Sisinnius to avoid strife at home the Emperor caused
Nestorius to be chosen, a Monk from the House by Antioch, whence Chrysostom
came. He was loud, eloquent, and temperate: But hot against the liberty of
those called Heretics: He begun thus to the Emperor, Give me the Earth weeded
from Heretics, and I will give thee Heaven: Help me against the Heretics and
I will help thee against the Persians. Socr. c. 29.
Thus turbulent hereticators must have the Sword do the work that belongs to
the Word: Princes must do their Work, c. 31.
and they will pretend that God shall for their sakes advance those Princes:
But he was rewarded as he deserved. He presently enraged the Arians by going to
pull down their Church, and they set it on Fire themselves to the hazard of the
City. So that he was presently called a Firebrand. He vexed the Novatians, and
raised stirs in many places, but the Emperor curbed him. Antony Bishop of
Germa vexing the Macedonians, they killed him: whereupon they were put out of
their Churches in many Cities.

. 9. At last his own ruin came as follows. Nestorius defended his Priest
Anastasius, c. 32.
for saying, that Mary was not to be called (...), the Mother of God; This set
all the City in a division, disputing of they well knew not what, and
suspecting him of denying the Godhead of Christ: But he was of no such Opinion,
but being eloquent and self-conceited read little of the Ancients Writings, nor
was very learned; and thought to avoid all extremes herein, and so would not
call Mary the Mother of God, nor the Mother of Man, but the Mother of Christ
who was God and Man.

At that time some Servants of some Noble Men impatient of their Masters
severities fled to the Church; c. 33.
and with their Swords resisted all that would remove them, killed one Priest,
wounded another and then killed themselves.

. 10. CXIII. The Emperor Theodosius jun. A Religious Peaceable Prince, weary
of this Stir, called a General Council at Ephesus, and gave Cyril order to
preside, (the Papists pretend that he was Pope Caelestine's Legate, who indeed
joined with him by his Letters, when he saw how things went.) Both Cyril and
Nestorius desired the Council (Letters before having made no end.) Caelestine
nor the Africanes could not come, Augustine was dead: Nestorius, Cyril, and
Iuvenal of Jerusalem came: John of Antioch was thirty days journey off, and his
Bishops much more, and stayed long. Cyril and Memnon of Ephesus would not stay
for him: Nestorius came the first day; But Cyril and the rest being sharp
against him, for not calling Mary the Parent of God, he said to them, Ego
bimestrem aut trimestrem Deum non facile dixerim: Proinde purus sum a vestro
sanguine: in posterum ad vos non veniam. That is, I will not easily say, that
God is two or three months old: I am clean from your blood, and will come to
you no more. Some Bishops going with him, they met by themselves. Cyril
summoneth him: He refuses to come till John Bishop of Antioch came. They
examine his Sermons and Witnesses, and condemn and depose him, as blasphemous
against Christ. Three or four days after, John of Antioch, and his Eastern
Bishops come: He took it ill that they stayed not for him: He joyneth in a
distinct meeting with Nestorius: Theodoret accuses Cyril's Anathematismes of
error: They depose Cyril and Memnon: Cyril's Synod cites John: He refuses to
appear:
They depose him and his adherent Bishops: And thus two Synods sat deposing
and condemning one another: Both Parties send their Agents to the Emperor: His
Officer Candidianus took part with Nestorius: He sends another Johannes
Comes, with charge to depose the heads of both the deposing Parties, and so to
make good both their depositions, viz. Nestorius, Cyril, and Memnon:
Candidianus before had told the Emperor, how all was done in violence and
confusion, and he had pronounced all Null, and charged them to begin all anew.
When Johannes Comes came, ^in. p 786.
he wrote to the Emperor, that All being in confusion, and Cyril and Memnon
fortifying themselves, he summoned them all to come to him; And lest they
should fall together by the ears, (which he feared, by reason of their strange
fierceness) he ordered their coming in so, that it might not be promiscuously:
Nestorius and John of Antioch being come first, Cyril and his company (except
Memnon) came next, and presently a great tumult and stir began, Cyril' s Party
saying, that the sight of Nestorius, whom they had deposed, was not to be
endured: They would have the Scripture read: But those that favored Cyril,
said, that the Divine and terrible Scriptures were not to be read without
Cyril, nor while Nestorius and the Oriental Bishops were present; and for this
there was a Sedition, yea, a War, and Fight: The same said the Bishops that
were with John, that Cyril ought not to be present at the Reading of the
Scriptures, he and Memnon being deposed: The day being far spent thus, he
attempted, excluding Cyril and Nestor^us, to read the Emperors Orders to the
rest; But Cyril' s Party would not hear them, because they said Cyril and
Memnon were unlawfully dep^sed: He had much a^ do to persw. de them at last,
(and indeed thrusting out Nestorius and Cyril by force) so much as to hear the
Emperors writing. But he made them hear it: In which Nestorius, Cyril, and
Memnon, were deposed. Those that were with John heard it friendly, and approved
it: The other clamoured, that Cyril and Memnon were wrongfully deposed: To
avoid Sedition, Nestorius was committed to Candidianus Comes, and Cyril to
Jacobus Comes (and Memnon after.) He concludes, Quod si pientissimos Episcopos
videro implacatos and irreconciliabiles, (Nescio unde in hanc rabiem and
asperitatem venerint,) etc. This was his Description of the carriage of this
Council.

Both Parties sent several Bishops, as their Delegates, to Constantinople: The
Emperor would not permit them to come nearer than Chalcedon, (which is as
Southwark to London.) While they wait there, Theodorite, one of John's Party
against Cyril, wrote back, that the Court was against Nestorius, but most of
the People were for them. It Is said that Pulcheria, the Emperors Sister, was
much against him. At last Pope Caelestine's Legates came to the Council and
took Cyril's Part. The Emperor saw how great the breach would be, if Cyril
were deposed, and he revoked the deposition of him and Memnon, but not of
Nestorius, and wrote a threatening Letter to Cyril and John, to charge them to
agree and join in Communion, and not divide the Churches, or else what he would
do to them both. These terrible words cured them both of Heresy: They
presently consulted, and sent each other their Confessions,
and found (good men) that they were of one mind and did not know it. And so
having their will upon Nestorius and his adherents, the rest united. But so,
that John and Theodorite took Cyril for a Firebrand to the last.

. 11. Nestorius being deposed retired quietly to his Monastery by Antioch, and
lived there in honor four years, but then was banished and dyed in distress:
(some Fable that he was eaten with Worms.)

. 12. The event of this Council was, that a Party of the Orientals adhered to
Nestorius, took Cyril and this Council for Heretics, and to this day continue
a numerous Party of Christians, called Heretics by the Pontificians, because
they are not for them: And the Eutychians on all occasions accused their
Adversaries the Orthodox to be Nestorians, and the Churches were inflamed by
the dissension through many Ages following.

. 13. And what was really the Controversy between them? Some accuse Nestorius
as asserting two persons in Christ as well as two natures, which he still
denied* Others accuse Cyril as denying two Natures: But his words about this
were many, but he affirmed two Natures before the Union, (and so did the
Eutychians) but one after: David Derodon a most learned Frenchman has written
a Treatise De Supposite, in which he copiously labors to prove that
Nestorius was Orthodox, holding two Natures in one Person, and that Cyril and
his Council were Heretics, holding one Nature only after Union, and that he
was a true Eutychian, and Dioscorus did but follow him, and that the Council of
Chalcedon condemned Nestorius and stablished his Doctrine, and extolled Cyril
and condemned his Doctrine.
But for my part I make no doubt that, de re, they were both fully of one mind,
and differed only about the aptitude of a phrase: Whether it were an apt Speech
to call Mary the Parent of God, and to say that God was two months old, God
hungered, God dyed and rose, etc. which Nestorius denied, and Cyril and the
Council with him affirmed. And what has the World suffered by this Word War.
But which was in the right.

We commonly say that forma denominat, and locutio formalis est maxim propria.
And so Nestorius spoke most properly: But Use is the Master of Speech, which
tyeth us not always to that strictness, and so Cyril well interpreted spoke
well: especially if the contrary side should intrude a duality of Persons, by
their denying the Phrase: While Nestorius accuses Cyril as if he spoke de
abstracto, he wrongeth him: while Cyril accuses Nestorius as if he spoke de
concreto, he wronged him: They both meant that Mary was the Mother of Christ
who was God* and of the Union of the Natures, but not the Mother of Christ as
God, or of the Deity. So that one speaking de concreto, and the other de
abstracto, one materially and the other formally, in the heat of Contention
they hereticated each other and kindled a flame not quenched to this day, about
a word while both were of one mind.

. 14. If any say it is arrogance in me to say that such men had not skill
enough to escape the deceit of such an ambiguity, I answer, humility makes not
men blind: The thing proves it self. Judge by these following words of
Nestorius and Cyril what they held.

. 15. Nestorius Epist. ad Cyril: Nomen hoc, Christus, utramque naturam,
patibilem scilicet and impatilibem in unica Persona denotat. Quo idem Chrstus
patibilis and impatibilis concipi queat; Illud quidem secundum humanam naturam,
hoc vero secundum Divinaem. -- In eo non injuria te laudo quod distinctionem
naturarum secundum Divinitatis and humanitatis rationem harumque in una
duntaxat persona conjunctionem praedicas. --
Et quod Divinitatem pati ^on potuisse discrte pronuncias: Haec enim omnia and
vera sunt and Orthodoxa; and vanis omnium hareticorum circa D^mini naturas
opinationibus quam maxim adversa sunt. Non dicit, solvite Divinitatem meam and
intra triduum exsuscitabo illa^^, sed solvite Templum hoc, etc. -- Vbicunque
Divinae Scriptura Dominica dispensationis mentionem faciunt, tum incarnationem,
tum ipsam mortem and Passionem, non Divinae, sed Humanae Christi naturae semper
tribuunt. Ergo si rem diligentius consideremus, sacra Virgo non Deipera, sed
Christipera, appellanda erit (which signifies that She is the Parent of the
Humane nature, receiving the Divine in Union of Person.) -- Quis ita desipiat
ut unigeniti Divinitatem Spiritus sancti creaturam esse credat. -- Sunt
imumerae sententiae quae Divinitatem neque nuper natam, neque corporeae
perpessionis capacem esse testantur. -- Rectum Evangelicaeque traditioni
consentaneum est, ut Christi Corpus Divinitatis Templum esse confiteamur,
illudque nexu adeo sublimi Divinoque and admirabili ipsi conjunctum esse
statuamus, ut Divina natura ea sibi vendicet, quae Coporis alioqui sint
propria: Verum propter eam sive communications sive appropriationis notionem,
nativitatem, passionem, mortem caterasque carnis propietates Divino Verbo
ascribere, id demu^, mi frater, mentis est paganorum more vere errantis aut
certe insani Apollinarii and Arii aliorumque haereticorum morbo aut alio etiam
graviore laborantis. Nam qui appropriationis vocabulum it^ detorquent illos
Deum verbum lactationis participem and succedanei incrementi capacem and ob
formidinem Passionis, etc. --

Nestor. Epist. 2. ad Caelest. Quidam de Ecclesiasticis quandam
contemperationis imaginem ex Deitate and Humanitate accipientes, corporis
passiones audent superfundere Deitati unigeniti, and immutabilem Deitatem ad
naturam corporis trans^sse confingunt, atque utramque naturam quae per
conjunctionem summam and inconfusam in Unica Persona unigenit^ adoratur,
contemperatione confundunt.

Nestor. Epist. ad Alexand. Hierapol. Council. 5. Act. Sess. 6. Oportet manner
naturas in suis proprietatibus, and sic per mirabilem and omnem rationem
excedentem unitatem unum confiteri filium. Non duas personas unam facimus, sed
una appellatione Christi duas naturas simul significamus.

In Scriptis Nestorii recitatis in Council. Ephesians. 1. Tom. 2. c. 8. Idem omnino
and Infans erat and Infantem habitabat. Item, Deus Verbum ante incarnationem
and Filius erat and Deus erat; At vero in novissimis temporibus servilem quoque
formam assumpsit; Caeterum cum ante Filius esset, Filius appellaretur, attamen
post Carnem assumptam, seorsim per se Filii nomine appellari non debet, ne duos
Filios videamur inducere. -- Item, voce Christi tanquam utriusque naturae
notionem complectent^ accepta, citra periculum illum assumpsisse servi formam
asseverat and Deum nominat; dictorum vim ad naturarum dualitatem manifest
referens.

Cyril lib. de recta fide ad Reginas page 53. de Nestorianis, Verbum and
humanitas (ut ipsi loquuntur) in unam Personam concurrunt: Vnionis enim quae
est secundum naturam and quae una est, nulla apud eos habetur ratio -- Et p.
66. de Nestor. Si Christus sola union^ secundum Personam cum Dei Verbo
conjunctionem habeat, (sic enim illi loquuntur) quomodo in illis qui pereunt
Evangelium Dei absconditum est? By which Cyril speaks for one Nature, and
Nestorius for one Person.

Cyril. l. 1. advers. Nestor. p. 16. thus reports Nestorius saying, Hic qui
videtur Infans, hic qui recens apparet, hic qui fasciis corporalibus eget, hic
qui secundum visibilem essentiam recenter est editus, Filius universorum
opifex, Filius qui suae opis fasciis dissolubilem creaturae naturam astringit.
-- Item, Infans enim est Deus libera potestate; tantum abest (Arie) ut Deus
Verbum sit sub Dei potest^te. -- Again, Novimus ergo Humanitatem infantis and
Deitatem; Filiationis Vnitatem servamus in Deitatis humanitatisque natura:
says Derodon, I dare boldly say no Christian has hitherto spoke trulier and
plainer of the Unity of Christ's Person in two Natures, than Nestorius.

Ex lib. Cyril 2. Cont. Nestor. p. 4. He thus reports Nestorius, Hoc quod
Christus est nullam patitur (...), sed Deitatis, and Humanitatis est (...):
Christus qua Christus est (...); neque enim duos Christos habemus neque duos
Filios: Non est enim apud nos primus and secundus, neque alius and alius, neque
rursus alius Filius and alius; sed ipse ille un^s est duplex non dignitate, sed
natura.

Cyril says that Nestorius was the Disciple of Diodorus Tarsensis from whom he
learnt his Heresy, Epist. ad Succes. and that he was the hearer of Theodorus
Mopsuest condemned in Council, for the same Heresy as Nestorius. But says
Derodon, Facundus toto lib. 4. largely proves that Diod. Tarsensis was
Orthodox by the testimonies of Athanasius, Basil, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, etc.
Et lib. 3. and 9. he proves the same of Theod. Mopsuest, citing the places
where he asserteth two Natures in one Person, Vid. Facund. l. 3. c. 2. and l.
9. c. 3. and 4. And Liberatus in Brevior. c. 10. says: Diod. Tarsensis and
Theod. Mopsuest. and alii Episcopi contra Eunomium and Apollinarem unius
Naturae assertores libros composuerunt, duas in Christo ostendentes naturas in
una persona: and ibid. Duas Joh. Antiocheni Epistolas, primam and tertiam,
lauds Theod. Mopsuest. continentes Chalced. Synodus Oecumenica per relationem
suam Martiane Imper^tori directam, suscepit and confirmavit.

. 16. By all this it is evident that Nestorius was Orthodox; and owned two
Natures in one Person:
And that the Controversy was de nomine, unless Cyril was an Eutychian. And
that it is a more accurate cautelous Speech a forma to say that God did not
increase, hunger, die, rise, etc. than to say God did these; because it seems
to intimate that Christ did suffer these, qua Deus, As God, which is blasphemy.
But that it is a true speech that God did suffer these, meaning not qua Deus,
but Christus qui Deus: and that one Syllable of distinction between qua and qui
might have saved these Councils their odious Contentions and Fighting, and the
Churches for many Ages the Convulsions, Distractions and mutual Condemnations
that followed, and the Papists the odious violation of Christian Charity and
Peace in calling the Eastern Followers of Nestorius, Nestorian Heretics to
this day. Judge how much the World was beholden to Cyril, Caelestine, and this
Council.

. 17. Obj. By this you make the Bishops and Councils to be all Fools, that know
not what they do, and to be the very plagues and shame of humane nature, that
would kindle such a flame not yet quenched about nothing.

Answ. 1. If we must measure, fidem per personas, yea, judge of matter of Fact
by respect of persons, judge so by the Councils at Ariminum, Syrmium, Milan,
Tire also; Judge so by the Second Council of Ephesus, and abundance such: How
shall we know which of them so to judge by? 2. Good men have foul Vices:
Faction, and Contention, and Pride, have undeniably troubled the Churches: When
Council. Carthag. 6. forbad Bishops to read the Books of Gentiles, it is no
wonder that the number of Learned Bishops was small; And when no Bishop was to
be removed from place to place, but all Bishops made out of an Inferior
degree, usually of the same Parish; Yea, and when Academies were so rare, it is
past doubt that Learned Bishops were rare: When Nectarius must be the great
Patriarch, that was yet no Christian, and when Synesius, because he had
Philosophical knowledge, is chosen Bishop, even before he believed the
Resurrection; When they were such, as credible Nazianzene, Isidore Pelusiota,
and long after Salvian describes. It is not I, but these knowing Witnesses, and
their own actions, that characterize them. Does not Socrates, that knew
Nestorius, say, that he was not Learned? And he, and others, that Cyril was
high and turbulent? Theodoret was a Learned man, and he thought no better of
his Adversaries.

The Objections against Nestorius and Theodorus Mopsuest, are largely answered
by Derodon, ubi supra.

. 18. The same Derodon labors to prove, that Cyril was an Heretic, the
Father of the Eutychians, and so were the Ephesians. Council, and Pope Caelestine.
His proofs against Cyril are reduced to these Heads. 1. His express asserting
One Nature only in Christ. Epist. 2. ad succes. Diocesar-Quae igitur necessitas
ipsum pati in propria natura, si post unionem dicatur una verbi Natura
incarnati?

Item, Ignorant rursus qui recta pervertunt, quod juxta Veritatem una sit
natura Verbi incarnata: si enim unus est filius natura and vere Verbum quod
ineffabiliter ex Deo Patre est genitum, and si idem per assumptionem carnis non
exanimis sed animatae anima intelligente processit homo de muliere -- Non enim
de solis simplicibus Vnum secundum naturam vere dicitur, sed etiam de iis quae
juxta compositionem convenerunt, ut est v. g. homo, qui constat anima and
corpore, haec enim inter se differunt specie, verunt a men unita unam naturam
hominis absolvunt, quamvis adsit ratione compositionis differentia secundum
naturam rerum, in unitatem concurrentium: superfluis igitur sermonibus
immorantur qui dicunt, si una est natura verbi incarnata, sequitur ut permixtio
confusioque generetur.

Nestorius third Objection was from Christ's voluntary passions; Ergo duas
naturas subsistere post unionem indivise. Cyril answers, Adversus rursus haec
eorum propositio nihilominus iis qui dicunt unam esse Filii naturam incarnatam
idque velut ineptum volentes ostendere, ubique duas naturas, subsistentes
conantur astruere; sed ignorant quaecunque non distinguuntur sola mentis
consideratione, ea prorsus etiam in diversitatem distinctam omnifariam ac
privatim a se mutuo segregari: e. g. Homo -- duas in eo naturas intelligimus,
unam animae, alteram corporis, sed cum sola discreverimus intelligentia and
differentiam subtili contemplatione s^u mentis imaginatione conceperimus, non
tamen seorsim ponimus naturas, sed unius esse intelligimus. Ita ut illae duae
jam non sint duae, sed ambae unum animal absolvunt. Tandem ita concludit. Haec
igitur ex quibus est unus and solus filius Dominus Jesus Christus
cogitationibus complexi, duas quidam naturas un^as asserimus; post unionem vero
tanquam adempta jam in duas distinctione unam esse credimus filii naturam
tanquam unius, sed inhumati and incarnati. It Is strange, how Cyril and the
E^tychians meant, that Christ's Natures were two before the Union. Did they
think that the Humanity existed before the Union?

So Epist. 1. Cyril. ad success. Nihil injusti facimus dicentes ex duabus
naturis factum esse concursum in unitatem; post unionem vero non distinguimus
naturas ab invicem, nec in duos filios unum and individuum partimur, sed
dicimus unum filium, and sicut Parts alterum erunt, Vnam Naturam Dei Verbi
incarnati.

Eadem dicit Epist^ ad Acacium Melet. Post unionem sublata jam in duas
distinctione unam essi credimus filii naturam,
tanquam unius, sed inhumati.

Cyril. Epist. ad Eulog. Presb. Nos illas (duas naturas) adunantes unum filium,
unum Dominum confitemur, deinde and unam per naturam incarnatam, quod and de
communi homine dicendum -- Dum unitatem confitemur, non distinguuntur amplius
quae sunt unita: sed unus jam est Christus and una est ipsius tanquam incarnati
Verbi natura.

Cyril. lib. cont. Nestor. p. 31. Hic recentissimae impietatis inventor quamvis
Christum unum se dicere simulet, attamen ubique naturas distinguit.

Et p. 45. Quomodo Christum unum and individuum dicis esse duplicem natura?

Cyril. lib. de recta fide ad reginos p. 63. Assumitur in unum Deitatis Naturam
unus Christus Jesus per quem omnia.

Cyril. Dialog. Quod unus sit Christus. [Vnum porro filium and unam ipsius
Naturam esse dicimus, licet carnem anima intelligente praeditam assumpserit.]

Many more such passages are in Cyril. Here Derodon proves, 1. That Cyril took
not (...) for Persona. 2. That he took not (...) for Division but Distinction:
If he did, it was an ill quarrel, when Nestorius asserted not a Division, but a
Distinction. 3. That Cyril still reproves Nestorius for asserting only a union
secundum personam, and not secundum naturam 4. That Cyril (as Dioseorus)
declares what union he means, not by Confusion, Commixtion or Transmutation,
but by Composition, (and so said the Eutychians.)

The second order of Derodons proofs is from all the places where Cyril pleads
for one hypostasis, and he shows that by hypostasis Cyril meant natura or
substantia singularis. The citations are too long to be repeated.

^. 3. His proofs are from all the Texts where he says the Word, and Humanity
concurred (...).

His fourth proof that Cyril was an Eutychian, is from all those places where
he says, that the Godhead and Manhood are made one nature as the soul and body
of man are.

His fifth order of proofs is from the words where he often attributes the same
operations, and the same attributes to both nature.

His sixth proof is from the testimony of Ibas Edes. apud Facund. l. 6. c. 3.
Ge^ad. Constable. ibid, l. 2. p. 77, 78. Johan. Antioch. Theodoret, etc.

. 20. For my part, I again say, past doubt, that neither Nestorius nor Cyril
were Heretical de re; but that they were of one mind, and that one spoke of the
concrete, and the other of the abstract; that one spoke of Christus qui Deus,
and the other of Christus qua Deus. But (pardon truth, or be deceived still)
ignorance, pride, and envy, and faction, and desire to please the Court, made
Cyril and his Party, by quarrelsome Heretication, to kindle that lamentable
flame in the World. But sin serves the sinners turn but for the present, and
becomes afterward his shame. All the Bishops would not follow Cyril. At this
day the falsely Hereticated Nestorians (says Breerwood Enquir. p. 139.)
inhabites a great part of the East, for besides the Countries of Babylon,
Assyria, Mesopotamia, Parthia, and Media, they are spread far and wide, both
Northerly to Cataya, and Southerly to India: Marcus Paulus tells us of them and
no other Christians in Tartary, as in Cassar, Sarmacham, Carcham,
Chinchintalas, Tauguth, Suchir, Ergimul, Tenduc, Caraim, Mangi, etc. so that
beyond Tigris there are few other Christians. The Persian Emperors forced the
Christians to Nestorianisme; Their Patriarch has his Seat at Musal in
Mesopotamia or the Monastery of St. Ermes near it, in which City the Nestorians
have 15 Temples: They are falsely accused still to hold two Persons in Christ:
They say as Nestorius himself said, You may say that Christ's Mother is the
Parent of God, if you will expound it well, but it is improper and dangerous.
They take Nestorius, Diodorus Tarsensis and Theodorus Mopsuest, for holy Men;
They renounce the Council Ephesians. and all that owned it, and detest Cyril. They
Communicate in both kinds: They use not auricular Confession: nor Confirmation:
nor Crucifixes on their Crosses: Their Priests have liberty for first, second,
or third Marriages, etc. Breerwood, ibid. p. 144.

. 21. I need no other proof for my opinion, that these Bishops set the World on
fire about a Word, being agreed in sense, than the reconciliation of the
Patriarchs Cyril and John when forced, and their Parties, professing that they
meant the same and knew it not. Obj. But they all condemned Nestorius. Ans. To
quiet the World, and to please the Courtiers and violent Bishops. And the
Emperor himself (says Socrates, l. 7. c. 41. one that excelled all the
Priests in modesty and meekness, and could not away with persecution,) was the
more against Nestorius because he was a persecutor himself.

Read Theodoret's Homily against Cyril, Bin. p. ^07. and Johan. Antioch. ibid.
But neither the one side [Nestorius haeresiarcha impiissimus,] nor the other
side [Cyrillus superbus and blasphemus] should signify much with men that know
what liberty adverse Bishops used.

. 22. As for them that say, Nestorius did dissemble when he asserted the Unity
of two Natures in one Person: and is not to be judged of by his own words, I
take them to be the firebrands of the world, and unworthy the regard of sober
men, who pretend to know men's judgments better than themselves, and allow not
men's own deliberate profession to be the notice of their Faith.

. 23. When the Emperor saw that there was no reconciling the Bishops, but by
force, he authorized Aristolaus, a Lay-Magistrate, to call Cyril and Ioh.
Antioch. to Nicomedia, and keep them both there till they were agreed:
whereupon John communed with his Bishops, and they yielded, having no remedy,
to the deposition of Nestorius, the Ordination of Maximinianus in his stead,
and communion among themselves. This is called another Council.

It would grieve one to read the Emperor Theodosius importuning Simeon
Stylites, a poor Anchorite, to try whether by Prayer and Counsel he could bring
the Bishops to Unity, and concluding, [This discord does so trouble me, that I
judge that this only has been the chief occasion of all my calamities.] Bin.
p. 928.

. 24. CXIV. An. 433. There was a Council called at Rome to clear Pope Sixtus
from an accusation of one Bassus, of ravishing a Nun.

. 25. CXV. There is talk of a Council at Rome to clear one Polychronius Bishop
of Jerusalem, of accusations of Simony: But contradictions make this (and the
former) to be altogether uncertain.

. 26. CXVI. The Armenians in Council are said to condemn Nestorian Books.

. 27. CXVII. A Council was held at Constant. to decide the Controversy between
the Alexandrian and Constant. Bishops, which should be greatest, and rule the
East; where it was carried for Constant. And Theodoret pleading for Antioch,
Dioscorus (the Alex. Agent) hated him ever after, (as he says Epist. 86.)

. 28. CXVIII. An. 439. A Council at Regiense of 13 Bishops did somewhat about
Ordinations, etc.

. 29. About this time Leo at Rome was fain to forbid bowing toward the East,
because the Manichees joined among them, and bowed to the Sun, and could not
be else distinguished from the Orthodox, Bin. de Leone.

. 30. CXIX. A Council at Aransican repeated some old disciplinary Canons.

. 31. CXX. Leo held a Council at Rome of Bishops, Priests, and Laymen, to
detect the wickedness of the Manichees, and warn men to avoid them.

. 32. CXXI. An. 445. Leo held a Council at Rome against Hilary Bishop of Arles,
for disobedience to his Decrees.

. 33. CXXII. A Council called General in Spain, recited the Profession of Faith
against the Priscillianists.

CHAP. VI.
Councils about the Eutychian Heresy and some others.
. 1. CXXIII. CYril had by many words so carried the business at Ephesus against
Nestorius, and himself so often said, that after the Union, the Natures were
one, that his Admirers took that for a certain truth: But when that quarrel was
over, Truth was truth still, and the Orthodox would not fly from it, for fear
of being called Nestorians; for they disclaimed Nestorius, but disowned the
Doctrine of One nature. Eutyches an Archimandrite, and Dioscorus, Successor to
Cyril, belived that they did but tread in his steps, and hold to the Ephesians.
Council. But that would not now serve, when the Scene was changed.

. 2. Reader, It is useful to thee, to know truly the state of this Tragical
Controversy, which had more dividing and direful effects than the former. The
Eutychians say, that Christ before their Union by incarnation had two natures,
that is, considered mentally, as not united; but after the union had but one
nature. They took up this as against Nestorianisme. The truth is, Though they
still go for desperate Heretics, I verily believe that all the quarrel was but
about ambiguous words: some of them understood the word [Nature] in the same
sense as their Adversaries took the word [Hypostasis] or [Person.] And (it is
sad that it should be true, but) most of them confounded [Vnity
undistinguished] and [Vniting undivided.] The Eutychians thought, How can that
be called Unity which makes not one of two? And no doubt the Natures are One;
But One what? Not One Nature, but One Person; Yet (to bring off Cyril) it may
be said that even the Natures are One, in opposition to Division or Separation,
but not One in opposition to distinction. He that had but distinguished these
two clearly to them, and explained the word [Nature] clearly, had better ended
all the Controversy than it was ended. It Is plain that Cyril and the
Eutychians allowed mental distinction, though not that the Mind should suppose
them divided: And it is certain that the Orthodox meant no more.

. 3. He that reads but Philosophers, Schoolmen, and late Writers, (such as
Fortun. Licetus de natura, etc.) will see how little they are agreed about the
meaning of the word [Nature,] and how unable to procure agreement in the
conception. They that say it is principium motus and Quietis, are
contradicoted, as confounding diverse Principia: and as confounding Active
Natures, and Passive, the Active only being Principium Motus, and the Passive,
Principium quietis. And on such accounts the Eutychians pleaded for One Nature;
because in Christ incarnate they supposed that the Divine Nature was the
Principium primum motus, and that all Christ's actions were done by it, and that
the humane soul, being moved by the Divinity, was but Principium subordinatum,
which they thought was improperly called Principium, (As most Philosophers say,
that Forma generica is improperly called forma hominis, because one thing has
but one form; so they thought that one person had but one proper Principium
motus.

. 4. Alas how few Bishops then could distinguish as Derodon does, and our
common Metaphysics, between, 1. Individuum, 2. Prima substantia, 3. Natura, 4.
Suppositum, 5. Persona, 6. and have distinguished, a right essence and
hypostasis, or subsistence, etc. and defined all these. Nature says Derodon de
suppos. p. 5. is taken in nine senses; But the sense was not here agreed on,
before they disputed of the matter.

Even about the Nature of Man, it is disputed, whether he consist not of many
natures? Whether every Element (Earth, Water, Air, Fire) retain not its several
Nature in the Body, or whether the Soul be Man's only Nature, and whether as
intellectual, and sensitive and vegetative, or only in one of these? And is it
not pity that such questions should be raised about the person of Christ by
self-conceited Bishops, and made necessary to salvation, and the world set on
fire, and divided by them? Is this good usage of the Faith of Christ, the Souls
of Men, and the Church of God.

. 5. But to the History: At a Council of Constantinop. under Flavianvs,
Eusebius Bishop of Dorileum accused Eutyches, for affirming Heretically as
aforesaid, (that after the Union Christ had but one Nature.) Eutiches is sent
for: He refuses to come out of his Monastery; After many Citations, be still
refusing, they judge him to be brought by force: He first delayeth: Then
craveth of the Emperor the presence of Magistrates, that he be not calumniated
by the Bishops. He is condemned, but recanteth not.

. 6. A meeting of Bishops at Tire cleared Ibas Edess. from the accusation of
Nestorianisme, made by four Excommunicate Priests, two of them perjured; and
reconciled him to such Priests for Peace sake.

. 7. Another meeting of Bishops at Berythum, cleared Ibas from a renewed
accusation of Nestorianisme, being said to have spoken evil of Cyril. An
Epistle of his to Maris a Bishop, was accused, which the Council at Calcedon
after absolved, and the next General Council condemned.

. 8. CXXIV. Another Council is called at Constantinople, by the means of some
Courtiers, in favor to Eutiches, where, upon the testimony of some Bishops,
that Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople condemned him himself, before the Synod
did it, and that the Records were altered, all was nullified that at the last
Synod was done against him.

. 9. CXXV. Theodosius calls a second General Council at Ephesus an. 449. and
makes Dioscorus Bishop of Alex. President. Dioscorus forbad Ibas and Theodoret
to be there, as being Nestorians: The Emperor himself was so much for peace,
and so deeply before engaged in Cyril's cause against Nestorius, that he
thought it levity to pull down all so soon again, the Eutychians persuading him
that they stuck to Cyril and the Ephesine and Nicene Council. Dioscorus
thinking the same, that Eutiches and Cyril were of one mind, and that it was
Nestorianisme which they were against, carried matters in this Synod as
violently as Cyril had done in the former. The Bishops perceiving the
Emperors, the Courtiers, and Dioscorus mind, could not resist the stronger
side. The Bishop of Rome was commanded by the Emperor to be present. He sent
his Legates; with his Judgment in Writing of the Cause. The Emperor for bad
those to be Speakers that had before judged Eutyches. The Roman Legates
excepted that Dioscorus presided: (It seems the Eastern Empire and Church,
then believed not that the Popes precedence was jure divino.) Dioscorus
declares, that the Council was not called to decide any matter of Faith, but
to judge of the proceedings of Flavianus against Eutyches. The Acts of the
Constant. Synod (after the Emperors Letters) being read, Eutyches is absolved:
Domnus, Patriarch of Antioch, Iuvenal, Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Bishop of
Ephesus, and the rest, subscribed the absolution, (which after they said they
did for fear, when another Emperor changed the Scene.) This being done, the
Acts of the former Ephesians. Council were read, and all Excommunicate that did not
approve them. (So that this Council of Eutychians thought verily the former was
of their mind.) Four Bishops, Flavianus, Eusebius, Doryl, Ibas Edes. and
Theodoret Cyri, are condemned and deposed: All the Bishops subscribed except
the Popes Legates; so that, says Bimius, In hoc tam horrendo Episcoporum
suffragio, sola navilula Petri incolumis emergens salvatur, p. 1017. Judge by
this, First, Whether Councils may err, Secondly, Whether they are the just
Judges or Keepers of Tradition, Thirdly, Whether all the World always believed
the Popes Infallibility, or Governing power over them, when all that Council
voted contrary to him.

Flavianus here offering his appeal, was beaten and abused, and dyed of the
hurt, (as was said in Council. Calced. and by Liberatus.) But this was no
quenching, but a kindling of the fire of Episcopal Contentions: Theodosius
missed of his end.

. 10. CXXVI. Leo at Rome in a Synod condemns this Ephesian Council.

. 11. CXXVII. Dioscorus in a Council at Alexandria, Excommunicateth Leo.

. 12. CXXVIII. Theodosius the Emperor being dead, Martian was against the
Eutychians: Anatolius at a Synod at Constantinople, makes an Orthodox
Profession of his Faith, like Leo's.

. 13. CXXIX. And at Milan a Council owneth Leo's judgment.

. 14. CXXX. Now comes the great Council at Calcedon, under the new Emperor
Martian, where all is changed for a time; Yet Pulcheria who married him and
made him Emperor, and whose power then was great, was the same that before had
been against Nestorius in her Brothers reign: Never was it truer than in the
Case of General Councils, that the Multitude of Physicians, exasperateth the
Disease, and kills the Patient. The word [(...)] the [one nature after union]
the words [one will and one opperation] had never done half so much mischief in
the Church, if the erroneous had been confuted by neglect, and Councils had not
exasperated, enraged, and engaged them, and set all the World on taking one
side or another. One skillful healing man that could have explicated ambiguous
terms, and persuaded men to Love and Peace, till they had understood themselves
and one another, had more befriended Truth, Piety, and the Church, than all the
Hereticating Councils did.

. 15. If what Socrates writes of Theodosius junior be true, (as we know no
reason to doubt) God owned his Moderation by Miracles, notwithstanding his
favoring the Eutychians, more than he did any ways of violence. Socrates
says, l. 7. c. 41, 42. that Theodosius was the mildest man in the World, for
which cause God subdued his enemies to him without slaughter and bloodshed; as
his Victory over John and the Barbarians show: Of which he says, First, Their
Captain Rugas was killed with a thunderbolt; Secondly, A Plague killed the
greatest part of his Soldiers; Thirdly, Fire from Heaven consumed many that
remained. And Proclus the Bishop being a man of great Peace and Moderation,
hurting and persecuting none, was confirmed by these providence in his lenity,
being of the Emperors mind, and persuading the Emperor to fetch home the
bones of Chrysostom with honor, wholly ended the Nonconformity and Separation
of the Ioanites.

. 16. Before Theodosius dyed, Leo Bishop of Rome set Placidia and Eudoxia, to
write to him against Dioscorus, and for the cause of Flavianus: Yea, and
Valentinian himself. Theodosius wrote to Valentinian (and the like to the
Women,) That they departed not from the Faith and Tradition of their Fathers,
that at the Council of Ephesus second things were carried with much liberty and
truth, and the unworthy were removed and the worthy put into their places, and
it was the troublers of the Church that were deposed, and Flavianus was the
Prince of the Contentions, and that now they lived in Concord and Peace.

. 17. The Council at Calcedon was called, an. 451. Dioscorus is accused for his
Ephesine General Council, and for his violence, and defense of Eutiches, and
the death of Flavianus. He alleges the Emperors Order to him [Authoritatem
and Primatum tuae praebemus beatitudini, (If the Popes Universal Rule be
essential to the Church, then the pious and excellent Emperor Theodosius, and
the General Council that consented, were none of them Christians that knew it,
but went against it.) Eos qui per additamentum aliquod, aut imminutionem conati
sunt dicere, praeter quae sunt exposita de fide Catholica a sanctis Patribus
qui in Nicaea, and post modum qui in Epheso congregati sunt, nullam omnino
fiduciam in sancto Synodo habere patimur, sed and sub vestro judicio esse
volunus.] Here Binnius accuses the good Emperor as giving that which he had
not but by usurpation, and this through ignorance of the Ecclesiastical Canons.
But were all the Bishops ignorant of it also? Or was so good an Emperor bred
up and cherished in ignorance of such a point pretended by the Papists to be
necessary to the Being of a Church, and to salvation; The Bishops of Jerusalem
and Seleucia also partook of the same power by the Emperor's Grant. Dioscorus
answered that All the Synod consented and subscibed as well as he, and Juvenal
Hieros. and Thalassius Seleuc.

The Bishops answered, that they did it against their wills, being under fear;
Condemnation and Banishment was threatened; Soldiers were there with Clubs and
Swords: Therefore the Oriental Bishops cried out to cast out Dioscorus. Stephen
Bishop of Ephesus (who had been Dioscorus chief Agent there) cried out, that
fear constrained them: The Lay-Judges and Senate asked, who forced them?
Stephen said Elpidius and Eulogius, and many Soldiers threatened him. They
asked, Did Dioscorus use violence with you? He said that he was not suffered to
go out till he had subscribed. Theodorus Bishop of Claudiopolis said, Bin. Tom.
2. p. 7, 8.
that Dioscorus, Iuvenal, and the leading men, led on them, as simple ignorant
men, that knew not the Cause, and frightened them with defaming them as
Nestorian Heretics. Thus they cried out that they were frightened.

The Egyptian Bishops answered, that A Christian fears no man, (and yet they
were afraid before they ended) A Catholic fears no man; we are instructed by
flames: If men were feared, there would be no Martyrs.

Dioscorus noted what Bishops those were that said they subscribed to a blank
Paper, when it was about a matter of Faith: But asked, who made them by their
several interlocutions to speak their consent? Hereupon the Acts of the Ephesians.
Council were read, among which were the words of Dioscorus, Anathematizing any
that should contradict or retract any thing held in the Nicene or the Ephesine
Synods: Adding, how terrible and formidable it was, If a man sin against God,
who shall intercede for him? If the Holy Ghost sit in Council with the Fathers,
he that retracteth cashiereth the Grace of the Spirit. The Synods answered, We
all say the same: Let him be Anathema that retracteth; (these Bishops that
curse themselves will easily curse others,) Let him be cast out that
retracteth. Dioscorus said, No man orders things already ordered: The holy
Synod said, These are the words of the Holy Ghost, etc. Theodorus denied these
words recorded. Dioscorus said, they may as well say they were not there.

. 18. Here also Eutyche's Confession at Ephesus was read, in which he
professes to cleave to the former Ephesine Council, and to the blessed Father
Cyril that presided, disclaiming all additions and alterations, professing that
he had himself Copies in a Book which Cyril himself sent him, and is yet in his
hands; and that he stands to the definition of that Council with that of Nice.

Eusebius Bishop of Doril. said, He lies; that Council has no such Definition.

Dioscorus said, There are four Books of it, that all contain this Definition.
Do you accuse all the Synodical Books? I have one, and he has one, and he has
one; Let them be brought forth. Diogenes Bishop of Cyrilum said, They
deceitfully cleave to the Council of Nice: The Question is of additions made
against Heresies. The Bishops of Egypt said, None of us receive additions or
diminutions: Hold what is done at Nice: This is the Emperor's Command. The
Eastern Bishops clamoured [Iust so said Eutyches.] The Egyptian Bishops still
cried up the Nicene Faith alone without addition.

Dioscorus accused the Bishops for going from their words, and said [If
Eutyches hold not the Doctrine of the Church, he is worthy of punishment and
fire, (ex ore tuo) My regard is to the Catholic and Apostolic Faith, and not
the Faith of any man: I look to God himself, and not to the person of any man,
nor care I for any man, but for my soul and the true and sincere Faith.] The
Egyptian Bishops cried out [Let no man separate him that is indivisible. No man
calls one Son two.] The Eastern Bishops cried, [Anathema to him that
divides. Basil Seleuciae said, Anathema to him that divides two natures after
the union; and Anathema to him that knows not the property of the natures.
The Egyptian Bishops cried out, [As he was born he suffered: There is one Lord,
and one Faith: None calls one Lord two. This was Nestorius voice. The Eastern
Bishops cried, Anathema to Nestorius and Eutyches. The Egyptian Bishops cried,
Divide not the Lord of Glory, that is indivisible.

Basil Bishop of Sileuc. reported how rightly he had spoken at Ephesus, and how
the Egyptians and Monks with noise opposed, and cried [Cut him in two that
says Two Natures, he is a Nestorian.] The Lay Judges asked him, If he spoke so
well, why did he condemn Flavianus? He said, Because he was necessitated to
obey the rest, being 130 Bishops. Dioscorus said, Out of thy own mouth art thou
condemned,
that for the shame of men have prevaricated and despised the faith. Basilius
Seleuc. said, If I had been called to Martyrdom before the Judges I had endured
it; but he that is judged of a Father uses just means: Let the Son dye that
speaks even things just to a Father.

But the Eastern Bishops better cried out, [We have all sinned, we all beg
pardon.] And Thalassius, Eusebius, and Eustathius, (leading Bishops) cried the
same, [We have all sinned, we all crave pardon.] After this the Acts of Ephesians.
and Constable. were read.

. 19. By what I have recited out of Binnius, and others, these two lamentable
things are undeniable:

I. That this doleful Contention, Anathematizing, and ruining each other, was
about the sense of ambiguous words, and that they were of one mind in the
matter,
and knew it not: The Egyptians (Eutychians) took two Natures and two Sons to
be of the same sense, which the others did not. And they thought that the rest
had asserted a Division of the Natures, when they meant but a Distinction: And
the rest thought that the Egyptians had denied a Distinction, who denied but a
Partition or Division.

II. And it is plain, that while all sides held that Nestorius did hold that
there were Two Sons,
which he expressly denied, that they cursed Nestorius in ignorance, and
maintained his Doctrine (except of the aptitude of the phrase (...),) while
they curse his person or name. The Doctrine of this Council is found, and
Nestorius's was the same, for two natures in one person, and one Son. This is
true, whatever Faction say against it.

III. That these Bishops (though we honor them for all that was good in them)
were so far from the Martyrs Constancy, that they turned as the Emperors
Countenance, and the Times, and worldly Interest turned; voting down Things and
Persons in Councils, and crying omnes peccavimus in the next: Only Peter's
Ship, says Binnius, escaped drowning at Ephesus, and yet here at Calcedon under
Martian all are Orthodox.

IV. But that which is worst of all is, that yet the same men that cry
peocavimus are here violent against any mercy to the Egyptian Bishops and Monks
with whom they had joined at Ephesus.

. 20. When an Epistle of Cyrils was read, the Illyricane Bishop cried out, We
all believe as Cyril did: Theodorete (that had been for Nestorius against
Cyril, and cast out by Dioscorus) spoke more warily, and said, Anathema to him
that says there are two Sons: We adore our Lord Jesus, etc. All the Bishops
cried, We believe as Cyril. Had not Cyril's name better hap than Dioscorus and
Eutyches, that followed him as far as they could understand him, and spoke the
same words as he?

The Orientals cried, We believe as Cyril. The Egyptians cried, We believe as
Cyril, We are all of the same opinion and mind; Let not Satan get place and
advantage among us. The Eastern Bishops cried, Leo and Anatolius are of this
mind; The Emperor and Senate are of this mind: The lay Judge, Senate, and all
the Council cried, The Emperor, the Empress, and all of us are of one mind:
The Egyptian Bishops cried, All the World are of this mind; We are of a mind.
(And who would think that yet they were disagreed, even to Hereticating and
Deposing, Persecuting one another.

O but say to the Egyptian Bishops, If you are all of this mind, Why did you
communicate with Eutyches, and condemn Flavianus? Dioscorus appealed to the
Records. And here Eustathius Beryl, showed what labor Cyril used to explain
his own meaning, in his Epistles to Acacius, Valerianus, and Successus Bishops,
and that these are his words; We must not understand that there are two
natures, but one nature incarnate of God the Word: And this saying he confirmed
by the Testimony of Athanasius. The Oriental Bishops cried out, This is the
saying of Eutyches and Dioscorus (yet these men just now were all of Cyril' s
mind^) Dioscorus said, We affirm neither confusion of natures, nor division,
nor conversion; Anathema to him that does. Does not this show that they all
agreed in Distinction of Natures? as also Cyril did. The Judges say, Tell us
whether Cyril' s Epistles agree to what is here reported of them (by
Eustathius,) Eustathius shows the Book, and says; If I have said amiss see
the Book; Anathematize Cyril's Book and Anathematize me: The Egyptians applaud
Eustathius, saying, Eustathius reports Cyril' s words, in which were, We must
not understand two natures, but one incarnate nature of God the word. And
Eustathius added, He has says there is but one nature so as to deny Christ's
flesh which is consubstantial with us, let him be Anathema: And he that says
there are two natures to the Division of the Son of God, let him be Anathema.
(one would have thought this should have ended their quarrel.) And Eustathius
added of Flavianus himself, that he received these naked words, and gave them
the Emperor; Let it be ordered that his own hand be showed. The Judges said,
Why then did ye depose him? Eustathius answered, Erravi, I erred.

. 21. Let it be here noted, that these Eutychian words of Cyril are here openly
proved, past denial: yet shamelesly does Binnius say, that this is Eustathii
allegatio pessima and haeretica: What, to repeat a man's Words? Secondly,
Is it not here plain that they were all of a mind, and did not, or through
faction would not know it? when Eustathius by a clear distinction had proved
it, and none of them did or could contradict him.

. 22. Dioscorus said that Flavianus in the words following contradicted
himself, and was deposed for holding two natures after the union; adding, I
have the testimony of the holy Fathers, Athanasius, Gregory, Cyril, in many
places, that we must not say, that after the union there are two natures, but
one incarnate nature of God, the word, I am ejected with the Fathers; I defend
the Fathers sayings; I transgress not in any thing; I have their Testimonies,
not simply or transitorily, but in Books.

. 23. Aethericus, Bishop of Smyrna, being questioned about his subscription,
said, he did as he was bid. In the second Action Dioscorus delivering his
opinion says, Ex duabus suscipio, duas non suscipio. That Christ is [of two
natures] but not that he [is or has two natures.]
Eusebius Doryl. tells him of his wrong to Flavianus and him; Dioscorus
confesses, saying, Then offer satisfaction to God and you, meaning repentance.
But Eusebius says, that he must satisfy the Law; And so the Verbal quarrel
turns to Personal revenge.

Basil Seleuc. (though before accused of Heresy) well reconcileth the
Controversy at last, if they would have heard him, saying, Cognoscimus duas
Naturas,
non dividimus; neque divisas, neque confusas dicimus.

Eutyches words at Constantinople being recited, he says, that he follows
Cyril, Athanasius and the Fathers. After Dioscorus and others had denied what
each other said in the Ephesine Council, the saying of all the Bishops were
read, each one absolving Eutyches, in words and reasons at large. After which
the Bishops cry again, Omnes erravimus; omnes veniam mereamur.

In the third Action many things were read that concerned their proceedings,
and among the rest a Law of Theodesius jun. for the confirming of the second
Ephesine Council, and the condemnation of Nestorius, and of Flavianus, Domnus,
Eusebius, and Theodoret, as Nestorian Heretics, deposing all of their mind,
forbidding any upon pain of Confiscation to receive them, and commanding that
none read the Books of Nestorius or Theodoret, but bring them forth to be
burnt, etc. So far could fierce and factious Prelates prevail with a pious and
peaceable Prince, by the pretenses of opposing Heresy and Schism. Martian made
Laws also clean contrary for the justifying of the men before condemned.

. 24. In the fifth Action the Egyptian Bishops Petition was read (who were
accounted Eutychians, adhering to Dioscorus:) They professed their adherence to
the Council of Nice and Ephesus 1. and to Athanasius, Theophilus, and Cyril.
The Bishops cried out, Why do they not curse the opinion of Eutiches? They
offer us their Petition in imposture: They would delude us, and so depart. Let
them curse Eutyches and his Opinion, and consent to Leo' s Epistle. While they
cried out to them to curse Eutyches, they answered (by Hieracus,) If any,
whether Eutyches, or any other, hold contrary to the things contained in our
Profession (the Nicene and Ephesians. Councils) let him be accursed. But for Leo's
Epistle, we must not go before the sentence of our Archbishop (of Alexandria;)
for we follow him in all things: The Council of Nice ordered that the Bishop of
Egypt do nothing without him. Eusebius Doryl. said, They lie. Others bid them
prove it. Other Bishops cried out, openly curse the opinion of Eutyches: He
that subscribeth not Leo's Epistle to which all the holy Synod consents is a
Heretic:
Anathema to Dioscorus, and to them that love him: How shall they choose them a
Bishop (instead of Dioscorus) if they judge not right themselves: The Egyptian
Bishops said, The question is about Faith, (not men:) But they cried out so
long, Curse Eutyches or you are Heretics, that at last the Egyptians said,
[Anathema to Eutyches and to them that believe him.] The Bishops cried to them
[Subscribe Leo's Epistle, else you are Heretics: The Egyptian Bishops
answered, We cannot subscribe without the will of our Archbishop. Some said,
All the Synod must not attend for one man: They that at Ephesus disturbed all
things, would here do so too: we desire that this may not be granted them, but
they may consent to the Epistle, or receive a Canonical damnation, and know
that they are Excommunicate. Photius Bishop of Tire said, How endeavor they to
ordain (their Archbishop) who are not of the same mind with the Synod? If they
think rightly let them subscribe the Epistle, or be Excommunicate. The Bishops
cried, We are all of this mind. The Egyptian Bishops said, We came not hither
without a just profession of our Faith. But (as to Leo' s Epistle) we are but
few (12 Bishops) and the Bishops of our Country are very many, and we cannot
give you all their minds, or represent their persons: We beseech this holy
Synod to have mercy on us, (There is no mercy where the Bishop of Rome is
concerned) and do but stay till we have an Archbishop, that according to the
ancient Custom of our Country, we may follow his Judgment: For if we break
presumptiously the the Canons and Custom, and do any thing without his will,
all the Regions of Egypt will rise up against us; therefore have mercy on our
age: have mercy on us, and put us not to end our life in banishment. The same
Egyptian Bishops cast down themselves on the Earth, and said, You are merciful
men, have mercy on us: Cecropius Bishop of Sebast. said, The whole Synod is
Greater and worthier of credit, than the Country of Egypt. It is not just that
ten Heretics be heard, and 1200 Bishops be past by: We bid them not show their
Faith for others but themselves. The Bishops of Egypt cried, Then we cannot
dwell in the Province; Have mercy on us: Eusebius Dor. said, They are
procurators for the rest: The Popes Legate said, If they err, let them be
taught by the magnificence of your footsteps, etc. The Egyptians cried, We are
killed; Have mercy on us: The Bishops all said, You see what a Testimony they
give of their Bishops, saying, we are killed there: The Egyptian Bishops cried,
We die by your footsteps: have pity on us, and let us die by you, and not
there. Let but an Archbishop here be made, and we subscribe and consent, Have
mercy on our gray hairs. Give us an Archbishop here: Anatolius knows that it
is the Custom of our Country that all the Bishops obey the Archbishop: Not
that we obey not the Synod, but we are killed there in our Country: Have mercy
on us; You have the power; We are subjects; We refuse not. We had rather die by
the Lord of the World (the Emperor) or by your magnificence, or by this holy
Synod, than there. For Gods sake have pity on these gray hairs; spare ten men:
We die there: It is better die here. All the most Reverend Bishops cried out,
These are Heretics. The Egyptian Bishops said, You have power on our lives,
spare ten men; Lords are Merciful: Anatolius knows the Custom; We are here
till an Archbishop be chosen: If they would have our Seats, let them take them:
We are not willing to be Bishops: Only let us not die. Give us an Archbishop,
and if we gainsay, punish us: We consent to these things which your power has
decreed; We contradict not; but choose us an Archbishop: We here stay till it is
done: All the most Reverend Bishops clamoured, Let them subscribe to the
damnation of Dioscorus.

Thus the poor Egyptian Bishops that had the upper hand under Theodosius, were
in a straight between the merciless Bishops in the Synod (that had lately at
Ephesus joined with them) and the furious Bishops and people of their own
Country that would have killed them when they came home (too common a Case at
Alexandria.)
But when all their dejected cries and begging could get no mercy from the
Bishops, the Lay Judges had some, and moved that they may be made stay in the
Town till their Archbishop was chosen (of whom you shall hear sad work anon.)
The Popes Legate requested, That if they would needs show them any humanity,
they should take sureties of them, not to go out of the City, till they had an
Archbishop. And so it was ended.

. 25. The next business was with the Abbots of the Monks: They had petitioned
Martian, that a General Council might be called, to end their lamentable
broils, and that without turbations, forced subscriptions or persecutions by
the secret contrivances of the Clergy, and casting men out before due judgment.
And they gave in a profession of their Faith, and petitioned that Dioscorus
might be called, because the Emperor had promised them that nothing but the
Nicene Faith. should be imposed. which he professed: The Bishops all clamoured
out their repeated Curse against Dioscorus, and their Toll injuriam a Synodo,
Toll violentiam a Synodo, Toll notam a Synodo, Istos mitte for as. that is,
Away with them; and would not hear their petition; But the Lay Judges made it
to be read: In which the Monks profess to hold to the Nicene Creed, and that
the Church might not have discord by imposing more: Protesting that if their
Reverences, abusing their power, resisted this, as before God and the Emperor,
the Judges, the Senate, and the Consciences of the Bishops, that they shake
their garments against them, and put themselves beyond their Excommunication:
For they would not be Communicators with those that thus refuse the Nicene
Faith; The Council still urged them to subscribe Leo' s Letter. Carosus and
Dorotheus in the name of the rest of the Abbots said; They were Baptized into
the Nicene Faith; They knew no other: They were bid by the Bishop that Baptized
them Receive no other: We believe the Baptismal Creed: We subscribe not the
Epistle: They are Bishops; They have power to Excommunicate and to Damn, and to
do what they will more: But we know no other Faith: The Archdeacon urged
Carosus to Subscribe to Leo's Epistle as Expository of the Nicene Faith, and to
Curse Nestorius and Eutyches: Carosus answered, What have I to do to curse
Nestorius, that have once, twice, thrice, and often cursed and damned him
already. Aeticus said, Do thou curse Eytiches as the Synod does or not?
Carosus replied. Is it not written, Judge not that ye be not judged? Again he
repeated, that he believed the Nicene Creed into which he was baptized; If they
said any thing else to him he knew it not: The Apostle says, If an Angel from
heaven preach another Gospel, let him be accursed: what should I do? If
Eutyches believe not as the universal Church believes; let him be accursed.

. 26. At last there was a dissension, whether Leo's Phrases should be put into
their Definition of Faith (now drawn up a new.) A while it was cried down, but
at last yielded to, when the Illiricane Bishops had first slighted Rome, and
cried, Qui contradicunt (diffinitioni) Nestoriani sunt: Qui contradicunt Roman
ambulent.

And Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople openly declared, That Dioscotus was not
condemned for matter of belief, but because he Excommunicated Leo, and when he
was thrice summoned did not appear.

. 27. After this Theodorets turn came, that had been for Nestorius, and the
Bishops all cried out, Let Theodoret curse Nestorius. Theodoret desired that a
Petition of his to the Emperor and to Leo's Legate, might be read; that they
might see whether he were of their belief or not. They cried out, We will have
nothing read; presently curse Nestorius, Theodoret told them that he had been
bred of the Orthodox, and so taught, and preached; and was against not only,
Nestorius and Eutyches, but all men else that held not the right. The Bishops
interrupted him, clamouring, speak out plainly, cursed be Nestorius and his
Opinions; cursed be Nestorius and those that love him. Theodoret answered, I
take not my self to say true, but I know I please God: I would first satisfy
you of my belief; for I seek not preferment, I need not honor, nor come hither
for that: But because I am calumniated, I come to satisfy you that I am
Orthodox; and I Anathematize every Heretic that will not be converted, and
Nestorius and Eutyches, and every man that says, there are two Sons, or thinks
so, I Anathematize. The Bishops again took this for dawbing, and cried out, say
plainly, Anathema to Nestorius, and them which hold that which is his.
Theodoret said, Unless I may explain my own belief, I will not say it. I
believe -- Here they interrupted, and all cried out, He is a Heretic, He is a
Nestorian: cast out the Heretic. Reader, would a man have believed that were
not forced by Evidence, That this Council was of Nestorius' s mind, and
confirmed his own Doctrine of the Unity of Christ's persons and two Natures, who
thus furiously cried down Theodoret? (except as to the aptitude of the word
(...).) And is it not a doleful Thought that the worthy Bishops of the Church,
even in a General Council, should no better know the way of peace? And do not
these words here translated out of Binnius, p. 92. and 106. agree too well with
Greg. Nazianzen's Character of Bishops and Councils? Not but that the Church
had always some Learned, Godly, Wise, and Peaceable Men, (such as Gregory Naz.
and Theodoret were, and many more, especially in Africa;) but you see that they
were born down by the stream of unskilful, worldly, temporizing, violent Men;
after once worldly greatness made it the way to preferment, and it became their
business to strive who should be uppermost and have his will.)

But Theodoret when he found that there was no hope of so much as a patient
hearing of his Explication and Confession, was fain to yield, and say, Anathema
to Nestorius, and to him who says not that the Virgin Mary was the Parent of
God, and who divides the only begotten Son into two Sons; which was yet
cautelously expressed; as if he said, supposing that Nestorius did so (which
himself denied) let him be accursed: And so Theodoret was absolved and counted
worthy to be a Bishop.

. 28. Iuvenal Hierosol. Thalassius, and the rest of the Leaders, at Ephesians.
Council 2, were pardoned: Ibas his Epistle to Maris against Cyril was acquit,
or at least the Bishop upon the reading of it. It is a sad Narrative of the
Calamitous Divisions which these Prelates and their Councils made. He said that
Cyril writ against Nestorius that there was but one nature in Christ, etc. Haec
omnia impietatis plena: He tells how Cyril preposessed the Bishops before they
met, and made his hatred of Nestorius his Cause. How he condemned Nestorius two
days before John of Antioch came: How afterward they condemned and deposed one
another: How Nestorius was in hatred with the Great men of Constantinople,
which was his fall: How John and Cyril's Bishops or Councils would not
Communicate with each other: How they set Bishops against Bishops, and People
against People, and a man's Enemies were those of his own household: How the
Pagans scorned the Christians hereupon: For (says he) no man durst travel from
City to City,
or from Province to Province, but each one persecuted his neighbor as his
enemy: For many not having the fear of God, by occasion of Ecclesiastical zeal,
made haste to bring forth the hidden enmity of their hearts against others: (he
instanceth in some Persecutors) and shows how Paulus Emisseuus helped to heal
them.

. 29. In the eleventh Action two Bishops strive for the Bishopric of Ephesus,
Bassianus and Stephen (that had been Dioscorus Agent): And in their Pleas each
of them proved that the other intruded by violence into the place, both he that
first had it, and he that thrust him out and took his Seat, and one of them
made his Clergy swear to be true to him and not forsake him; And while the
Bishops were for one of them, the Judges past Sentence to cast out both, and
all consented.

. 30. But after all the crying up of Leo' s Epistle, this Synod set so light by
Leo, as that, some say, against his Legates Will, they made a Canon, (28.) That
every where following the Decrees of the Fathers, and acknowledging the Canon
which was lately read made by the 150 Bishops, we also Decree the same, and
determine of the Privileges of the holy Church of Constantinople new Rome: For
the Fathers did give (or attribute) rightly the Privileges to the Throne of
old Rome, because that City ruled (or had the Empire) And moved by the same
consideration the 150 Bishops Lovers of God, gave (or attributed) equal
Privileges to the Throne of New Rome; rightly judging that the City which is
honored with the Empire and the Senate, and enjoys equal Privileges with
ancient Queen- Rome, should also in things Ecclesiastical be extolled and
magnified, being the second after it. The Popes Legates hand Boniface is
subscribed to all; and Eusebius Doril: thus subscribed Sponte subscripsi,
quoniam and hane regulam sanctissimo Papae in Vrbe Roma ego relegi prescentibus
Clericis Constantinopolitanis, eamque suscepit. And this Council was after over
and over approved by the Roman Bishops.

. 31. It in is this Canon notorious,
1. That the whole General Council and so the universal Church did then
believe, that the Popes or Roman Privileges were granted by the Fathers (that
is, by Councils) and stood not by divine appointment. 2. That the reason that
the Fathers granted them, was because it was the Imperial Seat. Had they
believed that the Apostles had instituted it, they had never said that the
Fathers did it for this reason; and that Constantinople should be equal or next
it for the same reason. 3. The Church of Constantinople never claimed their
Prerogative jure divino as succeeding any Apostle, and yet jure Imperii claimed
equal Privileges. By all which it is undeniable that the whole Church in that
Council, and especially the Greeks, did ever hold Rome's Primacy to be a humane
institution, upon a humane mutable reason. What the Papists can say against
this, I have fully answered against W. Johnson in a Book called, Which is the
true Church.

. 32. The Question now is, What concord did these late Councils procure to the
Churches?

Ans. From that time most of the Christian World was distracted into Factions
hereticating, damning, deposing and too many murdering one another. One party
cleaved to Dioscorus and were called by the other Eutychians; These cried up
the Sufficiency of the Nicene Councils Faith, as that which they were baptized
into, and would have no addition nor diminution; and condemned the Calcedon
Council, and excommunicated and deposed those that would not Anathematize it:
Those that were against them they called Nestorians.

On the other party were those that had cleaved to Nestorius by name, and had
been persecuted for his Cause; And these were a separate Body, and cried down
the other as Eutychians.

Those called Orthodox or Catholics cried down Nestorians and Eutychians by
name, indeed defending the same Doctrine as Nestorius, except as to the fitness
of the word (...). And the chief of Nestorius his first adherents perceiving
that indeed they were of one judgment, united with these against the
Eutychians. I have showed that all of them seemed to make all this stir but
about some Words which one party took in one sense and the other in another.
For these words the Bishops cast the Christian World into confusion, destroyed
Love and Unity under a pretense of keeping the Faith; so that the Church was
lamentably militant; Bishops against Bishops, in continual enimity and rage.
The Emperors at their wits end not knowing how to end the Ecclesiastical
odious Wars: And the Heathens hardened and deriding them all and their Religion.

. 33. When the Council was ended, and Proterius made Bishop of Alexandria in
Dioscorus stead, the City was in so great discontent that the Emperor Martian
was fain to send a Layman to mollify them; for they would not endure a
Calcedonian Bishop: They set more by Dioscorus than before (so that Binnius
incredibly says, they offered him Divine Honor.

. 34. It was not long till Martian dyed, and then they let the World know that
it was Emperors and not Popes or Councils that they regarded. They thought
then they might show their minds, and what they did Liberatus in Breviario,
Evagrius, Nicephorus and others tells us at large: But I will give it you in
the words of the Egyptian Bishops which conformed to the Council, Bin. p. 147.
One Timothy Elurus of Dioscorus Party who had gathered separated Congregations
before, since the Council of Calcedon, got some Bishops of his own Party to
make him Archbishop: The people soon showed their minds though it deposed their
Archbishop. They set up Timothy, and he presently made Ordinations of Bishops
and Clerks, etc. while he thus went on, a Captain, Dionisius, came to drive him
out of the City: The people rage the more against Proterius: He gets into the
Baptistry to avoid their rage, a place reverenced even by the Barbarians and
the fiercest Men: But these furious people, set on by their Bishop Timothy,
neither reverencing the Place, the Worship, nor the Time, (which was Easter)
nor the Office of Priesthood, which is a Mediation between God and Man, did
strike the blameless Man, and kill him cruelly, with six more; and dragging his
wounded Carkess every where, and cruelly drawing it about, almost through all
the parts of the City, did mercilesly beat the senseless Corpse, and divided his
Parts, and spared not to taste his Entrails with their Teeth like Dogs; whom
they should have thought the Mediator of God and Man; and casting the rest of
his Body into the Fire, they scattered his Ashes into the Wind, transcending
the fierceness of all Beasts: And the Architect of all this was (their new
Bishop) Timothy; first an Adulterer (taking another Church) and then a
Murderer, doing it in a manner as with his own hands, in that he bid others do
it: This man rules the Alexandrian Church, and going on does worse.

This is in the Epistle to the Emperor Leo; Bin. p. 151.
The like they write in another to Anatolius, adding, that he Anathematized the
Council of Calcedon and all that communicate with it, and received none that
receive it, till they renounce it.

. 35. On the other side Bishop Timothy's Adherents wrote to Leo in praise of
their new Bishop, professing the Nicene Faith, and declaring what great Concord
and Peace their City now had, and craving the Emperors approbation of him.

. 36. In Palestine also the same Fire kindled: The Monks that had been at
Calcedon returned lamenting that the Nicene Faith was there betrayed, and
stirred up their Fraternity to rescind the Acts; They got together and expelled
Iuvenal Bishop of Jerusalem, as a Traitor to the Catholic Faith and a Changer.
The Empress Eudocia) says Nicephorus) took their part; and strengthened them;
At Schythopolis they killed Severianus the Bishop, they compelled men to join
and communicate with them. At Jerusalem they killed Athanasius a Deacon for
contradicting them, Niceph. l. 15. c. 19.
and gave his Flesh to Dogs. Dorotheus the Emperous Lieutenant would have kept
the Peace, and they compelled him to join with them: But after twenty months
Iuvenal was restored. Thus in many Countries the War went on; And they that
knew not the Arcana Imperii thought all this was done by Bishops and Monks: But
the truth is Eudocia Theodosius's Widow, and Pulcheria Theodosius's Sister and
Martian's Wife, were of two sides: And Women had great power with Emperors,
and consequently with Bishops: But at last Pulcheria procured the conversion of
Eudocia to her side, and then she owned the Council, and then others owned it.
This was in Martians days.

. 37. The great number of Letters sent from the Bishops to Leo when he was made
Emperor, which were sent in answer to his own to them, engaged him the more
for the Council Party, and against Timothy Aelurus: He deposed him and put
Timothy Salophaciolus in his place: But the City was all in confusion between
the two Timothies, Niceph. l. 15. c. 17, 18, 19.
Bishops. The Egyptian Bishops write to the Emperor against Timothy and
Eutychiane. The Emperor sends forth his circular Letters, commanding all to
own the Calcedon Council. At Antioch Petrus Cnapheus ambitious of the
Archbishopric got into Martyrius place; by Zeno's help: And thinking they were
still managing only the Controversy against the Nestorians, and taking the
Orthodox for Nestorian Heretics, all were accursed by Anathema's that would
not say that God was crucified and suffered (The Orthodox doing the same,) and
thus they increased the Confusions. Martyrius their true Bishop when he saw
that he could do no good upon them, forsook them, with these words, Clero
rebelli, and populo inobedienti, and Ecclesiae contaminatae Nuncium remitto. I
renounce a rebellious Clergy, a disobedient People, and a defiled Church.
Petrus Cnapheus kept the Bishopric, and reviled the Calcedon Council. Leo the
Emperor banisheth him: Stephanus a friend to the Council is put into the
place: That you may know how the Council had united the people, even the Boys
were set on to kill this new Bishop with sharp Quills.

Common execution was too easy a death; Being killed they cast his Corpse into
the River, for favoring the Council of Calcedon, and succeeding their desired
Bishop: But Calendion succeeding him, made them Anathematize the same Peter
Cnapheus.

. 38. While Martian and Leo, reigned thus, the Council of Calcedon was kept up,
and almost all the Bishops were brought to subscribe to it; But death changes
Princes, and thereby Bishops. Leo dies, and dissolute Zeno succeeds him: He
would fain have had his peace among them in sensuality: Basiliscus takes the
advantage of his dissolute life, and usurpeth the Empire, and makes use of the
Bishops Schism and contentions to get him a party: (For the Bishops Schisms
greatly serve Usurpers ends.) And first he publishes his Circular Letters
against the Council of Calcedon, requiring all the Bishops to renounce it,
(because his Predecessors had been for it.)
To this, says Nicephorus, lib. 6. cap. 4. three Patriarchs, and no fewer then
five hundred subscribed, and renounced the Council. (And yet how violently they
damned all that would not receive it, and writ for it to Leo, but a little
before you have heard.) But quickly after, Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople,
and Dau. Columnella, persuaded Basiliscus to write clear contrary Circular
Letters, Commanding all to own the Council: For they convinced him that this
was the more possible way: And these also were obeyed. But Zeno was shortly
after restored to the Empire, who was for the Council: And then the Asian
Bishops turned again, and wrote to get their Pardon, saying, That they
subscribed to Basiliscus first Letters, not voluntary, but for fear! (O
excellent Martyrs.) Niceph. l. 16. c. 9.

. 39. Upon this the Council was up again, and the Bishops became Orthodox once
more: Till at last Zeno thought (as the Acacians did about laying by (...))
that the only way to unite these Bishops, was to leave all free, neither
forbidding any to own the Council of Calcedon, nor yet compelling any to it.
And so he wrote an Edict of Pacification, silencing the case, which he called
his Henoticon: For he thought that the Bishops would never agree either for it
or against it. But yet this ended not the quarrels: The fire still flamed:
Liberty contented not the Bishops: They were zealous for God as against his
Enemies the Heretics: And every Party were these Heretics and Enemies in the
judgment of the rest. All must be damned and ruined that would not be for God,
that is, that was not of their minds. When Liberty was once up, the people were
significant, and their mind was soon known. At Antioch, Calendion was cast out
of his Seat, and Peter Cnapheus got in again. (For a Combat for a Bishopric
was a War which they scrupled not.) And at Alexandria the whole City was in
confusion while Peter Moggus and John strove who should be Bishop. Moggus of
Alexandria anathematizing the Calcedon Council, and persecuting Dissenters, the
Emperor labors to reconcile them. Acacius at Constantinople, though
supposed Orthodox, Communicates with Peter Moggus: whether in obedience to
Zeno's Henoticon, or weary of hereticating, and why, is not known. (O how
common were separatist Bishops in those days!) Faelix Bishop of Rome condemns
Acacius Bishop of Constantinople for this: Acacius had equal privileges given
by the Calcedon Council, and had the presence of the Emperor and Senate,
and he again condemns Faelix; blotting his name out of the sacred Albe
(their Book of life.)

. 40. Acacius shortly dying, the Emperor found it too hard a task to choose a
Patriarch, that should not keep up the Sedition; Therefore he will refer the
choice to God: To that end he puts a blank paper on the Altar, and another
by it, requesting of God that an Angel might write there the name of him that
God would have to be Patriarch:
The doors are fast locked, and forty days Fasting and Prayer commanded, to
prevail with God: The Keys are committed to a sure and great Courtier, but one
that was subject to Angels: One Flavitas bribeth him, and he writes Flavitas's
name in the paper, and seals up the doors: And so there was an Archbishop
chosen by an Angel. This man joined with Peter of Alexandria by Synodal
Letters, to command all to curse the Council: and yet wrote to the Bishop of
Rome, that he renounced Communion with Peter; and he wrote to Peter that he
renounced Communion with the Bishop of Rome. But its fearful sporting with God
and Angels: He dyed within four Months.

. 41. After Flavitas succeeded Euphemius: He joined with the Bishop of Rome,
and rased Peter's name out of the Church Book: Peter and Euphemius as two
Generals were about gathering Synodical Armies against each other, and against,
and for the Council. But the Foot that spurneth abroad and spoileth the Designs
of Worldlings, even Death presently removed Peter. One Athanasius succeeds
Peter, and fain he would have reconciled and united his Clergy and People, but
he could not: Holy zeal is too easily quenched, but not contentious carnal
zeal. Palladius succeeds Peter Cnapheus at Antioch: Both these great
Patriarchs join together to curse the Council of Calcedon; and down went the
Council. But death again makes a turn, they both dye, and John succeeded at
Alexandria, and Flavianus at Antioch. Yet these must be of the mind of the
major part, and both join also to curse the Council: And the Patriarchs of Rome
and Constantinople curse them, and are for the Council: And thus Cursing was
the Religion of the Age.

. 42. But now Zeno the Emperor dies, and Anastatius Dicorus is chosen
Emperor. Nicephorus, lib. 16. c. 25. says, that he being a man of peace, and
desiring the ceasing of Contentions, followed Zeno's Henoticon, and left all to
their liberty to think of the Council as they pleased. Hereupon the Bishops
fell into three Parties; some servent for every word of the Council; some
cursing it; and some for the Henoticon or silent peace. The East was one way:
the West another: and Lybia another. Yea the Eastern Bishops among themselves,
the Western among themselves, and the Lybian among themselves, renounced
Communion with one another. Nicephor. c. 25. Tanta confusio mentiumque caligo
(says the Historian) orbem universum incessit, (it is not my censure) so great
confusion and blindness of mind befell the whole world: This was the Effect
even of Liberty.

. 43. The Emperor resolving to keep peace did purpose to fall on the most
unpeaceable whoever, even on both sides. At Constantinople he put out
Euphemius: (as some thought upon a personal dislike or quarrel:) For before his
inthornizing they say he had given under his hand to Euphemius a promise that
he would stand for the Council; and when he had possession he demanded up his
Writing: Euphemius denied it him, and was cast out: Macedonius succeeded him,
and got the Writing: The Emperor demanded it also of him; he also denied it:
The Emperor would have also put him out: The people rose up in Sedition, and
cried, It is a time of Martyrdom, let us all stick to the Bishop: And they
reviled the Emperor, calling him a Manichee, and unworthy of the Empire. The
Emperor was forced hereby to submit to Macedonius, lest he should have lost
all: The Bishop sharply rebuked him as the Churches Enemy. But these things
made the Emperor more against the Council, partly as more against him; and
when he saw time, he remembered Macedonius, and cast him out: yea he put Timothy
in his place, and burnt the Councils Acts. Timothy pulled down the Images of
Macedonius. The Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch: and Jerusalem, were all cast
out.

. 44. Peter Cnapheus Antioch had made one Zenaias a Persian Servant and
unbaptized, Bishop of Hierapolis. This man was against Images and against the
Council. He brought a Troop of Monks to Antioch to force Flavianus the Bishop
to curse the Council; Flavianus refuses: The people stuck to the Bishop, and
disputed the case with such unanswerable arguments, that so great a number of
the Monks were slain, as that they threw their Bodies into the River Orontes,
to save the labor of burying them. Niceph. 16. c. 27. But this ends not the
dispute; another Troop of Monks of Coelo-syria, that were of Flavianus and the
Councils side, hearing of the tumult, and the danger of the Bishop, flock to
Antioch, and made another slaughter, as great (says Nicephorus) as the former.

. 45. The Murders done by Bishops and Christians were sometimes punished by
Excommunication, but not by Death in those prosperous times of the Church: The
Emperor hereupon did banish Flavianus, which his followers took for
persecution; Peter Alex. being dead the Bishops of Alex. Egypt, and Lybia, fell
all into pieces among themselves, each having their separate Conventions. The
rest of the East also separated from the West, because the West would not
Communicate with them, unless they would Curse Nestorius, Eutyches, Dioscorus,
Moggus and Acacius: And yet says Nicephorus, l. 16. c. 28. Qui germani
Dioscori and Eutychetes sectatores fuere ad Maximam paucitatem redacti sunt.
Xenaia^ brings to Flavian, the Names of Theodore, Theodorite, Ibas and others
as Nestorians; and tells him, If he Curse not all these, he is a Nestorian;
whatever he say to the contrary: Flavian was unwilling, but his timorous
fellow-Bishops persuaded him, and he wrote his Curse against them, and sent it
to the Emperor. Xenaias then went farther, and required him to Curse the
Council. The Isaurian Bishops were drawn to consent to Anathematize it. The
refusers are all renownced as Nestorians. And thus the Council that Cursed
Nestorius, is Cursed of Nestorian: The Eutychians perceiving how near they were
agreed.

After Flavian, one Severus got to be Bishop at Antioch (a severe Enemy of the
Nestorians, and of the Council.) The first day when he was got in, he cursed
the Council, though it is said that he had sworn to the Emperor that he would
not: Niceph. lib. 16. cap. 29.

In Palestine the Condemnation or Ejection of Flavianus and Macedomius renewed
their distractions and divisions.

About Antioch, Severus grew so earnest, and wrote such Letters to the Bishops
under him, as frighted many against their Judgments, to Curse the Council, and
those that held two Natures, as Heretics: Some Bishops stood out and refused;
some fled from their Churches for fear. The Isaurian Bishops, when they had
yielded, repented, and when they had repented they Condemned Severus, that
drove them to subscribe. Two stout Bishops, Cosmas, and Severianus, sent a
Sealed Paper to Severus; and when he opened it, he found it was a Condemnation
under their Hands. The Emperor had notice of it, and he being angry, that they
presumed to Condemn their Patriarchs, sent his Procurator to cast them out of
their Bishoprics, (himself at last being against the Council.) The Procurator
found the People so resolute, and bent to Resistance, in defense of their
Bishops: That he sent word to the Emperor, that these two Bishops could not be
cast out, without bloodshed. The Emperor sent him word, that he would not
have a drop of blood shed for the business; for he did what he did for peace.

. 46. Helias, Bishop of Jerusalem, found all the other Churches in such
Confusion, the Bishops Condemning one another; that he would Communicate with
none of them, save Euphemius of Constantinople (before his Ejection) Niceph. c.
32. The Monks were engaged for the Council by such a means as this. One
Theodosius, a Monk (or Abbot) gathering a great assembly,
lowdly cried out in the Pulpit to them. [If any man equal not the four
Councils, with the four Evangelists, let him he Anathema.] This Voice of their
Captain, resolved the Monks; and they thenceforth took it as a Law, that the
four Councils should be saoris libris accensenda, added or joined with the
sacred Books. And they wrote to the Emperor, [Certamen se de eis ad sanguinem
us^^ subitur^s, that they would make good the Conflict for them, even to blood:
Thus Monks and Bishops then submitted to Princes. These Monks went about to the
Cities to engage them to take their side for the Councils. The Emperor hearing
of this, wrote to the Bishop Helias to reform it: He rejects the Emperors
Letters, and refuses: The Emperor sends Soldiers to Comp^ll or restrain
them. The Orthodox Monks that were for the Council, gathered by the Orthodox
Bishops, tumultuously cast the Emperors Soldiers out of the Church, Niceph.
c. 34. After this, they had another Contention, and there Anathematized those
that adhered to Severus. The Emperor more provoked by all this, sent Olympius
with a band of Soldiers to Conquer them: Olympius came, and cast out Bishop
Helias, and put in John. The Monks gather again,
and the Soldiers bieng gone, they come to John, and make him engage himself
to be against Severus, and to stand for the Council, though it were unto Blood:
He yielded to the Monks, and engaged himself to the Council, and brake his Word
made to Olympius. The Emperor is angry with Olympius for doing his Work no
better; and puts him out, and sends another Captain Anastatius; who came and
put the Bishop John in Prison and Commanded him to despise the Council: John
consulting with another Bishop craftily promised to obey him, if he would but
let him out of Prison, two days before, that it might not seem a forced act.
This being done, the Bishop on the contrary in the Pulpit before the Captain
and the People, cries out If any man assent to Eutyches, and Nestorius,
(Contraries) and Severus, and Soterichus, Caesariansis, let him be Anathema: If
any follow not the Opinions of the four Universal Synods let him be Anathema.
The Captain seeing himself thus deluded, fled from the Multitude and was glad
to save himself, the Emperor being offended more at this. The Bishops write to
him, that at Jerusalem the Fountain of Doctrine, they were not now to learn the
truth, and that they would defend the Traditions if need be even to blood,
Niceph. 16. c. 34.

At Constantinople the Bishop Timothy would please both sides, and pleased
neither: To some he spoke for the Council, to others he Cursed it. Being to
make an Abbot, the Man refused his Election, unless he consented to the Council
of Calcedon: Timothy presently Cursed those that received not the Council. His
Archdeacon hearing him, reproached him, that like Euripus roled every way. The
Emperor hearing it, rebuked him: And Timothy washed away the Charge, and
presently Cursed every one that received the Council, Niceph. l. 8. c. 35.

. 47. But what did Rome all this while? It were too long to recite their proper
History: They were for the Council, and they had other kind of Conflicts: The
Goths held them in Wars, and had conquered them, and Theodorick reigned there
as King, and so they were broken off from the Empire: Arians ruled them, who
yet if Salvian say true, did (after) shame the Orthodox in point of Temperance,
Truth, and Justice.

But besides their following greater Schisms, this Schism also did reach to
them. Festus a Roman Senator was sent by Theodorick to the Emperor on an
Embassy: which having done, he desired of the Emperor that Constantinople
might keep the Festival days of Peter and Paul (which they did not before) as
they did at Rome; and he prevailed: And he secretly assured the Emperor, that
Anastasius Bishop of Rome would receive the Honoticon (to suspend the
consenting to the Calcedon Council) and would subscribe it. When this
Ambassador came home the Pope was dead. To make good his Word to the Emperor,
he got a party to choose Laurentius Pope, who would receive the Honoticon: The
People chose Symmachus their Bishop.
And so there were two Popes settled, and the sedition continued three years,
not without Slaughter, Rapines, and other Calamities: Nicephor. cap. 35.
Theodorick an Arian, more rightuous than the Popes, would not deprive them of
their liberty of choice, but called a Synod, to judge which was the rightful
Bishop, and upon their judgment confirmed Symmachus: But Laurentius loath to
lose the prey, stirred up the People to Sedition, and thereupon was quite
degraded. This was a beginning of Schisms at Rome.

. 48. The Emperor at Constantinople favoring the addition [Qui crucifixus est
pro nobis,] the People who disliked it, seditiously cut off a Monks head, and
set it upon a pole, inscribing [An Enemy to the Trinity.] The Emperor overcome
and wearied with their Confusions, and Orthodox Murders and Rebellions; called
an Assembly, and offered to resign his Empire, desiring them to choose another:
This smote them with remorse, and they desired him to reassume his Crown, and
promised to forbear Sedition: But he dyed shortly after.

. 49. Anno 452. Valentinian the Roman Emperor attempted a great alteration
with the Bishops, by a Law recalling the Judicial Power of the Bishops in all
Causes, except those of Faith and Religion, unless the parties contending
voluntarily chose them for the Judges. This Binnius (and the other Papists)
take for a heinous injury to the Church.
In all men's judgment, says Binnius, it is absurd that the Sheep should judge
his Shepherd: If to day the Praetor stand at the Tribunal of the Bishop, and to
morrow the Bishop may be called to the Pretors Bar? That an Earthly judge may
take and punish the servants of the highest judge, and consecrated men: who
will not say that this is most absurd?

Answ. This shows what Church-grandure and power these men expect; If they
have not the Civil power, and be not Magistrates or Lords of all, the Church is
wronged. This Clergy-pride is it that has set the World on fire, and will not
consent that it be quenched.

1. By this rule all Christians should be from under all Power of Kings and
Civil Rulers: For are they not all [the servants of the highest Iudges] Has
God no Servants but the Clergy?

2. By this rule both Princes and People should be free from the Bishops
judgment: For are not these Bishops Men as well as Princes? and are not
Christian Princes and People the servan^^s of the highest Judge, and therefore
should not be judged by Bishops.

3. But what a wicked rebellious doctrine is intimated in the distinction, that
Princes are Earthly Judges, and Prelates are the servants of the highest Judge?
Are not Prelates Earthly Judges as well as Princes, in that they are men that
judge on Earth? And are not Princes Judges of Divine appointment and authority
as well as Prelates? Yea, and their power more past all dispute?

4. And what absurdity is it, that every soul be subject to the higher power?
And that he that is one of your Sheep in one respect, may be your Ruler in
another? Why may not the King be the Ruler of him that is his Physician or his
Tutor? And why not of him that is his Priest. Was not Solomon Ruler of Abiathar
when he displaced him? May not one man judge who is fit or unfit for Church
Communion, and another judge who is punishable by the sword? Did Christ come to
set up a Ministry instead of a Magistracy? He that says, Man who made me a
Judge, came not to put down Judges: He that says, By me Kings reign, came not
to put down all Kings.

Obj. Christ sets up a Kingdom of Priests, or a Royal Priesthood.

Answ. But his Kingdom is not of this World, or Worldly: It is a spiritual
Kingdom, conquering sin and Satan, putting down the World out of our hearts,
and making us hope for the everlasting Kingdom which we shall shortly enjoy.
The Disease of the Disciples that strove who should be greatest, and sit at the
right and left hand, and said, Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom
to Israel, has prevailed after all this warning on a Worldly Clergy, to the
great calamity of the Church. And what wonder, when even then St. Paul says,
All seek their own (too much) and none the things of Jesus Christ (so naturally
as Timothy did) and so zealously as they ought. Too many Popes have been Peter's
Successors in the Character given him, Mat. 16. Get thee behind me Satan, Thou
art an offense unto me; For thou savourest not the things that be of God, but
those that be of men. I understood not who were the spring of our late
Fifth-Monarchy men's diseases, till I read Campanella de Regno Dei, and some
such Papists, where I see that Christ's reign by his Vicar the Pope over all the
Princes and People of the World, is the true Fifth-Monarchy Heresy; For which
they bring the same Prophecies as the Millenaries do for their Expectations.

Obj. But the Pope, Prelates and Clergy (called the Church) are not to reign by
deposing Kings, but by Ruling them and being above them: As Love is above the
Law, which yet is made for the ungodly that want Love, and must be ruled by
fear; so Princes are for the World of unbelievers, but not for the Church and
Spiritual persons who live above them in the life of Love.

Answ. 1. This was one of the first Heresies which the Apostles wrote against:
Many tempted Christians then to think that Christianity freed them from service
and subjection and made all equal: But how plainly, frequently and earnestly,
do Paul and Peter condemn it? Is it not a shame to hear such Papists as cry up
such a Heresy as this, cry down and damn a Nestorian, or an Eutychian, or a
Monothelite, for an unskilful use of a word? Paul says, He that teaches
otherwise (against subjection) is proud, knowing nothing, but doting.

2. Love does indeed set us above Fear, and Legal threats so far as it
prevails: But it is imperfect in all, and Fear still necessary.

3. And this takes not down either the Law or Magistracy to us, but only
makes us less need such means. It Is one thing to love and live so holily and
justly as never to need or fall under the sword of Magistrates; and another
thing to be freed from subjection and obligation.

This increases in many the opinion, that the Papal Kingdom is Antichristian,
in that they set up themselves above Rulers that are called Gods.

3. But why must this privilege extend to the Clergy only? Have not other
Christians as much holy love, and spirituality, as most of them? And must
Princes rule only Infidels?

Some suspect none as inclining to Popery, but those that take up some of their
Doctrines of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Images, etc. But they that on
pretense of the raising of the Church, and defending its power, do first call
the Clergy only the Church, and then seek to make themselves the Lords of
Princes, by the pretenses of an Excommunicating Power, and plead themselves
from under them, and take it for their privileges to be free from subjection
to them and their penal Laws, are doubtless levened with that Popish Heresy,
which has done much of all the mischiefs, which the forecited History
describes.

. 50. CXXXI. Besides some little contention at Alexandria, under Proterius,
before he was murdered; the next in Binnius, is said to be at Angices
(Andegavens^,) which says over again some of their old Canons against Priests
living with Women, and removing from place to place, and such like. And the
Papists say that this Council was to contradict the Emperor Valentinians Law,
and to vindicate the rights of the Church, as not being liable to Civil
Judicatures, or under Kings.

. 51. CXXXII. Anno 45. 3. A French Venetick Council was called about
Ordinations, which repealed some former Canons, and was so strict, that the
first Canon kept Murderers and False Witnesses from the Sacrament, till they
repented (instead of hanging them.) And the second Canon denied the Communion
to Adulterers that unlawfully put away their Wives, and took others. (O strict
Laws.)

. 52. CXXXIII. Ann. 459. A Council at Constantinople, forb^d Simony.

. 53. CXXXIV. Ann. 467. A Council at Rome, of 48 Bishops; decreed that men that
had two Wives, or the Husbands of Whores should not be ordained: That they that
could not ^ead, and they that were mai^ed or dismembered, or the Penitent,
should not be made Ministers, etc.

. 54. CXXXV. Ann. 482. Ten Bishops at Towrs, made such honest Canons, as if
they yet retained somewhat of S. Martins Piety. They earnestly diswade the
Clergy from their Fornication: They go a middle way between them that forbad
Priests to get Children, and those that turn them loose, and decree that
married Priests that continue to get Children shall be advanced no higher: They
forbid the Clergy to be drunk: And to take in strange women: They forbid them
to forsake their Ministerial Function: (but what if Prelates silence them) They
keep those from the Communion that lie with Nuns (devoted to Virginity) till
they Repent: They keep Murderers from the Communion, till they penitently
confess. (This is not hanging them in Chains: But who shall answer for that
Blood, and for the next that this man kills?) others such honest Canons those
virtuous Bishops made (often made before)

. 55. CXXXVI. They say Foelix called a Council at Rome to admonish, and
Excommunicate Peter Cnaph. Antioch About the time time that he Excommunicated
Acacius Constable. and Acacius damned him again.

. 56. In this storm against Acacius, the Pope engaged other Bishops, one was
Quintianus, who sent Peter a dozen Curses for his Cure: Of which one reached
Cyril being against those that say [Vnam Naturam] Another was [Siquis
Deum-hominem, and non magis Deum and homineum dicit, damnetur] that is, ^f any
one say God-man, and not rather God and Man, let him be damned. How careless
are Papists,
and Protestants, that so commonly venture on the Word (...) to their
damnation: If our Neighbors, that commonly these thirty years last use the
word [God damn me had but put Thee] instead of [Me] I should have suspected
that the Councils and Bishops had made their Religion.

. 57. CXXXVII. They say that Ann. 483 Acacius (as bad as the Pope, made him)
called a Council at Constantinople, to Condemn Peter Cnapheus.

. 58. CXXXVIII. Foel^x called 77 Bishops to Rome, on this occasion: He sent his
peremptory Letters to Acacius, Constable. and some to the Emperor Zeno, by two
Bishops, Mis^nus and Vitalis: The Emperor took away their Letters; and (not
knowing then the Popes Soverainty) laid them by the Heels, till he made them
glad to Communicate with those Bishops that they came to Condemn: For this
Faelix and his Bishops, cast them out of the Episcopal Office; and they
presumed to excommunicate Acacius, as before said, even with this Clause,
Nunquam Anathematis vinculis exuendus: Never to be absolved from the Curse!
What no Repentance, for one that was no Heretic! but falsely so called, for
obeying the Emperor, in dealing gently with some Eutychians; were not this
Council and Pope Novatians?

. 59. CXXXIX. Yet Ann. 487. The same Faelix is said in a Council of 38 Bishops,
to decree Communion to the Lapsed, and Rebaptized, penitent Africans.

. 60. At this time, and before in Pope Leo' s time; some Maniches in Rome,
would not be Recusants, but Conformists, and come to Church, and take the
Sacrament; but they took only the Bread, and not the Wine. Leo, Sermon. 4. de
Temp. quadrag. writes this against them. When to cover their Infidelity, they
dare be present at our Mysteries, they so temper themselves, that they may
safely lie hid, in the receiving of the Sacrament, that they with an unworthy
mouth, receive Christ' s Body, but refuse to drink the blood of Redemption.
Which we would have your holiness to understand; that such men may be known to
you by these marks: And that when their Sacrelegious dissimulation is
discerned, being discovered they may by the Priestly Authority be driven from
the Society of the Saints. Hereupon the Pope decreed that none should
Communicate, but in both kinds: The Words of the Canon did. 2. de Consecrat.
are these. We find that some taking only a portion of the holy body, abstein
from the Cup of the holy blood: Because I know not by what superstition they
are taught to be thus bound; let such either receive the whole Sacrament, or be
driven from the whole: Because a division of one and the same mystery, cannot
come but from heinous Sacrilege. Reader, Is Rome constant in their Religion?
And have they no Innovations? Is not Binnius impudent in calling it foolish to
cite this Canon of their own Pope, against them. Consider it and Judge.

And as impudent is he, p. 232. in expounding these words of Gelasius. Non
desinit substantia vel natura panis and vini, That is* The substance or Nature
of the Bread, and Wine cease not: As if it speaks only of the substance and
nature of the Accidents: As if Accidents had substance, and Nature of their
own: What words, what evidence can be so plain as to convince such men.

. 61. Among the Epistles of Gelasius; And more largely, Ep. 13. ad Episcop.
Dardainae
one is to Euphemius Bishop of Constantinople, denying him Communion, till he
put the name of Acacius out of the Dypticks, both of them being Orthodox; only
because Acacius Communicated with an Eutychian; even when he is dead, those
that Condemn him not must be excommunicated*
were there ever greater separatists than these. And is it any wonder if now
the Pope separate from most of the Christian World.

There is also his Commonitor^um written to Faustus the Ambassador of
Theodorike at Constantinople; in which he insistetion the same way of
Separation. All the world must be in an Ecclesiastical Episcopal War, if they
will not damn and separate from every one that speaks an unapt word, if a
Council or Pope will but call it Heresy.

But here the Papists would have us believe that excommunicating in those days
was a proof of superiority: But Gelasius himself here tells them otherwise. It
was objected against him by Euphemius Constant. That one man may not
excommunicate Acacius a Patriarch. And he answers, 1. That it was the act of
many; that is, of the Council which condemned the Eutychians in general. But is
this good Law, or Divinity? Is every offender condemned, ipso jure, before his
personal guilt is Judged? Because the Law condemns all Thieves, may every man
Judge, and hang them. Acacius is confessed to be no Eutychian, but to have
obeyed his Prince, in Communicating with one: Euphemius was no Eutychian, but
would not disobey his Prince at the Popes command, by blotting out Acacius
Name. But his Second Answer is,
Quod non solum Praesuli Apostolico facere licet, sed Cuicunque, Pontifici ut
quo^libet and quemlibet locum, secund^m regul^^ hareseos ipsius ante damnatae,
a Catholica Communioni discernant. That is, Iris Lawful not only to an
Apostolical Prelate, but to any Bishop to exclude from Catholic Communion; any
Persons, and any p^ace, according to the Rule of his fore-damned Heresy. And
accordingly, others have excommunicated, the Pope, and lower Prelates have
Excommunicated Patriarchs; and the lower Patriarchs the higher:
Excommunication, as it is an Act of Government, is done only by a Governor:
But as all Christians are commanded to avoid scandalous Christians, so in their
several places they may practice this, the guilt being proved, I may tell him
that I have no rule over, I will have no Communion with you: But I cannot
thereby oblige all others to do the like.

This Gelasius also often ( Epist. ad Anastas. Imperat. etc.) sets up the
Priest above the Prince, as Gods Laws are above man's: As if Kings were were not
to Govern by Gods Laws? and as if the Bishops Canons were not man's Laws (if
they be Laws.)

. 62. CXL. It Is said that 70 Bishops at Rome under Gelasius determined of the
Canon of the Scripture, and also of accepted and rejected Books. In the Canon
they put a Book called Ordo Historiarum; with one Book of Tobias, one of
Judith, one of the Maccabees, Nehemias is lest out. Among the approved Books
the Epistle of Leo to Flavian Constable. is thus imposed, [The Text whereof if any
man shall dispute,
even to one iota (or tittle) and does not venerably receive it in all things,
let him be accursed.] A multitude of heretical and rejected Books are named:
Eighteen pretended to be by or, of some Apostles, and such other: And among
others the History of Eusebius (yet before approved, unless here he mean only
de vita Constable.) The Works of Tertullian, Lactantius, Arnobius, Clemens Alexand.
Africanus, Cassianus, Victorinus Pictav. Faustus Rhegiens. etc. Of the Canon of
Scripture Bishop Cousins has collected the true History from greater Antiquity.

. 63. CXLI. Vitalis and Misenus, the Popes Legates at Constantinople, having
been Excommunicated for Communicating with Acacius, etc. Vitalis dyed so, but
after eleven years Misenus repented, and was absolved by a Council of 55
Bishops: (might not the Pope alone have done it?)

. 64. CXLII. You have heard before how Festus got Laurentius the Arch-presbyter
chosen Pope at Rome, and more chose Symmachus: Theodorick an Arian being King
was just, and had so much wit as to please the Clergy while his Kingdom was
unsettled. The Pope, under his protection, excommunicated both Emperor and
Patriarch of Constantinople, for Communicating with Heretics;
but he never excommunicated Theodorick at home, though an Arian* There was
reason for it: Interest is such men's Law. But while the Schism between
Symmachus and Laurentius divided the Senate, the Clergy, and the People, five
or six several Councils are called at Rome, mostly to heal this rupture: For at
first the Laurentians laid some Crimes to the charge of Symmachus; and when the
Councils would not cast him out, they fell to rapine, violence, and bloodshed,
many being killed, and all in confusion: So that it was work enough in three
years for King and Council to end the Schism.

. 65. CXLIII. When the Arian Persecution abated in Africa, Thrasa^^ndus the
King, contriving which way to root out the Orthodox without violence;
he commanded that when any Bishop dyed, no other should be ordained in their
places. Hereupon the Nonconformists seeing the Churches like to decay, ann.
504. held a Synod, in which they decreed and do their that though they suffered
death for it they would go on, and ordain, Office; concluding that either the
mind of the King would be mollified, or else they should have the Crown of
Martyrdom. This is called Concilium Byzacenum.

. 66. It is greatly to be noted, that many following Councils in Spain, France,
and other parts of Europe, which were held under the Gothish Kings, were more
pious and peaceable than the rest fore-described. The Reasons seem to me to be
these: 1. These Kings being conquering Arians, the Bishops durst not damn them
for Heresy, for fear of their own necks; and so were greatly restrained from
the hereticating work of Councils. 2. These Kings having a narrower Dominion
than the Empire, and being jealous of their new gotten Conquests, were nearer
the Bishops, and kept them more in awe than the Emperor did. 3. And these
Councils being small (of a few Bishops) had no such work for arrogance and
ambition, as the great General Councils had: 4. And the great proud pretending
Patriarchs that set the World in a continual War, were not here to strive who
should be the greatest. The Pope himself was seldom mentioned in the Spanish
and French Councils, or the African.

. 67. CXLIV. One of these honest Councils is Agathense by the permission of
Alaricus, by 35 Bishops, Casarius Arelatensis being chief: Where many Canons
for the Clergy were made or repeated.

The 3d Canon is, that if Bishops wrongfully excommunicate any one, other
Bishops shall receive them.
(Did the Popes observe this with Acacius, Euphemius, etc.) Can. 63. If any
Citizens on the great solemnities, that it, Easter, the Lords Nativity, or
Whitsuntide, shall neglect to meet where the Bishops are, (seeing they are set
in Cities for Benediction and Communion,) let them be three years deprived of
the Communion of the Church.
(Does not this prove that the City Churches then met all in one place, and so
were but one Assembly at those times? How else could all the Citizens be with
the Bishop at one time?) But even these Canons forbid Clergymen to sue any
before a Secular Judge, or to appear or answer at another suit, Can. 32.
Otherwise both are to be excommunicate, Can. 37. It punishes those that kill
men, but with denying them Communion. Can. 50. Only if a Bishop, Presbyter, or
Deacon, commit a Capital crime, he shall be deposed and put into a Monastery,
and have but Lay-communion. (When Murderers are hanged, and Trayters also
quartered, this Canon is laid aside.) I thought a Monastery had been a
desirable place, and not bad enough to serve Traitors and Murderers instead of
the Gallows.

. 68. CXLV. A Council at Apanna under Sigismund King of Burgundy, recited such
like Canons as the former: save that there is one just such as our Fanatics in
England would have made, who would not worship God in any Temple which the
Papists had used to their Mass: so faith Can. 33. The Temples (or Churches) of
Heretics, which we hate with so great execration, we despise to apply to holy
uses, as judging their pollution to be such as cannot be purged away. But such
as by violence they took from us we may recover.
This is just Down with the Idolatrous Steeple Houses. But if they would give
the Nonconformists in England leave to Preach in such places, they would be
thankful, and think God will not impute the sin of others to us.

. 69. CXLVI. A Council at Sidon of 80 Bishops, was called by the Emperor
Anastasius, where they agreed to curse the Council of Calcedon, and Flavianus
Antioch, and Johan. Paltens. were banished for refusing. This was about the
time when the foresaid Fight was between the Monks and the Antiochians, when
the Carcasses of the Eutychian Monks were cast into the River.

. 70. About this time was the fall and rise of the Papacy. The fall, in that
the Eastern Empire made little use of Popes, but did their Church work without
them. Their rise, in that the Western Empire and Africa being divided between
many late conquering Kings, they all labor to settle themselves in a peaceable
possession by pleasing the Clergy, who, as they found, had no small interest in
the People.

. 71. CXLVII. Hincmazus in the life of Remigius, tells us of a strange thing
done at a Council at Rhemes; that one Arian Bishop challenged all the rest to
dispute, and when Rhemigius came in would not rise to him, but upon the shadow
of Remigius passing by him, he was struck dumb, and falling at Rhemigius feet,
by signs asked pardon, and was suddenly cured of his dumbness and Heresy,
confessing the Deity of Christ.

. 72. CXLVIII. Because Johan. Nicopolit. did but call some of his Bishops to
flatter the Pope, and to curse all Heresies and Acacius, this is put in among
the Councils. But the Council. Tarracense, Anno 516. seems more regardable
(under Theodorick) where the Clergy are restrained from buying cheaper and
selling dearer than others, (this it seems grew to be a part of their
privileges.) and from judging causes on the Lords day: And it is ordered that
the Bishop send a Presbyter one week, and a Deacon another, to the Country
Congregations, and to visit them himself once a year, because by the old
custom he is to have a third part of all the Church profits.

Qu^r. Whether a Bishops Diocese then was any bigger than one of our
Corporations with the Neighbor Villages? And if one of our Bishops that have
above a thousand Parishes, or many hundred, should have the third part of all
(or as other Canons say the fourth,)
Would not our Bishops be yet richer men than they are? Especially if they that
confine Bishops to Cities, could get a Prince to call no Corporation a City but
one or two in a Kingdom, and be as the Abuna is in Ethiopia, that has the
thirds of all the Ecclesiastical benefits in the Empire. This Council had ten
Bishops.

. 73. CXLIX. The Concillium Gerundense is next, Anno 517. under Theodorick; It
consisted of seven Bishops, (Bishoprics began to grow so big, that they could
not so suddenly meet by the scores and hundreds as when every Church was known
by one Altar and one Bishop, as Ignatius speaks.) The seven men made Canons,
that the same Liturgy should be used in the other Churches of that Province as
were used in the Metropolitan Church.
(For formerly every Bishop in his own Church did pray as he thought best,
without Imposed or agreed Uniformity of many Churches, much less of all in a
Nation.) They Decree also that Litanies be used on the Kalends of November. A
Litany then signified a solemn supplicating of God by the People Assembled,
Fasting, Walking, Singing, and Praying, as is used here in the Rogation Week:
sometime they walked to the Memorial of some Martyr, sometime about the
streets, often bare foot, continuing it with Fasting for certain times. The Last
Canon is, That the Priests say the Lords Prayer twice a Day, Morning and
Evening. (That was a short Liturgy.)

. 74 CL. When Justin was made Emperor, the Bishops turned in the East, and
down went the Eutychians, and a Synod of 40 Bishops at Constantinople resolved
that the Names of Euphemius and Macedonius should be restored into the Dyptick
(their Book of life) and that Soverus should be condemned with his Adherents.

. 75. The Case has been often intimated before; In those times when all the
Empire was in confusion between Eutychians, and the Orthodox, and some
Emperors took one side, and some the other, and some in vain endeavored
peace: The Churches of Antioch and Alexandria were more Eutychian than
Constantinople, though the Emperor that favored the Eutychians were present:
Acacius was Orthodox, but pleased the Emperor so far as to Communicate with,
or not curse and excommunicate the Bishops of Antioch and Alexandria. For this,
as you have often heard, the Pope Excommunicated him, and he so dyed (having done
as much for the Pope.) Euphemius and Macedonius that succeeded were both
Orthodox, and commanded by the Emperor to Communicate with the Eutychians, and
persecuted, and both cast out by him, for not obeying him, as is before
described in that and another such matter: The Pope had required them to blot
Acacius name out of the Dyptick: The Court, Clergy, and People were against it,
thinking it arrogance in one man, to Excommunicate the Patriarch of the
Imperial City that was Orthodox, upon his personal revenge or quarrel: They
obeyed not the Pope: The Pope is against them for not cursing a dead Orthodox
Bishop Acacius: The Emperor was against them for being against the Eutychians,
as the Pope was for not being more against both them, and all that did not
curse them as much as he did, Were not these Bishops in a hard case? Both agree
to their extirpation, and when they were dead to damn their names: But the
Clergy and People agreed not. The Eastern and Western Churches were hereby*
divided. (that is, Constantinople and Rome.) Is not the Christian World
beholden to such Tyrants and proud pretenders for its distractions and
calamities? That will rather divide the Christian World, than endure the names
of Orthodox persecuted Bishops to be honored when they are dead, because they
would not blot out and abhor the name of another dead Orthodox Bishop their
Predecessor, when the Pope cursed him for Communicating with an Eutychian. I
know the Papists will cry up, The preservation of the Faith and Purity* But if
ever any did overdo the Pharisees, that reproved Christ for eating with
Publicans and Sinners: If ever any became Plagues of the World, by being Wise,
Orthodox, and Righteous overmuch, and made use of the name of Faith, to destroy
Faith, Love, Humanity, and Peace, and cried up the Church, and Unity, as
Catholics, to destroy the Church and Unity, and crumble it into Sects and
Factions; it is certainly these men.

But the East and West that thus began their separation by the spirit of Pride
and Envy that Rome had against the growing greatness of Constantinople,
continue their Division to this day; And it has been no small cause of the
ruin of the Empire and the Christian Cause, and delivering all up to the
Mahometans: Which the good Pope seemed to judge more tolerable (with all the
streams of Blood that went before and after) than that he should not have his
will upon an Orthodox dead man's name. Sure fiut Iustitia and ruat Coelum, was
devised by these precise over righteous Popes.

. 76. Evagrius (lib. 3.) says, that Justin came to the Empire as follows:
Amantius was one of the Greatest men, but incapable of the Empire, because he
was an Eunuch: He gave a great sum of Money to Iustine, to hire the Soldiers
to choose Theocritus, his bosom friend: Iustine with that Money hired them to
choose himself, and quieted Amantius and Theocritus, by murdering them both.
And because Vitalianus (that had usurped and laid down,) was then great, he
drew him in to be a Commander near him, and so got him killed. But he becomes
Orthodox, and says Binnius, p. 374. The great Patron and Defender of the
Catholics, by the singular favor of God obtained the Empire. So zealous was
he, that he caused the tongue of Severus the Eutychian, Archbishop of Antioch,
Evagr. l. 3. cap. 4.
to be pulled out of his head, for cursing so often the Council of Calcedon, and
such like things. Paulus succeeded him and dyed, and Euphrasius succeeded him,
who was buried in the ruins of the City*
it being cast to the ground by a terrible Earthquake, and the remnant burnt
with fire from Heaven, in the lightning that went with the Earthquake. Evagr.
l. 6. cap. 6.
But Euphremius Lieutenant of the East, did so charitably relieve the People,
that in reward they chose him for their Bishop. Reader, Was not a Bishopric
then grown a considerable preferment, when the Emperors Lieutenant of the East
took it for such, even to be Bishop of a City that lay on heaps?

. 77. CLI. Things being now on the turn, a Synod at Jerusalem votes up the
Council of Calcedon, and cry down Soverus.

. 78. CLII. And another at Tire do^^ the like.

. 79. CLIII. And another Council at Rome again decrees the damnation of the
three dead Bishops of Constantinople, Acacius, Euphemius, and Macedonius: Ann.
518.
What, never have done with dead men? Methinks stark dead might satisfy Pride
and Malice.

Binnius says, that the Eastern Church yielded to blot out of the Dypticks the
names of Acacius, Euphemius and Macedonius (not the Heretic) and the
Emperors, Zeno, and Anastasius: The Pope makes himself the Governor of Hell;
where he thought these Emperors and Bishops were. But it is worse than Savage
malice that will not cease toward dead men! And if the Empire yielded, they
showed more love of Peace than Rome did, but not much wit, in giving a Prelate
of another Princes Dominion such power to defame, and force them to defame
their Emperors and Patriarchs at his pleasure.

. 80. The zeal of Justin to eradicate the Arians, and take all their Churches
from them, provoked Theodorick (though a just man, that gave the Orthodox
liberty, protection, and encouragement, yet an Arian, and gave the Arians
liberty also) to resolve, that he would use the Orthodox in Italy, as Justin
did the Arians in the East: Whereupon John, Bishop of Rome, with some others,
went as his Ambassadors to Constant to mediate with Justin for the Arians
ease. Anastastus in lib. Pontif. says he obtained it: Binnius out of Gregor.
Taron. says the contrary: which is more probable. However by going on such a
Message for real Heretics, it appears with what sincerity the Popes
prosecuted the dead names of the three Orthodox Constant. Bishops, on pretense
of zeal against Heresy: When their interest urges them,
Let the World be set on fire rather than you shall speak favorably of an
Eutychian: But when interest changes, Rather than they in Italy shall suffer,
John goes to Constantinople for favor to the Arians. Suppose he did not
speed: What went he thither for? On this provocation, Theodorick, on other
quarrels, put to death Symmachus, and his Son-in-law Boethius, Roman Senators
and excellent men, and imprisoned John when he returned, and in the prison he
dyed: And when he was dead the Arian King chose Foelix the fourth Pope: Was
this Election valid? If yea, he that is strongest, though a Heretic may choose
the Pope? If not, than their succession was then interrupted.

. 81. CLIV. We have next a great Council called Ilerdense of eight Bishops
ander Theodorick. to mend some faults of the Clergy, viz. That they that
Minister at the Altar abstain from man's blood, Can. 1. That they that commit
Adultery, and take Medicines, or give them to cast the Birth, or that Murder
the Child, shall abstain from Communion seven yea^^: And if they be of the
Clergy, must be content with the Communion and the Chore without their Office,
Can. 2. None shall draw an offender, though a Servant out of the Church, (nor
say other Canons out of the Bishops house) that flies thither for any Crime
(The Church and Bishops Houses had the privilege to be the harbor for
murderers, Thieres, Traitors, etc.) But Can. 11. allows the Bishop to punish
them more than others (with longer forbearing the Sacrament) if those of the
Clergy murder one another: O severe Laws!

. 82. CLV. Next we have a Council (not all so great, having but six Bishops)
under Theodorick, that ordered that the Epistle should be read ^^fore the
Gospel, and some things like others.

. 83. CLVI. And four ordinary sayings, were said over again by fifteen Bishops
at Aules.

. 84. It seems the Semepelagians then much prevailed: For one Lucian made a
Recantation of his Errors to a Council of 17 Bishops at Lions, as urged by
them: One of his supposed errors was, that Some are deputed to death, and
others predestinate to Life; and another, that none of the Gentiles before
Christ were saved by the light of Nature: And now he owneth: That in the order
of times, some were saved by the Law of Grace, others by the Law, of Moses, and
others by the Law of Nature; But none ever freed from Original Sin, but by holy
blood.

And Faustus Rheg. against the Praedestinarians was owned by the foresaid
Council at Arles, Bin. p. 386.

. 85 Theodorick made the Clergy Subject to Civil Judicatures; allowing them
their liberty of Religion: When he dyed (of whose Soul in Hell they pretend
visions) his successors Athalaricus, for the quiet possession of his Kingdom,
at the Clergies Complaint of this as an injury, was pleased to restore them to
their Dominion, and Freedom from subjection.

. 86. Justinian succeeding Justin, (by his choice) Compileth the Laws into
better order then before, and to the great advantage of the Orthodox Clergy,
and against Heresies: And yet two things trouble the Papists in them. 1. That
he seems to pretend to a Power over the Church Laws. But their shift is to
say that he did it but as a defense and Confirmation of the Bishops Laws. 2.
That he restored the Names of his Predecessors' Zeno, and Anastasius, with
Notes of Piety and Honor; whom the Popes had presumed to damn as Eutychians or
Toleraters of them: But for this they say; It was the doing of Tribonianus, a
Heathen Lawyer, that did the work: As if Justinian would let him do what he
disliked, and not correct it.

. 87. When Justinian resolved to set up the Council of Calcedon; he Cursed
Severus, and deposed the two Patriarchs, Anthimius of Constantinople, and
Theodosius of Alexandria, for they were both Eutychians: Severus had persuaded
them rather to forsake all worldly interest, than the Faith (as he called it.)
But here I cannot see how the Historians (as Evagrius) will be reconciled with
themselves; that say, Justin caused Severus Tongue to be pulled out; and yet,
that he afterward persuaded Anthimius at Constable. unless he did it only by
writing.

. 88. So far was Iustinian's resolution, and power, from reconciling the
Bishops of the Empire, that he could not keep Unity, in his own House or bed:
For his Wife Theodora, was firm to the Eutychians; and cherished them, as he
did the Orthodox, and both with so great constancy, that Evagrius suspecteth
they did it politickly, by agreement, (for the peace of the Empire) that each
party might be kept in dependence on them.

. 89. An Insurrection in Constantinople occasioned the killing of about thirty
thousand, Evag. l. 4. c. 10. 11. and Nicep. l. 17. c. 7.
says Evagrius c. 13. out of Procopius.

. 90. About this time a miracle is spoken of so credibly, that I think it not
unfit to mention it: Hunnerikus in Africa, being an Arian, Goth persecuted the
Orthodox Bishops, especially on pretenses that they refused to swear fidelity
to him, and his Son: (say some) They were forbidden to preach, and for not
obeying, or for Nonconformity; the Tongues of many were cut out, who they say
did speak freely after as before: It were hard to be believed; But three
Historians I have read that all profess that they saw, and heard the men
themselves, viz. Victor Vticensis Aenaeas Gazaeus de Anima, and Procopius in
Evagrius, l. 4. c. 14. Who yet adds that two of them upon some sinfulness
with Women, lost their speech and remained dumb. Nicephor. says Rem cum
foeminis habuissent: Alas, that miracles will not prevent Sin.

. 91. In the eleventh year of Justinian, Athalaricus being dead, and Theodatus
a Kinsman succeeding, this man loving books better than War, yielded up Rome
and the Crown to Bellisarius Justinians General; and so after the Goths had
kept it 60 years, it was restored without a drop of blood, says Evagrius l. 4.
c. 18. But when Bellisarius went away T^tilas came and recovered Rome: and
Bellisarius returning, recovered it from the Goths again, c. 20.

. 92. Three several Countries about that time, received the Christian Faith,
much through the Reverence of Justinians power, viz. The Heruli, the Abasgi,
and they of Tanais, Evagr. c. 19. 21. 22. But the grievous Wars and Successes
of Cosroes the Persian in the East, and a plague of fifty two years
continuance, which destroyed a great part of mankind, took down much of the
Roman Glory.

. 93. CLVII. A second Concillium Aransicanum Condemned Semepelagianisme,
propagated by Faustus Bishop of Rhegrim, after Prosp. who had been of the
contrary mind.

. 94. CLVIII. A Concilium V^sense of ten Bishops, decreed that Parish Priest
should breed up young Readers, who may marry at age; that the parish Priests
shall preach, or in their absence, the Deacon read a Sermon: That Lord have
mercy on us be often said: That Holy, Holy, Holy, be often said: That, As it was
in the beginning, etc. be often said.

. 95. CLIX. A Synod of 16 Bishops at Carpenteracte decreed that the Bishop of
the City should not take all the Country Parish maintenance to himself.


. 96. CLX. As Faelix was chosen Pope by Theodorick; so Athalaricus claiming the
same power, chose after him Boniface the second: An Arrian Heretic made the
Pope. Others not willing of the Kings Choice, chose Dioscorus; so there are two
Popes: But Dioscorus quickly dies; and Boniface Condemns him when he is
dead, on some pretense of money matters, as Simoniacal; and calling a Synod,
appoints Virgilius a Deacon, his Successor. After he calls another Synod,
to undo this Choice, upon his Repentance; and shortly after dies himself.
Agapetus that followed him, absolveth the dead man Dioscorus, whom Boniface
Cursed: such work did Church-Cursing then make, as the Engine of Ambition.

. 97. CLXI. A Council of 8 Bishops at Toletane, said somewhat again to keep
Bishops from Women, and from giving their Lands from the Church.

. 98. CLXII. John was put by Justinian, to call a Council at Rome on an odd
occasion (which shows what it was that Bishops then divided the the World
about) In the days of P. Hormisda,
there was a Controversy (de nomine) whether it might be said: One of the
Trinity was Crucified: Hormisda declared against it, because they that were for
it, were suspected of Eutychianisme, (and condemned after) But the Nestorians
laid hold of this, and said: If we may not say that one in the Trinity was
Crucified; then we may not say: Mary was the Parent of one in the Trinity:
Justinian sent about this to John; and he and his Synod said contrary to
Hormisda: That we may say, that one of the Trinity was Crucified. Does not this
plainly confess the blood and doleful divisions, caused by Bishops and Monks
for so many Ages about Nestorianisme, and Eutychianisme, was but about a Word
which in one sense is true, and in another false; which one Pope says, and
another unsaith. When Binnius after Baronius has no more to say for excuse of
this; but that It a mutatis hostibus arma mutarinecesse fuit: O for honesty:
Against diverse Enemies we must use diverse Weapons. But Sir may you use contrary
assertions, as Articles of Faith? Or do you not here undenyably tell us that
Ambiguous words, and Clergy Jurisdiction, have been the causes of almost all
the Divisions, and Ruins of the Church for 1300 years?

. 99. Justinian took a better Course to Convince, and Reconcile dissenters,
than violence. There is in Binnius, p. 409. etc. The recital of a disputation,
or Friendly Conference between the Eutychian Bishops, and Hypatius, with others
of the Orthodox: The most clear, rational, and moderate of any thing, that I
find before that time explaining their Controversy: And which fully proves
what I have all along said as my Opinion, that indeed the world was confounded
by unskilful men about hard Ambiguous words and by a Lordly, selfish, imposing
Spirit, in too many of the Captains of those Militant Churches: And that clear
distinguishing explication of Terms, with humble Love, would have prevented
most of those divisions.

In that Conference, these things are specially notable. 1. That the Oriental
Bishops called Eutychians, condemned Eutyches, and yet honored Dioscorus, who
defended him; so that it was a quarrel more about Men, Names, and Words, than
Doctrine. 2. That Hypatius, and the Orthodox (though they were not willing to
suspect Corruption in Gyril's Epistles, yet) could not deny but Cyril used
Eutyches words, that is asserted, one Nature of God Incarnate, after the Union.
3. That yet they proved that Cyril also held two Natures: (but say the
Eutychians, he only held two before the Union considered intellectually) so
that either Cyril was an Eutychian, or else his unskillful speaking, as both
parties did, set the world together by the Ears. 4. That unrighteous partiality
greatly prevailed with the Orthodox Bishops, and Councils of these times; when
they could (as Hypatius here did) put a Charitable Construction upon the same
words of Cyril, for which they condemned so many others, who as his obedient
followers, held what they did of Cyril's. Vnam naturam Dei incarnati:
They say, We neither Condemnit, nor Justify it. If they had used that
moderation with all others, all had been in greater peace. 5. That they say so
much of the falsifying of Athanasius Epistle to Epictetus, of Appollinaries
Epistle fathered on Julius, of the falsehood of the Dyonysius Areopag. etc. As
he tells us, that we must not be over credulous in trusting to writings
ascribed to the Ancients. 6. That Nullus ex antiquis recordatus est ea; was
thought a good argument against the Authority of Dyonisius Areopagita. 7. They
instance in the difference between the Greeks and Latins about the words
Hypostasis, and Persona, which set the Latins on condemning the Greeks as
Arrians, and the Greeks it on condemnthe Latins as Sabellians, till Athanasius
that understood both Tongues, persuaded them, that their meaning was the same
(And necessity urged Athanasius to reconcile them) which Greg. Nazianzene and
other peaceable men afterward promoted; And yet Hierome was judged a Heretic
after, for disliking the word Hypostasis.) And yet must Hard ambiguous words
confound and divide the Churches still?

8. They confess that Cyril, [idem dicebat esse substantiam, quod naturam vel
subsistentiam] and ideo in duodecim Capitulis suis pro duabus substantiis vel
naturis duas subsistentias posuit. Reader, If this great Learned Voluminous
Prelate had no more accurateness of Speech than to confound substance,
nature, and subsistence, and put them one for another; what could be expected
from the multitude of poor unlearned Prelates, that took his name for their
guide, and cried out in Council, Great is Cyril; We believe as ^yril: And what
then? Could the confusions of the World be caused by (between Nestorians,
Eutychians, Severians, Monothelites and Catholics) such a strife about words
as Cyril had occasioned?

9. Note that Hypatius and the Orthodox here maintain, that Flavianus himself
subscribed as much for one Nature as Dioscorus could have desired: And that the
Controversy lay in a syllable, Whether Christ were one Person? Ex duabus
naturis, or, In duabus; the Eutychians said Ex, and the rest said In: and
Flavian yielded to Ex, and the Synod of Calcedon accepted both:
Neque illi istos reprehendunt, neque isti illos tanquam unius honoris
arbitrati voces utrasque, quando and unam naturam Dei verbi incarnatam, non
renuit beatus Flavianus in confessione quam propria manu subscripsit, dicere,
etc. Where Flavians words are recited to Theodosius, Et unam Dei verbi naturam
incarnatam tamen dicere non negamus, quia ex utrisque unus idemque Dominus
Jesus Christus est. And would not this much used to all other, have healed all
the Churches?

10. Note that Hypatius and the Orthodox make not Cyril infallible, but say,
that his Synodical Epistles they receive, not as his, but the Synods: But for
the rest, Neque damnamus eas, n^que suscipimus.

11. That the Controversy was Logical (p. 413.) how Unition makes or
denominateth one.

12. Note that they expressly say, Vbi Vnitio dicitur, non Vnius significatur
rei conventus (so all say) sed duarum v^l plurium and diversarum secundum
naturam: Si erga dicimus Vnitionem, procul dubio confitemur, quod carnis
animatae and verbi: sed and hi qui duas naturas dieunt, idem sentiunt. And if
this be true, were they not all of a mind and knew it not?

13. Note that the Eutychians took Theodorets Anathema, Nestorio and Eutycheti,
with a Valete added for a slur, and a deceit: and Hypatius was fain to intimate
a blame on the Council, that had not the patience once to hear such a man as
Theodorite to open his judgment, but cried out only, Curse them, curse them,
and he interprets Theodorets Valete, as saying, Now take my Bishopric if you
please.

14. In a word, had this Light and Love been used by the Bishops, which this
Conference expresses, it had prevented much Confusion in the Churches, scorn
against the Bishops, hardening of the Infidels, and destruction of Christian
Love and Peace. And though the Eastern Bishops yielded not, many of their
followers did.

. 100. CLXIII. They say an African Council sent to Justinian to procure the
restoration of their Liberties, which the Vandall Arians had taken away
(Justinian having recovered Africa.)

. 101. Pope Agapetus was forced by King Theodatus to go on an Embassy to
Justinian, to turn by his Armies from Italy: which he did, and not prevailing
(having rejected Authimus) he dyed there, Anno 536.

. 102. CLXIV. Menna being made Bishop of Constable. a Council was there called.
Sure no Roman Presided; for there was then an Inter-regnum: But was it then a
good Council? As please the Pope! Yet so impudent is Binnius as to say, that
Menna was the Popes Vicar, and his Legates presided, when there was no Pope on
Earth.

The work of this Council was to condemn and curse Authimus, (a Bishop of
Constable. got in by the Empress, and put out by the Emperor) with Severus late
Bishop of Antioch, and Peter Bishop of Apamea, and Zoaras a Monk, as being
Acephali, that is, Severians, or Eutychians, as they were variously called:
Severus and Peter have cruel persecutions also laid to their charge, (for
persecution has but its time.) The Emperor hereupon makes a fevere Law
against them, sending them by banishment to solitude, and condemning their
Books to the fire, and judging their hands to be cut off that writ them. (We
may see whence our Church History mostly comes, even from the stronger side,
that had power to burn all which they would not have known.)

Two things in this Council offend the Romanists: 1.
That John Bishop of Constantinople is called Patriarcha Oecumenicus: 2. That
Euphemius, Macedonius, and Leo are named, and Leo last: the two first having
been damned by the Popes so often since they were dead. And they have no better
remedy, but to say that some ill Greek hand has falsified the Councils. (Is
that all the certainty we have of recorded Councils.) If you suspect the
Greeks, why may we not also suspect the Romans; especially in the days of
wicked Popes?

The People cried out here, Quid manemus in communicati? Binnius notes, that
from the time that Macedonius their Orthodox Bishop was ejected, the faithful
Catholics withdrew themselves from the Communion of impious Timothy that was
put into his place.
Note 1. that this Macedonius is he that the Roman Pope so often damned alive
and dead: 2. That the Peoples separation from bad possessours of the Bishops
Seats, was then an usual and justified thing.

. 103. CLXV. A Council at Jerusalem having notice of what was done at Constable. do
the same against Authimus, Severus, Peter, and Zoaras.

104. A^astasius in lib. Pontisic. says that the Arian King Theodatus
corrupted with Money, made Silverius Pope, And at the same time the Empress
Theodora promised the Popedom to Vigilius, on condition he would restore
Authimus and those that the Council had damned: which he promising, the Empress
sent him with Letters to Bellisarius to see it done. Silv^rius was but a
Subdeacon, and Vigilius an Archdeacon, son to Pope H^rmis^^a: Silverius was
accused by many witnesses of Treason in offering to let in the Go^hs into the
City, and was banished, and Vigilius pu^ in his place, and had the keeping of
him and famished him to death, and succeeded him. So that here were a while two
Popes at once, one chosen by an Arian, and the other a perfidious Murderer,
that undertook to restore those that were ejected as Heretics: And was this
man to be communicated with any more than Acacius, Euthymius, or Macedonius?

. 105. Theodosius a Bishop of Alexandria refusing to subscribe to the Calcedon
Council, was ejected and banished by Justinian, and Paulus as Orthodox put into
his place: who being accused of Murder was also put out and banished, and
Zoilus put into his place.

. 106. But Theodosius is said by Liberat. and others, to have first deserted
the place,
being wearied with the Peoples Wars: The case was this: A new controversy was
started, whether the body of Christ was corruptible or incorruptible? The
division about this was so great, that the Church divided, and chose two
Bishops: Those that were for the incorruptability, had Gainas for their
Archbishop, and were called by the other Phantasiastae, and Gainites: Those
that were for the corruptability, had Theodosius for their Archbishop, and
were called by the other corrupticolae, and Theodosians. Most communicated with
Gainas; but the Soldiers were for Theodosius. Liberatus Breviar. c. 20. says,
that they fought it out, and The People fought for Gainas, many days; and being
slain by the Soldiers lost their greatest part: but yet a greater number fell
of the Soldiers: And Narses was overcome, not with Arms, but with the concord
of the Citizens: The women cast stones on them from the tops of the Houses; But
the Soldiers did that by Fire which they could not do by Arms. And says
Liberatus, That City is divided with that Schism to this day, some being called
Gainites, and Phantasiasts, and the other Theodosians, and Corrupticolae.

. 107. The Case of the Orthodox Paul that succeeded him, is described by
Liberatus, c. 23. He intending to put out Elias the Master of the Soldiers as
a Heretic, by a power received from the Emperor, one of his Deacons
discovered it to Elias by Letters. Paulus fearing the fate of Proterius, and
getting the Letters, got Rhodo the Emperors Augustal Magistrate to secure the
Deacon, who by one Arsenius Murdered him: for which alleging the command of
Paulus the Bishop, and the Emperors command to obey Paul, the Emperor put to
death the Magistrate Rhodo, and deposed Paulus, and put Zoilus in his place.

. 108. There is in Liberatus, c. 22. An Epistle of Pope Vigilius, in which he
performs his promise to the Empress,
and owneth Communion with Authimus, etc. and denies two natures, etc. But
Baronius and Binnius take it for a forged Epistle; when as we have scarce a
more credible Writer than Liberatus.

. 109. Niceph. l. 17. c. 26. says, that Vigilius, when Rome was again taken by
the Goths, fled to Constantinople; There he fell out with Mennas the Orthodox
Patriarch (Cui Agathon Papa, quod nunquam antea factum est, manus imposuit,
says Niceph. c. 9.) and eo insolentiae progressus est, he grew so insolent
that he Excommunicated Menna for four Months: which so provoked Justinian, that
he sent men to apprehend him, and when he fled to the Altar, they dragged him
away, and Anastasius in lib. Pontif. says, They tied a rope about his neck and
dragged him about the streets till the evening, and made him glad to communicate
with Menna. But at last he was restored to his Bishopric.

. 110. Two heinous crimes Evagrius charge Justinian with: 1. Insatiable
covetousness and extortion. (But he used to do very great good works.) 2.
Encouraging Murderers (see Evagr, l. 4. c. 31.) so that men were no where safe,
but they that killed them, as in an act of manhood were protected.

. 111. And though he was the great Zealot for the Orthodox against all
Heretics, he dyed a reputed Heretic; in so much that Evagrius over boldly
pronounces, That when he had set the whole World on tumults and sedition, and
at last received what was due for his lewd practices, he departed into endless
torment prepared for him by the just judgment of God, l. 5. c. 1. An arrogant
sentence. And will Orthodox Zeal for the Church do no more to save a Soul from
Hell.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Controversies de tribus Capitulis, and the Fifth Council called
General, and many other.
1. EVagrius l. 4. c. 38. tells us, that Justinian fell from the right Faith,
affirming, That the Body of Christ was every way incorruptible; and that he
wrote an Edict, in which he said, That the Body of the Lord was not subject to
death or corruption; that it was void of natural and unblameable affections,
etc. which Opinions he purposed to compel both Priests and Bishops to
subscribe: but they put him off, as expecting the Opinion (not of the Pope,
but) of Anastasius Bishop of Antioch, then famous for his skill and gravity:
But Anastasius would not be moved, and Justinian threatening to banish him, dyed
before he did it, or published his Edict. So hard was it then to escape Heresy.

2. So hot was Justinian in this Error, Some late Historians tell us of
incredible numbers of the Egyptian Christians whom Iastinian destroyed in this
blind zeal for Christ, but I find no such thing in the old Historians though it
was too bad.
that he ejected Eutychius that resisted him at Constantinople, says Niceph.
l. 17. c. 29. Iulianus Halicarnas. and Gainas raised this, holding that
Christ's hunger, thirst and suffering, were all immediately voluntary, and not
as ours by natural necessity. They said that as we all hold Christ's Body
incorruptible after his resurrection, so did they before it, yet consubstantial
with ours. The Orthodox distinguished of Corruption:

1. Blameless Passions of Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, etc. 2. Dissolution of the
Bodies Elements. The first they said Christ was subject to before the
Resurrection, but not after (nor we:) The later not at all. The Heretics that
held the contrary, were called the Aphthartodocitae, says Nicephorus, [Qua
multi mortales correpti sunt, non solum ex eis qui honores and magistratus
gesserunt, sed eitam Hierarchae primarii, and Monachi vita illustres, and ex
sacerdotali ordine alii, ut ipse Imperator Justinianus.] The Hereticators and
Damners are divided about Iustinian's soul and name; some place him yet in
Heaven, and others in Hell. If it be true that Nicephorus says of him, my Vote
should go against the Damners, viz. [Nil tale de Christo propter summum ipsius
erga illum amorem and desiderium audire constituerit: Princeps etenim iste
tanto in Christum pietatis ardore flagrasse, ab eis qui res illius memoriae
posteritati mandarunt, dicitur, quanto alius, qui ante eum imperium
obtinuerunt, nemo, termaximo illo Constantino semper excepto: Itaque propter
vehementem in Christum amorem illius gratia multa etiam violenter fecit, etc.
And if it came from vehement love to Christ, all I will say is, 1. Let him that
is without Error, be the first in damning him. 2. But it was just with God to
leave him to be numbered with Heretics, who was so blindly zealous in
executing the Sentences of Hereticating Prelates: (The Case of Nestorius, and
many others before.)

3. In his time the Indian Auxumites turned to Christ, and Justinian joyfully
sent them a Bishop.

And I take it for more dishonor to the Bishops than to him, that Nicephorus
says, c. 32. [In Pontifices quos admodum de Sodomorum haeresi insanire
compererat, acerbe, seu potius faede, Justinianus animadvertit. --

And it is noted (ibid.) that in a Famine he commanded Flesh to be sold in
Lent; but the People would dye rather than buy it, and break their Customs.

4. CLXVI. An. 540. A Council of 25 Bishops at Orleance, made some Canons of
Discipline.
The 3d Canon about Ordaining Bishops, lays down the old Rule, [Qui
praeponendus est omnibus, ab omnibus eligatur,] that is, of the Clergy and
People: (The Churches yet were no greater than that all the People could join
in choosing the Bishop.) The 10th Canon dissolveth incestuous Marriages made
after Baptism, but not those made before (as if the reason were not the same!)
The 27th Canon finding some too Jewish in keeping the Lord's Day, that would
not use a Horse or Chariot to carry them, nor would dress Meat, or do any thing
to the adorning of their Houses, or themselves, forbids only grosser
labors, which hinder the holy duties of the day.

5. CLXVII. The Canones Barcinonenses, speak of the order of Liturgy, that
Clerks must cut their Beards, but not shave their Beards, and such like.

6. CLXVIII. (To pass the Council. Byzazenum, as having nothing noted of it)
Anno 541. a Council. Arvernense decreed (under King Theodebert) one Canon,
which, if practiced, had been worth many Kingdoms, Ca. 2. [That no one seek the
sacred honor of a Bishop by Votes, but by Merits: nor seem to get a Divine
Office,
rebus, sed moribus: and that he ascend to the top of that eminent dignity, by
the ELECTION of ALL, and not by the FAVOR of a FEW: That in choosing Priests
there be the greatest Care, because they should be irreprehensible, who must
rule in correcting others, etc.

7. CLXIX. An. 545. Another Council at Orleance under King Childebert, among
other Orders, says, Can. 3. that the Synod forbids the Citizens to
celebrate Easter out of the City; because they must keep the principal
Festivities in the presence of the Bishop,
where the holy Assembly must be kept. But if any have a necessity to go
abroad, let him ask leave of the Bishop.] This Canon, and many other to the
same purpose tell us, that then the Infidels were still so many, that a
Bishop's City-Church could all meet in his presence in one place.

The 5th Canon decrees, that a Bishop shall be ordained in his own Church
which he is to oversee; which implies, that then ordinarily there was but one
Episcopal Church. And indeed it was long before the Country meetings were any
other than Oratories or Chapels that had no Altars, nor any but the Bishops
Church.

Much ado many Councils made to keep Priests and Bishops from Wives, and to
restrain them from Fornication.

8. CLXX. In a Synod at Constantinople, An. 547. the business was debated de
tribus Capitulis.

9. Here the occasion of this stir must be noted. One Theodorus Bishop of
Caesar. Cap. was an Eutychian, but for his skill in business, was great with
the Emperor. He thought if he could but cast any slur on the Calcedom Council,
it would justify their Cause: And the Emperor being speaking against the
Eutychians, (or Acephali) Theodorus told him that he might easily bring them
all in, if he would but condemn Theodorus Mopsuestenus, and the Writings of
Theodoret, and the Epistle of Ibas against Cyril, which the Council had
received, it would satisfy them. This seemed to the Emperor a happy way of
concord (the Empress putting him on) and so he set himself earnestly to effect
it. These three men had been accounted Nestorians, and two of them had written
smartly against Cyril as heretical and turbulent; but yet renouncing Nestorius
they were received, and justified at Calcedon against their Accusers. And if
one may judge impartially by the Evidence that is left us, they seem to have
been far wiser and better men than the majority of the Bishops of those times:
But neither Learning, Piety, nor soundness in the Faith, is any security in
such times, against Hereticaters, that can but get the upper hand and major
vote. And Ignorance usually is most proud and loud, most confident and furious;
and such can easilier make wise men pass for Heretics, than learn of them to
be wise. But the final judgment sets a strait.

When Justinian was earnestly set upon this Project, the Defenders of the
Calcedon Council perceived themselves in a difficulty; should they condemn
these three men, they would seem to condemn the Council (about which there had
been such a stir in the Empire:) And they should seem to justify the
Eutychians, and to strengthen them: And if Council were against Council, it
would dishonor Councils: And if they should refuse the Condemnation, they
would seem to desert Cyril, and the first Ephesian Council, and perhaps might
be called Nestorians; but, worst of all, they should displease the Emperor, and
might occasion his favoring the Eutychians. Therefore they took this prudent
course, to put off the business to a General Council, and to delay till then
the Emperors attempts.

But the Emperor did first publish his Edict, in which after the Confession of
his Faith, and praise of the four Councils, he adds ten Curses
(Anathematisms, according to the Custom and Religion of those times) of which
the three last are against the tria Capitula, or the Councils seeming
approbation of the three forenamed men. The Bishops resisted a great while, but
at last were forced to submit.

10. CLXXI. To this purpose Vigilius Romanus had a meeting of about 30 Bishops,
Constant. an. 547.
where Vigilius yielding was called a Desertor, as prevaricating to please the
Emperor; he got them to give in their reasons on both sides in writing, and
then gave all to the Emperor's party, and persuaded the rest to silence and
communion till a Council, because it was not a Controversy about Faith, but
about Persons.

11. The Emperor's Party (acted by Theodore Caesar*) got some Bishops to
assemble at Mops^est. An. 550. to prepare a Condemnation of their former Bishop
Theodore, by saying that his name was not in their Book.

12. CLXXII. King Childebert called another Council at Orleance, where many old
disciplinary Canons were repeated: Among others, Can. 9. That no Layman be
made a Bishop without a years time to learn his Function. (You may conjecture
what Scholars they were then!) Can. 10. That none get a Bishopric by gifts, or
seeking; but with the will of the King, by the election of the Clergy and the
Lay People.
Can. 11. Also (as the ancient Canons have decreed) let none be made Bishop to
an unwilling People (or without the Peoples consent) nor let the People or the
Clergy be inclined to consent, by the oppression of persons in power (which is
not lawful to be spoken:) But if it be otherwise done, let the Bishop be for
ever deposed from his obtained honor of Pontificate, who is ordained rather by
force, than lawful decree.
C. While one Bishop is living, let not any other be there made Bishop; unless
perhaps in his place, who is ejected for some capital Crime. Can. 21. Though
all Priests, and others, must be careful to relieve the Poor with necessaries,
yet especially every Bishop must from the Church-house as far as they can,
administer necessaries for food and raiment to such as are in weakness both in
his Territories and his City, etc.]

Note I. Were those Bishoprics any bigger than our Parishes of Market Towns
with the Chappelleries? where 1. All the Laity met to choose the Bishop. 2.
Where the Bishop could know and relieve all the Poor. 3. And this from the
domus Ecclesiae, which was but one.

II. Our Nonconformists plead, that according to these ancient Canons, 1. Those
Bishops are no Bishops who came not in by any choice or consent of the People
or Clergy, but by power are imposed on the most unwilling. 2. That those
Ministers that were never deposed for any Crime, are not to be forsaken by
their Flocks, nor imposed persons thrust into their places, accepted by the
People, while the first has true right.

13. CLXXIII. We come now to that which they will needs call the fifth General
Council at Constantinople, An. 553. of 165 Bishops. In which let these
particulars be noted. 1. That Iustinian's Letters or Formulae were first read,
in which he expressly affirms, that it was the Emperors that called the former
General Councils, and he that called this. 2. That he lamenteth the divisions
which former Councils had left unhealed: saying, [The followers of Nestorius
and Eutyches made so great trouble in the holy Churches of God, that divisions
and schisms were made in them, and the Churches had no Communion with one
another: For no man that traveled from one City to another, did presume to
communicate, nor any Clerk that went from one City to another, to go into the
Church.] Here was lamentable separation indeed. 3. That Justinian was made
believe, that these divisions would be healed, if the tria Capitula of the
Council of Calcedon were but condemned: For the Eutychians did so much boast of
Cyril, being confident that they did but follow him, and his first Ephesian
Council, that if he were vindicated, he thought they would be satisfied. 4. And
he thought that the three Bishops were indeed so far to be condemned, having
disgraced Cyril, and favored Nestorius, and the other was Nestorius's Master.
5. That the receiving and the cursing of the Council of Calcedon, having
hitherto been the great Contest among the Bishops, some were loath now to cast
so great a dishonor upon it, and to give the Eutychians so much cause to
boast; supposing they would but be the more confirmed in their opposition.

14. Note also, that Vigilius Bishop of Rome was then at Constantinople, but
came not to the Council, nor sent any Legate to it: But the Emperor tells the
Council, That when Vigilius Bishop of Rome came to that City, the Emperor
exactly opened to him all things about the tria Capitula, and asked him what he
thought of them; and that Vigilius not once nor twice, but often in writing,
and without writing, anathematized the impious tria Capitula.] And that he had
showed that he was ever of the same judgment, etc.

And they had made Justinian believe, that Ibas in his Epistle denies God the
Word to be made man, and the Virgin Mary to be the Mother of God.]

15. The Emperor's Writing being read, at the next meeting the Council sent to
Vigilius to sit with them, but he still refused, alleging, That there were few
of the Western Bishops there. To which their answer is notable, that [The
meeting of all the rest ought not to be delayed for the Western Bishops: For in
all the four General Councils, there was never found a multitude of the Western
Bishops, but only two or three Bishops,
and a few Clerks. But now you are here, and many Italian Bishops are at hand,
and many of Africa, Illyricum, etc. And if he would not meet them, they must do
it without him. They urged him also with the Emperor's words, that he being
alone, had often in writing, and without writing, condemned the tria Capitula,
and the Emperor desired him but to do that with others, which he had done by
himself. But yet Vigilius would not come: Whether it was because he understood
not Greek, and so should be a contemned Cipher (for he says, They all knew
that he understood it not) or whether it was to avoid the Censure that he had
before incurred, or both, is not known. For you must understand, that Vigilius
had suffered defamation at Rome already, as a Revolter from the Calcedon
Council, for joining herein with the Emperor in the beginning, and his chief
interest lay at home.

16. Theodorus Mopsuestenus Writings are searched; and though he is highly
extolled by many good Authors, yet many passages recited in the Council, and
after by Vigilius, do show either the error of his judgment, or his
unskilfulness in speaking; for they are not justifiable. But if every Papist
voluminous Writer should be damned as a Heretic, whose Writings have more and
greater Errors than the Council gathered out of Theodore Mepsuostenus, it would
be a hard reward for their exceeding labors. When such men as Tostatus,
Aquinas, Scotus, Ockam, Durandus, etc. Bellarmine, Baronius, Suarez, Vasquez,
Cajetane, etc. have spent their days in diligent labors, how easy a matter is
it for a proud idle Drone that does nothing or worse, to gather as many and as
great Errors out of their Works, as were in many then counted Heretics. But
the approbation of God, who pardons failings, will be the comfort of such as
improve their Talents; when the slothful, unprofitable Servant shall be
condemned, and quarrelling with the imperfections of the diligent will not save
them.

It is evident that Theodore and Nestorius acknowledged Christ's Godhead and
Manhood, Soul and Body, and the personal Union of them. But they were none of
them perfect in Logic and Metaphysics, nor so spoke as that no man could
blame their words.

17. Next the words of learned Theodorite are scanned; and many very smart
passages against Cyril are recited: Many verbal Controversies are repeated.
Theodorite is accused for saying, That Mary begat not God in the nature of God;
but Man as united to the Godhead;
That Christ was forsaken, suffered, hungered, slept, was ignorant of that day
and hour, etc. as man, and not as God: That it was not God that was ignorant,
(he meant not as God, or not the Deity) but the form of a Servant, which knew
no more than the Deity revealed: And so of many other properties or acts of the
Humanity, he says, It was not Deus Verbum that wept, that learnt obedience,
etc. meaning only not qua Deus, or not Deitas, for want of care in speaking.
And Ep. ad Ioh. Antioch. (Bin. p. 559.) it is apparent that he also
misunderstood Cyril, and thought he held that by Unity of Natures, the Deity
was properly become very flesh. A severe Epist. ad Joan. Antioch, against Cyril
after his death is there charged on him, in which he with great saltness
rejoiceth in his death, [Miserum illum nec ad similitudinem aliorum dimisit
nostrarum animarum gubernator diutius eorum potiri, quae videntur esse
delectabilia; sed crescentem quotidie viri malignitatem sciens and corpori
Ecclesiae nocentem, quasi pestem quandam amputavit and abstulit opprobrium a
filiis Israel: Laetificabit superstites ejus discessio: Contristavit vero
forsitan mortuos, and timor est ne praegravati ejus conversatione, iterum ad
nos remittant, vel illos diffugiat qui eum abducunt, sicut ille tyrannus Cyri
Ciliciam: Procurandum est igitur, and oportet tuam Sanctitatem maxim hanc
suscipere festinantiam, and jubere collegio mortuos asportantium lapidem
aliquem maximum and gravissimum Sepulchro imponere, ne iterum huc perveniret
and instabilem voluntatem iterum demonstraret: Infernis nova dogmata adferat:
Ibi diu noctuque sicut vult sermocinetur: Non enim timemus ne and illos
divideret -- silet miser invitus: Nudata illus facta alligant linguam,
obstruunt os, fraenant sensum. -- Ideo plango miserum and ploro: Nec enim puram
mihi delectationem fecit mortis ejus denunciatio, sed dolor permixtam: Laetor
and jucundor ejusmodi pestilentia commune Ecclesiae videns liberatum:
Contristor vero and ploro cogitans quod nec requiem malorum miserabilis
susceperit, sed majora and pejora pertentans defunctus est; somniavit enim, ut
dicunt, and regiam urbem perturbare, and tuam Sanctitatem accusare, utpote ea
colentem: Sed vidit Deus and non despexit: Immisit fimum in os ejus, and
fraenum in labia ejus, etc.

Binnius thinks some bad man fathered this falsely on Theodoret, I would hope
so too: But it is strange that the Council fathered it on him, and none did
vindicate him. And the next Charge (Bin. p. 559.) rebukes his Charity, viz.
his Speech at Antioch in the presence of Domnus, [Nemo neminem jam cogit
blasphemare -- non jam est contentio: Oriens and Aegyptus sub uno jugo est:
Mortua est invidia; and cum eo obruta est contentio: requiescant Theopathitae.]
Is not this of the same kind? And this is not denied to be his. Whosoever it
was, it was sad that Bishops should have such minds, and use such words of one
another, especially if it be as I confidently believe, viz. that not
distinguishing the concrete from the abstract, and Qui Deus, from Qua Deus,
they both meant the same thing, and differed but about the aptitude of words,
for want of explication and distinction.

18. In brief, After the reading of many Papers, and Ibas Epistles, the tria
Capitula were condemned, viz. Theodore Mopsuest. and the writings of Theodoret
against Cyril, and Ibas Epistle. And so the Emperor found the Council as
obedient as he desired.

19. But Vigilius Bishop of Rome, who would not come to the Council, now gives
in his Constitutum, or his own judgment upon the whole Case, and that with
great moderation. He first recites many passages of Theodore Mopsuest. which
he renounceth; and he dispraiseth the passages of Theodoret and Ibas, but he
refuses to join in the anathematizing of them, alleging that good men have
their errors, and instancing in many whose errors were noted, and yet their
persons not condemned, especially when they had either recanted them, or better
explained their words: And he notes that it would be a great injury to the
Calcedon Council, to have its own members now thus condemned, that were by them
accepted. [Quid enim aliud est mendaces aut simulantes professionem rectae
fidei Patres in sancta Calced. Synodo residentes ostendere, quam dicere aliquos
ex eis similia sapuisse Nestorio; quorum judicio Nestorium ejusque dogmata
fuisse damnata.]

And soberly he says, [It is not lawful to pass any new judgment on the
persons of the dead, but we must leave all men in the case that death found
them, and in special Theodore Mopsuest. what the Fathers did is evident from
what is said; I dare not condemn him by my sentence, nor yield that any one
else condemn him: but far be it from me to admit his wrong opinions.]

This was the right way: If they had all dealt as wisely and Christian-like,
Counsels had not been the Confounders of the Churches.

20. Nicephorus names many of Origen's Errors that were condemned in this
Council, but it is not found in the Acts. Binnius doubts not but the
Origenists stole them out, and falsified the Records, and also forged those
Epistles of Vigilius, in which the opinion of One Operation is asserted. But
will they allow us equally to suspect such Records as have been kept at Rome?

21. What good this Council did, and how the peaceable Emperor attained the end
that Theodore Caesar. promised him, of uniting Dissenters, I shall tell you but
in the words of Binnius (who follows Baronius in almost all) What Theodore
Caesar. promised, that the Eutychian Heretics called Hesitants, when the three
Capitula were condemned, would receive the holy Calcedon Council, was not
obtained, when this was ended; but rather a most grievous mischief was added to
the Church: For when the Defenders of the three Capitula, with Vigilius the
Pope did not acquiesce in the Councils decree, the whole Catholic Church was
torn by Schism; and which is worse, the Emperor stirred up Persecution, in which
he deposed or banished Vigilius (holding to his Constitutum) Victor. Afric. and
others.

22. I do impartially commend Vigilius' s moderate Constitutum, but I must
needs say that there needs no other instance than Vigilius, that Interest is
a Law to some Roman Bishops, and that their pretenses of Infallibility,
Tradition and Antiquity, notwithstanding they have changed their very Faith, or
judgment of Councils at least, as their wordly motives changed. Vigilius first
flattered the Emperor, and joined with him against the tria Capitula, Conc.
Calced. that is against Theodore Mopsu. Theodoret and Ibas three Bishops, says
Binnius p. 608. [Seeing therefore that before this Council a Schism arose in
the Western and Africane Church, because Vigilius had consented to the
Emperor's opinion, it became necessary, for the avoiding of Schism, Sacrilege
and Scandal, that he should publish his Constitutum, in defense of the tria
Capitula, by virtue whereof the Western Churches should be united, and the
contempt of the Calcedon Council should be avoided, which the Impugners of the
tria Capitula did fraudulently contrive; and that the Universal Church should
learn by this example, that no man that dyed in the true Faith, should be
condemned when he is dead: But, (did Vigilius stop here?) No, says Binnius,
[But when after the end of his Council the Church received yet greater damage,
and the Emperor persecuted them that contradicted the Synod And would not
Papists have Princes do so?
, and it was feared that the whole East would be divided and separated from the
Roman and Western Church, unless the Bishop of Rome approved the fifth Synod,
then Pope Vigilius, in a Cause which could bring no prejudice to the Orthodox
Faith, did well and justly change his former sentence, and approved the Synodal
Decree, for condemning the tria Capitula, and revoked and made void his
Constitutum, which he before published in defense of the tria Capitula. The
prudent and pious Pope (that came to the Popedom by Bribery, Tyranny, and
Murder of his Predecessor) did in this prudently imitate St. Paul about
Circumcision, etc.

O what certainty and constancy is here in the Papal judgment; For a Pope about
one Cause to judge for it, against it, and for it again in so short a time? And
all this upon reason of Policy and State. Did the same so often change, and
prove first true, and then false, and then true again?

But the Papists excuse is, that it was de Personis, non de Fide. Answ. But 1.
Is it lawful to take the same thing for true and false, good and bad de
Personis, as our interest requires? 2. Why are the Persons condemned but on
supposition that their Faith was condemnable? 3. You confess that it was for
the advantage of the Eutychian Faith, and the depression of the Faith of the
Calcedon Council, that the tria Capitula were condemned.

Reader, If all this will not tell thee how much need there is of a surer and
more stable support of our Faith than Popes and Councils, yea and better means
of the Churches Unity and Concord, I must take thee for unteachable: what have
such Councils done, but set the Churches together by the ears?

23. Liberatus in his Breviary says, (c. 3. 10. 24.) that Theodore Mopsu. his
Works were approved by Proclus, Johan. Antioch. the Emperor, the Council of
Calced. etc. But Binnius says, Nimis impudenter and incaute: Yet all
acknowledge Liberatus a most credible Historian, and lived in Iustinian's time.
He says also, that Nefandissimum haereticum Theodoretus and Sozomenus
laudarunt adeo ut hac de causa uterque magnam nominis sui jacturam passus
fuerit, etc. But wise men are apt to think as hardly of such as can cry out
Nefandissimum haereticum against all that speak as unskilfully as this man did,
as of charitable men that praise them for what is good, while they disown their
frailties and imperfections: If it be as he says, many thought that ^heodoret
assumed his own name from this Theod^re, by reason of his high esteem of him,
it is like he had some special worth, though he has many culpable expressions.
And Sozomen is an Historian of so deserved reputation, that it seems to me no
argument of Pope Gregory's Infallibility, that he says, lib. 6. ep. 95.
Sozomenum ejusque Historiam seeds Apostolica recipere recusat; quoniam multa
mentitur, and Theodorum Mopsuestiae nimium laudat, atque ad diem obitus sui
magnum Doctorem Ecclesiae fuisse perhibet.] I think the Author of Gregory's
Dialogues did plura mentiri, and yet that Gregory was Magnus Ecclesiae Doctor.

24. The Controversy whether Vigilius were the Author of the Epistle to Menna,
I pass by: But, methinks, Binnius is very partial to justify so much what he
did after Silverius' s death, as beginning then to have right to his Papacy,
and to give him so differing a Character (from Sanctissimus Papa) before, while
he possessed the same Seat, as these words of his express, [Cum omnium, etc.
seeing that Villainy (or Crime) of Vigilius, did exceed the Crimes of all
Schismatics, by which making a bargain with Heretics, and giving money by a
Layman, he by force expelled Silverius Bishop of the prime Seat, and spoiled
of his Priestly induments (or attire) banished him into an Island, and there
caused him to dye, it should seem no wonder to any man, if a desperate wretch
(homo perditus,) the buyer of another's Seat, and a violent Invader, a Wolf, a
Thief, a Robber, not entering by the true door, a false (or counterfeit)
Bishop, and as it were Antichrist, the lawful Pastor and Bishop being yet
living, did add most pernicious Heresy to his Schism.] Yet this man became the
most holy Pope, by the virtue of his place, as soon as he had but murdered
Silverius, and was accepted in his stead, and then it became impossible for him
to err in the Faith.

25. CLXXIV. Anno 553. A Council was called at Jerusalem by Iustinian's
Command, who sent to them the Acts of the Constantine Council de tribus
Capitulis, to be by them received; the Bishops all received it readily, save
one Alexander Abysis, who was therefore banished, and coming to Constantinople,
say Baronius and Binnius, was swallowed up, and buried by an Earthquake. If
this was true, no marvel if it confirmed the Emperor in his way: But I doubt
the obedient Bishops were too ready to receive such reports.

26. CLXXV. The same year 553. the Western Bishops held a Council at Aquileia,
out of the Emperor's power, where, as Defenders of the Council of Calcedon,
they condemned the fifth Constantine Council aforesaid, and (so says Binnius)
separated themselves from the Unity of the Catholic Church, and so continued
for near an Hundred years, till the time of Pope Sergius, who reduced them.
Were not these great Councils and Bishops great Healers of the Church, that
about condemning some written Sentences of three dead men, thus raise a War
among the Churches? Were Heretics or Hereticaters the great Dividers?

27. But here follows a Case that raises a great doubt before us, Whether
the Pope alone, or all his Western Bishops, when they differ from him, are the
Church? After the death of Vigilius, the Secular Power procured Pelagius the
Archdeacon to be made Pope; the Western Bishops disclaiming Iustinian's
Council, and Pelagius obediently receiving it (and the Popedom,) there could
not be three Bishops got that would ordain him, as the Canons required, so that
a Presbyter Ostiensis was fain to do it.

Besides the Question (Which now was the Church?) here are other hard Questions
to be solved.

Qu. 1. Whether Iustinian's Election of a Pope was valid? And if so, Whether
other various Electors may do it as validly?

Qu. 2. Whether a Presbyter's Ordination of a Bishop or Pope was valid? If so,
Whether Presbyters may not ordain Presbyters?

Qu. 3. Whether this Pope was truly Head of the Catholic Church, when his
Bishops obeyed him not?

Qu. 4. Whether it was then believed at Rome itself, and in the West, that a
General Council, approved by the Pope, was either infallible, or necessarily to
be obeyed?

Qu. 5. Whether it be true which W. Johnson, alias Terret, often tells me, That
it is not possible that there can be any Schism in the Catholic Church,
because of the essentiality of its Union?

28. Note that this Pope Pelagius, because his Bishops rejected him and the
Council, got Narses the General to compel them: And then who can doubt but he
was Pope, and they his Subjects?

But Narses scrupled it, lest he should be guilty of Persecution; Iustinian's
Pope Pelagius tells him, it is no sin, and bids him not fear it; for it is no
Persecution which compels not men to sin: but all that separate from the Pope,
and assemble separatedly do sin, and are damned Schismatics; therefore he
desires him to send the Bishops of Aquileia, Milan, and the rest that yield
not, Prisoners to Constantinople. Narses obeys the Pope and Emperor; the
Bishops excommunicate Narses; the Pope writes to him, that it is no news for
erring Bishops to take themselves for the Catholic Church, and to forbid
others their Communion, and counsels him to go on and repress them. And the
Civil Sword and the Ecclesiastical were thus engaged in a Roman War; one Bishop
Sapandus of Ares in France the Pope got specially to stick to him, whom
therefore he commended to King Childebert, etc.

29. CLXXVI. A Council at Paris deposed Bishop Saphoracus for some great Crime.

30. While the Romans were resolving to subject themselves to the Goths again,
because the Pope made Narses their Persecutor, Narses took it so ill, that he
went away from them, but the Pope drew back, and he Bar^nius contradicts
Anastasius and others in this point.
shortly died. Bellisarius also was ruined, and Justinian himself shortly dyed.
Binnius says it is reported that he had no Learning, and thinks that his
Civil Laws were Tribonian's, and his Ecclesiastical Theodorus Caesariensis's.
And says that the Church rejects his Laws of Usury, Churches and
Ecclesiastical Persons, as arrogant Usurpations. Qu. Whether the Roman Power
was then understood by Princes or People?

31. CLXXVIII. Another Synod at Paris repeated nine old Canons:
The 8th was, [No man may be ordained a Bishop against the will of the
Citizens; nor any but whom the election of the People and the Clerks, shall
seek with plenary will; none shall be put in by the command of the Prince, etc.

32. CLXXIX. An. 563. in the time of Pope John 3d. (not he, but) Theodomire,
alias Baronius thinks that Theodomire was Father to (...).
Ariamire King of the Sueves, called a small Council at Braccara in Galicia,
where eight Bishops opened so much of the Priscillian Heresy, as may tell us
it was worthy to be detested (not much unlike the Manichees;) and many old
Canons they recited: But I could have wished that they had not made a man's diet
the note of his Heresy, and a sufficient cause of his conviction and
damnation. The Priscillianists (as these say) would not eat flesh, nor herbs
boiled with flesh.
This Council ordered that if any that abstained from flesh, did not eat herbs
boiled with flesh, he should be taken for an Heretic. This is not conformable
to Paul's Rules or Spirit.

33. This Council ordered that none should be buried within the Church, which
Binnius well sets home. And whereas Priscillian taught that in the Liturgy [the
Pax vobis, Peace be unto you] should be said only by the Bishop, and Dominus
vobiscum by the Priest, the Council contradicted him. 1. We see here what
Trifles divided men! 2. We see that yet the Churches usually were no bigger
than met in one place with the Bishop, or might do: For it is supposed that
every Church-Assembly had a Bishop present to say his part.

34. Thedomirus the Suevian King, under whom this Council was held, was the
first of that race that turned Orthodox; all the Sueves before him (with the
Goths) having been Arrians.

35. CLXXX. Anno 566. The contest about choice of Bishops grew sharp. King
Clotharius made one Emerius Bishop Santoniensis; the Canons had before decreed
that Kings should choose none, but all the People and the Clerks, and the
Metropolitan ordain him. The King's Bishop is deposed by a Council. Santoniense,
of which Leontius of Bourdeaux was chief. They sent the King word of it by a
Presbyter: The King filled a Cart with Thorns, and laid the Priest on them, and
sent him into Banishment, and forced the Bishop to submit to his will.

36. That it may be known that neither Popes,
Councils, nor consenting Bishops divided Diocesses and Parishes, here Binnius
gives us at large, first Constantine's divisions in Spain, and next the fuller
division of King Wamba. Bin. p. 649, etc.

37. CLXXXI. At Tours in France (eight Bishops) in a Provincial Council,
revived many Canons of the old matter, (to keep Bishops and Priests from Women)
Can. 13. The Bishop may keep his Wife as a Sister, to govern his house: But
Can. 20. Priests that will keep Wives, must have some Witnesses to lie in the
same Chamber, to see that they lie not with them. And Can. 14. Episcopum,
Episcopam non habentem, nulla sequatur turba mulierum, etc.

Can. 21. They say, [Those that the Law commands to be put to death, if they
desire to hear the Preacher, we will have to be convicted unto life, (that is,
not to dye:) For they are to be slain with the sword of the mouth, and deprived
of Communion, if they will not observe the Decrees of the Seniors left them,
and do despise to hear their Pastor, and will not be separate.] Some Sectaries
among us are of the same mind, against putting penitent Malefactors to death.

38. CLXXXII. Anno 570. There was a Council at Lions of Fourteen Bishops, who
recited six Canons to restrain the Vices of the Clergy: Binnius, out of Greg.
Turon. tells you the occasion was, that one Salonius and Sagittarius, as soon
as they were made Bishops, being then at their own will, broke out into
Slaughters, Murders, Adulteries, and other wickedness. And Victor Bishop of
Tricas. keeping his Birthday, they sent a Troop with Swords and Arrows, who
cut his Clothes, beat his Servants, and carried away all his Provision, leaving
him with reproach: The King Gunthram hearing of it, called this Synod, which
found them guilty, and deposed them: They tell the King that they are unjustly
cast out, and get his leave to go to the Pope, John 3d. The Pope writes to the
King to have them, as wronged men, restored, (this was the Papal Justice and
Reformation:) The King chideth, but restores them; but they grew never the
better afterward, but asking pardon of Bishop Victor, he forgave them, and for
that was afterward excommunicate.

39. CLXXXIII. An. 572. a Council was called under King Ariomire at Braccara of
12 Bishops: They are mostly forbidding Bishops to take money for their
Ordinations, Consecrations, and other Actions. And the first Canon requires
them to walk to all their Parishes, and see that the Clerks did things rightly;
that Catechumens learnt the Creed, and to preach to the People to forbear
Murder, Adultery, Perjury, False-witness, and other mortal Sins, to do as they
would be done by, and to believe the Resurrection, Judgment and Recompense
according to Works.

40. CLXXXIV. An. 572. a Concilium Lucense did receive from Martin Bishop of
Braccara 84. old Canons, of which the 67th was against reading Apocrypha,
or any thing but the Canon of the Old and New Testament in Church.

41. After Iustinian's death, his Sisters Son Justinius was Emperor, a sensual
and covetous man, who murdered presently a Kinsman of his own name, upon
suspicion that he was too great; yet he drew up a good Profession of Faith,
exhorting all the Bishops to agree in it: But Chosroes, King of Persia, invaded
his Empire, because the Greater Armenia (which was then under the Persians, as
the Lesser was under the Romans) to avoid the Persians persecutions, had
revolted to the Empire, and destroyed their Rulers: The Persians conquered so
much of the Eastern part of the Empire, and Iustine's Soldiers made so little
resistance as drove him out of his wits; and his Wife, by entreaty, got the
Persians to make a Truce. Tiberius was then made Caesar, and afterward Emperor
upon Iustine's death; and Justinian his Captain repelled the Persians, and
recovered much of what they had conquered.

42. An. 576. Diverse Kings of France by War among themselves destroyed
Churches, and confounded all; and a Council at Paris was called, but in vain,
to have persuaded them to Peace.

43. After Benedictus, Pelagius 2d was Bishop at Rome; Tiberius an excellent
Emperor quickly dyed, and by his choice Mauritius succeeded him. Pelagius (by
Gregory his Deacon) wrote against the Bishops that would not condemn the tria
Capitula: And when all his writings prevailed not, he got Smaragdus the
Exorchate to force them by the Sword: (The great remedy which Rome has trusted
to.)

44. CLXXXV. M^^veus Son and Heir to Chilperic King of France, marrying his
Uncles Widow, offended his Father, and fled to St. Martin's Church at Tours,
and forced Bishop Gregory to give him the Sacrament. The King could not get the
Bishop to deliver him up; he fled, and the King called a Synod at Paris to
judge Pretextatus a Bishop, whom he accused for marrying him, and confederating
with him.

45. CLXXXVI. The two Bishops forenamed, Salonius and Sagittarius, being again
accused of Adultery and Murder, and being freed by professing Repentance, King
Guntheramus called a Cubilone Synod, and accused them of Treason, and so
deposed and banished them.

46. CLXXXVII. An. 582. King Gunthram called a Synod at Mascou, to revive the
old Canons for restraining the Lust and Vices of the Bishops and Clergy.

47. CLXXXVIII. An. 583. A Council. Brenacense is called, to try Gregory Bishop
of Tours, falsely accused of charging the Queen of living in Adultery with a
Bishop; an Archdeacon and a Deacon bore false Witness: but all came to light,
and Gregory was cleared by his Oath.

48. CLXXXIX. An. 587. A Council at Constantinople increased the
Church-divisions which continue to this day, wherein John Bishop of
Constantinople was decreed to be called, The Universal Bishop, which Pope
Pelagius could not endure* O what has this Question done to the World, Who
shall be the chief or greatest? So much of the image and work of Satan has
been found in the professed Servants of a crucified Savior, and in those that
have worshipped the Cross!

In this Synod Gregory Bishop of Antioch was tried, and acquitted of a false
Accusation of Incest with his Sister another man's wise.

49. Pelagius writes against John's Universal Title, saying, [Universalitatis
nomen quod sibi illicite usurpavit, nolite attendere, etc. Nullus enim
Patriarcharum No not the Roman.
hoc tam profano vocabulo unquam utatur: quia si summus Patriarcha Universalis
dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen caeteris derogatur. Sed absit hoc, absit a fidelis
cujusquam mente hoc sibi vel velle quempiam arripere, unde honorem fratrum
suorum imminuere ex quantulacunque part videatur. Quapropter Charitas vestra
neminem unquam suis in Epistolis Universalem nominet, ne sibi debitum subtrahat
cum alteri honorem offert indebitum. Adversarius enim noster Diabolus qui
contra humiles saeviens sicut Leo rugiens circuit, quaerens quem devoret, non
jam, ut cernimus caulas circuit. -- Omnia qui soli uni Capiti cohaerent,
videlicet Christo, per electionem pompatici sermonis ejusdem Christi sibi
studeat membra subjuga^e. Nec mirum quod ille tentater qui initium omnis
peccati scit esse superbiam, etc. And so he goes on, exhorting them rather to
dye, than to submit to the Title Universal, and resolving Excommunication
against the User of it.

50. Binnius says, It is ridiculous hence to impugn the Primacy of the Church:
But Qu. 1. Is it not impudent after this, for them to use the Title of
Universal? Qu. 2. Does not this allow us to separate from them that usurp it?
Qu. 3. Does not Pelagius here plainly distinguish between the place of Prime
Patriarch which he claims, and Universal Bishop or Patriarch which he
damneth. Qu. 4. Does he not describe this damned Usurpation, to be a subjecting
all Christ's members to himself? Qu. 5. Does not the Pope now use both the name
and thing as far as he can attain it? Qu. 6. Did not Pelagius and Gregory know
that John did no more intend to put down all other Patriarchs or Bishops by
this Title, than the Pope does? Qu. 7. Does not the Pope now claim that as by
Divine Right, which John claimed but as of Humane? Modesty can deny none of
this.

51. CXC. An. 587. Nine Bishops at Lions repeated six old Canons about Women,
etc.

52. CXCI. An. 589. King Gunthram finding all things grow worse, and that all
was long of the Bishops only, (says Binnius) called a Council at Mascou,
where the stricter keeping of the Lord's Day was commanded.

53. Here Binnius notes that Priscus is called Patriarch, and that the Bishops
of Venice, Istria and Liguria, continuing still separate from Rome, chose
Paulinus Bishop of Aquileia their Patriarch, [Quem sibi loco summi Pontificis
supremum Antistitem constituerent.]
Qu. Did the Bishops then believe that the Pope's Universal Government was
essential to the Catholic Church? And that none were the Church but his
Subjects?

54. CXCII. King Gunthram, An. 589. by a Council at Valence, settled his
Benevolences on the Churches.

55. CXCIII. An. 589. At Toletum King Recaredus called a Council, and renounced
Arrianism, and recited several Canons; among others, that Bishops and Priests
Wives might dwell with them, but not lie with them. And they lament and condemn
the practice of such as kill their children, appointing them sharp discipline
without capital punishment. (Had the Church power to free Murderers from death,
as they long did, Was this holy Reformation?)

The 11th Canon says, That they found that in many Churches of Spain, men
filthily and not regularly did Penance, that they might sin as often as they
would, and be as often reconciled by the Priests, etc. Many reforming Canons were
here made. There were 67 Subscribers besides the King, and of diverse Cities two
Bishops, which was unusual.

56. CXCIV. (Passing by a meeting at Rome) Another Council at Narbon was held
by Recaredus, who brought over the Goths from Arrianism.

57. The Emperor Mauritius, though a great and excellent person, was ruined by
the mad and uncurable mutinies of his Soldiers, and at last, with his Family,
cruelly murdered by Phocas, one of his Captains; a terrible warning to Princes
not to trust too much to Armies.

58. All this while the opposers of the Calcedon Council kept up, and were
divided in the East into many Parties among themselves: Among others, the great
Peripatetic Johan. Philoponus was their most learned Defender, writing with
such subtilty, that the Natures really two, were to be called One Compound
Nature, as the Soul and Body of a man are, as (says Nicephorus) was not easy
to be answered (by which, how much of the Controversy was de Nomine and de
Notione Logica, let the Reader further judge;) he that will see some of his
words, may read them in Niceph. l. 18. c. 45, 47, 48. his Notions made men call
him a Tritheite.

59. Iacobus Zanzalus being a great Promoter of the Party, many ever since have
from him been called Iacobites: And the divided Parties that opposed the
Council, called the other Melchites, that is Royalists, because they took them
that followed the Council, to do it merely in obedience to the Emperor, (for it
was not the Pope then that was the Master of Councils.

60. Among the Armenians also some raised the like Heresies about the Natures
of Christ, some thinking his Deity was instead of a Soul to his Body, etc. To
which they added superstitious Fasts, and worshipping the Cross, and such like,
not pleading Reason, but old Tradition for their Errors, saying they had them
from Gregory, vide Niceph. l. 18. c. 53, 54. But I must go forward.

61. Pelagius dying, Gregory called Magnus, succeeded him at Rome: He continued
the Controversy about the Title of Universal Bishop, writing many Epistles
against it: He flattered Phocas the murderous Tyrant, with a Laetentur Coeli
and exultet Terra, etc. yet was one of the best and wisest of their Bishops. He
sent Augustine into England, who oppressed the British Church, and converted
the Saxon King of Kent. He introduced more Superstitions, and greatly altered
the Liturgy. Of which read Mr. T. Jones of the Hearts Sovereign.

62. CXCIV. A Concilium Hispalense of eight Bishops recited three Canons.

63. CXCV. Mauritius before his death, desired Gregory to call a Synod at Rome,
to draw in the Western Bishops that separated, and to cast them out if they
disobeyed:
which he did, and they refusing his Summons, Severus of Aquileia, and other
Bishops were ruined. They thought God destroyed Mauritius for persecuting them.
Gregory thought God would have them destroyed as Schismatics. The Bishops of
Rome for near an hundred years were forced the more to please the Emperor,
because their own Bishops had cast them off, and set up another Head against
them.

64. CXCVI. An. 590. A Council. Antisiodorense made diverse Canons against
Superstitions, and some too superstitious (as that Women must not take the
Sacrament in their bare hands, etc.)

65. I find it so tedious to mention all the little Synods, that henceforth I
shall take but little notice of them, but of the greater only.

One under Recaredus at Caesar-Augusta, made three Canons about the Arrians.

One in Numidia displeased Gregory.

66. A Council at Poitiers was called on occasion of two Nuns, daughters to the
King of France, that broke out of the Nunnery, with many more, and accused the
Abbess, and got men together, and stripped her stark naked, and drew her out, and
set all France in a Commotion, and were forced to do Penance.

A Council was called at Metz, to reduce the Bishop of Rhemes convict of
Treason (for Bishops that were Traitors or Murderers were not to dye.)

A Synod at Rome under Gregory absolved a Priest of Calcedon condemned by John
of Constantinople; what one did, the other undid.

An. 597. Under King Recaredus, 13 Bishops made two Canons for Priests
Chastity, etc.

Another under him, An. 598. A Council: Ostiense made two such more.

An. 599. A Council at Constantinople did we know not what.

An. 599. Under King Recaredus, 12 Bishops at Barcinon made four Canons against
Bishops Bribery, etc.

A Council of 20 Bishops, 14 Presbyters, and 4 Deacons at Rome made a Canon for
Monks.

Another there, An. 601. against a false Monk.

Another at Byzacen against a Bishop.

Another in Numidia about a Bishop and a Deacon.

67. Gregory dying, Sabinian succeeded him, who reproached him, and would have
had his Books burnt as unsound, says Onuphrius: And, says Sigebert, Gregory
appeared to him in a Vision, and reproving him for that and Covetousness,
knocked him on the head, and he dyed.

68. Boniface 3d succeeded, chosen by Phocas the Murderer, who hating his own
Bishop of Constable. Cyriacus, ordered that Rome should be the chief Church.

69. A Council at Rome forbad choosing a Pope, till the former had been three
days dead, because they sold their Votes for money.

70. Boniface the 4th is made Pope, and Phocas gives him the Pagan Temple,
called Pantheom, for Christian Worship. In his time, Phocas was killed by
Heraclius, as he had killed Mauritius.

71. An. 610. A Council at Toletum, under King Gundemar, about the Bishop of
Toletum's Primacy, which the King setleth by Edict.

72. A Council at Tarraca under King Sisebutus took the shortest way, and only
confirmed what had been before done for Priests Chastity.

73. Deus dedit was next Pope, in whose time the Persians conquered Jerusalem,
and carried away the Bishop, and (they say) the Cross.

74. Boniface 5th succeeded: Heraclius the Emperor is worsted by the Persians,
who would not give him Peace, unless the Empire would renounce Christ, and
worship the Sun; Heraclius overthrows them; Mahomet now rises, and makes a
Religion of many Heresies.

75. At a Synod at Mascou, Agrestinus accused Columbanus of Superstition, for
Crossing Spoons, etc. but was refelled.

76. Seven or eight Bishops at Hispalis, condemned the Eutychians, and called
them Acephali.

CHAP. VIII.
Councils held about the Monothelites, with others.
1. BEing come to the Reign of Pope Honorius at Rome, who was condemned by 2 or
3 General Councils for a Monothelite Heretic, (as Vigilius was by his own
Bishops for an Eutychian) and having showed you what work both the heretical
and hereticating Bishops and Council made in the world about (not only (...),
but) (...), one Nature, and the condemning of dead men; I shall next show you
what work they made also about the words, [One Operation, and One Will,] or
[Two Operations, and Two Wills.] Reader, Would thou think that there were
venom enough in one of these words, to poison almost all the Bishops in the
world with the Plagues of Heresy, or Heretication and Contention?

2. The old Controversy still keeping the Churches all in pieces, some being
for two Natures after Union, and for the Calcedon Council, and others against
it, and but for one Nature after Union: Cyrus, Bishop of Alexandria, was told,
that it would unite them all, if they would confess One Operation, and One Will
in Christ, or at least lay by the talk of One and Two, and use the words, [Dei
virilis Operatio.] The Operation (and Will) of Godman. CXCVII. He therefore
called a Synod at Alexandria, in which this was decreed (called Satisfaction.)
For they said that Dei virilis signified two Natures, and so they thought they
had at last hit the way of concord, which neither the General Council of Ephesians.
1. Ephesians. 2. Constant. 2. Calcedon. Constant. 3. had found out: but all set the
Bishops but more by the ears.

Cyrus sent his Decrees to Sergius Bishop of Constantinople, Sophronius Bishop
of Jerusalem persuaded the silencing of the names of [One] or [Two] Operations
or Wills. Sergius sent the Case to Honorius to Rome; Honorius rationally
persuaded them to use neither the one word, nor the other, (One or Two)
foreseeing that a new quarrel was arising in these words, and (little knowing
how for this he was by General Councils to be Hereticated, when he was dead)
persuaded them to a silent Peace. It is but few Popes that were so wise and
peaceable; and this one must be a Heretic for it, or General Councils be
fallible, and much worse.

3. Because (knowing the effect of the old unhealed Cause) I foresee that such
men will go near to Hereticate me also when I am dead, for condemning
Hereticating Incendiaries in the Nestorian, Eutychian, and Monothelite
quarrels; I will recite the words of Binnius himself, who says the same that I
have said from the beginning, (though I justify him not from
self-contradiction.)

Tom. 2. p. 992. [Honorius, fearing (which after came to pass, and which he
knew had fallen out in former Ages about the word Homoousion and many others)
lest that Contention should grow to some great Schism, and seeing withal that
Faith might be safe without these words, he was willing to reconcile both
Opinions, and withal to take out of the way the matter of Scandal and
Contention. Writing therefore to Sergius, he advised him to abstain from the
word [One Operation] lest they should seem with Eutyches to assert but One
Nature in Christ; and yet to forbear the word [Two Operations] lest with
Nestorius, they seemed to assert Two Persons. (A Slander contrary to his
words.) I again say, If all the Hereticating Bishops and Councils had followed
this discretion and moderation, O what had the Church escaped!

Yet they are fain to stretch their wits to excuse his words elsewhere, [Unde
and Unam Voluntatem fatemur Domini nostri Jesus Christi.] But it is certain that
in some sense it is One, and in another sense Two.

4. The Emperor Heraclius interessed himself in the Controversy, Binnius says
by the fraud of Anastasius Patriarch of the Iacobites, he was deceived, Animo
defend^ndi Concilium Calcedonense. The Iacobites were Eutychians, the greatest
enemies of the Calcedon Council; and it is strange then how they deceived him,
to defend it by destroying it.

But, says he, [While he, besides his place and office, by the persuasion of
the Devil, was wholly taken up in defending questions of Faith by his own
judgment, etc.] Here you may see what the Papists Clergy would make of Kings
and all Laymen: If they be wholly taken up in defending questions of Faith by
their own judgment, they pronounce them to be persuaded to it by the Devil.
Error is from the Devil; but sollicitous searching after the defense of Truth,
is liker to be of God. But they must not do it by their own judgment: By whose
then? By the Bishops no doubt; What Bishops? General Councils. And had not the
Emperors long enough followed Councils, and banished such as they condemned,
till, while they almost all condemned one another, the world was scandalized at
the odious Divisions and Cruelties of the Church? But must they follow Bishops
without using their own judgments about the Case? What, as their mere
Executioners? Must the Princes of the world act as Brutes, or Idiots, or
Lictors? Was this the old Doctrine, Let every Soul be subject to the higher
Power, etc?

5. CXCVIII. King Sisenandus (the second that had all Spain) called a Council
at Toletum of all his Kingdom, An. 633. of 70 Bishops, who made many good
Canons for Faith, Order, and Reformation; the last is a large defense of the
King against Rebellion: But they order that when a King is dead, the Prime Men
of the whole Nation, with the Priests, by common consent, choose another, that
retaining the Concord of Unity, there should be no strife through Force or
Ambition.

And they decree the Excommunicating of wicked Kings that live in great sin;
which I doubt whether the fifth Commandment forbid them not to have done, it
being a purposed dishonor.

6. CXCIX. Another at Toletum was called 636, by King Chintillane, which went
the same way; Kings were Rulers here, and not Popes.

7. CC. Another at Toletum, An. 638. by the same King to the same purposes.

8. The Emperor Heraclius published an Edict for the Monothelite Opinion,
called his Echtesis; and Sergius Constable. joined in it.

9. Sergius dies, and Pyrrhus a Monothelite succeeds him.

10. Severinus is chosen Pope, but being not Confirmed (as was usual) by the
Emperor's consent, he is plundered of his wealth.

11. The Saracene Arabians conquer Persia, and the Eastern parts of the Empire.

12. Sergius before his death called a Council at Constantinople,
which confirmed the Emperor's Faith, and the Monothelite Opinion.

13. An. 640. John 4th was made Pope, who condemned the Emperor's Echtesis;
and, it is said, the Emperor disowned it, and said that Sergius made it, and
desired it might be published in his name.

14. Heraclius dies, Constantine succeeds him, and dies in 4 months,
Heracleo succeeds: After six months the Senate depose him, and cut off his
Nose, and cut out his Mother's Tongue, on suspicion that they poisoned
Constantine, whose Son Constans is next set up.

15. Pyrrhus, thought guilty of Constantine's death, flies into Africa, and
Paulus a Monothelite has his place. Pyrrhus seems converted by Maximus in
Africa, comes to Rome, and is owned by the Pope against Paulus. Paulus
persuadeth the Emperor to publish a Typus, requiring all the Bishops to lay by
the Controversy and Name of One and of Two Wills and Operations of Christ. But
this which was approved in Pope Honorius, is cried down as Heretical in the
Emperor.

Pyrrhus returns to his Opinion, and Paul dying, he is again put in his place
at Constantinople.

Binnius no better answers the Objection, [that the Emperor's Edict said but
what Pope Honorius said,] than by saying, that the time made the difference. It
was good in Honorius's time, and bad after to be quietly silent in such a Case.

16. They say there was a Council in Numidia, another at Byzacene, at Carthage
another of 68 Bishops, about the Monothelites.

17. CCI. Another Council was at Toletum under King Chindascrindus.

18. CCII. The Pope, with one of his little Councils at Rome, (for the foresaid
Italian Bishops yet disowned him, and obey the Patriarch of Aquileia) presumed
to condemn Paulus Constable. and Pyrrhus, and the Emperor's Edict, (Typus:)
Wherefore his Agents at Constantinople were cast out, beaten, their Altar
overthrown, etc.

19. Martin is made Bishop at Rome: He condemns the Emperor's Edict of
Silence (as to Two Wills and Operations, or One.) The Emperor sends for him,
he is brought Prisoner to Constantinople, laid in Irons under several
Accusations; banished and dyed.

Here the Pope pretends that Truth must not be silenced: The Emperor says,
Peace must not be broken for needless words: Quer. Whether he be a Martyr that
suffers for oppugning such Peace? 20. CCIII. His Laterane Council, An. 642. is
very larg^ly recorded, in which the Emperor's Edict, with Cyr^s, Alex, Sergius,
Pyrrbus and Paulu^ Constant. are condemned, and two Operations and Wills
asserted.

21. CCIV. (Passing by a Synod at Orleance) An. 653. another Council was held
at Toletum against incontinent and ignorant Priests. Kings here used to preach
to the Bishops by their Letters and Decrees. Dukes and Lords here subscribed.

22. Eugenius is Pope, and dies; Vitalianus succeeds him: Constans the
Emperor comes to Rome, gives them gifts, and communicates with them. It Is
said he killed his Brother Theodosius, and after was killed himself: Mezentius
usurpeth the Empire. Constantine Pogonatus, Son to Constans, conquereth him,
and reigns. Pope Vitalianus helps him, and therefore expects his help.
Rome stood so much between the Eastern Empire, and the Western Kings (Goths,
Lombards, Franks, etc.) that both sides flattered the Roman Clergy, (though
they often suffered from both.) The Empire to keep them from turning to the
Goths, etc. and the Goths to keep them from turning to the Empire. And they
that had most need of the Popes, most advanced them; and they that had least
need and most dominion, kept them under.

23. CCV. Another Council at Toletum, An. 655. called by K. Recessuinthus, (not
the Pope,) made diverse good Canons for Church Order; among which the tenth is,
that because all the Canons often made, could not keep Bishops and Priests from
Lechery, they tried this additional way, to decree that all their Children
begotten of their Servants, Maids, etc. should be incapable of inheritance, and
should live in continual servitude to the Church.

King Recaredus made a Law, that Bishops and Priests Concubines should be whipped
with an hundred Stripes; and others, that they should be sold for Slaves.

24. CCVI. The King of France (Clodoveus) called his Bishops together at a
Village called Clypiacum, and made a Sermon to them, and they applauded him.

25. CCVII. He called another Synod at Cabilone for Church Order,
where Can. 10. it was decreed, that all Ordination of Bishops should be null,
that was otherwise made than by the election of the Comprovincials, the Clergy,
and the Citizens. (A threefold Lock is not easily picked) Let England understand
this, to be the old Canons and Custom.

26. CCVIII. A Council. Emeritense, called by King Recessuinthus, made more
Orders for regulating Bishops and Priests, etc.

27. CCIX. A Synod at Rome justified a Bishop of Crete, wronged by his
Archbishop.

28. CCX. Another at Toletum under King Wamban, An. 675. sought to reform the
Bishops and Clergy.

29. CCXI. An. 675. the same King Wamban had a Synod at Braccara, for reforming
the Clergy. Can. 5. was to correct the Bishops that had turned Piety into Pride
and Vanity; going to the Solemnities of the Martyrs, with Relics hanged about
their necks, carried in Chairs by Deacons in white, etc. O what has the Pride
of Prelates done in the world!

30. Pope Adeodatus, and after him Donus reigned at Rome, and the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and Antioch were Monothelites, and Constantine needing the West,
having lost the East, took part with Rome.

After Donus came Agathy, in whose time the Bishop of Ravemia, after
long rejecting the Bishop of Rome as heretical, returned to communion with
him. Constantine sent to Rome, to require the Bishop to keep Missionary Legates
at Constantinople, and entreated them to lay by Philosophical Controversies,
and preach the pure Scripture, that the Churches at last might have Peace. (But
alas how long was that counsel vain!)

31. CCXII. Beda says, an English Council met, An. 679. under Theodorus, to
own the Catholic Faith, Bed. l. 4. c. 13.

32. CCXIII. The same year 679. A Council at Milan told the Emperor their
opinion for Two Wills and Operations.

33. CCXIV. A Synod at Rome prepared matter for the General Council against the
Monothelites. This tended to please the separating Bishops of Italy that
divided from the Pope, for seeming to desert the Calcedon Council by condemning
the tria Capitula.

34. CCXV. Now comes the 3d Council of Constantine, called the 6th General
Council, in which 289 Bishops condemned the Monothelites, that were for One
Will and Operation. Constantine Pog. being against them; Macarius Patriarch of
Antioch was the chief of them, who would have consented to name neither One nor
Two, but when they had done all, professed that he would be cast into the Sea,
before he would say there were in Christ two Wills and Operations; thinking
that he held to Cyril, and the first Ephesian Council against Nestorius. George
Bishop of Constantinople deserted him, and he was deposed and banished (to
Rome; no hard Banishment but for ill company.)

35. A long stir there was among them, perusing former Writings; Macarius and
his Party producing many, which others said were falsified (so little certainty
is there often of Copies.) The Epistles of Sergius Constable. and Honor. Romans are
read, which I should think peaceable and honest; but the General Council damned
and cursed them both as Heretics. The Papists say, General Councils may err in
matter of Fact: How much more then in matter of Faith, which is more obscure?
and matter of Fact is much of the matter of our Faith.

No Man's name had so strange a Fate against Hereticaters, as the great
Hereticater Cyril's; who (in this Council in Cyrus artic. and many others) was
fully proved to assert One Nature of God incarnate after the Union] and yet
called Orthodox, and those that said as he, and much less, were damned
Heretics.

Some that confessed two Natures, yet denying two Wills after the Resurrection,
supposing the Humane Will called Natural had been laid by, were here damned
with the rest.

36. CCXVI. An. 681. King Ervigius held another Council at Toletum, for the
Royal Power, and reforming the Clergy.

The Pope had so little to do, and the Kings so much in all these Spanish
Councils, that it is strange Spain is now become so servile to the Pope. Binnius
is forced to confess here (To. 3. p. 110.) that [The study and labor of choosing
fit men to be made Bishops, was in the power or hands of the Gothish Kings,
which by the indulgence of the Roman Popes is in the Spanish Kings even to our
times] which he proves. (O indulgent Popes, who let go what they cannot keep!)

An. 682. Some Synods in France did, we know not what.

37. Leo 2d is made Pope by the Emperor; and because he confirmed the Acts of
this Council, which damns Honorius as an Heretic, the Papists know not which
way to turn themselves.
Baronius would have Leo's Epistle forged. Binnius will have either the Acts
corrupted by Theodore Constable. before they were sent to Leo, or that necessity
compelled him to this hard condition by the iniquity of the times, and that
Heresy else would have revived, etc. so that by their reckoning, they that
rely all on Tradition and Fathers, leave not Fathers, Councils or Traditions
certain for one Age.

38. CCXVII. An. 683. K. Ervigius had another Synod of 48 Bishops at Toletum,
for restoring some guilty of Treasons, securing the King, etc.

39. Constantine Pogon. restored to Rome the power of making Popes without the
Emperor, which the Gothish Kings and other Emperors had long denied them.

40. Benedict 2d is made Pope: A new Controversy in his time is raised. The
Spanish Bishops write an Epistle, in which they assert Three Substances in
Christ, his Divinity, his Soul and his Body, and say withal that a Will begat
a Will, Bin. page 127.
that is, the Divine Will begat the Humane. The numbers of One, Two, and Three,
had so confounded Men in those times, that the words frightened the Pope, and he
expostulated and warned them to take heed in what sense they used them; which
has made it a question whether this Pope were not erroneous himself.

41. CCXVIII. Another Council at Toletum against the Monothelites.

42. Pope John 5th was the first Consecrated without the Emperor since the
liberty granted.

Theodoric King of France called a Council, An. 685. in which he deposed
several Bishops.

43. Constantine Pog. dying, Justinian 2d his Son is Emperor. Binnius says, he
was not sound in the Faith (a hard thing then!) And that he repented of the
liberty granted in choosing Popes, and so ordered that the Exarch of Ravenna
approve them, by which Bribery was used with the Exarchs. And while the
Soldiers, and Clergy could not agree, they were fain to consent to a third,
Conon, to be Pope.

44. Conon being dead, Theodore and Paschal strove for the Popedom, and got
their Parties to stand it out for them. Paschal promised the Exarch a great Sum
of Gold to make him Pope. When they could not agree, Sergius a third was
chosen. The Exarch forced him to pay the Gold, and so he got the Soldiers love
and the Popedom.

45. CCXIX. An. 688. Another Toletan Council writ a defense of their assertion,
that Christ had three Substances, and that Voluntas genuit Voluntatem.

46. CCXX. A Council at Caesar-Augusta, made five Canons; the last was, that
when the Kings dyed, the Queens should lay by their civil Habits, and be put
into a Monastery, and profess Chastity.

47. CCXXI. An. 692. Was the famous great Council called the Quini-Sextum at
Constantinople, by Justinian 2d's Order; why it should not be called a 7th
General Council, I know not. It was called by the persuasion of Callinicus
Constant. to make a full Body of Canons for Practice, because the 5th and 6th
Councils made none. Binnius says, It could not be a General Council,
because the Pope was not there by himself, or his Legates, and yet confesses
that neither was he or his Legates at the first Constantine Council, and yet it
was universal. And why does not another Bishops absence (E. G. Alexand.
Ierusal. etc.) null a General Council as well as the Popes? The Papists rail at
this Council as a Convention of Malignants, (Bin. p. 154.) and against
Balsamon, that defends it as a wicked Greek Impostor; (the word [wicked] in
these Men's writings is a term of art and interest, and no moral term.) They
recited abundance of old Canons, many of great use. One would wonder whence the
anger against them arises. It was per summam nequitiam, says Binnius, that
they called themselves a General Council: And the Holy Ghost was not with them,
because the Pope was not with them, (p. 154, 155.) and they ordained many
things contrary to Apostolical Constitutions, and the Canons of General
Councils. Reader, you see here, 1. How little trust Papists lay on that part of
Tradition which depends on Councils? 2. That it is the Pope (one Man) that is
the certainty of Tradition and Judgment, without whom Councils are nothing. 3.
That if the Pope be absent, all the other Bishops assembled in Councils by the
command of Emperors, may be called Knaves and wicked Malignants. Alas how few
Bishops adhered to the Pope, (when Italy was not yet cured of Separation from
him) in comparison of those that met in these Eastern Councils which they
revile! 4. You see here, how far they are from truth, that say the Universal
Church still cleaved to the Pope, when most (by far) of the Bishops in the
world forsook him! you see Luther was not the first.

48. Note that Tharasius Bishop of Constantinople, An. 692. in the 2d Council
of Nice, tells them, that it was the same Bishops that met in the 6th General
Council at Constantinople, who met again here under Justinian. And were not the
Bishops of the place so near the time competent Judges of the matters of so
notorious Fact? And were the same Bishops an infallible General Council at the
6th Council, and yet all wicked Schismatics or Knaves, and wicked Men, when
they meet again but to make Church-Canons for Reformation? If this do not tell
you how truly Binnius says, in their own judgment [that Councils have just so
much authority as the Pope gives them] what can tell it you?

49. Yea, Binnius makes this Council to be Monothelites: And were the same Men
Orthodox in the 5th or 6th Council ten years before, and Heretics in this? Is
this the constancy of the Church and Bishops Faith?

50. The 13th Canon is one that displeases them; in which the practice of the
Church of Rome in separating Priests from their Wives,
is expressly renounced; and it is decreed that no Priest be required to
separate from his Wife, (so be it they abstain at Fasts and necessary Seasons)
nor any Priest endured to put away his Wife, on pretense of piety; else he must
be deposed.

51. Another is the 16th Canon, that makes Deacons like Overseers of the Poor.

52. The 22d is a hard Canon that Bishops and Priests, ordained with money, and
not by examination and election, be deposed, and they that ordained them.

53. The 36th Canon displeases them also, which confess the Church of
Constantinople's Privileges as equal with Rome.

54. The 38th Canon contains one great cause of the old Confusions, viz. That
whatever alteration the Imperial Power makes on any City, the Ecclesiastical
Order also follow it. Did God make this Law? Are not as many Souls in a Town
that is no City as capable of being a Church as Citizens? It is in the Princes
power to make and unmake Cities: May he accordingly make or unmake Churches?
What if a King will have but one City in his Kingdom, must there be no more
Churches or Bishops? What if there be no Cities (as in many American and
Arabian Countries) must there be no Churches? What if the King will
disfranchize most of the Cities, and another will make every Market Town a
City; must Churches be altered accordingly? If so, O that our King would make
us so many Cities, as the work and the souls of Men need true Bishops, that one
might not have a thousand Parishes without any subordinate Bishop!. But if this
hold, the Emperor might have taken down Rome, and set up Constantinople, or any
other at pleasure.

55. Can. 50. Forbad Clergy and Laity to play at Dice, on pain of Deposition,
or Segregation.

And Can. 51. forbids going to Shows, Jesters, Stage Plays, Huntings.

The 55th Canon commands the Church of Rome to amend their Customs, and not to
fast on Sabbath Days.

Can. 62. Forbids Women's Public Dancings, and Men's and Women's together, and
their putting on Masquers or Players Apparel, or Persons, etc.

Can. 63. Commands the burning of false Histories of the Martyrs, as tending
to bringing Religion into reproach. continual joyful Praises to God, and holy
Exercises, and to use no Horse-Races, etc.

The 67th Canon is against eating Blood.

Can. 72. Nullifieth Marriage with Heretics. (Alas, good Bishops, did you
think the Papists would have Hereticated you as Monothelites, and nullified all
Marriages with you by this Canon? But two Heretics Marriage is not null.

Can. 78. Commands all the illuminate (baptized) to learn the Belief, and
every Friday to say it to the Bishop and Presbyters. (How many Parishes or
hundred Parishes had the Bishop then to hear? Not so many as ours.)

56. The 82 Canon offends the Papists, forbidding the Picture of a Lamb to be
made for Christ as the Lamb of God.

The 90th Canon is (an old one) Not to kneel on any Lord's Day, and that this
begin on the evening before.

P. 155. Binnius reproves them for calling Cyprian Archbishop, and he proves
that Africa then had no Archbishop or Primate.

57. CCXXII. An. 693. was another Toletan Council, called by King Egica: Before
it the King writes a Sermon for them, wherein he tells them, That every Parish
that have twelve Families, must have their proper Governor: But if less, it
must be part of another charge.

58. CCXXIII. An. 694. was another Toletan Council under the same King Egica:
(One would wonder that the Legislative virtue of the Church should be continued
to such fertility and multitude of Laws, as must follow if in all Countries
there be every year a Council: How great must the Volumes of Laws be at last?
) Binnius in his Notes on this Council tell us, That though Paul would have the
believing Husband or Wife stay with the Unbeliever, in hope of Conversion, yet
many hundred years experience has taught us the contrary, (that it tends
rather to hurt than good) and therefore now it must be otherwise, and they must
separate.

59. CCXXIV. Even to those days the number of Pagans and Infidels in most
Countries was the greatest, and the care of good men was to convert them: (And
therefore we read still of so many baptized at age.) A Council at Utrecht
decreed (Willebrood (or Willifrid) and Suibert being Leaders) that the best
Preachers should be sent from the Neighbor Churches to convert the Heathens,
(that was better work, than striving who should be chief, or raging about hard
words.)

60. CCXXV. A Synod at Aquileia, An. 698. condemned the 5th General Council at
Constantinople,
for condemning the tria Capitula of the Council of Calcedon. (O what Concord
Councils caused!)

61. Pope Sergius refusing to own the Council of Constant. at Trul. under
Justinian 2d, the Emperor commanded that he should be brought Prisoner to
Constantinople. The Soldiers of Ravenna (Sergius having paid them the 100 l. of
Gold) hearing of it, rose up and rescued him, and made the Emperor's Officer in
fear beg for his life. By such Obedience Rome kept up.

62. Tiberius the 2d deposed Justinian the 2d, and cut off his Nose, and
banished him. Justinian was restored, and exposed Tiberius to scorn, and killed
him, and banished Bishop Callinicus to Rome for unfaithfulness to his Prince.
John the 6th was now Pope.

63. John the 7th is made Pope (another Council at Toletum under King Witiza I
pass by) he was a Greek. CCXXVI. He gathered a Synod at Rome, to debate
Iustinian's Order for the receiving the Trull. Council. And our English
Willifrid, accused by his King, was here justified, as a Son of that Church:
And a Synod in England received him, when the King was dead.

64. Sisumius made Pope lived but 20 days, and Constantine succeeded him, who
was sent for to Constantinople, and honored by Justinian.

65. About this time (An. 708.) Spain was conquered by the Saracens;
Binnius says, Because King Witiza forsook the Sea of Rome. By which we still
see that Rome was forsaken even by the best Church, such as Spain then was, and
was not the Ruler of the World.

66. Bardanes Philippicus by Rebellion deposed Justinian, and was made Emperor;
and within two years was so used himself by Anastasius, (his eyes put out, and
he banished.)

67. CCXXVII. The Emperor Philippicus and Job. Constant. called General Council
at Constantinople; I may well call it General, when Binnius says, There were
innumerable Bishops, which is not said of any other Council. They all condemned
the 6th General Council, and their Opinion of two Wills, and two Operations.
Where it is manifest,

1. How great a part of the Church regarded not the Authority of Rome.

2. Nor thought a General Council infallible, when innumerable Bishops are
against both.

3. And how strong the Monothelite Party was.

4. And alas, how bad too many Bishops, that can change as fast as Emperors
will have them. For says Binnius (after Baronius) [Thus at the beck of the
Emperor, and at the will of a Monothelite Patriarch, the holy sixth Synod is
condemned, and what they decreed of two Wills in Christ, and two Operations,
and all retracted by the Decree and Subscription of very many Oriental Bishops,
that were in one moment turned from being Catholics, to be Monothelites.] Is
this the constancy of Bishops, and the certainty of their Tradition? But why
have we not the, Acts of this great Council, as well as of the rest?

CHAP. IX.
Councils called about Images and some others.
1. POpe Gregory the 2d is the Man that must set up Image Worship against all
opposition,
rebel against his lawful Sovereign, and confederate with other Princes to
alienate the Western Empire, when the East was almost ruined before, and so to
weaken the Christian Power, that the Turk might shortly win the Empire.

2. To have recited all along as we went on, what new Ceremonies, Formalities
and Orders were invented and brought in by the Popes, and how Doctrine and
Practice grew corrupted, being a thing done already by many others, would have
been tedious here, and besides the design of this writing, which is but to show
how Prelates have used the Church by their contentions about JURISDICTION and
HARD or AMBIGUOUS WORDS; and what has been the work especially of General
Councils. But we cannot tell you well the work of the following Councils,
without telling somewhat of the occasion of the matter.

The Primitive Christians used not Images in the Worship of God, (read Dalaeus
de Imaginibus.) But the contempt of Christianity by the Heathens, occasioned
many to oppose their contempt by glorying in the Cross of Christ, and by making
the transient sign of it with their fingers; and thence they grew to use the
fixed sign of it; and thence to speak of and believe many Miracles wrought by
it; and thence to make the Image of Christ crucified, (which yet Epiphanius
condemned;) and thence by degrees to make the Images of the Apostles and
Martyrs; and thence to make in their Churches the Images of their deceased
Bishops, (till an Excommunicater ar^se of another Opinion, that pulled any of
them down.)

And abundance of Dreams, Visions, Apparitions and Revelations were the
pretended Proofs that prevailed for many such Superstitions, but especially for
Images, and Purgatory, and Prayers for the dead. Among others, an English Monk,
Egwin of Evesholme, chosen Bishop of Worcester, must lead the way, by pretense
of a Vision, (a Dream, no doubt) see Spelman's Council. p. 209. in his own Chart
Egwin says, [That the Virgin Mary first appeared to a certain Shepherd called
Eoves, and afterward to himself with two Virgins, holding a Book in her hands,
and told him in what place she would have him build her a Monastery. The crafty
Dreamer divulged the Vision, and some good Men opposing it, the Pope must have
the hearing of it. The Pope put it to the Oath of Egwin, whether ever he saw
such a Vision or not? Egwin swear it, and the matter was past doubt, (just as
honest Commenius took Daubritius's Prophesies to be of God, because the
melancholy Man swear that they were true.) Hereupon Egwin is sent home, and a
Council called to take Egwin's words again that he had such a Vision, (and in
the end was added, That the Virgin Mary' s Image must be set up in the place.)
The Pope sent to King Kenred and King Offa by Bishop Brithwald, to grant what
the Vision intended; who obediently make over a great part of the Country to
that Monastery, as you may see described in Spelman, Conc. p. 209, 210. in
Charta Kenredi and Offae Regum. And p. 211. in Charta Egwini, who says
himself, that [God being propitious to him, he had in a little time got for the
said Church an hundred and twenty Farms given, as is written and confirmed in
the Charter of that Church. Many Villages are there named, and some great ones,
in the fattest and richest part of the County of Worcester. Was not this a
profitable Dream or Vision? And should we not have many Dreamers and Swearers,
if they could get as much by it as Egwin did? And herewith Images are set up.

3. But Baronius and Binnius question whether Naucler and Bale say true, that
this Council first brought Image Worship into England, because it came in
before with Austin the Monk. To which Spelman Page 217, 218. vide caetera.
well answers, That the use of the Cross in banners and otherwise was here
before, and some Images for Instruction and Commemoration, as Beda's own words
intimate; but not any worship of Images, or worshipping before and toward them.

And Sir H. Spelman says, (proving that Image Worship was not then in use
among the Saxons) that even praying to the Saints themselves was not then in
use, mentioning an old Psalter of his written about the time of the 2d Nicene
Council, in which there were an hundred seventy and one Prayers inserted
between the Sections of the 119th Psalm, and in them all not one name of any
Saint, or the Virgin Mary, much less any Prayer directed to them.

4. If one talk now with our English Papists, they are so loath to own their own
Doctrine and Practice, that they will tell you they hold not the worshipping of
the Image, but of the Person signified by it. But to tell them how commonly
their Writers defend worshipping Images, (if Colere and Cultus signify
Worship) and what Aquinas says of giving the worship of Latria to the Image of
Christ, and to the Cross, though undeniable, yet will not be taken for
sufficient proof. I shall therefore give you here the sense of the Papal Church
in England, in the form of Abjuration which they prescribed to those that they
then called Lollards, as it is found in the Tower Records; and you must take it
in the old English in which it is written, because I do but transcribe it, and
must not alter it, the sense of it being plain and obvious.

Ex Rotulo Clausax. de Anno Regni Regis Ricardi secundi 19 membr. 18 dors.
MEmorand, quod primo die Septembris Anno Regni Regis Ricardi secundi post
Conquestum decimo n^no Willielmus Dynel and Nicholaus Taillour, Michaelus
Poucher, and Willielmus Steynour, de Nottingham in Cancellar. ipsius Regis
personaliter constituti Sacramenta divisim prestiterunt sub eo qui sequitur
tenore. [I William Dynel before yhow worchipefull Fader and Lord Archbishop of
Yhorke and yhowr Clergy, with my free will and full avyside swear to Good and
to all his seyntes upon this holy Gospelle that fro this day forthwarde I
shall Worship Images with preying and offering unto hem in the worschip of the
seintes thae they be made after and also I shall never more despise pygremage
ne states of holy Church in no degree. And also I shall be buxum to the laws
of holy Church and to yhow as mine Archbishop and to mine other ordinares and
Curates and keep yo laws upon my power and meynten hem. And also I shall
meyntem ne techen ne defenden errors conclusions and techynges of the Lollards
ne swych conclusions and techings that men clepyth Lollardes doctryn Ne I shall
her books ne swych books ne hem or any suspect or diffamed of Lollardery
resceyne or company with all wyttyngly or defend in yo matters and if I know
any swych I shall with all the have that I may do ghowe or else your ner
Officers to wyten and of her books. And also I shall excite and stir all tho
to good doctryn that I have hindered with mine doctryn up my power. And also I
shall stand to yhour declaration wych es heresy or error and do thereafter and
also what penance yhe well for that I have don for meyntenyng of this false
doctryn menyne and I shall fulfill it and I submit me thereto up my power. And
also I shall make no other gloss of this mine oath bot as the words stand. And
if it be so that I come again or do again this oath or any party thereof I hold
me here cowpable as an heretyke and to be punyshed by the law as an heretyk and
to forfeit all my goods to the Kings will with outen any othr process of
law. And thereto I require the Notarie to make of all this the which is my will
an instrument agens me ut ex habundanti idem Willielmus Dynel eodem die voluit
and recognovit quod omnia bona and catalla sua mobillia nobis sint forisfacta
in casu quo ipse juramentum praedictum se^ aliqua in eodem juramento contenta
de cetero contravenerit ullo modo.

Here you see whether Papists worship Images, and whether they take it not for
Heresy (which is death) not to worship them, and whether they leave it to men's
liberty or not.

5. Leo Isaurus being Emperor, he took the worshipping of Images to be
Idolatry; and his Empire being invaded by the Saracens, who were scandalized by
the Christians Images, he thought it was a warning to him to reform them; and
he published his Edict accordingly against the Religious adoration and use of
the Images of Angels, Martyrs, or Saints. Gregory, Bishop of Rome, resisted
him, and made Men believe that this was to fight against Christ, and impiously
to despise the Saints. The Emperor commanded his Obedience on pain of
Deposition. He would neither obey nor suffer. The Emperor sent Men to apprehend
him, (some say to kill him,) but he escaped them. The Lombards were stirred up
to make War against the Emperor as an Enemy of Christ:
[The Pope (says Binnius, p. 177. out of Zonaras) entered into a League with
Charles Martell King of France, that, if there were need, he should defend the
Church of Rome against the Emperor (their proper Sovereign) which League being
prudently made, the Emperor abstained for fear of Charles, who by great
Victories was become famous. -- But when the Emperor would not obey the Pope's
pious warnings, but used Tyranny in the East against the Orthodox, then the
Pope anathematized him as a known declared Heretic, and exhorted all his
Subjects in Italy to depart from his obedience.]

Note how Rebellion is the work and strength of the Roman Papacy* But do not
our Papists now disown all this, and profess themselves to be the Loyallest
Subjects?

Answ. If they do, let them join Restitution with Confession. If the Father
seize on another man's Inheritance, and the Son keep it, and disclaim his
Fathers act, this is but a dead Confession.

But hear the next words in Binnius, and judge what Doctrine yet they hold,
[Quo facto Sanctissimus Pontifex clarissimum posteris suis reliquit exemplum;
ne in Ecclesia Christi regere permittantur haeretici Principes, si frequenter
moniti errori pertinaciter adhaerescant.] That is, BY WHICH FACT (deposing the
Emperor in Italy,
and absolving all his Subjects from their Obedience) THE MOST HOLY POPE LEFT
HIS POSTERITY A MOST CLEAR (or Famous) EXAMPLE, THAT HERETICAL PRINCES MAY NOT
BE PERMITTED TO RULE, IF BEING OFTEN WARNED THEY PERTINACIOUSLY ADHERE TO ERROR.]

Note this ye Princes and Rulers that hear of Papal Loyalty.

1. It is not lawful for them, if they can help it, to permit any of you to
reign over Christians, if they do but judge you Heretical. To tolerate you is
against their Consciences, if to depose you be not above their strength.

2. By this Rule you see, that they were virtual Rebels to most or many
Emperors, when they durst not actually rebel. 1. When Constantine the Great
banished Athanasius, it is like they would have taken him for an Heretic. 2.
Constantius and Valens being Arrians, the Pope did virtually rebel against
them, and depose them (if then they were of the same mind as now.) 3.
Theodosius junior, Zeno, Anastasius, and other Emperors they virtually deposed
as Eutychians. 4. Justinian the first they virtually deposed as a
Phantasiastick. 5. Philippicus, and many more Emperors are called by them
Monothelites. 6. Leo and Constantine, and others, are called Iconoclastae. 7.
Many Christian Princes and States, now are called by them Protestant or
Lutheran Heretics. All these, they say, are such as may not be permitted, and
therefore they have interpretatively and virtually rebelled, and deposed them.

3. You see how great a matter this Excommunication is, and how impossible it
is, by it for Kings and States to continue long in any right to their
Dominions: For all men err; and while there are so many Patriarchs, Prelates,
if not Priests that have the power of Excommunicating, all men may expect it:
For he that is orthodox in the judgment of one Patriarch, will be a Heretic in
the judgment of another: while Rome, Constable. Alexand. Antioch, Ierusal. are so
seldom of one mind. If with the repenting Lollard (aforesaid) you will swear to
hold that for Error which the Archbishop of York says is such, perhaps the
Archbishop of Canterbury may be of the contrary mind:
Those called Arrians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites, Iconoclasts, etc.
have in their turns had most of the known Christian World. And he that is
Excommunicate by one, must be received by none.

4. But if it be the Popes prerogative, that though more may Excommunicate
Kings and Emperors, none but he can depose them, and disoblige all their
Subjects, it is pity but those Princes that are in love with such a Papacy
should know by experience what they love: For he that will take Satan for his
Ruler, must bear the inconveniences of his Government.

5. You see here how the Empire was weakened, and so exposed to the Turk; even
by the Rebellion of Rome cutting off the Western Empire from it.

6. And you see what true Subjects they were to the Arrian, Gothish Kings, at
Rome, Spain, etc. who would have deposed them if they could. What wonder if the
Goths kept down the Pope.

6. In these times the Pope met with an English Bishop Wilfrid, who
extraordinarily flattered and adored him, and he accordingly made him Bishop of
Mentz, and his great agent (even about this foresaid English Council which was
to set up Church-Images:) and recommended him to many Christian Princes: And
why was all this? and what was his rare merit? He took this Oath to the Pope
(Bin. p. 178) [In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, in the Reign
of Leo the great Emperor etc. I Boniface, Bishop by the Grace of God, do
Promise to thee, Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and to thy Vicar Pope Gregory
and his Successors, by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the inseparable Trinity,
and this most Holy Body of thine, that I will exhibit all faith and purity of
holy Catholic faith, and in unity of the same faith, God operating, will
persist, in which all the salvation of Christians is proved undoubtedly to
consist; and will no way consent, whoever persuades me, against the unity of
the common and universal Church, but, as I said, will exhibit my faith and
purity and concourse to thee and to the Profits of thy Church, to whom by the
Lord the Power of binding and loosing is given, and to thy aforesaid Vicar and
his Successors in all things, etc.]

Nothing is more meritorious with a Pope, or any Prelate of that Spirit, than
to be absolutely devoted to him, and swear obedience to him: Indeed they that
are fully fallen from God (as Satan is) would be as Gods to the world
themselves, and have all men depend upon them, and obey them.

7. What Arguments moved the Emperor to be against Images, (specially the 2d
Commandment) and how Gregory thought that it was not the Images of God and
Christ, and Angels and Saints that were forbidden, you may see in his Epistles
too long to be here recited.

8. Here Binnius inserteth three Roman Councils. One cursing unlawful
Marriages. Another persuading Corbinianus to keep his Bishopric, who would
fain have laid it down. And a third for Images, against the Iconoclasts (the
Emperor's Heresy.)

9. Gregory 3d succeeds Gregory 2d. He sends his Epistles for Images to the
Emperor. The first Messenger durst not deliver them. The rest were stopped at
Sicily, and kept Prisoners. The Lombards infested Italy and Rome. The Pope
importuneth the French King for help. Alphonsus is made King in Spain against
the Saracens, and first called himself [Catholick King.
] Two Councils, Binnius says, were held at Rome for Images. The Title of the
second is, [Pro Imaginum Cultu, for the Worship of Images: An. 732.
Image Worship was then avowed. But the Eastern Churches did more obey the
Emperor.

10. Pope Zachary coming next, in whose time Italy was distressed by
Luitprandus King of the Lombards, who took four Cities from the Pope, because
he protected Trasimundus Duke of Spoleto: The Romans helped Trasimund, on
condition he would restore to them the four Cities; he performs not his
promise: wherefore Pope Zachary turned to Luitprand, and to win him, Salutaria
illi praedicavit, says Anastasius; and he promised him to restore the four
Cities. For the performance whereof, this Pope traveled to him himself, (noted
by Anastasius as a great act of self-denial, as venturing his life for the
Cause of God, that he would go to the King to ask for four Cities) which he
happily obtained.

11. In this Pope's time the Crown of France was translated from the King and
his Line, to a Subject, his Major Domus.

Charles Martell the great French Conqueror was the Pope's Patron against the
Emperor who was his Sovereign. Gratian. d. 16. q. 1. post Can. 59. tells it us
as a matter of Church-credit, that when he was dead, he was damned to Hell
(much blood, and defending Popes that rebel against their Sovereign are a very
likely proof.) Carolomannus succeeded him, who, after two years Reign, resigned
his Crown, and chose a Monastery. Chilperic that came after, proved very dull
and sensual, and giving himself to his pleasure, let the business of Government
lie most on the hands of Pepin, who was his Major Domus, who thereby got the
power and the respect that was proper to the King, while the King grew into
contempt. (And if Kings cannot keep up their Power and Honor by the mere
dignity of their place, without personal worth and performance; why should
Popes, Prelates and Priests, (whose Power and Honor, as a Physicians, depend
upon their Worth and Work) expect to keep up their Power and Honor merely by
their Offices?) Pepin won first the Nobles of France, and then the Pope; For,
as Baronius and Binnius (p. 197.) tell us, [It seemed to the most Potent Pepin
(Major Domus) No wonder.
and to the rest of the chief Men, and to all the People, that he that had not
the Matter and Force of the Kingdom, should not have the name of a King; and on
the contrary, he that had the Riches, Power and Virtue, should also have the
name of King: And because these Princes and People were Christians, they judged
that these their Councils would neither stand ratified to Posterity, nor be
acceptable enough to God, unless they received Authority and Force from the
common Father and Pastor of the Christian Church, the Vicar of the Lord Christ,
and Successor of St. Peter. Therefore they send Legates to Rome to Zachary, of
whom Bishop Burchardus Herbipol. was the chief, who were to ask the things
aforesaid of him. He consented, and decreed, and wrote back, that Chilperic
being thrust into a Monastery, Were not Monks holy men then?
St. Boniface should declare and anoint Pepin King in Germany and France:
Boniface, Bishop of Mentz, obeyed Pope Zachary, and by the Authority of the Sea
Apostolic, deposed Chilperic, (called also Childeric) and placed Pepin in his
stead. Thus Ieginhart in Vit. Car. Mag. Annal. Franc. an. 751. Paul. Diac. li.
22. Marianus Scotus li. 3. Regino li. 2. an. 749. Sigebert in Chron. Lambert in
Hist. Germ. Otho Frising. li. 5. 21. Ado. aetate 6, fol. 213. Aimoinus li. 4.
c. 65, etc. Yea (say they) the Heretics of our times deny not the History. --
But they sharply impugn two circumstances: The first is, that it was a great
wrong to Chilperic, that the Kingdom was taken from him: The second, that the
said Translation was made by the consent of the Council, Nobles and Commons,
without the Authority of the Apostolic Seat If you will needs have the honor
of so had a work, (that you may have power to do the like) take it.
. Serarius proves that the cause of the Translation of the Kingdom was just.
1. Because all the best men did desire and wish it, and did by their counsel
and help cooperate to it. 2. Because St. Bishop Burchardus did, as Legate,
solicit the Pope for it. 3. Pope Zachary commanded it to be done; 4. And the
most Holy Boniface at the Pope's command did execute it. 5. And being approved
by Divine Testimony, it is recited in the sacred Canons, 15. q. 6. c. alius. 6.
And by none of the old Historians not praised, or disallowed: Only our new
Heretics, that love Novelty, Arrogance and Rebellion by their perverse
judgment by Contumelies and Lies disallow it. And that it was by the Authority
of the Apostolic Seat, that the Kingdom was translated from Chilperic to
Pepin, the foresaid Historians do so expressly say, that it is a wonder with what
front the innovating Heretics dare call it in question.
Lastly, It is here to be noted, that it was by this same Pope Zachary that the
nomination or postulation of Bishops for the vacant Churches in his Kingdom,
was granted to King Pepin. Therefore if elsewhere you read that the Kings of
France give Bishops to the Churches, remember that it is not done by their own
Right, but by the Grant of the Apostolic Seat: In vain therefore do the
innovating Heretics glory in this Argument, who endeavor to subject the Church
to Kings.] So far Binnius after Baronius.


12. From this Story and these words, let the Reader think how to answer these
Questions.

Quest. 1. Had not Kings need to take heed of making any one man too great, if
greatness and exercise of Government, give him so much right to the Kingdom?

Qu. 2. Had not Kings need to look to their manners, for their Crowns sake, as
well as their Souls, if Lust, Sensuality and Dullness forfeit their Kingdoms?

Qu. 3. Did not Wars and weakening of the Empire make a great change with Popes,
when they that were set up and banished at the Emperor's pleasure, can now
first depose the Emperor in the West, for being against Images and Persecuting,
and then can translate the Crown of France?

Qu. 4. Was not an ambitious Pope a fit Tool for Pepin and his Confederates to
work by, to put a pious gloss on their Conspiracy?

Qu. 5. Did not the Pope rise thus by serving the turns of Conspirators, and of
Princes in their quarrels with one another?

Qu. 6. Are Subjects Judges when a King's Sins make him unworthy of the Crown?

Qu. 7. Yea, is the Pope Judge, and has he power to depose Kings, if he judge
them such Sinners, and unfit for Government?

Qu. 8. Is it a good Reason that a King is justly deposed, because Good Men and
Holy Bishops are the Desirers and Promoters of it?

Qu. 9. Would not this Reason have served Maximus against Gratian? Was it not
Cromwell's Plea? If he had but had the Pope and People on his side, you see how
it would have gone.

Qu. 10. Is it the mark of an Innovating Heretic, to say that the Church
should be subject to Kings; when Paul and Peter said it of all Christians so
long ago?

Qu. 11. Is it a Note that Protestants love Rebellion, because they are against
Popes deposing Kings? Or is there any heed to be taken of the words of impudent
Revilers, that dare speak before God and Man at this rate? Is deposing Kings
the Papists freedom from Rebellion, and is our opposing it a character of
Rebels?

Qu. 12. Is it any wonder that Bishop Burchardus desired it, and that Bishop
Boniface executed the Pope's command, who had been translated from England by
him to such dignity, and had sworn Obedience and Service to him?

Qu. 13. Is it any wonder that the Pope made these Bishops Saints?

Qu. 14. I hope they were really godly Men: But is it any wonder that some good
Men at such a time as that, did think it had been for the interest of Religion,
to have all Power in the Clergies hands, especially being themselves Bishops
that were to have so great a share? How few Bishops are afraid of too much
power, or ever do refuse it!

Qu. 15. If the King of France had his Kingdom by the Pope's gift, what wonder
if he had the power of nominating Bishops also by his gift?

Qu. 16. Whether he that has power to give, has not power to take away, and
be not Judge when the Cause is just?

Qu. 17. With what face do Papists at once make these claims, and yet profess
Loyalty to Kings?

Qu. 18. Whether it concern not Kings to understand on what terms they stand
with the Pope and his Clergy, that must not be subject to them, but have power
to depose them?

Qu. 19. If there be any Party among them that has more Loyal Principles, is
it a sign of the concord of their Church, that agrees not in matter of so
great moment? Or a proof that the Pope is the infallible Judge of
Controversies, that will not determine so great a Point on which the Peace of
Kingdoms does depend?

13. About the same time they persuaded Rachis King of the Longobards,
Successor to Luitprand, for the love of Religion to lay down his Crown, and go
into a Monastery; so that Monasteries are places for the worst and the best;
some too bad to reign, and some too good, lest they should overmaster the
Clergy.

14. It may be you will think that this Pope Zachary, and his sworn Vassal St.
Boniface, were some very profound Divines, that could by their wisdom and piety
thus master Kingdoms. Doubtless they were zealous Adversaries to Heresies
(except their own) and Successors of the Hereticating and Damning Fathers. For
Epist. 10. (Bin. p. 206, 207, 208.) Zachary writes to Boniface, to expel
Virgilius from the Church and Priesthood, for holding Antipodes, viz. that
Sunshine, and Moonlight, and Men are under the Earth,
as well as here which we call over it. The words are, [De perversa autem and
iniqua doctrina, quae contra Dominum and Animamsuam locutus est, si
clarificatum fuerit ita eum confiteri, quod alius mundus and alii homines sub
terra sint, seu Sol and Luna; hunc habito Concilio ab Ecclesia pelle Sacerdotii
honor privatum.] That is, But as to the perverse and unjust Doctrine which he
has spoken against the Lord and his own Soul, if it be made clear that he so
confesses, that under the Earth there is another world and other Men, and Sun
and Moon; call a Council, and depriving him of the honor of Priesthood, drive
him out of the Church.] That by [another world] is meant Antipodes, or the
other side of the Earth inhabited, is doubtless.

15. Qu. 1. Did God make Popes to be the Governors of the Antipodes, for so
many hundred years, before they knew that there was any Antipodes? And when
they excommunicated and silenced those that affirmed it?

Qu. 2. Were these Popes and Bishops Men of such wisdom, as were fit to
hereticate Dissenters as they did?

Qu. 3. Do we not see here what some Councils were, and did in those times?

Qu. 4. Do we not see what Heresy signified at Rome, and how little heed there
was to be taken of their outcry against some Heresies?

Qu. 5. Whether was all the World, or all the West bound to avoid Communion
after with Virgilius?

Qu. 6. Do we not see here of what Infallibility the Pope is, in judging of
matters of Faith, and how happy the World is to have such a Judge, and of what
credit his Heretications and Excommunications are?

Qu. 7. Do we not see how Religion has been depraved and dishonored by the
Pope and his Clergy, calling Good Evil, and the most certain Truths by the name
of [Perverse and unjust Doctrines, against the Lord, and Men's own Souls?] What
heed to take of these Men's words, when they seem zealous against Sin and Error?

16. Perhaps you will ask, How could any but Idiots be so ignorant? Whither did
they think the Setting-Sun went? Or what did they think the Earth stood upon?

Answ. The easiest things are strange to Men that never learnt them; it is pity
that it should be true, that Lactantius and other Ancients, yea, Austin himself
were ignorant of the Antipodes; but yet they had more Modesty than to
hereticate and excommunicate them that affirmed it. Few Bishops had much
Philosophy then. Origin and Apollinaris that were most Philosophical, had been
hereticated and disgraced it. Clemens and Tatianus sped not much better.
Councils had forbid Bishops to read the Books of Heathens. Austin had a truly
Philosophical head, being the Father of School Divinity; but he was (...), and
had little from his Teachers. You may see in a great Hereticater Philastrius,
what they thought then of the course of the Sun, by what he says of the
Stars: As it was one Heresy to call the Star^ by the names of living
Creatures, so it was another to deny that the Stars were Luminaries arbitrarily
moved; that by Angels were set out at night to light the World, and at morning
retired inwards, or were taken into their place again, as Men set out lights to
the street at night, and take them in again. I confess that no General Council
declared this, (as they have done worse things;) but you see what kind of Men
were hereticated by Pope Zachary, St. Boniface, and St. Philastrius, and such
Bishops; and how little it signifies in such Writers, whether you read a Man
called a Saint, or a Sinner; an Orthodox Catholic, or Nefandissimus
Haereticus, as they use to speak: I speak it only of such Men.

17. For, Reader, I must still remember thee, that this Folly, Pride, and
almost Fury, was not the Genius or Character of the true spiritual Ministers
and Church of Christ, but of a worldly, ignorant, domineering sort of Men; that
made it their business to get Preferment, and have their wills. God had all
this while abundance of faithful Ministers that sat down at the lower end; and
humble holy People, that set not up themselves in worldly Grandeur, and came
not much on the Stage, but approved themselves in secret, and in their several
Places and Conversations to God, some Laymen, some Priests, some Bishops, some
of their names are come down to us in History, but those are few. They strove
not for great Places, nor did their Works to be seen of Men, nor looked to Men
for their Reward.

18. Some of the Canons and Councils of these Universal Pastors were answerable
to their Excommunications. In Zachary' s 12th Epistle to his Vassal St.
Boniface, he gives him the resolution of many doubts. One is, [After how long
time Lard may be eaten? And it is resolved by the Pope; That there is yet no
Canon or Law for this by the Fathers, but he determines himself, 1. That it
must not be eaten before it be dried in the smoke, or boiled, (or basted) with
fire; But if you list to eat it raw, it must be eaten after the Feast of
Easter.] Binnius, p. 209. (What would become of the Church, if there were not a
Judge of such Controversies, and an infallible Determiner of such Questions?)

19. CCXXV. I told you before how the Pope commanded Boniface to call a Council
to eject him that asserted the Antipodes; I must next add a French Council
called by King Carolomannus to Reform the Clergy (an. 742.) and to recover
Christian Religion, which in the days of former Princes dissipata corruit,
being dissipated, was ruined; and to show the People how they may come to save
their Souls, who have been hitherto deceived by false Priests. (They are the
words of the King and Council, Bin. p. 210. c. 2.) Where it was decreed that
Priests be not Soldiers, (unnecessarily:) That they keep not Hounds to go an
hunting with, nor Hawks: That every Religious Fornicator shall in the Jayl do
Penance with Bread and Water. If the Fornicator be a Priest, he shall be first
scourged, and then remain in Prison two years: But if an inferior Clerk or Monk
so fall, he shall be whipped, and then do Penance a whole year in Prison, and so
the Nuns.

This was somewhat like a Reformation: Had it not been done by a King* it might
have past for Heresy. It was at Ratisbonne; Boniface presiding.

Such another Council called Leptinense, there was under Carolomannus.

Another Council at Rome repeated the often repeated Canons, to keep Bishops and
Priests from Nuns and from Fornication.

20. An. 744. Another Synodus Suession. under Chilperic governed by Pepin,
condemned again Aldebert (that set up Crosses in several places, and drew
People to himself) and another as Heretics.

21. Another Council in Germany, an. 745. handsomely set Boniface the Pope's
Agent in the Archbishopric of Mentz. First Geroldus the Archbishop is sent out
against the Saxons with an Army, and he and most of them killed: Then Gervilio
his Son, a Layman, is made Archbishop to comfort him. At another War he
pretends a Conference with him that killed his Father, and murders him; this is
past by as blameless: But Boniface says, That a Man that had his hand in
Blood, must not be a Bishop; and so got him out, and was made the chief
Archbishop of Germany himself in his place. Judge whether he served the Pope
for naught.

22. Yet Boniface had not done with the two Heretics, Aldebert and Clemens, a
French man and a Scot. Boniface sends to Rome (Bin. p. 216.) to desire the
Pope, that as he had himself condemned these two Heretics, the Pope would also
condemn them, and cast them into Prisons, where none might speak with them.
(Thus the Pope obtained his Kingdom, and edified the Church. The motive was,
that Boniface prosecuting them, had suffered much for their sakes, the People
saying that he had taken from them holy Apostolic Men, (but this was not a
Prison.) The Crimes which he charge on Aldebert a Bishop are, that he was an
Hypocrite, (an open Crime!) that he had said an Angel appeared to him, and he
had some rare Relics, and that he said he was Apostolic, and wrought
Wonders; that he got some unlearned Bishops to make him a Bishop absolutely,
against the Canons. He would not consecrate any Church to the memory of an
Apostle or Martyr; and spoke against visiting in Pilgrimage the Temples of the
Apostles: He made Churches to his own honor, and set up Oratories and Crosses
up and down, and drew People from other Bishops to himself. That he gave his
nails and hair to be honored with the Saints Relics, and would not hear
Confessions, saying he knew their sins already.] If all this was true, (which I
know never the more for this Accusation) he seemed an Hypocrite indeed, but
whether an Heretic, I know not.

The Scot Heretic is accused as denying the Church Canons, and the meaning of
some Fathers, despising the Synods Laws, saying that he may still be a Bishop
(for so he was) though he had two Sons, (in Adultery, says Boniface, perhaps
in Marriage;) and (as he says) holding that a Man may marry his Brothers
Widow, and that Christ at his Descent delivered all Souls out of Hell.] This
was a foul Error indeed, if truly charged. These were charged by Boniface and
the Roman Synod, to be forerunners of Antichrist, (and how like are Aldebert's
Pretensions to many Roman Saints!) A Prayer also of Aldeberts was read, in
which he prayed to Angels under several strange names: Bishops and Presbyters
had Votes in this Council, and subscribed the Hypocrites condemnation. Bin. p.
218. But there is no certainty that he named more than three Angels.

23. Stephen the 2d was chosen Pope by ALL THE PEOPLE after Zachary, and dyed
four days after suddenly.

24. Stephen the 3d was chosen by all the People (says Anastasius.)
Aistulphus, King of the Longobards, threatened Rome, took their Gifts, and
demanded their Subjection. The Pope (after Gregory the 2d's Rebellion) was glad
to send to the Emperor, to crave an Army to save Rome and Italy; when he could
get no help from Constant. he sent to Pepin King of France. One that he had
made King by Rebellion, was obliged to help him, and by an Army forced
Aistulphus to covenant to restore Ravenna, and many other Italian Cities, (not
to the Emperor, whose Agent claimed his right, and was denied by Pepin;) but to
the Pope, (to reward him, and get the pardon of his sins.) Aistulphus broke his
Covenants. Pepin with another Army forces him to deliver them, and returns.
Aistulphus dies; Desiderius a Captain by Usurpation invadeth the Kingdom,
Radchis that had been King before, and went into a Monastery, and the Nobles of
the Longobards resist the Rebel.
He sends to the Pope, offering him all that he could desire (more Cities) to
help him: The Pope makes his own bargain with him, as he did with Pepin, (and
Charles Martell before) and by the help of the French, setleth the Rebel
Desiderius in the Kingdom. Pepin makes a Deed of Gift of all the foresaid
Cities to the Church of Rome, (Was this Constantine's Gift?) He gave away
another Man's (the Emperor's) Dominions, and with Desiderius's additions, now
the Pope is become a Prince.

24. CCXXVIII. We come now to a great General Council of 338 Bishops at
Constantinople, An. 754. under Constantine Copronymus against the worshipping of
Images: Sixtus Sene^sis and Pet.
The Adversaries of it will not have it called the 7th General Council, because
diverse Patriarchs were absent, and it decreed, say they, Crabbe p. 458. say it
was at Ephesus, but Binnius confuteth them.
against the Truth. They not only condemned the worshipping of Images, and
Germanus Constantinus, Georgius Cyprius, Jo. Damascenus, and other Worshipers
of them, as Idolaters; but destroyed the Relics of Martyrs, and exacted an
Oath of Men (by the Cross, and the holy Eucharist) that they would never adore
Images, but execrate them as Idols, nor ever pray to the holy Apostles,
Martyrs, and blessed Virgin, says Baronius and Binnius, p. 235. But the 15th
and 17th definitions of this Council recited in the 2d Nicene Council,
show that they were not so free from praying to the Virgin Mary and Saints, as
we could wish they had: For they decree we must crave her intercessions, and
theirs; but they forbad praying to their Images.

25. The Acts of this Council (not pleasing the Adversaries) are not delivered
fully to us; but it fell out that their Decrees are repeated word by word in
the 2d Nicene Council, and so preserved.

26. There is one Doctrinal definition of this Council, owned also by their
Adversaries the 2d Council. Nicen. which by the way I will take notice of, about
the glorified Body of Christ, (and consequently ours after the Resurrection)
that it is a Body but not Flesh, Bin. p. 378. defin. 7. [Siquis non confessus
fuerit Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum post assumptionem animatae, rationalis
and intellectualis Carnis simul sedere cum Deo and Patre, atque ita quoque
rursus venturum cum Paterna Majestate, judicaturum vivos and mortuos,
non amplius quidem Carnem, neque incorporeum tamen ut videatur ab iis a quibus
compunctus est, and maneat Deus extra crassitudinem carnis, Anathema.] To which
says the Nicene Council by Epiphanius, [Huc usque recte sentiunt and Patrum
traditionibus convenientia dicunt, etc.]

Two sorts I would have take notice of this:

1. The Papists, who say that the Bread is turned into Christ's very Flesh,
when he has no very Flesh in Heaven: And therefore the meaning must be of the
Sacramental Sign, that it is the Representation of that real Flesh of Christ
which was sacrificed on the Cross.

2. Some prejudiced Protestants that think he that says, [Our Bodies (and
Christ's) in Heaven; will not be Flesh and Blood formally and properly so
called, but spiritual glorious Bodies] does say some dangerous new assertion;
such gross thoughts have gross heads of the heavenly state. To these I say, 1.
You contradict the express words of God's Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. Flesh and Blood
cannot enter, etc. That it is meant of Formal Flesh and Blood, and not
Metaphorical (Sin) is plain in the Context, see Dr. Hammond on the Text. 2.
Give but a true definition of Flesh and Blood, and it will convince you of
itself. 3. You see here that you maintain an Opinion which these two (even
adverse) General Councils anathematized.

27. By this Council we may see, how little General Councils signify with the
Papists, either as to Infallibility, Authority, or preservation of Tradition,
longer than they please the Pope. As to their Objection, that call it
Pseudo-septimum, that the Pope was not there; I answer 1. No more was he by
himself or Legate at the first of Constant. called the 2d General Council, as
Binnius professes. 2. Is not the Church the Church, if the Pope be not there?
Then he may choose whether ever there shall be more General Councils, (as
indeed he does.)

28. CCXXIX. An. 756. King Pepin called a Council in France, declaring that
things were so far out of order, that he could attempt but a partial
Reformation, leaving the rest till better times. The first Canon was, that
every City have a Bishop;
of old (...), signified every such Town as our Corporations and Market Towns
are: And by all the old Canons and Customs (except some odd ones) every such
Town of Christians was to have a Bishop; and in Phrygia, Arabia, etc. the
Villages had Bishops, says Socrates, etc. And in many places the Villages had
Chorepiscopos, which Petavius (Annot. in Epiphan. Arian.) fully proves were
true Bishops. And yet then the most of the People in most Countries were
without the Church; so that then a Church was no greater than was capable of
personal Communion.

Here this King (being made by the Pope) so far gratified the Clergy, as to
decree that Contemners of Excommunication should be banished. And now the Keys
do signify the Sword, and Church Discipline is made another thing than Christ
had made it.

The 13th Cap. is, That no vacant Bishop meddle in another Bishop's Parish
without his consent, (by what true authority then can the Pope meddle in other
Men's Diocesses, since the foundation of his humane authority in the Empire is
subverted?)

The 14th Cap. decreed, That Men may use Horses and Chariots for Travel on the
Lord's Day, and get Meat and Drink, etc. but not do common work.

The 17th, That no Clerk try his Cause before a Lay-Judge, without the Bishop's
leave.

29. Pope Stephen dying, in the division at the next choice, (by all the
People) the stronger part chose Paulus a Deacon, CCXXX. in his time a German
Council condemned Oathmarus, Abbot of St. Gallus, for Incontinence, and put him
in Prison, where he dyed of Famine; as Historians say, maliciously upon false
accusation.

30. At this time the Greeks accused the Romans, for adding the word [Filioque]
to the Creed:
And about that and Images, they say there was some Synod at a Village called
Gentiliace.

31. Pope Paul dying, and the People having still the choice, he that could get
the greatest strength was in hope of so rich a Prey: And Constantine, Brother
to one Duke Toto, getting the strongest Party, by fear compelled George Bishop
of Praenestine, with two more Bishops, to make him Pope, (being first ordained
Deacon,) he possessed the Popedom alone a year and a month:
Then one Christopher the Primocerius, and his Son Sergius being powerful, got
out to the King of the Longobards, and craved his help against Constantine as
an Usurper; and gathering some strength got into Rome, killed Toto; and caused
Constantine the Pope, and another Brother Paessivus to take Sanctuary. One
Waldipertus a Presbyter was of Christopher's Party, and to make haste, without
Christopher's knowledge, he gathers a Party, and they make one Philip (a
Presbyter) Pope. (So there were two Popes.) Christophorus incensed, swore he
would not enter Rome, till Philip was pulled out of the Bishop's house; which
Gratiosus, one of his Party, presently performs, and Philip returns to his
Monastery. Christophorus calls the Clergy, People and Soldiers together, and
(by his means) they choose another Stephen, (and so there are three Popes.) The
Actors being now in their zeal, go to Theodorus a Bishop, and Vicedominus that
joined with Pope Constantine, and they put out his eyes, and cut out his
tongue. Next they attempted the like excaecation on Passivus. Bishop Theodore
they thrust into a Monastery, and there (while he cried for a little water)
they famished him to death. Passivus they put into another Monastery. They took
all their Goods and Possessions. Pope Constantine they brought out, and set on
Horseback on a Woman's Saddle with Weights at his Feet, and put him into a
Monastery, (How holy then were Monasteries!) Shortly after they brought him
forth, and Pope Stephen and some Bishops deposed him. Then the Citizens were to
make their penitent Confessions for owning him. Next the Army goes to Alatrum
in Campania, where Gracilis the Tribune that had been for Constantine is
apprehended, brought bound to Rome, imprisoned, and after his eyes put out, and
his tongue cut out. After this, Gratiosus and his Zealots go to the Monastery
where they had thrust Pope Constantine, and drag him out, and put out his eyes,
and leave him blind in the street. Next, they go to their own Friend Priest
Waldipertus, and feign that he had laid a Plot with the Longobards to kill
Christopher, and send to apprehend him, and when he fled for Sanctuary to a
Temple, they drew him out with the blessed Virgins Image in his hand (even then
when they were rebelling for the sake of Images;) but that would not save the
Priest, (because he set up Philip for Pope;) they thrust him into a filthy
Dungeon-hole, but that was too good for him: In a few days they drew him out,
and casting him on the earth, put out his eyes, and cut out his tongue, and put
him into an Hospital, where he dyed of the pain. And now Pope Stephen had, no
doubt, a lawful calling to be Pope. He sends his Legates to the King of France.
He brings forth blinded Pope Constantine to answer for his Crime, who falling
flat on the earth, he lamenteth his sin as more than the Sands on the
Seashore, and professes that the People chose and forced him to be Pope,
because of their sufferings under Paul: But at his next appearance he tells
them, that he did no more than many other Laymen did, who invaded Bishoprics;
as Sergius Archbishop of Ravenna, Stephen Bishop of Naples, etc. when they
heard this, all the Priests caused him to be buffeted, and cast him out of the
Church, and burnt his Papers, etc. And the most holy Pope Stephen cast himself
on the earth, with all the Priests and People of Rome, and with tears lamented
their sin, that they had taken the Communion from the hands of Pope
Constantine, (it seems it is a sin to communicate with Bishops that are brought
in irregularly by secular Power without due Election,
and they are no Schismatics that refuse it.) And so they all performed their
Penance for it, Anastas. in ejus vita.

32. CCXXXI. On this great occasion Pope Stephen (being far unable now to call
General Councils) sends to the King of France, to entreat him to send some wise
Bishops to a Council at Rome, who sent him about a dozen, who, with some
others, agreed against Constantine's Election, and such other for the time to
come; and damned a Synod that Constantine had held; and also passed their
judgment for Images.

33. But here was a great difficulty, (such as often after happened) Whether
Constantine's Papal Acts were valid; and the Council decreed that they should
all be void except his Baptizings, and his Consecrations: And so those Priests
that he Consecrated, when they were after duly chosen, officiated without a
new Consecration.
Either he was a real Pope, or no Pope. If a Pope, then by the Canons Stephen
was no Pope, and so the Succession there failed. If no Pope, then, 1. How come
his Consecrations to be valid? 2. Are not Presbyter's Ordinations better than a
Lay-mans? 3. Then the Universal Church had no Head, and so was no Church (with
them) while Constantine was Pope.

34. A like Schism fell out at Ravenna: The power of the Magistrate made one
Michael, Scriniary of the Church, (a Layman) Archbishop, the People being for
one Leo, whom they imprisoned. He kept the place above a year; but by the help
of the Pope, and the French, the People rose and cast him out, and brought him
Prisoner to Rome, and set up Leo.

35. Christopher and his Son Sergius were the Captains that had wrought this
great deliverance to the Church: And now they plead with King Desiderius for
St. Peter's Rights, as still zealous for the Pope. The King is angry with them,
and jealous of their power, and seeks to destroy them, and particularly to
set their own Pope against them. They get the Citizens to stand by them, and
the King comes with an Army. The Pope seeing which was like to be the stronger
side, in great wisdom went out to the King, and after some days conference with
him, sends to Christopher to render himself to the King. The Citizens hearing
this, forsook Christopher and Sergius; Gratiosus (seeing they were deserted by
the People through the Pope) went out first to the King and Pope, and Sergius
next, and Christopher last. The Pope was so kind to them that made him Pope,
that he made them Monks, and put them in Sanctuary in St. Peter's Church to
save their lives: But they had Adonibezek's justice, and were soon dragged out
thence, and Christopher's eyes put out, of which he dyed. But Sergius was
awhile a Monk, and then thrust in the Laterane Cellar. Thus went the matters of
the Universal Monarch at Rome.

36. A little before the Pope's death, Sergius was fetched blind out of the
Cellar, and killed; the next Pope searched out the Authors, and found them to be
Paulus Cubicularius, and the last Pope's Brother, and other great Men; and he
prosecuted some of them to Banishment, but the Archbishop of Ravenna caused
Paul to be killed.

37. It was Adrian (a Deacon) that was then chosen Pope (Son to the chief Man
in Rome, ablest to effect it.) Upon these stirs, Desiderius desired friendship
with the Pope; but he demanding the Cities which Pepin had given the Church
(some of which Desiderius, still kept) and doing the foresaid justice on the
Friends of Desiderius, he came with an Army and killed many, and took many
Cities. The Pope urges the restitution of all his Cities, (indeed the
Emperor's) given him by Pepin; he still denies; the Pope gets Charles of
France to come with an Army, for fear of whom the Longobards fly. The Duchy
of Spoletum, and other Cities, yield themselves to the Pope, (and, as a token
of subjection, receive tonsure.) Charles besieges Desiderius in Papia, and
forces his Brother Carloman's Wife and Children that fled to the Longobards,
to yield themselves to him; while the Siege continued Charles went to Rome, and
was gloriously entertained by the Pope, and renewed to him Pepin's gift of all
the Exarchate of Ravenna, and many Dukedoms and Cities, (which were none of his
own to give) and now the Pope is a Prince indeed. And Charles returning to the
Siege, conquereth Papia, takes King Desiderius, and wins all the Longobards
Kingdom: And thus Strength gave Right (according to the Atheists Opinion now
stirring, that [Right is nothing but a power to get and keep.] Pepin and
Charles make themselves Kings, and the Pope a Prince; that while they share the
Emperor's Dominions between them, they might be a strength to one another. And
Desiderius being himself but an Usurper, helped by the Pope into the Throne, no
wonder if when interest changed, the same hand take him down. How Charles his
Brother Caroloman dyed, and why his Wife and Sons fled from Charles to the
Longobards, and what became of them, is not well known.

38. Pope Adrian the 1st thus made a greater Prince than any before him, did
greater works than they had done, and ob nimium amorem Sancti Petri, and ex
inspiratione Divina, built many great and stately Buildings, made all places
about his Palace, Baths, etc. fit for splendid pomp and pleasure, and all this
from mere self-denial and holiness: Many Churches also he repalred and adorned,
and did many other such good works.

39. This great Adrian was before but a Deacon. I have often marvelled to read
that Deacons were so ordinarily then made Popes, (and sometimes Laymen) when
yet the old Canons required an orderly rising through the several degrees.
It was no wonder that then a Deacon at Rome was a far higher preferment than a
Bishop: For a Deacon (and a Priest) might be chosen Pope, but a Bishop could
not: For of old (when Diocesses and Parishes were all one) the Canons decreed
that no Bishop should remove to another Church, (except being Consecrated by
others, he never consented nor had possession;) so that every Bishop must live
and dye in the place where he was first Ordained; so that Rome, Constable. Alex.
Antioch, etc. and all the great Seats chose either Deacons, Priests, or Monks
to be their Patriarchs and Bishops. No wonder then, if as Nazianzen says,
Orat. 5. it was the custom to have almost as many Clergymen in every Church as
People, in regard of the present Honor, and the future hopes of Preferment.
Indeed he carried it that had the greatest Friends, which was as commonly the
Deacon, as the Priest or Archdeacon. By which we may conjecture, whether the
worthiest Men were made Popes: For if they were the worthiest, why were they by
former Popes never made higher before than Deacons? Did not the Popes know the
worthiest men?

And if a breach of the Canons in Elections nullify the regular Succession, by
this it is evident, that the Roman Seat has no such Succession.

40. By the way the Reader must note, that in all the Writings of the Popish
Clergy concerning these matters, there are certain terms of Art, or Interest,
which must be understood as follows, viz.

1. Sanctissimus Papa,
the most Holy Pope, signifies any prosperous Bishop of Rome, how wicked
soever in his life.

2. Rex Pientissimus, the most Pious King, signifies a King that took part
with the Pope, and advanced his Opinions and Interest.

3. Imperator Sceleratissimus, and Haereticus Nefandus, etc. a most wicked
Emperor, (or Patriarch, or any other) and abominable Heretick] signifies one
that was against the Pope, his Interest or Opinion. Homo mendaeissimus, a Liar,
is one that says what the Papists would not have to be true. If you understand
them otherwise, you are deceived (ordinarily.)

41. About the death of Paulus Cubicularius, and others, note, that it had long
been the way of the Church-Canons, to contradict God's great Law for humane
safety, [He that sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed;] and on
pretense of being (more) merciful (than God) to entice Murderers, Adulterers,
and all wicked Thieves and Criminals to make up the Church of Christ, by
decreeing, that instead of being Hanged, or Beheaded, if they would but be
Baptized, they should but be kept for a time from the Sacrament, or do
Penance; and what Villain would not then be a Christian?

42. Here arises a great Controversy with Sigibert, (a Monk-Historian) and
Gratian himself, which Baronius and Binnius take up, viz. the first say, [That
Charles being at Rome, a Council there with Pope Adrian gave him the power of
choosing the Pope, and ordering the Apostolic Seats; and all Bishops and
Archbishops in all Provinces, to receive Investiture from him; and that none
should Consecrate a Bishop unless he were praised and invested by the King; and
that they Anathematize all that rebel against this Decree, and confiscate their
Estates if they repent not: But, say Baronius and Binnius, this is a lie, and
devised deceit to flatter the Emperor Henry a Schismatic. And while
Chroniclers may have the Lie given them so easily by Dissenters in matters of
such public Fact, we are left at great uncertainty in History, others as
confidently giving the Lie to the Papal Flatterers, as they do those of their
own Religion that do not please them.

One of the Reasons against this Decree, is the contrariety of the French
Constitutions, l. 1. c. 84. saying, [Not being ignorant of the sacred Canons we
consented to the Ecclesiastic Order, to wit,
that Bishops be chosen by the Election of the Clergy and PEOPLE, according to
the Statutes of the Canons out of their own Diocese, without respect of Persons
or Rewards, for the merit of their life, and their gift of wisdom, that by
example and word they may every way profit those that are under them.]

1. This indeed shows how Bishops by the Canons were to be chosen, even till
these days of Charles the Great; he was to be taken for no Bishop that came not
in by the Peoples (as well as the Clergies) Election, or consent at least.

2. But this contradicts not what Sigibert and Gratian say; the Emperor might
still have a negative voice after all, especially as to a Pope: In very deed,
the door is safe that has diverse locks. 1. It belongs to the Clergy and
Ordainers to judge who shall be [A Bishop or Minister of Sacred things.] 2. It
belongs to the Flock to discern whom they will accept for THEIR Bishop or
Pastor. 3. It belongs to the Magistrate to judge whom he will countenance or
tolerate in that Office.

43. Paulus Diaconus the Historian was Secretary to Desiderius the Longobard
King; Charles in anger commanded his hand to be cut off, for doing somewhat for
his own King against him; the Courtiers added, that his eyes should be put out;
which made Charles consider and say, If we do but cut off his hand, where shall
we find such another Historian?

44. Constantine the Emperor now dying, called Copronymus; the Papists call us
to take notice what a Leader we follow that are against the Worship of Images;
saying that he dyed with the beginnings of Hellfire, convinced of his sin
against the Virgin Mary, and that all his life he loved the smell of dung, and
stinking things; strong Arguments for Image Worship, as worthy as Sigebert's
and Gratian's, to be suspected as Lies, or of little certainty.

45. While Leo Isaurus and Constantine lived, the Councils of Bishops went with
them, and Images went down in the Eastern Empire: Constantine dying, his Son
Leo succeeded him, says Binnius, in his Heresy, Impiety and Sacrilege, that
is, in his opposition to Image Worship, and such like. Petavius says, he first
feigned himself a Catholic, (that is, for Images) but after fell off: His
Sacrilege was, that loving Jewels, he took for himself a rich Crown, which
Maurice had devoted to the Virgin Mary; whereupon Carbuncles arose on him, and
he dyed: but had not Maurice himself a sadder death? Thus partial Historians
feign and apply Judgments.

46. Irene, Leo's Widow, with her Son Constantine a Child, next ruled, and,
says Binnius, God by a Widow and an Orphan Child, by a Wonder, did tread down
the Impiety that had been set up, and restored Religion, that is, Images. And
indeed Rome's interest and proper way has been chiefly advanced under Women
and Rebels. And it is no wonder if Irene a Woman, and her Child, were more for
Images than their Predecessors. Children use to play with Images, and Women's
Fancies are often not unsuitable to them. I think it as observable a matter, as
Binnius does, to note the Instruments.

47. There are in Binnius the Titles of 44 at least Epistles of Pope Adrian's
recited:
The 36th says, [He professes that the Church of Rome does embrace and
reverence the Whole fourth Calcedon Council. Remember then that the last Canon
is approved, which declares the reason of the Roman Privileges to be because
it was the Imperial Seat, and therefore that Constantine should have the like,
and that it was given it by the Fathers.

Most or many of them are thanks to Charles for giving St. Peter so many great
Cities and Dukedoms, and Exhortations to him to continue his bounty. By their
ordinary language you would not suspect any Selfishness, Pride or Covetousness
in the Popes; it is but for St. Peter that they desire all.

48. In his Epistle to Constantine and Irene, (the Child and Mother) to entice
them to be for Images, he tells a fabulous Story See Hen. Fowlis of Papists
Treasons, P. 120. proving the whole Story false.
of a Vision of Constantine's sending him to Silvester as his Guide, to be
baptized of him, and to be thereby cured of a Leprosy: It was Peter and Paul
that appeared to him; and he asked Silvester whether there were left any Images
of Peter and Paul, which he affirmed, and showed him their Pictures; and the
Emperor cried out, These are the Men that appeared to me. And part of their
Message to him was, that he should bring all the world into the subjection of
the Church of Rome.] Was not here a strong Argument to a Woman and a Child to
be for the Pope and for Images, contrary to current History, (that tells us
Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia a little before his death;) and without
any credible proof. Thus the Papal Rome was built. When Adrian had given away
the Western Empire to Charles, yet he thus flattereth a Woman and Child in the
East, as if he had done them no wrong at all. 49. Paul Bishop of Constable. having
sworn against Images, and repenting, is said to resign his place, and to tell
them that they must have a General Council; and Tarasius succeeding him, being
for Images, got a promise of a Council. It seems by their Epistles, though they
agreed about Images, Pope Adrian and this Tarasius accused each other as
suspected of Simony, see Bin. p. 262. and the Epistles. Irene knew that
Tarasius was for her turn, and Tarasius knew that Irene was for Pictures; and
so between them common notice was given abroad beforehand to the Bishops,
(that lately had condemned Image Worship,
and pulled them down) that the Empress and the Patriarch were for restoring
Images, and would call a Council to that end: and this was enough to prepare
the majority of the Bishops for a sudden change.

50. Besides a Council at Worms, An. 772. to little purpose, Velserus has
published one of that year at Dingolvinga in Bavaria under Duke Tassilo, which
had diverse Canons of Equity, and some of Superstition; one was, that certain
Bishops and Abbots agreed, that whosoever dyed first, the rest should sing so
many Psalms, and get thirty Masses to be said. And a notable Privilege is
granted to all that will but seek liberty or shelter in the Church, that both
they and their Posterity shall be free, unless they bring a debt
undischargeable on themselves.

51. There is by Canisius published an Epitome of the old Canons (except the
Nicene) as gathered by this Adrian, and sent to Charles Mag. I will recite a
few of them, Ex Clem. c. 23. Let a Bishop, or Presbyter, or Deacon, taken in
Fornication, Perjury, or Theft, be deposed, but not excommunicate.

C. 28. That a Bishop who obtains a Church by the Secular Powers be deposed.


Can. Antioch. 8. Country Presbyters may not give Canonical Epistles, but the
Chorepiscopi, (by which it is plain, that the Chorepiscopi were not Presbyters,
but (as Petavius on Epiphan. Arrius has well proved) true Bishops.

C. 11. That condemned Clerks shall never be restored if they go to the
Emperor.

Can. Laodic. c. 33.
[That no one pray with Heretics or Schismatics,] (which seems to oblige us
to separate from the Roman Prelates, who are grievous Schismatics, by imposing
things unlawful on the Churches, and silencing and persecuting those that obey
not their sinful Laws.

Before the Can. Sardic. he mentions the weakness of old Osius, that said
that they were both in the right, who used the word [of one substance,] and [of
the like substance.]

Can. Sard. 2. That a Bishop that by Ambition changes his Seat, shall not have
(so much as) Lay-communion (no not) at the end.

C. 14. C. 15.
That no Bishop be above three weeks in another City, nor above two weeks from
his own Church, (which implies that each Bishop had then his own particular
Church.)

Can. Afric. c. 15. That there be no Re-baptizing, Re-ordaining,
nor Translations of Bishops.

C. 17. That if a Bishop to be Ordained be Contradicted, (that is, by any
objected unfitness) he shall not after be Ordained as purged only by three
Bishops, but by many.

C. 19. That Diocesses that wants Bishops, receive none without the consent of
the Bishop who hitherto held them, (so it was) not proudly; For if he overhold
them, (that is, hold them under himself alone, when they need more Bishops)
affecting to sit over the People, and despising his Fellow-Bishops, he is not
only to be driven from the retained Diocesses, but also from his own Church:]
(so that no proud Bishops should have power to hinder the Churches from having
as many Bishops as they need.)

C. 60. That Bishops that are of later Ordination, presume not to set or prefer
themselves before those that were before them.

C. 94. If a Bishop, six months after admonition of other Bishops, neglect to
make Catholics of the People belonging to his Seat, any other shall obtain
them that shall deliver them from their Heresy:
(that is, Donatism, or the like;) so that if one Bishop neglect the Souls of
his People, and another that is more able and faithful convert them, they may
be the Flock of him that converted them, without removing their dwelling.

C. 105. That a Bishop shall not Excommunicate a man on a Confession made only
to himself: if he do, other Bishops shall deny Communion to that Bishop.

52. Several German Councils are mentioned, (at Worms, Paderborne, Daria, in
which (by a new example) Charles Mag. is confirmed to force the Saxons to
profess themselves Christians, and to take an Oath never to revolt: who yet
(doing it by constraint) were often perjured and revolted, till at last their
Heathen Duke Witichind became a voluntary Christian himself.

53. There are 80 more Canons against Oppressors of the Clergy, said to be
collected by Adrian, of which one is the old one, That no Bishop judge the
Cause of any Priest,
without the presence of his Clergy; because the Bishop's Sentence shall be
void, if it be not confirmed by the presence of the Clergy.

Another, That no Bishop ordain or judge in another's Parish, else it shall be
void;
For we judge that no one i^ bound by the sentence of any other Judge, but his
own: (Who then is bound by the Pope, or any Usurper, who will Excommunicate
those that are not of his Flock?)

Another says,
[By a general Sanction we forbid Foreign judgments, because it is unmeet that
he should be judged by strangers, who ought to have Judges of the same
Province, and that are chosen by himself.

Another,
That no Bishop presume to judge or condemn any of the Clergy, unless the
accused Person have lawful Accusers present, and have place for defending
himself by answering to the Charge.

Another,
For Nullifying such Bishops judgments as are done without due Trial, by
Tyrannical Power, and not by Canonical Authority.

Another says,
Constitutions that are contrary to the Canons, and to the Decrees of the
Bishops of Rome, or to Good Manners, are of no moment: (which nulleth even many
of the Bishops of Rome also, as against Good Manners.)

Another notable Canon is, [Delatori aut lingua capuletur, aut convicto Caput
amputetur: Delatores autem sunt qui ex invidia produnt alios.] That is, Let a
Delator's tongue be pulled out, or if Convict, his Head cut off: Delators are
those that through envy betray others; (or envious Accusers.) Alas! if our
Delators, Calumniators and Informers were thus used now, what abundance would
have suffered for wronging some one Man?

Another Canon is, If a Man be often in quarrels, and easy (or forward) to
accuse, let no Man receive his Accusation without great Examination? (What then
will be thought of the usual Accusations of Clergy Calumniators, that for
Sects, and worldly Interest, can reproach others without shame or measure?)

Another is, That the danger of the Judge is greater than the danger of him
that is judged; therefore all care must be taken to avoid unjust judgment and
punishments.

Another is, [Let no Man receive the witness of a Layman against a
Clergyman.] (And Door-keepers, and Clerks, and Readers, were then Clergymen:
Was not this a great privilege to the Church?)

54. CCXXXII. We come now to the great General Council at Nice 2d, called by
the Papists the 7th, (that is, the 7th which pleased them.)

I have before noted that Irene, the Widow of Leo, now Ruled, her Son
Constantine being Titular Emperor, a Child, under her Government. One
Stauratius a Senator most swayed her, or ruled her. Taurasius the Patriarch
joined with her for Images. They call a Council at Constantinople. A General
Council and three Emperors (Leo, Constable. and Leo) had lately condemned Images,
and taken them down. The Pope and many Italians had resisted by force. This
violence made the Emperor use severity against the Resisters. At Ravenna they
killed Paulus the 14th Exarchate. In Rome they took Peter a Duke, and put out
his eyes. In Campania they beheaded Exhileratus the Duke, and his Son Adrian,
who took the Emperor's part. How the Emperor hereby lost Italy, is before
showed. But this Woman Irene will do as the Pope would have her: She is as much
for Pictures as the Pope himself. She calling this Council at Constantinople,
the old Soldiers bred up under the former Emperors being against Images,
(haeresin medullitus imbiberant, says Binnius,
p. 396.) Would not endure them in Constantinople, but routed them. At which
the Empress being troubled, dismissed the Bishops till they had purged the Army
of those old Soldiers, and then she called the Bishops to Nice; and there (they
knowing their errand beforehand) damned themselves and their Brethren that had
held the former universal Synod, and set up Images again.

55. By the way, I appeal from Pride and Ignorance, to Christian Sobriety and
Reason, how the taking down of Images can (in the Roman sense) be called an
Heresy,
unless it be an Article of Faith, that Images must or may be used. And can any
Man that ever read and believed the Scriptures, and the Writings of the first
four hundred years, believe that having or worshipping of Images, or Saints by
Images, is an Article of Faith, or necessary to Salvation? The best of them
that any Man can plead with Modesty is, that they are indifferent, or lawful,
and useful to some Persons. The Papists tell us now that they would not compel
us to bow toward Images, but leave it to our liberty. Must it be Heresy, and
the Christian world cast into distractions about it, when yet this
Image Worship is Idolatry in the sense of one part of Christians, and but
indifferent and convenient to the ignorant (that have other helps enough) in the
sense of others? O what a Plague has it been to the world, to have a worldly
Clergy invade the Churches!

56. At the meeting of this Council we have first the Call and Title, in which,

1. The Emperor and his Mother are called the Governors of the whole world,
(Orbis Terrarum.) And yet our Papists (as W. Johnson in his Novelty represt,
etc.) would make Men believe that if they find but such a saying of a Council,
or of the Church, it must needs signify more than the Empire, even all the
Earth indeed.

2. It Is expressly said over and over, that this Council was called by the
Emperor, and by their Decree and Command.

Tharasius begins with telling them the need of Reformation (for Images,)
and reporting how they were assaulted at Constantinople, when they met there,
(and so removed to Nice,) etc.

57. Next the Letters of the Empress and her Son are read, in which they are
before made know what they must do. They are told what Paul Constable. on his
Deathbed said for Images, and that Tarasius would not take the Patriarchate
till he had promise of a Council to restore them, and some hopes of it.

The Emperor here says, that [he called and Congregated the Synod, and that ex
universo terrarum orb, out of the whole earthly world;] and yet it was only
out of the Roman Empire.

58. When the Bishops business was so well made known by the Woman that called
them, first three Bishops that had been lately forward speakers against Images
in the former General Council under Constantine, did humbly confess their sin
to the Council, and asked forgiveness; that is, Basil. Ancyrae, Theodorus
Myron, and Theodosius Amorii. And first Basil Bishop of Ancyra gave them his
Creed, in which he professed to believe in the Trinity, and to embrace the
intercession of the Mother of God, and of the heavenly Powers, and of all the
Saints, and with all honor to receive and embrace their holy Relics, firmly
believing that he may be made Partaker of their holiness: Also that he
embraces the venerable Images, which The Verb is left out.
the Economy of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. and of the inviolate Virgin our
Lady the Mother of God, and of the holy Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, and all
Saints; and gives them due honor: Rejecting and cursing with all his mind
that called the 7th Synod Where he was lately a Leader.
, that was gathered by a depraved mind and madness -- a false Council, as alien
to all Piety and Religion, impiously barking against Ecclesiastical Legislation
-- reproaching venerable Images, and commanding them to be taken out of the
Churches, etc.

And to show his zeal, and lead others the way, he delivers in nine Curses or
Anathemas. One against those that demolish Images. Another against those that
expound the Scripture words against Idols and Gentile Images, as against
Christians Images. Next he execrateth all that embrace not Images, so it is now
become necessary unto salvation.) Another Curse is against those that favor
them that are against Images, etc. (Was not the Church ill used by her Bishops,
when they are sure to be cursed by them; one year cursing all that be for
Images, and another cursing all that be not for them? Was it such a cursing
Clergy, to make a cursed Church, that Christ ordained?) And that the Council
might not suspect that this Bishop was a Temporizer, and changed his Opinion
with the Times, first he professes to declare all this, [With his whole Soul,
Heart and Mind;] and next he wishes, [That if ever by any means he revolt
again from Images, he may be alienated from God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
and the Catholic Church.] And thus he renounceth Repentance, cursing himself
if ever he repent.

59. Tharasius and his Synod glorify God for this excellent Confession: And
next comes Theodore Bishop of Myros, and he does the like, and is joyfully
received: And next comes Theodosius Bishop of Amorium, and he more dolefully
lamenteth, that [being a sinner, and seduced, he had blattered out many evils
untruly against venerable Images; and therefore confessing his fault, he
condemns and curses (or detesteth) himself, resolving hereafter to do the
same thing which he had cursed (or spoken ill of) and to teach it to the world,
and begging to be received among Christians, though unworthy. Next he offers
his Libel, viz. First I approve, receive, salute and venerate before all
things, the intemerate Image of our Lord Jesus Christ our true God, and the
blessed Mother Virgins, who brought him forth without seed How was he then of
her substance.
; whose help, protection and intercession I pray for night and day, that she
may help me a sinner, as having that power from him whom she brought into the
world, Christ our God. And I receive and venerate the Images of Saints,
Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, Fathers, Eremites, not as Gods, etc. And with all
my mind I beseech them to intercede with God for me, that I may find mercy in
the day of judgment. On the same account I venerate the Relics of Saints, etc.

So he proceeds also to his Curses, and first he anathematizeth all that
venerate not Images: Then he curses those that reproach them: And next, that
speak evil of them: And next he curses those that do not from their hearts
teach Christian People the veneration of holy and honorable Images of all
Saints, which from the beginning pleased God.

Qu. 1. Where shall we have Painters enough? 2. Where shall we have Money to pay
them? 3. Where shall we find room to hold them? 4. Is not here a new Article of
Faith, and a new Commandment necessary to Salvation? 5. Was not their Church
Universal, as it stood before all or most here cursed? 6.
Was it not a hard matter to be saved, or be a Conformist on these terms, when
a Man that did but doubt of Images, yea, that did not teach them to the People,
and that from his heart, must be cursed? 7. Was not such a cursing sort of
Bishops a great Curse, Shame and Calamity to the Church? Did they not tempt
Infidels to curse or deride them all, while they thus cursed one another, even
their Councils?
Tharasius joyfully received all this, and Constantine Bishop of Constance in
Cyprus said, That this Libel of Theodosius drew many tears from him, (I suppose
of joy;) And now they all saw the way.

60. But now comes a Crowd more to do their Penance; Hypatius Bishop of Nice,
Leo Rhodi, Gregory of Pisidia, Gregory of Pessinunt, Leo of Iconium, Nicolas of
Hierapolis, Leo of Carpathium. And now Tarasius was sure of them, he grows
more upon them, and will know of them, Whence it was that in the last Council
they did what they did against Images? whether it was through mere Ignorance,
or by any reason that drew them to it: If through Ignorance, he bids them give
a Reason how they came to be so ignorant: If upon any Reason, to tell what that
Reason was, that it might be refuted.

Leo, Bishop of Rhode, answered, [We have sinned before God, and before the
Church, and before this holy Synod; Ignorance made us fall from the Truth, and
we have nothing to say in our own defense.]

Tharasius would know what Reason now moves and changes them; some say,
because it is the Doctrine or Faith of the Apostles and Fathers. Another
alleges a saying as of the Antioch Council, and another as of Isidore Pelus*
which the learned Reader examining, may see what proof it was that Images were
brought into Churches by; it is worth the noting. But another alleges the
Apostles and Prophets Tradition: But what is the proof? And did not the Council
at Constant, nor the Bishops in the Reign of the three former Emperors know
what Tradition was? Was it unknown till now? How came it now known then?
Or who told it this Council, when the last knew it not? Or if the last were
false Knaves, how shall we be sure that these were honest Men? Or that the same
Men were suddenly become wise and honest?

Tharasius asks one of the Bishops (Leo) How it came to pass that he that had
been ten or eight years a Bishop, never knew the Apostolical Tradition for
Images till just now? He answered, Because through many Ages, (or Times) Malice
endured, and so wicked Doctrine endured; and when this persevered for our sins,
it compelled us to go out of the way of Truth; but there is hope with God of
our salvation. But Constantine Cypr. answers him, You that are Bishops, and
Teachers of others, should not have had need to be taught your selves. Leo
replied, If there were no expression of sin in the Law, there would be no need
of Grace. Another (Hypatius) replied with the rest, We received ill Doctrine
from ill Masters. Yea, but says Tarasius, The Church ought not to receive
Priests from ill Teachers. Hypatius, Bishop of Nice, replieth, [Custom has so
obtained.]

61. Hereupon the Synod desired to be informed on what terms Heretics were to
be received, when they returned: so the Canons were brought and read. And
though many Canons and Fathers have said, that no Repentance for some Crimes
must restore a Man to the Priesthood, though it must to the Church; and there
is an Epistle of Tarasius put by Crabbe before this Council, in which he
determines that a Simoniack may be received upon Repentance to Communion, but
not to his Office; yet Tarasius here being desirous of their return, (knowing
that these Penitents that renounced the errors of their Education, and former
practice, would draw others to conformity with them) did resolutely answer all
that was objected against their reception.

62. Here (in Crab. p. 472.) a question fell in (upon their reading the Proofs,
that repenting Heretics were by the Church to be restored to their Bishoprics
and Priesthood,) What Heretics those were? And it was answered, that they were
Novatians, Encratists, and Arrians, and Manichees, Marcionists, and Eutychians.
And then one asks, Whether this Heresy (against Images) was greater or less
than all those?
And Tharasius answers, (like a Stoic) [Evil is always the same and equal,
especially in matters Ecclesiastical, in the Decrees of which both great and
small, to err is the same thing; for in both God's Law is violated.] (O Learned
Patriarch, worthy to be the setter up of Church-Images!) A venerable Monk that
was Vicar of the Oriental Patriarch,
answers, [That this Heresy is worse than all heresies, and the worst of all
Evils, as that which subverteth the Economy of our Savior.]

Note, Reader, how the Patriarchal Thrones did govern the Church and this
Council, and by what reasons Images and Saints intercessions were set up.
Arrianism, Manicheism, Marcionism, no Heresy that denied the essentials of
Christianity, no evil was so bad with them as to deny Church-Images, etc. And
so the late General Council, and Bishops, for three Emperors Reigns, had been
under the worst of Heresies and Evils, worse than Arrianism itself.

63. But here Constantine the Notary of the Constable. Patriarchate, happily
brought in so pertinent a Testimony, as much made for the pardon of the
penitent Bishops: He read out of the Council of Calcedon, how the Oriental and
other Bishops that had lately set up Eutyches and Dioscorus in the 2d Ephesian
Council,
cried at Calcedon, [We have all sinned, we all ask forgiveness.] And how
Thalassius, Eusebius and Eustathius cried, [We have all erred, we all ask
forgiveness.] And after them Iuvenal, and after him the Illyrican Bishops
cried, [We have all lapsed, we all ask pardon.] And so the President was
undeniable and effectual. These were not the first Bishops that went one way in
one Council under one Prince, and cried peccavimus for it, as Heresy, in the
next.

64. But Sabas the Monk starts yet a greater doubt than this, and that is,
whether they had true Ordination, and so were true Bishops. For seeing they
were bred in the times of Heresy, which had prevailed under so many Emperors,
and had Heretical Teachers, it is like they had Heretic Ordainers, seeing the
late Council showed what the Bishops then were. And the Fact was confessed, that
they were Ordained by Bishops that were Heretics, (that is, against
Church-Images, and praying to Saints for their intercession, and using
Relics.
) The Bishop of Rome's Vicars pleaded hard against their Ordination; but
Tarasius knew what a breach it would make in the Church if a General Council,
and all the Bishops that were at it, and all the rest that consented to it, and
were bred up in that Opinion, should be degraded, and the new Conformity
receive so great a stop; and what confusion it would make among the People, (as
they had seen in many former instances) and therefore he is against their
deposition. And first there are two passages read in their favor out of
Ruffinus and Socrates, and somewhat of Athanasius. And then when Peter Vic.
Romans alleged the instance of Meletius against it, Tarasius brought a notable
expeditious Argument, viz. The Fathers agree among themselves,
and do not contradict one another: ergo the rest consent to these that have
been cited. Methinks I could make great use of this Argumentation to save time,
labor and difficulty in disputing. E. G. Nazianzen wished there were no
difference of Bishops Seats (one above another) and said that he never saw
Councils that did not more harm than good. The Fathers differed not among
themselves; ergo the rest of the Fathers were of Gregory's mind.

In conclusion, they offered their Confessions, and were absolved.

65. In the 2d Action, the Rulers send in the Bishop of Neo-Caesarea to do his
Penance; and he also cries for mercy, and confesses that his errors and sins
were infinite, but now he believed as the Synod does. Tharasius asks him
whether he be not ashamed to have been ignorant so long, and questioneth the
sincerity of his Repentance, which he earnestly professes, condemning his Sin,
and promising Conformity.

Next a long Epistle of Adrian's to the Emperor and Empress, and another to
Tharasius for Images are read: For Popes use not to travel to General Councils,
but to send their Letters and Legates, lest in their present Disputes they be
found no wiser than other Men, and their Infallibility be proved less at hand,
than at a distance, where they hear not the Debates. Here Adrian to the Empress
relates the foresaid Vision of Constantine Mag. to be healed of his Leprosy,
a Fable fit to introduce Image Worship; and for an Infallible Pope to use,
fully confuted (as aforesaid) by Henry Fowlis (after many others) of Popish
Treasons.

66. Tharasius professes his consent to Adrian's Letters, yet professes,
[That he gives the Worship called Latria to God alone, Crab. p. 485.
and places his belief in him alone.] Contrary to Aquinas and his Followers,
and other such Roman Doctors. And the whole Council ecchoed their consent, and
voted for Images; so much can one Woman do in Power.

67. In the 3d Action, Gregory Bishop of Neo-Caesarea is to receive his
Absolution fully, and Tharasius puts in an Objection, that it is said that some
Bishops in the late Persecution did scourge dissenting Bishops, and such were
not to be received: But Gregory protested that he scourged none. But he is
accused by others, to have been a Leader of the last Council against Images,
and so he is deferred. And the Epistle of Tharasius to the Eastern Patriarchs
is read, (and their Answers;) in which it is to be noted, that yet
Image Worship was not owned: For he professes in his Creed to them, that [We
admit Pictures for no other use, but that they may the more perfectly be
exhibited to the sight and eyes; as the Lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the World, etc.]

And the 4th Action containing all their Proofs from Scripture and Fathers,
plead but for the memorative and instructing use of Images, by which they are
to the eye, what words are to the ear: But they should have considered the
danger of abuse, and foreseen how much further they were like to be carried, as
with the Papists they are.

And in the fifth Action they proceed in reading more, to the same purpose, for
commemorative Images;
till one read the Itinerary of the Apostles, which they voted to be a cursed
Book, and said it was that Book that the Synod against Images made use of:
whereupon Greg. Neo-Caes. and Theodos. Amorii, are asked whether that Book was
read in the false Synod, and they swear by God, that it was not, but only some
recited words as out of it. Pretorius a Nobleman said, [But they did all by the
Royal Procuration.] And they proceed to refell the Testimonies that were
brought against Images. Cosmas Cubicularius brought out an Old Testament with
Scholia blotted out, where was yet legible on the second Commandment, [If we
make the Image of Christ, truly we do not for the similitude adore it, but that
the mind might be raised upward by what is seen.] The Expunction was said by
Tarasius to be done by his Predecessors, Anastasius, Constantine, Victor, all
Heretics. And here they cursed Concealers and Cancellers of Writings. (Woe then
to Rome!) Other rased Books were read, and Curses added against the Adversaries
of Images, and those that communicate with them.

68. In the 6th Action, the words of the 7th Council against Images are brought
forth in a Book with a Confutation of them, which the Reader that has leisure
may compare. Greg. Neo-Caesar. read the Councils words. Joan. Cancellarius read
the Confutation. It fell out well that this Confutation was undertaken, or else
we had lost the Decrees of this Council; as the Acts, for ought I know, are
buried.

In general every sober Reader may perceive a great deal of difference between
the style of the Council of Constantinople, and the Answer. The Council speaks
with as much temper and gravity, as most of the best Councils have done. The
Answer abounds with such railings and reviling words, as are meeter for a
common Scold, than for Divines. The common language of it, is to call the
Bishops of the Council, Blinded, Ignorant, Fools, Wicked, Deceivers,
Blasphemers, and such like. And if all the Bishops on earth be present, or
represented in a General Council, what a Case then was the Church in? And how
shall we know what Council is to be believed, unless the Pope make all the
difference?

69. The number of the Bishops were At Constantinople
338. They first show how Satan has brought in Idolatry. One of their chief
Arguments against Images of Christ, is, that they savor of Nestorianism,
representing Christ by his mere Manhood, when they cannot paint his Godhead;
calling that Picture Christ, and overthrowing the Economy and Union of his
Person. I meddle not with the weight of their reason, but only recite it.

70* It Is again worth the noting, that the Answer to them says, (For their
charging Images, as drawing down the mind to Creature-worship; Latria) [O
insanien'em linguam, quam instar machaerae acutae and veneno imbutae possident,
etc. O mad tongue, which they possess like a sharp sword, imbued with poison,
etc. For no Christian ever gave Latriam to the Image of those that are under
Heaven; for this is the Fable of the Gentiles, and Devils invention, and the
aggression of Satanical Action.] -- [Our Latria is in Spirit and Truth.] Other
passages forbid us to think that they juggle here, and denying Latriam only to
Creatures under Heaven, intend to give it to Creatures in Heaven; for they
appropriate it elsewhere to God: by which they greatly differ from Aquinas and
such Papists.

71. Note also that (whether well or ill) both these adverse Councils curse
Pope Honorius as an Heretic; see Crab. p. 560, etc.

72. Another Argument which the first 7th Council (at Constable.) uses against
Images in Churches, is, that Christ himself has chosen and instituted such an
Image as he would be represented by, and that is the Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, and therefore we must not presume to make another, as if he had not
done it well. This shows that this General Council and the Church then held
that the Bread was not nullified, nor become Christ's Essence, but was the
Image or Representation of his broken Body, and so called, The Body of Christ,
as we say of E. G. Caesar's Image, This is Caesar.

But the adverse Council, or the Answer, raileth at this as an abominable
Speech, (Crab. p. 567.) as if the Sacrament might not be called, The Image of
Christ, (though de re they seem not at all to differ) says the Constantine
Council, [Imaginem totam electam, viz. substantiam panis mandavit appon^, ne
scilic^t, humana effigy figurata, idolatria induceretur.] A Deo tradita Imago
Carnis ejus panis scilicet Divinus impletus est Spiritu Sancto, cum poculo
quoque sanguinis lateris illius vivificantis. Haec igitur vera incarnatae
dispensatienis Christi Dei nostri Imago sicut praedictum est, quam ipse nobis
verus naturae vividus Creator propria voce tradidit.

73. Note also (Crab. p. 568.) that the Constantin. Council plead, That this
use of Images began neither by the Tradition of Christ,
nor of the Apostles, nor of the Fathers: And that the Answer says, that [The
Veneration of Images was delivered with many other things without Scripture,
from the Apostles time, etc.

Here note 1. How those Papists (in particular which I have elsewhere answered)
are confuted, who say that [Tradition is universal, sure, known, constant, and
no Churches pleaded Traditions against each other, at least in necessary things
or Faith; but if we have not the right now, it must be because the Councils
went all to Bed in one mind, and rose in another.] You see here that the 2d
Nieene Council took the Doctrine of the former to be Anathematized Heresy; and
that 338 Bishops in one of the Councils, (and the most under many Emperors) and
350 Bishops in the other Council, pleaded Tradition against each other. But
sure any Man that has read the Fathers of the first 300 or 400 years, will
easily see which of them was in the right, excepting the sign of the Cross.

2. Note also that it is here confessed, that there is no Scriptural Tradition
of this use of Images.

74. In the Definitions of the Constantine Council it is to be noted,

1. That they are not so much against the intercession of the Virgin Mary, or
Saints, as the Protestants mostly are, nor as the Papists make them: For (Crab.
p. 589.) they say Defin. 15. [If any confess not holy Mary ever a Virgin,
properly and truly the Parent of God, and superior to every Creature visible
and invisible What! superior to Christ's Humanity? How prove you that she is
superior to the highest Angels?
, and does not with a sincere Faith crave her Intercessions, as having this
liberty with him that is born of her, God, let him be Anathema.

And Defin. 17. [If any confess not that all who from the beginning to this
day, before the Law, and under the Law, and in the Grace given of God, being
Saints are venerable in the presence of God in soul and body Are the bodies of
all Saints already risen?
, and does not seek their intercessions, as having liberty with God to
intercede for the world according to Ecclesiastical Tradition, let him be
Anathema.] Were not these Men high enough in Creature-worship, to escape the
Curse of Heretics?

2. I noted before how they do Defin. 7. conclude, that Christ's Body glorified
is not proper Flesh, and yet not incorporeal, but his true Body.

75. That you may see that this Council were of one mind, in the conclusion
they all say, Omnes se credimus; Omnes idem sapimus; Omnes approbando probando
volentes subscripsimus, etc. We all thus believe, (against Images;) We are all
of one mind; We all subscribe willingly, as approving, etc. Only Germanus,
George, and Manzurus, (supposed to be Damascene) are found among the
Anathematized Dissenters, Crab. p. 592.

76. The 7th Action of the Nicene Synod, contains their Definition, in which
they deny indeed Latria to Images, but yet say (more than before) [That they
that see the Pictures, may come to the memory and desire of the Prototypes; as
by the sight of the Cross, and by the holy Gospels, and holy Oblations. -- For
the honor of the Image resulteth to the Prototype, and he that adoreth the
Image, in it adoreth the described Argument.] So that they that began lower, in
the conclusion came up to Adoration.

They all profess full consent, and curse all that bring Scripture against
Images, and that call them Idols, etc. They curse the last Council, as Rugiens
Conciliabulum; and three dissenting Bishops, and three former Patriarchs of
Constable. two more Bishops they add. They curse all that receive not Images, and
all that salute them not in the Name of the Lord and his Saints, and that care
not for unwritten Tradition of the Church.

Next they write an Epistle to the Empress, (and her Child) applauding them,
and adding, that [Denying Latria to them, they judge them to be adored and
saluted, and pronounced every one Anathematized that is so minded, as to stick
at and doubt of the Adoration of Images, and this as empowred by God's Spirit
so to curse them; Crab. p. 605.
which Anathema (say they) is nothing else but separating them from Christ.

Judge now what the use of such Councils was, [To curse Men, and separate them
from Christ,] and that if they do but doubt of adoring Images. Reader, if thou
believe that in these Heretications, Separations and Damnations of such, they
were of Christ's mind, and did his work, and served not his Enemy against him
and his Church, I am not of thy mind, nor am ever like to be.

Another Epistle they wrote to the People, and one Tharasius sent to Adrian.

77. Some Canons of theirs are added, of which this is the third.

[Every Election of a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, which is made by Magistrates,
shall remain void, by the Canon which says, If any Bishop use the Secular
Magistrates, to obtain by them a Church, let him be deposed and separated, and
all that communicate with him Alas! Must all be Separatists from the Bishops in
England, France, etc?


The 4th Canon is, [Paul says, I have desired no Man's silver or gold, etc. If
therefore any one exacting money, or any other thing, or for any affection of
his own, shall be found to drive from his Ministry, or to segregate any one of
his Clergy, or to shut the venerable Temple, forbidding in it the Divine
Ministeries, showing his madness even on that which has no sense As by
Interdicts
, such an one is truly senseless, and shall be obnoxious to the Lex Talionis,
and his work shall fall upon his own head, as being a transgressor of God's
Law: For the chief Apostle Peter commanded, Feed the Flock of God, overseeing
it, not by force, but freely and voluntarily, according to God; not for filthy
lucre sake, but readily and cheerfully; not as having a dominion ^ver the
Clergy, but as being examples to the Flock.

The 15th Canon forbids one Man to have two Churches.

The 22d Canon forbids Canting, and Minstrels, and Ribald Songs at meat: But
the 7th savors of their Superstition, forbidding any Temple to be Consecrated
without Relics, and ordering Temples that have no Relics to be put down.

78. In the Letter to Adrian, Tharasius tells him, that he had a year before
attempted the like at Constable. but was hindered a whole year by violent Men;
which further shows how far the opposition to Images had obtained, when Irene
began to set them up.

79. So much of the 2d Nicene Council, in which by the power of one Woman, and
Stauratius a Senator that ruled her, the judgment of the Universal Church (if
the Council, or most of the Bishops in the Empire signify it) was suddenly
changed from what it had been during the Reign of the three last Emperors, and
made that Church-use of Images (which some thought sinful, and no judicious
Christian could judge necessary, but indifferent, and of use to some) to be
henceforth so necessary, that the Denyers are sentenced for cursed Heretics,
yea the Doubters cut off from Christ.

80. CCXXXIII. Binnius next adds a Council at Forojulium, An. 791. held by
Paulinus Bishop of Aquileia: in which is a Speech of his to the Bishops, and an
excellent Creed, and 14 Canons, written as by himself; all in a far more
understanding, sober, pious manner, than is usual among the Patriarchs at
General Councils. The 13th Canon is an excellent Precept for the holy
observation of the Lord's Day, wholly in Holiness, and in Hymns of Praise to
the Holy Ghost, that blessed it by his admirable Advent, calling it God's
Sabbath of delight, beginning the 7th day evening, not for the honor of the
7th day, but of this Sabbath, etc.

81. Yet rash and unskilful words set the Bishops into more divisions. Faelix
Urgelitanus, and from him Elipandus Bishop of Toletum,
taught that Christ as the eternal Word was God's Natural Son, but that as Man
he was his Adopted Son. Hence his Adversaries gathered that he was a Nestorian,
and held two Sons. A Council An. 792. at Ratisbonne was called to condemn this
Heresy. Yea, Jonas Bishop of Orleance says, That it infected Spain for a
great part, (and he knew their Followers to be certain Antichrists, by their
faces and habits.) But wise Men think that the Controversy was not de re, but
de nomine; And that if one Christ be said to be one Son of God in two natures,
by a twofold fundamentum of the Relation of a Son, and that the foundation of
the eternal Relation was the eternal Generation, and the foundation of the
temporal Relation in the Humanity, was the temporal Generation and Union with
the Deity, yet this proves not two Sons: yea, or if it had been said that two
Generations being the fundamenta, two Relations of Sonship result from them.
If this be unskilfully and illogically spoken, it will not follow that the
Speakers held two Persons, or made any more division of Christ's natures than
their Adversaries did; but only might think that a double filiation from a
double fundamentum, might be found in one Person. Let this Opinion be wrong, I
see not how the Hereticators could make it a damnable Heresy. But it is pity
that Faelix had not taken warning by the Churches long and sad experience, to
avoid such wordy occasions of Contention, and not to set again on work either
the Heretical, or the Hereticating Evil Spirit.

82. Claudius Taurinensis,
a great and worthy Bishop at this time, did set in against the Worship and
Church-use of Images, against whom Jonas Aurelianensis wrote, whose Writings
are in the Biblioth. Patrum by Marg. de la Bigne; Read them, and judge as you
see cause.

. 83. About the time of the Frankford Council, came out a Book-against Images,
which is published as written by Carolus Magnus himself. A great Controversy
it is, Who is the Author? No small number say, it was Charles his own indeed.
Others, that it was written at his Will and Command. But Binnius and some
others deny it, Bin. p. 288 Bellarm. de Imag. lib. 2.
and say it was written by Serenus Massiliensis an Iconoclast, and his
Disciples. How we shall know the Truth in such Cases, I cannot tell: But it is
confessed that Spain and France were then much infected with the Doctrine which
is against Church-Images. It is certain that Pope Adrian says, that Carolus
Mag. sent him such a Book by Engilbert an Abbot, and his Epistle against it is
extant.

. 84. CCXXXIV. We come now to a great Council at Frankford, called by Charles
Mag. present, and by Adrian. And as late as it is, all the Historians cannot
tell us whether it was Universal, or what they did. Some say it was a General
Council, because Charles summoned it as such, and 300 Bishops were there.
Others say No, it was but Provincial, because none of the Bishops of the East
were there, It was such a Western General Council as that at Trent was for
extent
(a sufficient reason; and the like may be brought to prove, that there never
was a General Council in the World* so called from the whole World, but only
from the whole Empire.) That they dealt with the Case of Elipandus Bishop of
Toletum, and Faelix Urgel. is agreed on, but what they did about Images is not
agreed on. Ado; Rhegino, Aimonius Urspurg. and many Historians say, They
condemned the Nicene Council that was for Images. Even Baronius is of the same
mind, thinking the Liber Carolinus deceived them. He proves this to be the
common judgment of Historians, and ancient Writers. Bellarmine Lib. 2. de
Imagine. cap. 14. Even Dion. Petavius after all says, In which Synod of
Frankford, the 7th General Council was rejected by the Bishops that were
ignorant ^f its Decrees, An. 794. Hist. l. 8. c. 7.
(his Brother) is of the same judgment. And is not their Concession more than
twenty later Men's denial? Yea Genebrard concurreth; yet Binnius leaves his
Master Baronius, and gives his Reasons against them. And he does well prove,
that it could not be by ignorance and surprise, that the Frankford Council
should condemn the Nicene; and he is loath to think that they were wilful
Heretics, especially when they profess to follow Tradition: But he knew that
the 7th Constantin. Council against Images, professed to follow Tradition. And if
French Men will make us Heretics for speaking English, it is no wonder if we
make them Heretics for speaking French. If Men will Hereticate others for
Images, or Ceremonies, or Words, others will measure the like to them. This
kind of Hereticating is circular, and has no end.

Suarez will have either the Historians to have erred, or their Books to be
corrupted; with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you. You shall
then give us leave to suspect your Books, where there is far greater cause.

85. But the Synod, or Paulinus Aquileiensis, a learned worthy Bishop in the
Synod, (whom the rest follow) copiously write a Confutation of Elipandus and
Faelix. And the charges of Heresy are,

1. That they call Christ as to his Humanity, God's Adopted Son, (and his
eternal Person his Natural Son.
) 2. Because they say he was Adopted by Grace. 3. Because they say he was a
Servant.
Alas for the Church, that must thus by Bishops be distracted for want of skill
in words! Is there no remedy? Binnius confesses that some Papists think that
they meant right, as Durandus did, and that the difference was but in words.

The Council supposes Elipandus and Faelix to use the word [Adoption]
exclusively, as to Christ's Filiation by Generation, as conceived by the Holy
Ghost: whereas it is far likelier that they took both Conjunct to be the
fundamentum filiationis. God adopting, that is, of his good Will freely
creating Christ's Humane Nature, and uniting it to the Divine; called Adoption,
because it was God's free act of Love, and not a communication of his Essence,
as the eternal Generation is. The Humanity is not God's Essence. And I hope the
name of [The Son of Man] used so often by Christ of himself, is no Heresy. And
there appears no reason to censure them as denying either the eternal or
temporal Generation of Christ.

But they argue against them,

1. That he is said to be Adopted, that is, not Generated. 2. And that he
merited it not, but was adopted of mere Grace, but so was not Christ.
Answ. 1. These Objections seem to confess that the difference was but
denomine; and is the unapt use of such a word, an Heresy? How many Heresies
then have most Councils, and Fathers, and all Authors?

2. Must we needs understand God's Adoption, just in the measure as man's?

3. We are Regenerate, and yet Adopted. Why then is it a Heresy, to say, that
Christ was Generated, and yet Adopted?

4. Grace is either that which is against the merit of evil, or only without
the merit of good. It Is doubtless that the first was not by them imputed to
Christ: And it is undoubted to me, that it is consequentially Blasphemy, to say
that Christ's Humane Nature, or any Angel had not the later. For the very
being, and therewith all the good in the constitution and antecedent benefits
of a Creature must go before his merits. Merit is too low a word for the Divine
Nature as such before the Incarnation. And the Humane Nature did not merit to
be before it was, e. g. to be conceived by the Holy Ghost, etc. As free
Benefits are called Grace, Christ's Humane Nature had Grace.

But they object, that the two Bishops did not distinguish between Christ's
Adoption, and ours.

Ans. 1. We have not their Writings to see that.

2. If they did not, it is like it was, because they thought it needless, being
understood by all. They believed the Creed, That Christ was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary; and that the Godhead assumed the
Humanity into personal Union. They knew that none dreamed that it was so with
us.

The Council says, That it is Heresy to use the name Adoption of Christ. The
two Bishops seemed to think, That God's free assuming of the Humanity into
personal Unity with the Word eternally generated by the Father, might be called
Adoption. If the improper use of the word be Heresy, I leave it to the Reader
to judge which were the Heretics: But I think neither.

But another part of the Heresy was,
to say that Christ was a Servant as Man. And they think he was no Servant,
because a Son. Some will think confidently that the Council were here
Heretics, but I think they did but strive about words. By [Servant] the
Council seems to mean exclusively, [One that is no Son.] But the other meant
inclusively, [A Son and Servant.]

They take him for a Servant, that owes Service and Obedience. And Christ as
Man owed Obedience to his Father on two accounts;

1. As a reasonable Creature to his Maker.

2. As one that had by voluntary Sponsion undertaken it. I might add,

3. As the special Law of Mediation was imposed on him, or given him, as Man,
by which it was made his special duty to die for Man, etc. He says when he
comes into the world, Here I am to do thy Will, O God; yea, thy Law is in my
heart. Did he not take upon him the form of a servant? Phil. 2. 7. which was
not a show of that which is not, but of that which is. Is he not called God's
righteous Servant justifying many, Isa. 53. 11. Does not God often call him, My
Servant, Isa. 49. 6. and 52. 13. Zech. 3. 8.

The Council seemed to think that the Bishops thought that Christ was born a
Servant, and not a Son, and was adopted a Son only after for his merits: Bin.
p. 428. [Ex quadam Elipandi confessione quae in Biblioth. Toletana reperitur in
quodam libro a Beato and Heterio contra Elipandum scripto; aiunt nonnulli
Faelicem and Elipandum non in mysterio Incarnationis, sed tantum abut^ndo voce
Adoptionis, instar Durandi, aberrasse: Idemque conjecturis affirmant istis,
quod nihil eorum quae Nestorio objecta fuerant in Conc. Ephesians. contra Elipandum
attulerent, etc. See the rest.
But there is no show of reason to impute this to them that professed to
believe the Creeds and Scripture, and said no such words. They seemed to intend
nothing but to distinguish the natural eternal Generation of the second Person
in the Trinity, from the temporal Generation of the Man Christ Jesus, which was
an Act of free Beneficence.

But they concluded that they were Nestorians, because they intimated two Sons,
by saying that he was eternally begotten, and yet adopted a Son.

Ans. 1. It is not unlike that Nestorius himself for want of more skill in
speaking, was used as they were.

2. Why should that be imputed to them which they deny? They are told that as
Nestorius craftily denied two Persons, and yet inferred two, so do they. But is
not this a vindication of Nestorius by a Council? (Who knows what a man
holds, better than himself?)

Obj. But by consequence Heresy will follow.

Ans. If all are Heretics that hold any Error which such a greater Error would
follow from as is called Heresy, I doubt not but every Council and Bishop, and
Christian were Heretics; the saying of some great Divines being true, That
Truths of Faith and Morality are so connext, that he that holds the least
Error therein, does by consequence subvert the foundation. You may say that
every man that tells a lie, or commits any known sin, is an Atheist, and
that if he believed that there is a God, he would know that he must not sin
against him; he that sins before his Face, denies his Omniscience, and (...)
denies God, etc. At this rate all are Atheists and Heretics.

3. But may not one that says, [Christ as the second Person in Trinity was the
Eternal Son of God; and as Man, was by Generation in thus made the Son of God
and Man:] truly mean that it is but one Person that in one respect is the
Eternal Son, and in another respect the Temporal Son? May he not hold that the
personal Unity makes it unmeet to say, There are two Sons, because that would
imply two Persons, which they and Nestorius denied? But, again I say, what if
they had said that there might be two Filiations, or filial Relations in one
Person, resulting from two foundations, Eternal and Temporal Generation, and if
this had been an unapt speech, (to say ex duobus fundamentis duae orientur
relationes) yet how comes it to be Heresy?

86. I write not this, and such like, to justify the accused; for I think the
Council said well, (^in. p. 4. 18.) 1. Cur nobis non sufficient quae in
Sanctorum Patrum dictis inveniuntur, and universali Catholica sanctionis
consuetudine confirmantur. 2. Quare generationem Filii Dei vel aeternam de
Patre, vel temporalem de Matre quisquam hominum audeat investigare, dicente
Scriptura, altiora te ne quaesieris! O well said! Happy Church, if the Bishops
had held to this: But here you see that they held a double Generation, Eternal
and Temporal, and yet but one Filiation. I write this, because the Hereticating
Spirit yet reigns, and by these old Weapons fights against Love and the
Churches Unity, on pretense of Orthodoxness; and to this day the Papists reject
a great part of Christ's Church as Heretics, by the countenance of former
Councils censoriousness, calling Christ's Members Iconoclasts, Monothelites,
Nestorians, Eutychians, and many such names, some fetched from indifferent
things, (or duties) and some from quarrels about hard words.

87. Note here that Binnius expressly says, that Adhuc nondum est certum qualis
in particulari fuerit haeresis Faeliciana: It is not yet certain what this
Faelician Heresy was. And if so, I hope I shall not be censured for the same,
notwithstanding you may say, the Council knew it.

88. It Is worth the noting as to the credit of Council Records,
which Binnius there says, (p. 427.) [If this Council as it now is extant, may
without temerity be rejected, all Councils by the same reason may be rejected
which Surius has gathered from the Catholic Libraries.] He confesses that
the rest are no surer than this, and yet that Baronius, Bellarmine, by the
generality or number of Historians consent, do confess that there was by this
Council a rejection of the Conc. 2d Nicene, which is now here to be found in it.

89. The Council at Frankford determined that Christ was not a Servant,
Servitute poenali Deo subjectus, Vid. Not. Bin. p. 428
subject to God by penal Servitude. The present agreement of Christians, takes
this for Socinianism and Heresy: Christ suffered for our sins; his subjection
to Poverty, Reproach, the Cross, and many works, (as Fasting, being carried
about by Satan, and tempted, Mat. 4. 1. washing his Disciples feet, traveling
on foot, being subject to his Mother, and to Princes, paying Tribute, etc.) we
suppose were part of his Humiliation. The Holiness and Obedience was good, and
no Penalty: But the matter of that Obedience was the Cross and Suffering, which
is Malum Naturae. And if this was no punishment (voluntarily accepted by his
Sponsion) how was Christ our Surety, bearing our Transgressions? how suffered
he for our sins? Is not suffering for sin, even of others, penal? Is not the
denial of Christ's penal Service and Suffering, a denial of his Satisfaction
and our Redemption? You see how easy it is to find Heresy and Infidelity
itself in unskilful words; and yet it is like the Speakers meant better than
they spoke.

90. Note that Pope Adrian first made himself Judge, and Anathematized
Elipandus as an Heretic, and so the Council was biased (with the Emperor;)
and how great Adrian's power was (having made Charles Emperor, and Charles made
him a Prince,) it is easy to conjecture.

91. Binnius says, p. 429. that Faelix, besides his other Heresy, impugned
Images, and that this is said by the Council. Senonens. in Decret, fid. c. 14.
Platina in Adrian. Sabellic. Enead. 8. li. 8. Alph. de Castro verb. Imago. And
that Claud. Taurin. being his Disciple, and an Iconomach, he must needs be so
himself: From whence I argue, that it is most probable that the Historians say
true, that say Charles and the Council of Frankford were against the Nicene
Council and Images. For else how could it come to pass, that they say not one
word against Faelix and Elipandus for denying Images,
when their Party was grown so great in Spain and France?

92. Pope Adrian dying, Leo the 3d succeeded. His Piety was so great, that
Anastasius writes, as it were, a Volumn, in naming the good works which he did,
that is, the Silks, Vails, Clothing, Silver, Gold, and innumerable gifts which
he bestowed upon Posts, Pillars, Altars, Walls, Floors, Utensils, it would tire
one to read them, and the hard names of them; yea, he said seven Masses a day.
Yet some Kinsmen of Pope Adrian's, Paschal Primicerius, and Campullus
Sacellarius, and Maurus Nepesinus, laid Crimes to his charge; and assaulted
him, and twice put out his Eyes, and cut out his Tongue, and put him in a
Monastery;
yet (says the Story) his Eyes and Tongue were perfectly restored, and he fled
to his Protector Charles into Germany; and Charles came to Rome, and judged his
Accusers to Banishment, and restored him; and he crowned Charles then Emperor
of the West, and perfected the Donation to him of all that had been the
Emperor's. Charles gave him great Presents; and with his own Revenues and that,
he laid out so much Silver and Treasure at Rome, and did so many new things in
the Churches, that if you read but Adrian's life, and this Leo's, you will be
ashamed to disgrace the Church of Rome with any Titles or Pretenses of the
ancient primitive state, but must say, Old things are past away, behold all is
become new. Charles the Great, made the Pope Great.

93. Some Historians say,
that the kissing of the Pope's Foot, was brought in thus by this Pope Leo: A
handsome Woman kissed his Hand, which so inflamed his Heart with Lust, that he cut
off the Hand that the Woman kissed, and ordained that ever after the Pope's Foot
should be kissed instead of his Hand: But I rather believe with Binnius, that
this is but a Fiction, because 1. There is mention before this of kissing the
Pope's Foot. 2. And I do not think that such a Heart would so easily part with
a Hand.

94. To look back to the East; when Irene had kept up Images awhile, her Son
Constantine grown up, is weary of her Government and Stauratius, and deposes
her; and when he ruled, the Bishops mostly were conformable to him: But in his
youthful Folly and Rage, he put out the Eyes of his Uncle Nicephorus, and
Alexius a Captain; he put away Mary his Wife, and took one Theodota, that
better pleased him, in Marriage; one Joseph that married them, See Petav. Hist.
li. 8. c. 6.
was preferred for it. Tarasius connived, and durst not gainsay. Theodore
Studita and Plato therefore renounce the communion of Tarasius. At last, An.
797. his Mother Irene, and Stauratius, found means to apprehend him, and murder
him, that is, put out his Eyes, of which he dyed, which some celebrate as a
pious Act; it was done by her that set up Images. But within one year,
Nicephorus deposed and banished her into Lesbos, where she dyed, and he took
the Empire to himself.

95. Binnius, p. 445. says, [That the Emperor banished Theodore Studita, for
reproving his Marriage, and when he added crime to crime, Merito jussu Matris
quam imperio exuerat, zelo justitiae non regni, oculis, imperio, and vita
orbatus est. By the command of his Mother in her zeal for justice, he was
deservedly deprived of his Empire, Eyes and Life.] What is not just with such
Historians, that makes for their Interest? And how contemptible is their
Censure of good or evil Men, which has no better Measures?

96. He tells us also, (p. 444.) that the Spanish and French Bishops at these
times, of their own heads, without the Pope, added [Filioque] to the Creed,
which has to this day made so great a stir. It seems they thought that the
Pope's Authority was not necessary to it.

97. He adds, that Charles the Great being dead, the People grew bold, and rose
up again against the Pope; which occasioned Rapines, Flames, and Murders, that
Ludovicus the new Emperor was fain to take his Fathers Office, and come to Rome
to save the Pope, and suppress the Rebels.

98. The Venetian Duke killing a Patriarch, Johan. Gradensis, Paulus Patriarch
of Aquileia called a Synod to crave aid of Charles.

99. CCXXXV. An. 806. A Council was held at Constantinople,
in the Cause of the foresaid Joseph that had married the Emperor to his second
wife, who had been ejected by Tarasius from his Bishopric, and the Emperor
calling a Council, they restored him; wherefore Theodorus Studita called them a
Council of Heretics and Adulterants, because they restored the Causer of the
Emperor's Adultery. But how few Emperors have not found Councils of Bishops
ready to do their Will?

100. Charles the Great making his Will, divided his Empire between his three
Sons, giving them Laws of Communion and Succession, (that if one dyed without
Children, his Kingdom be divided between the other two; but if he have such
Sons as the People will choose,
they succeed their Father:) Commanding all three that they be the Defenders of
the Bishop of Rome, as he and his Father and Grandfather had been (to their
commodity.)

101. CCXXXVI. An. 809. Was another Council at Constantinople, which was
gathered to condemn honest Theodorus Studita,
and Plato, and such as had been against the restoring of Joseph, of which
says Binnius, [When the Bishops there Congregate had brought the most holy
Plato in Chains to be judged, and had passed the Sentence of Anathema on the
Universal Catholic Church This is not the first time that Councils have (...)
Catholic Church.
that was against their Error, they made a most wicked Decree, that the
Marriage of Constantine with Theodota, (his Wife yet living, thrust into a
Monastery) should be said to be lawful by dispensation. They added for the
Emperor's sake this wicked and shameless Sentence, That the Laws of God They
mean but the Canons of the Church.
can do nothing against Kings; and that if any imitate Chrysostom, and shed his
Blood for Truth and Justice, he is not to be called a Martyr: That Bishops have
power to dispense with all the Canons.] Remember that Papists confess all this
to be wicked. We have not the Acts and Speeches of these Councils preserved.

102. CCXXXVII. An. 809. A Council was held at Aquisgrana, about the Procession
of the Holy Ghost, and the word [Filioque] in the Creed A new Controversy.
. Of which they sent some Messengers to the Pope, who approved the thing, but
dissuaded them from adding it to be sung in the Creed; and after inscribed the
Creed without Filioque in Latin and Greek in two Silver Tables, to show that it
should not be changed: which yet after it was by the Pope's consent.

The French Annals say, that in this Council they treated of the state of the
Church, and conversation of the Clergy, but determined nothing for the
greatnesses of the matter.

103. CCXXXVIII. An. 113. (Yet under Charles the Great) a Council was held (by
his Command) at Arles, where many very good Canons were made for the
Reformation of the Bishops and Priests.

104. CCXXXIX. The same year the same Charles had a Council at Tours, which
made 51 as honest Articles, as if Martin himself had been amongst them;
even against all kind of sin, and for all godly living. Among others, the 37th
Canon tells us, that the custom of not kneeling in Prayer on any Lord's Day, (no
not at the Sacrament) nor on any Weekday between Easter and Whitsuntide, was
yet in force; on other days they required humble kneeling.

105. CCXL. Yet another Council did Charles call the same year at Chalons
(Cabillonense) in which he ordered Schools for the restoring of Learning, (our
Alcuin being his Persuader greatly esteemed by him) Learning then being almost
worn away, (and Ignorance taking place) till he greatly revived it: no less
than 67 Canons were here made, most very good ones; but praying for the Souls
of the Faithful departed, and anointing the Sick, are there enjoined.

106. Among many good Canons, the 13th is against the Oath of Obedience to the
Bishop,
and to the Church. The words Translated are these: [It is reported of some
Brethren (Bishops) that they force them, that they are about to ordain, to
swear, that they are worthy, and will not do contrary to the Canons, and will
be obedient to the Bishop that ordains them, and to the Church in which they
are ordained; which Oath, because it is very dangerous, we all ordain shall be
forbidden.]

107. The 15th Canon says, [It is said that in some places the Archdeacons
exercise a certain domination over the Parish-Presbyters, and take Fees of
them; which is a matter of Tyranny, rather than of order of Rectitude: For if
the Bishops must not Lord it in the Clergy, but be Examples to the Flocks, much
less may these do it.

108. The 25th Canon complaining how the old Excommunicating and Reconciling
was grown out of use Council-Curses for Opinions take place
, they desired the Emperor's help how they should be restored.

109. Can. 33. They say, That Confession to God and Man are both good; but that
Confession made to God, purges sin; and that which is made to the Priest,
teaches how their sins may be purged.

110. The 45th Canon is against them, that by going to holy places, Rome, or
Tours, think to have their sins forgiven.

111. CCXLI. Yet another Council the same year 813, was held under Charles M.
at Mentz in Germany to the like purpose, many godly Canons being made.

112. CCXLII. Yet another under Charles at Rhemes, for Instructing and
Catechizing, and many good things, like the former.

113. CCXLIII. But we have not done with Images yet, An. 814. There was a
Council called at Constantinople, which damned the Council of Nice 2. Irene
having set up Images, and murdered the Emperor her own Son, (as is aforesaid)
was deposed by Nicephorus, who Reigned near ten years, with Stauratius his Son;
he was no Friend to the Clergies power, and was killed in Fight by the
Bulgarians, and his wounded Son Reigned a few months. Michael Curopalates
succeeded, a Man of great Piety and Peace, but unfit for War, who being
overcome by the Bulgarians, he consented to give up the Empire to Leo Armenus,
a better and prosperous Soldier. This Leo the 5th, was of the mind of the
former Leo's against Images, and his mind being known, the Bishops conformed
presently, insomuch that in his 2d year this Council called by him,
Anathematized the Bishops that would not renounce the Nicene 2d Council; and
when they lay prostrate on the earth, it is said some trod on some of them, and
they turned them at a Backdoor out of the Council: For the Patriarch
Nicephorus, that was for Images, was deposed, and Theodorus Melissenus that was
against them put in his place, and led the rest. Thus did Council against
Council thunder Anathema's, and curse each other by separating them from
Christ, till few were left uncursed. The Rulers of the Monasteries also were
called in, and those that would not consent against Images, were rejected.
Nicetas and Theodorus Studita were the Champions for Images, and were both
banished and imprisoned. Theodore wrote to the Council for Images, and tells
them that [To take away the venerable Adoration of the Images of Christ, Bin p.
470 Epist. Theod.
and of the Mother of God, and of all the Saints, was to overthrow the Economy
of Christ.] And he continued in Prison to preach and write for Images.

Those Councils that pleased not the Papists, we have not the Acts of, as we
have of such as Nic. 2. that pleased them. Had we all the Speeches and
Arguments used in this and other Councils against Images, as largely as those
that were for them, we might better see which had the better management.

114. CCXLIV. The Clergy had for many hundred years abrogated God's Law, [He
that sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed;] and had put
Penance for the punishment instead of Death: But now at last the murdering of
one John a Bishop (inhoneste and inaudite mordridatus, as they then spoke) they
were put to find some harder Penalty to save the Clergies Lives: And so they
set great Fines of Money on the Murderers; and more than so, He that wilfully
murdered a Bishop must eat no flesh, nor drink any Wine as long as he lived. If
Murder now had no greater a punishment, Bishops would scarce be safe any more
than others. This was at a Council at a Village called Theorius, or Dietenhoven.

115. Next succeeds Pope Stephen at Rome; Platina says Stephen the 4th,
Anastasius and Binnius say Stephen the 5th. Platina and others say that he
Reigned but seven months; Anastasius and others say seven years, and seven
months. Platina says he was the Son of Julius a Roman; Anastasius says he was
the Son of Marinus It Is like Julius Marinus, as Onuphrius says, was his name.
.

Charles dying, the Empire came to his Son Ludovicus called Pius, his Brothers
dying also. The Bishops of Italy (says Platina and others) stirred up Bernard
to rebel against him; but he was conquered, and put to death: as also were the
Saxon Rebels. Paschal first succeeding, Stephen is made Pope without the
Emperor's knowledge; for which he excused himself, as forced by the People that
chose him: The Emperor pardoned it, but demanded obedience as to their
Elections for the time to come. Platina in vit. Paschal. l. 1. who says that
Paschal was suspected of the Rebellion of Italy, but disclaimed it; and that
the Emperor reassumed many Cities to the Empire, to prevent new Rebellions.

Some say that Bernard was but blinded: Among others banished for Treason, were
Anselm Bishop of Milan, and Theodulfe Bishop of Aurelia, (Orleance) so that
Italy and France joined in the Treason. See Petav. Hist. M^nd. li. 8. c. 8.

116. CCXLV. Ludovicus Pius was so careful to reform the Bishops and Clergy,
that he raised their ill will against him, being too pious for them that should
have been the Teachers of Piety; yea, so slothful did they grow, that though
his Father and he had done extraordinary works for the promoting of Learning
and Godliness, yet Learning in his days grew to such decay, that Learned Men
became the common contempt, and few of them were to be found; but Wealth and
Jurisdiction were the study, care, and interest of the Bishops.

Yet in his time at Aquisgrane, there was a Council that wrote, instead of
Canons, the most excellent Treatise for the Teaching and Government of the
Teachers and Governors of the Church, (besides the regulation of Monasteries)
that ever any Council did before them: Not in their own words, but in the
several Sermons, and passages of the chief Fathers, (Isidore, Hierom, Gregory,
Augustine and Prosper,) that had written to the Clergy heretofore, which they
collected into 145 Chapters and Canons.

But you must know that the excellency of the Canons of Provincial Councils in
France and Spain, in these Ages, did not show the excellency of the Bishops, so
much as their Pravity and Necessity, as the Medicine does the Disease. For such
Canons were ordinarily drawn up by the will of the King, by some one or few
choice Men, (such as Paulinus Aquileiensis in his time,) to whom the rest
consented, because they knew the King would have it so Says Vita Ludovici in
Bin. p. 525. Congregatis Episcopis, etc. fecit componi ordinarique librum
Canonicae vitae normam gestantem, in quo tot^us (...) erdinis perfectio
continetur. In quo inseri jussit c^^i potusque and omnium necessarrorum s^mmam.
Quem librum per omnes Civitates and Monasteria Canonici ordinis sui imper^
(...) per manus miss^rum prude^tium. See the rest; so that it was the Emperor's
Book, and not the Council's work.
.

117. In these Chapters of this Council, they cite Isidore and Hierom at large,
proving that it was Presbyters that were called Bishops in Paul's Epistles, and
Acts 20. and that in those times the Church was ruled by the Common Council of
Presbyters, till Schism showed a necessity that one should rule among the rest.

They cite Isidore' s words, that [Caeteri Apostoli cum Petro par consortium
honoris acceperunt] Et [Non esse Episcopum qui praeese dilexerit, non
prodesse.] And Hierom' s on Titus maintaining the foresaid Identity, and his
[Sciat Episcopus and Presbyter sibi Populum conservum esse non servum:] And his
excellent Epistle ad N^potianum: Many Sermons of Augustine' s describing his
Collegiate Community of the Clergy. Isidore' s words, [Plerique Sacerdotes suae
magis utilitatis causa quam gregis praeesse desiderant: Nec ut prosint,
praesules fieri cupiunt, sed magis ut divites fiant and honorentur: suscipiunt
sublimitatis culmen, non pro Pastorali regimine, sed pro totius regiminis vel
honoris ambitione, atque abjecto opere dignitatis, solam nominis appetunt
dignitatem. Dum mali Sacerdotes Deo ignorante non fiant, tamen ignorantur a Deo
-- sed hic nescire Dei, reprobare est.] If Isidore say true, remember that I
wrong not the Bishops in saying the same of them. And if this was the case of
the most, as he affirms, what better than we find could be expected from
General Councils, where it is carried by the major vote.

They cite Gregory' s words, [Nemo amplius nocet in Ecclesia, quam qui perverse
agens nomen vel ordinem sanctitatis habet: Delinquentem namque hunc redarguere
nullus praesumit, sed in exemplum culpa vehementer extenditur, quando pro
reverentia ordinis peccator honoratur. -- Melius profecto fuerat ut hunc ad
mortem sub exteriori habitu terrena acta constringerent, quam sacra officia in
culpa caeteris imitabilem demonstrarent. Much more such against ungodly Bishops
they recite.

Cap. 46. They tell us that the Canons against Kneeling on the Lord's days were
yet in force, [Quoniam sunt quidam in Die Dominico genuflectentes, and in
diebus Pentecostes; ut omnia in universis locis consonanter observentur,
placuit sancto Concilio, stantes Domino vota dignissima persolvere.

In Hierom' s Epistle to Nepotian which they cite, there are most pungent
warnings to Priests to take heed of familiarity or abode with Women; yea, even
when they are sick. Scio (says he) quosdam convaluisse corpore, and animo
aegrotare caepisse; Periculose tibi ministrat, cujus vultum frequenter
attendis. He requires Clergymen to avoid fine Clothes, curious Hair, pleasing
the Appetite, and Riches. He says of himself, [Natus in paupere domo, and in
tugurio rusticano, qui vix millio and cibario pane rugientem satiare ventrem
poteram, nunc similam and mella fastidio. He says, the Mouth, Mind, and Hand
of Priests must agree: Even a Thief may speak against Covetousness. -- Multo
melius est e duobus imperfectis rusticitatem habere sanctam, quam eloquentiam
peccatricem: Multi aedificant parietes and column^s Ecclesiae substruunt:
marmora nitent, auro splendent laquearia, gemmis Altar distinguitur; and
Ministrorum Christi nulla electio est. Portemus Crucem Christi, and divitias
lutum putabimus. -- Facile contemnitur Clericus qui saepius vocatus ad prandium
ire non recusat. And his Epistle ad Oceanum, has yet more against converse
with Women. Prima tentamenta Clericorum sunt Faeminarum frequentes accessus --
Ianua Diaboli, via iniquitatis, Scorpionis percussio, nocivumque genus est
Faemina. Cum proximat stipula, incendit ignem. -- Mihi creed non potest toto
cord habitare cum Domino, qui Faeminarum accessibus copulatur. With much more
the like.

It appears by Cap. 112. a Sermon of Augustines, that it was the custom then
for the Preacher to sit, and the Hearer to stand, [I will not hold you long,
(says he) because while I sit, you are weary by standing.]

Augustine shows there how little he regarded the Appeals of his deposed
Priests to Rome, [or Councils] Interpellet contra me mill Concilia, naviget
contra me quo voluerit, sit certe ubi potuerit; adjuvabit me Dominus, ut ubi
ego Episcopus sum, illic Clericus esse non possit.

118. Yet I wonder that the Chap. 122 of this Council intimates so strange a
proportion of Meat and Drink to be the daily Commons of the Canonical Monks,
I had thought they had lived in greater Abstinence. The proportion of Alms or
Commons allowed them was, [Every day four pound of Bread,] (enough for me for
near 4 weeks;) and five pounds of Wine, (more than I drunk, I think, in 20
years, in Wine;) or else where Wine was scarce, they had three pounds of Wine,
and three of Beer; or in great scarcity, one pound of Wine, and five of Beer. I
think our ordinary Ministers drink not so much Wine in a year, as these did in
a day; I mean such as live in the Country, and were of my Acquaintance. I
wonder how any Plowman's Belly can hold four pound of Bread one day, and live,
without a present Vomit or Purge. I have tried long Cornario's and Lessius's
di^t (12 or 14 ounces of Panada, and as much Beer only in a day, without
tasting any other Meat,) and found no incommodity as to Health or Pleasure; but
should I eat four pound of Bread in two days, I do not think I should ever eat
more without a Vomit. And how can any Man drink five pound of any ordinary
Wine, and not be drunk, or dead? yea, or three Pints either. What Man's Belly
will hold six pounds of Wine and Water every day, unless it pass as Tunbridge
Waters, without present Suffocation, or a Dropsy. I would hope that I
understand not this Chapter in the Council, but that these Canons had some
Beggars that were to partake with them, but that I find no encouragement for my
charity in the Text or History: But verily if it were as it is written, I
wonder how these abstemious Monks did escape death by their Gluttony and
Drunkenness one week or day without Physic; notwithstanding that the Council
gives you notice, cap. 122. lin. ult. that a pound has but 12 ounces.

119. We must not unthankfully omit what kindness Anastasius (says Pope
Paschal) showed to the English: By negligence their House at Rome was burnt,
and the Pope ran out barefoot, and where he stood, the Fire stopped Quae si vera
sunt, says Binnius himself.
; therefore he stood barefoot there till morning, that the Fire might be fully
quenched. But this he did for the love of St. Peter, whose Church was in danger
by the Fire.

120. The Papists here bring forth a Constitution out of their own Library, by
which Ludovicus confirms to the Popes all that ever his Ancestors gave them,
and adds so much, that he was then made (if this be true) (as the Geographia
Nubiensis calls him) the King of Rome indeed. And they merely feign that
Charles and Ludovicus Pius made none of these Laws of themselves, but by the
Pope's advice, against plain evidence of History.

121. A Convention of Abbots at Aquisgrane, and another of Bishops, and a Synod
at Engelheim follow, and one at Attiniac, in which they say the Emperor
penitently lamented his severity against his Nephew Bernard, and others, with
open Confession and Penitence. And indeed his great endeavors to promote Piety,
and to reform the Clergy; his frequent Councils, (in which it was he, by the
advice of a few chief chosen Men, that did their business, and governed all)
with the rest of his Life described by the Writer of it, and other Historians,
do show that he was justly called Pius, though Wars will cause many actions to
be repented of.

122. Platina says, that Anastasius says, that Ludovicus gave Paschal the
power of freely choosing Bishops, which before was not done without the
Emperors. (The Peoples consent still supposed.)

123. The Pope being dead, two are chosen (which was the 11th Schism) but
Eugenius the 2d carried it, the Emperor sending his Son Lotharius to settle the
Peace of the City, jamdudum Praesulum quorundam perversitate depravatam, says
the Author of the Life of Ludovicus; where Murders of the chief Men had been
committed in the Schism, and Men's Goods taken away, and much confusion made.

124. In the East* the Party, that were against Images, prevailed ever since
Irene the Woman that set them up was deposed and dyed; her Son Constantine,
whom she murdered, being not for them before, nor Nicephorus that deposed her
after; But Leo 5 Armenus that succeeded Michael Curop. earnest against them,
and, as they called it, persecuted the Worshippers of Images. A Prince
confessed to be very profitable to the Empire; Michael Balbus that is supposed
the chief of them that murdered him, reigns in his stead: he set himself
earnestly to have healed the Church-divisions of the East about Images. To that
end he sent Ambassadors to Ludovicus Pius into France for his counsel, in the
professing his great desire of Peace. Ludovicus called together some that he
most esteemed for Learning at Paris, (which some call a Council, but were like
to be more learned than the Majority in Councils) to debate and consider the
business. The Paris Divines in this Debate drew up a Writing, in which they
greatly sinned, says Bellarmine, in that they took on them to reprehend the
Pope, and a General Council; (But do not they themselves condemn many General
Councils?) In which, says Bellarmine, they far exceeded the Author, who in the
name of Carolus Mag. put forth a Book against the worshipping of Images.
For he (which also the Fathers of the Frankford Council did) disallowed (or
rejected) the 2d Nicene Synod, because they thought it had been celebrated
without the Pope's consent An unlikely thing.
: But these Counselors of the Emperor Lewis, confess the Council of Nice 2d
for the worshipping of Images to be called and approved by Pope Adrian, and yet
they did not fear to examine, judge, and reprehend both the Synod itself, and
the Epistle of Adrian to Constantine for the worship of Images, yea, and the
defense of that Synod sent by Adrian to Charles M. saying, [Indiscrete noscitur
fecisse in eo quod superstitiose eas adorari jussit.] So (says Bellarmine)
they were not ashamed to judge the Judge of themselves, and of the whole world,
to feed the Pastor of all Christ's Sheep, and to teach the Teacher of all men;
than which temerity, no greater can be imagined. Thus far Bellarmine.

125. Here I desire the Reader to take notice,

1. That even then when the Pope was advanced to his Kingly greatness, yet as
the Eastern Empire was far from obeying him, so even that one Prince that set
him up, and defended him, with his Doctors and Counselors, were far from
thinking him Infallible,
but reproved him, and judged him as superstitious for Image Worship, and were
not herein ruled by him.

2. And judge whether most Bishops would not have judged accordingly, if they
had had but the same countenance from Princes, as the Bishops in the East and
these now had?

3. And judge with what Face the Militant Doctors of Rome do pretend, that all
the world was then subject to the judgment of the Pope, and bid us name any
Churches that rejected it, when East and West so far rejected it as is here
confessed, even when they were grown so high, yea and Councils as well as Popes?

126. Hereupon a Book was printed An. 1596. called, The Council of Paris about
Images, containing,

1. The Emperor Michael' s Epistle, (by which, says Bellarmine, one would
judge him one of the best Princes that ever was.)

2. The Paris Doctors Collection of Testimonies, proving, (in the middle way)
that Images should not be broken contemptuously, as some would have them; nor
be worshipped as the General Nicene Council, and the Pope would have them.

3. An Epistle in the Pope's name, written, (says Bellarmine, by the French
Doctors) to Michael the Emperor, showing, that Images are neither to be wronged
disgracefully, nor adored.

4. An Epistle of the Emperor Ludovicus to the Pope, desiring him to write to
Michael to further this Peace of the Churches.

5. An Epistle of Ludovicus to the two Bishops whom he sent to Rome, [t direct
them how to carry themselves wisely, to get the Pope's consent.] Whether this
at Paris was a Council, or only a select Convention of Men chosen by the
Emperor, is a Controversy of no great moment. I take the latter to be the more
honorable sort of Assembly, as the world then went; and should reverence more
the judgment of 20 or 12 Men, selected by such an extraordinary Prince, than of
the majority of the Bishops of all Europe: As I prefer the judgment of those
Men that by King James were appointed to Translate the Bible, before the
judgment of the major part of the whole English Clergy, of whom perhaps one in
ten had a smattering in the Hebrew Tongue, and one of an hundred understood it,
(at the most.)

127. Our modern cheated English Papists, that are taught here in England to
say that they worship not Images, might here see the Fraud of their Clergy,
that fit them a Faith to their interests and occasions. We confess that it is
but three sorts of Images that Aquinas says we should worship with Latria
(Divine Worship:) But yet the rest are to be worshipped, say their Doctor^. Why
else do they so commonly condemn this Book and Council of Ludovicus Pius, that
forbids both the breaking and the worshipping of them? Why does Bellarmine
purposely revile, and particularly confute this Book? Why does Binnius recite
all Bellarmine's Answer in his Council. Tom. 3. p. 529, etc?

128. Bellarmine is very loath that the Epistle here said to be written by Pope
Eugenius the 2d, should be taken to be his, and supposes that it was but sent
to him to be subscribed: By whom? If by the Emperor Ludovicus Pius, and his
Council of Divines, you may see of what reputation the Pope was then in the
Church. One great Argument against it is, That the Pope would not so impudently
flatter the Emperor, as to say, O venerable Princes of the world, seeing by
God's disposal you govern all the Church, etc. And for uniting the Church which
by God's Ordination you govern: What filthier Flattery (says Bellarmine) could
there be? Michael Balbus a Murderer, etc. is said by the Pope to govern the
Church by God's disposing. What then are Bishops for?

Ans. And 1. Did not even Gregory Mag. as much flatter a worse Man and
Murderer, Phocas? and his Successors him and many more?

2. Did not many, if not most of the Emperors, Heathen and Christian, come in
by Murder, or Invasion, and Usurpation? And were Men therefore disobliged from
obeying them, when they were settled, by submissive implicit consent?

3. But the venom of the Cardinal Jesuite's answer is, that he takes it to be
base Flattery,
to say that Princes are by God's dispose the Governors of the Church: For then
what are the Bishops for? And must the world be ridden and abused by such Men,
that would turn Princes out of all Government of the Church, and understand not
that the Government of the same Church, may belong to the Magistrate and the
Pastors respectively, (as the Government of an Hospital to the King, and to the
Physician?) May not one rule and punish by the Sword, and another by the Word,
by Teaching, and the Church Keys? Is it not one thing to Fine, and Beat, and
Banish, and Kill a Man, and another to sentence him unmeet for
Church Communion? Mavelous, that God permits the world to be deluded by
such a blinded or blinding Clergy, though as learned as Bellarmine, that would
make these things seem inconsistent, and separate what God has conjoined!

See here to what the Roman Clergy would reduce Kings, they must be no
Governors of the Church.
And if all the Kingdom be Christians, are they not all the Church? And so the
Christening of the Subjects deposes the King, and makes the chief Priest King
that Christeneth them.

If he had said that Kings govern Churches, but not as Churches, but as parts
of the Kingdom, he had said falsely: For they govern them as Churches, though
not by the same sort of Government as the Pastors do; as they govern not
Hospitals by the same sort of Government, as the Physicians.

129. In Eugenius's Epistle it is honestly and truly said, that [If there had
never been a painted or a forged Image, neither Faith, Hope nor Love, by which
Men come to the Eternal Kingdom, would have perished.] I am of Bellarmine's
mind now, that this was none of the Pope's Epistle, (but the honest Emperor's,
and his Clergy Councils:) He thought it too bad for a Pope, and I think it too
good for a Pope. He thinks that the Pope must be mad, if he would have so
condemned his Predecessor Adrian's Acts, as this Epistle does; and I doubt he
was not so honest as to do it. But did not Bellarmine know how much more sharp
and virulent Accusations Popes have laid on one another?

130. CCXLVI. So powerful was Ludovicus Pius's Attempts to reform the Clergy,
that it drove Pope Eugenius the 2d for shame to call a Council at Rome, (not
from the Antipodes, but) of 63 Bishops, (An. 826.) who repeated some old
Canons, and, among other things, forbad such Feasts and Plays as our Wakes ar^
on any Holy Days to be used.

131. Valentine was next chosen Pope, (Collectis in unum Venerab. Episcopis and
Gloriosis Romanorum Proceribus, omnique amplae urbis Populo in Pal. Later.
says Anastasius) but he lived but 30 or 40 days, (Historians agree not of it.)

132. Gregory the 4th succeeded, who, says Platina, would not undertake the
Papal Office, till Ludovicus the Emperor had considered of the choice, and
confirmed it: [Which, (says Platina) Ludovicus did not out of Pride, but lest
he should lose the Rights of the Empire, Mark that it is the Rights of the
Empire.
being by nature gentle and most humane, and had ever upheld the Rights of the
Church. He settled Benefices on every Priest, that Poverty might not hinder
them.] You see here that the great Friend of the Church yet took that for the
right of the Empire, that none should be Pope against his consent.

133. Platina, adding how he reformed the Clergy, forbidding them gay Attire,
Ornaments, Sumptuousness and Vanities, says thereupon, Would thou had lived
in our times, O Ludovicus! For the Church wants thy holy Institutions, and
Censure, so much has the Ecclesiastical Order poured out itself to all Luxury
and Lust.] So describing their abominable Pride and Vanity.

134. Pope Gregory added so much to the good works of his Predecessors, by
mending, building, adorning so many Temples, Pillars and Posts, with Stones,
Vestments, Silver, etc. and removing the Bones of Saints, (if he mistook not)
that it is no wonder if Rome grew into greater pomp and splendour than ever
before.

135. This godly Emperor having three Sons by his first Wife, and marrying a
second, having two Sons by her; the Sons of the first Wife hated the second
Wife, thinking her Son Charles had too much favor. One Son (Pepin) apprehended
his Father, and the eldest (Lotharius) came in and approved it,
and the 3d joined with them, and wickedly deposed him from his Kingdom: of
which anon.

136. Ludovicus called Councils at Paris, Mentz, Lions, and Toulouse, for
Reformation; some say upon the warning of a Maid that being possessed of the
Devil, and speaking Latin, said that this Devil executed Judgments on the Land
for their Sins, Injustice, etc. CCXLVII. The Council at Paris wrote a large
Book for Reformation, An. 829. with the rest of this Emperor's Constitutions,
worthy to be Translated for the common good, that all ^ight see the difference
between Reformers and turbulent Heretics and Hereticators, and proud aspiring
Prelates. The Book is a Treatise of pious Directions. The 50th Chapter,
reproving the breach of the Lord's day, says, that [By sight and by certain
relation they have notice, that many working on that day have been killed with
Thunde^bolts, some punished by sudden Convulsions, some by visible Fire, their
Flesh and Bones being in a moment consumed and turned into ashes, and many
other such terrible judgments. Therefore they require that as the Jews keep
their Sabbath, all Men much more do spiritually observe this day of the Lord.

The second Book does notably show the duty of Kings and Magistrates.

The last Chapter requires those that are far from the Church, to meet for
Prayer in other places, as being acceptable to God.

In the 8th Capitul. (Bin. p. 569.) the Bishops say, [Beati Petri vicem indigni
gerimus.] So that the Pope is not Peter's only Successor; others represent
him, if this Council did not mistake.

137. CCXLVIII. We come now to a Council which shows you, that the good
Canons made by the Emperor for Church-Reformation, were far from reforming the
generality of the Bishops. It is the Council at Compendium, which too
compendiously deposed the godly Emperor, (of whom the world was not worthy.)

Calumniators pretended that one Bernhard a Courtier lay with Judith the
Emperor's second Wife: The Sons of his first Wife hating her; Pepin, whom his
Father had made King of Italy, on this pretense Traitorously raises Arms
against his Father. Lotharius, the eldest Son, too much consenting, persuaded
his Father to let a meeting without Arms, at Neomagus, prevent a War. At that
meeting the Nobles, Parentis Imperium legitime prorogabant, says Binnius, p.
575, and Pepin took up Arms again. The Father conquereth his Son, and takes
him Prisoner, and might justly have taken away his life, but he was stolen out
of Prison in the night. Ludovicus depriveth him of his Kingdom of Italy, and
divides it between his two Sons by the second Wife, Charles and Rodolphus.
Hereupon Lotharius the eldest rebelling, knew not how to conquer his godly and
prosperous Father but by the Bishops: Them he draws into his Conspiracy, that
as Binnius himself says, [Ut quem filii armis imperio deponere non possent,
horum saltem nundinariorum Antistitum suffragio and judicio,
honor ac potestate imperiali privaretur: successit impiis conatus
impiissimus.] The last means of Treason was a Council of the base mercenary
Bishops; a wicked Attempt that served these wicked Men, and did the Feat. Ebbo
the Archbishop of Rhemes, (of a base original) and enough more such Prelates were
not wanting. The Emperor had before voluntarily lamented his putting out the
eyes of his Kinsman Bernard a Rebel, (of which he dyed) as too cruel, (when now
no Prince scrupleth Hanging, or Beheading open Rebels.) The Church had
satisfaction by his voluntary Penance, for that which few Men will think a
Fault. And what do these Bishops now, but become their Sovereign's Judges, yea,
and that when he was absent, and condemn him unheard, for this former Fault.
Note the Case.

1. They condemn their King to be deposed, who were Subjects.

2. Yea, Clergymen, that had least to do with State Affairs.

3. Yea, and that for a Fault, which perhaps was but Justice, and no Fault.

4. Or if it were a Fault, was before judged and remitted. And did godly Lewis
cherish Christian Bishops so zealously, for this use, so basely and
traitorously to depose him?

5. Yea, and to join in the horrid Rebellion of unnatural Sons, to accomplish
their designs.

6. And to tempt Princes to hate Religion, when in Nomine Domini, the pretense
of Religion shall do greater wickedness by Prelates, than the Rebels Arms was
able to perform.

Says the Author of the Life of Ludovicus Pius, [This judgment some few
gain-sayed, more consented to it: the greatest part, as it uses to be in such
cases O wicked use of Bishops!
, consented by word, for fear of offending their Leaders Whom should they have
feared more than God and their King?
. They judged him, absent and unheard, neither confessing nor convict, before
the Bodies of St. Medard Confessor, and St. Sebastian Martyr, to lay down his
Arms Is this the use of Relics?
, and forced him to lay them before the Altar; and clothing him in a black
garment, under a strict Guard, they thrust him into Prison. By this testimony,
says Binnius, it is certainly proved that the whole business was done by force
and fear, and colored with the false pigment of Religion. Thus was the best of
Princes, after all his services for the Prelates, and kindness to his Sons,
deposed, and basely used by both, against Nature and Religion.

His first Restoration, when he had been before deposed, was by the Germans:
How he was restored the second time, I find not certainly; some would give Pope
Gregory the honor of it. It is likeliest that the interest which his goodness
had got in the People, with the odiousness of his Sons and Bishops Acts, did
it: But fully restored, after all this, he was. And being somewhat backward to
forgive Lotharius, he filled France with new Wars, till the Emperor for Peace
did pardon all. But Ebbo, Archbishop of Rhemes, and Agobard, Bishop of Lions,
were deposed, as Leaders of the Treason; and Ebbo banished, and restored by
Lotharius when his Father dyed; yea, and sent as a fit Man to convert the
Normans by Pope Paschal's mission, being made Bishop of Hildesheim in Saxony,
by Ludovic King of Germany, see Petavius Hist. l. 8. c. 8.

Shortly after, An. 840. the Emperor (solicited yet to more Wars by his own
Sons, about dividing the Kingdoms) dyed, a direful Eclipse of the Sun foregoing
his death, the day before Ascension-day.

138. That you may see the base Hypocrisy of these Traiterous Bishops, I will
recite their words in the Council that condemned the best of Emperors; An. 833.
but his Imprisonment they leave out.

139. The Bishops condemnation of the Emperor Ludovicus Pius, An. 833. after a
Preface of the Duty of Bishops without Favor or Fear to judge Sinners, and the
need of putting their Sentence in writing, to avoid the censure of bad Men,
they say --

We hold it necessary to notify to all the Sons of the Church, both present
and future, how we Bishops, set over the Empire Here is a High Court of
Prelatical Justice against a good Emperor.
of our Lord and most glorious Emperor Lotharius, An. 833. the first year of
the said Prince in October, did generally meet at the Palace at Compendium,
(Compeigne) and humbly heard the said Prince Lotharius accusing his Father
; And we took care, according to the Ministry enjoined us, to manifest to him
or his Nobles, the generality of all the People, what is the Vigor, and Power,
or Priestly Ministry, and with what Sentence of Damnation he deserves to be
damned, who will not obey the warnings of the Priests No doubt but you made
this known too far.


And next both to the said Prince, (Lotharius) and to all the People, we
studied to denounce, that they should study most devoutly to please God, and
should not delay to appease him in whatever they had offended him: For many
things were examined, By what Authority?
, which by negligence happened in this Empire, which manifestly tended to the
scandal of the Church, and the ruin of the People, or the destruction of the
Kingdom; which must necessarily be quickly corrected, and by all means for the
future prevented Who made you the Governors of the Empire, and Judges of such
matters? Are Rebellions of Sons, the Fathers fault?
.

Among other things we mentioned, and remembered all Men, how by God that
Kingdom, by the administration of the most excellent Emperor Charles of good
memory, and the Valor of his Predecessors, was peaceable, and united, and nobly
enlarged, and committed to the Lord Emperor Lewis by God in great peace to be
governed; and by God's protection remained so preserved, as long as that Prince
studied God, and used his Father's example, and was careful to acquiesce in the
counsels of good Men: And how in progress of time, as is manifest to all, by
his improvidence or negligence, it fell into so great ignominy and baseness,
that it became not only the grief of Friends, but the derision of Enemies.

But because the said Prince has negligently managed the Ministry committed to
him, and did both do and compel others to do many things displeasing to God and
Man, or permitted others to do it Must the King answer to a Court of Bishops,
all the evils that he permits the Bishops and such others to do?
, and provoked God in many wicked counsels, and scandalized the Church; and
that we may omit innumerable other things) at last drew all his Subjects to a
common destruction, and by God't just judgment, suddenly his Imperial Power was
taken from him Lotharius had got the Nobles to begin.
. But we remembering the Commands of God, and our Ministry, and his Benefits,
thought him worthy, that by the leave of the said Prince Lotharius, we should
send a Message to him by the Authority of this Sacred Assembly, to admonish him
of his Guilts, that he might take sure advice for his safety (or salvation.)
That he might in his extremity study with all his might, that being deprived of
his earthly Power, according to God's Council, and the Churches Authority, he
might not also lose his Soul. To the counsels of which Messengers, and their
most wholesome warnings he willingly consented, he took time, and set a day in
which he would give an answer to their wholesome Admonitions O humble Prince^^ O
traiterous Prelates!
.

And when the day was at hand, the same Holy Assembly unanimously went to the
venerable Man, and took care to admonish him of all that he had offended God
in, and scandalized the Church, and troubled the People committed to him, and
to bring all to his remembrance. And he willingly embracing their wholesome
Admonition, and their worthy and congruous Aggravations, promised in all things
to acquiesce in their wholesome counsel, and to undergo their remedying judgment
Its pity but he had better Judges
. And being glad of so wholesome an Admonition Its like he looked for better
measures.
, strait we entreated his beloved Son, Lotharius Augustus, to be speedily
present, that without delay, with his Nobles he might come, that there might be
a mutual reconciliation between them according to Christian Doctrine, that if
there were any blemishes or discords in their hearts, a pure and humble begging
of Pardon Of a traiterous Son and Subjects.
might expiate them, and thereupon before all the multitude, he might receive
the judgment of the Priesthood as Penitents do, which soon after was done.

Therefore the Lord Ludovicus coming into the Church of Holy Mary, God's
Mother, where rest the Bodies of Saints, that is, of Medard, a Confessor of
Christ and Bishop, and of Sebastian a most excellent Martyr (the Priests,
Deacons, and no small multitude of the Clerks standing by, and his Son the
foresaid Lotharius being present with his Nobles, and the generality of all the
People, even as many as the Church could hold) and being prostrate on the earth
upon Hair-cloth Was this keeping the fifth Commandment, and Honoring the
King? O wicked Son, and wicked Prelates!
before the Holy Altar, be confessed before all, that he too unworthily used
the Ministry committed to him, and in it many ways offended God, and
scandalized the Church of Christ, and many ways troubled the People by his
negligence: And therefore for the Public and Ecclesiastic Expiation of so
great Guilts, he said he would desire Penance, that God being merciful by their
Ministry and Help, he might prosperously deserve (or obtain) Absolution of so
great Crimes, God having given them the power of Binding and Loosing; whom also
the Bishops, as spiritual Physicians, did wholsomly admonish, telling him that
true remission of Sin follows pure and simple Confession; that he should
openly confess his Errors, in which he professed that he most offended God,
lest he should hide any thing within, or do any thing deceitfully before God,
as it is known to all that he did heretofore in the Palace at Compeigne, when
he was by another Holy Assembly reproved before all the Church: And that he
come not to God now, as he did then, by dissembling and craft, with a double
heart, and provoke him to anger, rather than to forgive his sin O insulting
Traitors!
; for it is written, The dissemblers and crafty provoke the wrath of God. And
after this Admonition he professed that he had chiefly sinned in all those
things, whereupon he had been familiarly reproved by the foresaid Priests, by
word or writings; that being by due rebuke reproved of the things they gave him
a writing They wrote him his Lesson, and confessed his sins for him.
of, containing the sum of his Guilts, of which they had specially reproved
him; which he had in his hands, viz.

I. As in the same Paper is fullier contained, incurring the guilt of
Sacrilege and Murder, in that he kept not, according to his promise, the
fatherly Admonition and terrible Contestation made to him with Divine
Invocation before the Holy-Altar in presence of the Priests, and the greatest
multitude of the People; in that he had done violence to his Brethren and
Kindred, and had permitted his Nephew to be killed A Traitor in open Rebellion
, whom he might have delivered; and that being unmindful of his Vow, he after
commanded the Sign of Holy Religion to be made for the revenge of his own
indignation.

II. That being the Author of Scandal, and Troubler of the Peace, and Violater
of the Sacraments, by unlawful Power he corrupted the Covenant which was made
between his Sons for the peace and unanimity of the Empire, and tranquillity of
the Church, by common Council, and consent of all the faithful People, and
confirmed by the Sacrament: and in that he compelled his faithful People in
contrariety to the said first Covenant and Oath, to swear another Sacrament O*
Oath.
, and so fell into the guilt of Perjury, by the violation of the former Oaths.
And how much this displeased God, is plain, in that the People subject to him
had afterward no peace, but were all led into perturbation, bearing the
punishment of their sins, and by God's just judgment.

III. That against Christian Religion, against his Vow, without any public
profit or certain necessity Against the Arms of his own Sons.
, deluded by evil counsel, he commanded a general Expedition to be made in
Lent, and in the extreme parts of his Empire appointed a general Meeting (or
Council) at the time of the Lord's Supper, when the Paschal Sacraments were to
be celebrated of all Christians Rebels must not be resisted in the Lent, or
Easter.
. In which Expedition, as much as in him lay, he drew the People into great
murmuring, and against right put the Priests of the Lord from their Offices,
and brought great oppression on the Poor.

IV. That he brought violence on some of his faithful People, that for his and
his Sons fidelity and safety, and the recovery of the shaking Kingdom, humbly
went to him, and made known to him the snares prepared for him by his Enemies;
And that against all Law Divine and Humane, he deprived them of their Estates,
and commanded them to be banished B^t a Bishop that does but differ from the
rest in a word, must be banished.
, and made them when absent judged to Death, and doubtless induced the Judges
to false judgment. And against Divine and Canonical Authority, raised prejudice
against the Lord's Priests, (or Bishops) and Monks, and condemned them absent.
And in this incurring the guilt of Murder, he was a violater of the Laws of God
and Man.

V. Of diverse Sacraments (Oaths) contrary to each other, often made unreasonably
by his Sons or People, he commanding and compelling them; whereby he brought no
small blot of sin on the People committed to him. He hereby incurred the guilt
of Perjury, because these are rightly charged on him as Author, by whom they
were compelled. But in the purging of Women, in unjust Judgments, in false
Witnesses and Perjuries, which have been committed in his presence by his
permission, how much he has offended God he himself knows.

VI. Of diverse Expeditions which he has made in the Kingdom committed to him,
not only unprofitably, but also hurtfully without counsel and profit; in which
many and innumerable heinous Crimes were committed in the Christian People, in
Murders and Perjuries, in Sacrilege and Adulteries, in Rapines, in Burnings,
either in the Churches of God, or diverse other places, in Plunderings and
oppressing of the Poor, by miserable usage, and almost unheard of among
Christians; which all, as is aforesaid, reflect on the Author.

VII. In the divisions of the Empire rashly made by him, against the common
peace, and the safety of the whole Empire, for his own will; and the Oath which
compelled all the people to swear, that they would act against his Sons as
Enemies, when he might have pacified them by Fatherly Authority, and the
counsel of his faithful People.

VIII. That so many Mischiefs and Crimes committed in the Kingdom committed to
him, by his negligence and improvidence were not enough, which yet cannot be
numbered, by which the Kingdom was evidently disgraced and endangered: but
moreover to add to the heap of miseries, he lastly drew all the People of his
power to their common destruction, when he ought to have been to his People the
Captain of safety and of peace, when the Divine Piety had decreed to have mercy
of his People by an unheard of and invisible manner, and by preaching in our
ages.

For these things therefore, and in all these things which are before recited,
confessing himself guilty before the Priests, (or Bishops) or all the People,
with tears, and protesting that in all these things he sinned, he desired
public Penance, that so he might satisfy the Church by repenting, which he
had scandalized by sinning; and as he was a scandal by neglecting many things,
so he professed he would be an example by undergoing due Penance.

And after this Confession he delivered to the Bishops the Paper of his Guilts
and Confession for future memorial, and they laid it on the Altar; and then he
put off his military Girdle and laid it on the Altar, and stripping himself of
his secular Habit, he took the Habit of a Penitent put on him by the hands of
the Bishops, that after so great and such Penance Here is a new sort of
Imposition of the Bishops hands, to depose a King so as never to be restored:
But it failed.
, no Man after may return to a secular Militia.

These things thus done, it pleased them that every Bishop should write in his
own Papers how the matter was done, and should strengthen it by his own
subscription, and offer it to Prince Lotharius, thus strengthened in memory of
the Fact. To conclude, it seemed good to us all that were present, to put the
sum of all the Papers, and of so great a business into one Breviate, and to
roborate it by the subscription of us all with our hands, as is hereafter
demonstrated. --

The Author of the Life of Ludovicus adds, '[Pullaque indutum vest, adhibita
magna custodia sub tectum quoddam retrudunt.]

Here you see the Trial of the godly Emperor, the Articles exhibited against
him in the High Court of Episcopal Justice, and the use of Penance, and of
laying on of the Bishops hands, in investing him in the Garb of perpetual
Penance. What wonder if the Pope ascended to such power, when ordinary Bishops
in the best governed and instructed Country then in the world, obtained such
power; even by the name and abuse of the POWER OF THE KEYS? Says Binnius,
[Thaganus therefore justly for this cause declaimeth against Ebbo, Bishop of
Rhemes, the Leader, as impudicum and crudelissimum Episcopum!] And what were
they that would thus follow him?

140. CCXLIX. But the next Council was forced to do better, An. 835.
(for usually the Bishops followed the stronger side;) in Theodorus Villa they
caused Ebbo to depose himself from his Bishopric, and the rest excused
themselves that they did it by necessity and fear, and were all forgiven, Bin.
p. 575. And yet will the Bishops say, that this Emperor was not humble and
merciful?

141. CCL. After his Restoration, An. 836. Ludovicus caused a Council at
Aquisgrane, to renew the Laws for the Reformation of the Clergy and Abbots,
with the Instructions and Rules for Kings themselves at large laid down. And
here they determined, that all Bishops hereafter that were Rebels and Traitors,
should be deposed, and Laymen anathematized. But they sufficiently minded the
Power and Dignity of the Bishops to be upheld.

142. There is a Treatise in Binnius, p. 583. in which the Statutes of the
Synods of Aquisgrane are opened and confirmed by Scripture.

143. CCLI. An. 836. Binnius tells us, that in the deposing of the Emperor,
Agobertus, Bishop of Lions, and Bernard, Bishop of Vienne, having been Leaders
with Ebbo, at the Council at Theod. Villa, fled, and the Emperor and all his
Sons, save Lotharius, being here present at a Council at Lions, they being
summoned, appeared not, and Sentence was put off, because they were absent.

144. An. 839. Pepin the Emperor's Son dying, he passed by his disobedient
Nephew Pepin, and divided that Kingdom of Aquitain only between his Sons
Lotharius and Charles; whereupon his Son Ludovicus was offended, and with them
of Aquitain raised Rebellion again, and by a Convention at Cabilone, and after
it, reconciliation was made.

145. The Emperor Ludovicus Pius dying An. 840. aged 64, his Sons fell together
in Wars for his Kingdoms.

Lotharius the eldest, that had used his Father so traitorously and
unnaturally, sought too great a part for himself, and came to a War with
Ludovic and Charles, who conquered him, and put him to a shameful flight, An.
841. in which Fight, say Historians, a greater slaughter was made of the
French, than was ever known in the memory of man. This was the man that deposed
his Father for the slaughter of the Subjects by his Wars against him. The next
year they fought again, and he was again overcome.

146. CCLII. It Is easy then to conjecture which way the next Council (which
was at Aquisgrane) would go: The conquering Princes made the Bishops their
Counselors, when they had made Lotharius fly out of the Country, what they
should do with his Kingdom; and, says Binnius, they received the answer which
Nithardus li. 1. describes in these words, ['The Bishops considering the deeds
of Lotharius from the beginning, how he had driven his Father out of his
Kingdom; how he had made the Christian People perjured by his Covetousness; how
often he had frustrated the Oath he made to his Fathers, and his Brethren; how
often, since his Fathers death, he had attempted to disinherit his Brethren; how
many Murders, Adulteries, Burnings, and all kind of heinous deeds the Universal
Church suffered by his most wicked Covetousness: And that he neither had any
knowledge of governing the Commonwealth, nor could men find any footsteps of
goodness of will in governing. For which causes deservedly, and by the just
judgment of God Almighty, they said he fled first in Battle, and then from his
Kingdom: Therefore all (the Bishops) unanimously agree and consent, that for
his wickedness God has cast him out, and has delivered his Kingdom to his
Brothers that are better than he. But the Bishops did not give them this
liberty, till they openly asked them, whether they would govern it as their
ejected Brother did, or according to the will of God. They answered, that as
far as God should enable them, they would govern themselves and theirs
according to God's will. By God's Authority (say they) we warn, exhort and
command, that you undertake it, and rule it according to the will of God.] So
far Nithard.

147. You see here that it is no wonder that the Pope took upon him to set up
and take down, to make and unmake Kings, when the subject Bishops did it by
their greatest Sovereigns. And you see here God's just judgment on a rebellious
Son, and the shameful mutability of a temporizing Clergy. And how presumptuous
Bishops have abused Religion, the use of the Keys and the Name of God, to the
confusions and calamities of the world. But Lotharius after this Deposition
reigned.

148. All these times Images were cast out in the Eastern Empire, even all the
Reign of Leo the 5th, and of Michael Balbus, (however he recalled Theodorus
Studita from Prison) and of Theophilus that succeeded him; Petavius li. 8. c.
9. says, that Theophilus followed his Father in persecuting the Worshipers of
Images, but yet was a most strict requirer of Justice, and reigning 12 years
and three months, In France Claudius Taurinensis set against Image Worship, and
going to Rome, etc. And Jonas Aurel. writes against him, citing some of his
Sentences (too strong for the Answerer,) but in his Preface professes that he
never read or saw his Book: Was not this an excellent Confuter?
died An. 841. the next year after the death of Ludovicus Pius. He left his Son
Michael, a Child, Emperor, under the Rule of his Mother Theodora.

149. And now come up Images again by a Woman, which ever since a Woman's Reign
almost had been cast out; she ruled 14 years, just as Irene did, and sped as
she; for when her Son came to age, he deposed her. In this time Methodius
first, and Ignatius after, were made Patriarchs of Constantinople. And Bardas
(made Caesar) deposed Ignatius, because he would not excommunicate Theodora
when she was deposed, and set up the learned Photius in his place, that came in
as Nectarius had done from the Laity, by sudden Ordination: one honored even
by the Papists for his great learning, but reviled for being against them.

150. CCLIII. An. 842. This Woman had presently so much power on the mutable
Bishops, as in a Council at Constant. to turn them to be again for Images, and
as Theophanes says, [Suddenly changing their judgment, they cursed those that
opposed Images;] and so after 120 years rejection they were restored, and the
Nicene 2d Council owned without any great difficulty: And here all that were
for Images accounted it Godliness, and called them Ungodly that were against
it, and this Woman Theodora is styled for it a very godly Woman, (though the
other called it Idolatry;) and so while one side was cried down as Profane, and
the other as Idolatrous; the poor Church felt to its sorrow, that Images were
not taken for things indifferent.

Theophanes railing at John the Patriarch of Constant. says, that [Seeing so
sudden and unexpected a change, he that ruled impiously was struck with such a
stupor and blindness of mind, that he was ready to have killed himself; and
being the head of all the wickedness, of an ungodly judgment, that had led the
Emperors by lies, and thrust them into the hell of impiety, he was with
ignominy cast out, and good Methodius put in.] I recite the words, to show you
what various Characters the interest of Images gave to men, and what Godliness
and Ungodliness, Good men and Bad men, are in the sense of many Historians.

151. The Pope dying, Johan. Diaconus seizes on the place by force; but
Sergius is chosen against him, and prevails: I^ whose beginning Lotharius
sent his Son Ludovicus with an Army to Rome Thinking they would have resisted
him: The Pope submitted himself to all that was desired of a Subject, till
Ludovicus was gone.
, Sigibert says to be the Confirmer of the Pope, and claim that right; others
say, to be crowned. To Lotharius they swear obedience, but not to his Son. Some
great debate Anastasius tells us that a great company of Bishops had against
the Pope and his Party, but he tells us not what it was, but that the Pope was
too hard for them, and glad when the French were gone.

152. It Is before said, that after the Bishop's deposing him, Lotharius was
restored, the three Brothers agreeing, that Ludovicus should have Germany, and
part of France, and Charles have France, and Lotharius Narbon and Italy as
Roman Emperor.

CCLIV. The Archbishopric of Rhemes had been ten years without a Bishop upon
Ebbo's removal or flight, and two Presbyters successively Fulke and Hotho had
been the Governors of it, (some will question the validity of their acts.) And
a Council at Bellovacum makes Hincmarus Bishop.

153. Under Carolus Calvus the Church Lands were much alienated, especially
Abbots Lands, to Nobles and other Laymen. Whereupon CCLV. a Council at Melda
(Meaulx) did by Ansegisus and Bernardus Levita draw up a Book of seven Parts,
lamenting the sins of Christians, and the Sacrilege of the Laity, and offered
it to the King, who refused it, the Nobles being against it: For which (say the
bold Expositors of God's Providence) the Normans by Invasion troubled the Land.

154. Leo the 4th became Pope; they durst not consecrate him without the
Emperor's authority, Anastas. in Bin. p. 618. This Pope wrought great Miracles,
say they. 1. He conquered a Basilisk that killed men by his looks, (as St.
George conquered the Dragon.) 2. By the Cross he stopped a fire in the City: But
his good works contain a Volumn in Anastasius, viz. the many Churches that he
adorned, enriched, repaired; the silver Vessels and Ornaments that he gave, the
Posts and Pillars, and Altars that he beautified, and the glory that he added
to the Roman City and Churches, etc. yea, when the Saracens came and spoiled
St. Peter's Church in the Suburbs of Rome, he caused the said Suburbs to be
walled and fortified, as a new City, calling it Leonina from his name: And he
made two or three Prayers of six or seven lines long, to desire God's
protection of it, by the intercession of St. Peter. And he writes a notable
Homily, in which he comprizeth much of the Canons, teaching them all the Arts,
Gestures, and Ceremonies of canting the Mass; and precisely orders, that
every Priest do learn his Lesson; and that if any of them be illiterate, (that
cannot read) he shall be suspended till he amend, (learn to read;) so learned
was the Clergy in that Age.

155. By the way, the often mention here of singing the Mass, does remember me to
note that which is much over-looked; viz. How Liturgies imposed first came up,
or were mostly propagated without any exception or opposition: It was chiefly
because they did sing them, and had fitted them accordingly to their singing
Notes, like our Cathedral singing of our reading Psalms and Prayers: And we all
know that the People or Minister cannot make Psalms ex tempore, but we must and
do use forms in singing; but the Prayers that were not sung, but said, were
longer left free to the Speakers present skill.

156. CCLVI. An. 847. in a Council at Paris, Lotharius caused the cause of Ebbo
to be reviewed; but after Summons, he would never appear to his death.

157. CCLVII. A Council at Mentz, An. 847. repeated many Ecclesiastical Canons:
Among others, Murderers still, instead of death, are but put upon long removal
from the Communion, no, though they murder Priests.

In this Council a Woman called Thiota, was judged to be whipped, because she had
professed to have Revelations foretelling the day of judgment that year,
putting the People in fear, and even many Priests followed her as a Prophetess;
she confessed that a certain Priest persuaded her to do it for gain.

CHAP. X.
Of the Councils about Ignatius and Photius, and some others.
1. CCLVII. AN. 848. A Synod at Mentz under Rabanus condemned Godescalcus a
Presbyter, and Monk of Rhemes, as a Predestinarian Heretic. Hincmarus Ep. ad
P. Nicol. recites his Heresies to be,

1. [That as God has predestined some to life eternal,
so others to death eternal: That he would not have all Men saved, but only
those that are saved, else he should have his Will frustrate, and not be
Omnipotent.

2. That Christ dyed not for all, but only for the Elect, who are the world
that he redeemed; others he redeemeth by Baptism, but not by dying for them.

3. That no one shall perish that Christ dyed for.

4. He adds, (how truly I know not,) That he asserteth a threefold Deity in
the Trinity of Persons.] They laid him in Prison, and Hincmarus wrote to the
Pope to know what to do with him, saying, That he must employ a very able Man
to keep him, for he wraps People, even the meanly learned, into admiration of
him, reciting Scripture and Fathers distorted whole days together. Some Bishops
took his part.

2. They say a Synod at Tours wrote an Admonition to one Nomeno^us the King's
Lieutenant in Britany, for Tyranny and Oppression, and casting out the just
Bishops, and putting in Mercenaries, Thieves and Robbers; Bin. p. 638. and for
despising the warnings of the Pope and Bishops.

3. Canisius tells us of a Concilium Regiaticinum, regulating Bishops, and Cap.
6.
ordaining that the Arch-Presbyter examine every Master of a Family personally,
and take account of their Families and Lives, and receive their Confessions:
And Cap. 7. that a Presbyter in the absence of the Bishop, may reconcile a
Penitent by his command. Cap. 13. That in the Villages Arch-Presbyters be set
over the Lower-Presbyters. C. 12. That none that are denied Communion, may have
any Military or Civil Office; and so every Bishop is Master of the Magistrates.

4. CCLVIII. The Saracens in Spain persecuting the Christians, forced the
Bishops to meet in Council at Corduba, and decree against Martyrdom, and the
Memorial of Martyrs,
says Binnius, p. 643. [Holding a Satanical Meeting, forbad Martyrdom, and
took away the Honor of Martyrs, saying, That they that were not violently
drawn to deny the Faith, but offered themselves to danger of their own accord,
are not to be numbered with the Martyrs, not working Miracles as the Martyrs
did, nor their Bodies remaining incorrupt.

5. A Synod at Mentz, An. 852. did we know not what. But 853. CCLIX. one at
Soisons was approved by Pope Benedict, and reprobated by Pope (...) (Bin. p.
648.) (yet both infallible.) And it is no wonder, for it is about a hard Point,
and in which the Papacy is much concerned. When Ebbo was deposed and banished,
Lotharius restored him for a while, and he intruded again, and ordained many
Priests. Hincmarus succeeding in his lifetime, rejects all those that he
thus ordained. A Council is called to judge whether their Ordination was valid
or null. The Council decreed, that [Whatever in Ecclesiastical Ordinations the
said Ebbo had done after his damnation,
according to the Traditions of the Apostolic Seat, as is read in the Deeds of
the Popes, except Sacred Baptism, which is perfected in the name of the
Trinity, shall be all void and null, and those ordained by him in whatever part
of the world they shall be Fugitives or wander, because they cannot fly from
God's judgment, let them be held deprived of all Ecclesiastical Degrees by the
judgment of the Holy Ghost.] And yet these Men had showed Letters from the King
and diverse Bishops, for their reception as Presbyters, but the Synod said they
were counterfeit.

Another Case was this, one Halduinus had been made Deacon by Ebbo, and
Consecrated Presbyter and Abbot by Lupus Bishop of Catalonia. The Presbyter was
ordained out of his own Jurisdiction to the Church of Rhemes: This being
questioned, an Archdeacon showed the King's Letters, commanding the Ordination
of Halduinus. Lupus ordained him, in obedience to the King, without examining,
(there being then no Bishop at Rhemes.) Whereupon the Synod decreed, according
to the Canons, (say they) That they that are made Presbyters without
examination by ignorance, or by dissimulation of the Ordainers, when they are
known, shall be deposed; because the Catholic Church defends (but) that
which is irreprehensible. And it was showed in Council. Sardic. c. 9. and other
Councils and Decrees, That the said Bishop touched nothing of his Ordination,
but that he that leaped to the Priesthood without the degree of Deacon Because
he was made Deacon only by Ebbo.
, he ought to retire (resilire) to due degradation.

6. Here you see the Nullification even of the Ordinations of an ejected
Archbishop, yea, and of a lawful Bishop, when he makes a Presbyter of one that
was by such an ejected Bishop made Deacon, and when he ordains unworthily
without due examination. And if this hold, what interruptions have there been
in the Succession of Bishops, especially in the Roman Seat!

7. Anastasius a Cardinal, Presbyter of Rome, betook himself to the Emperor,
soliciting him to depose Pope Leo the 4th, and to place him in his stead. The
Pope hearing it, calls him home to his charge, from whence he had been absent
five years: but he would not return, nor appear, wherefore CCLX the Pope called
a Council at Rome, which deposed him.

8. CCLXI. Ignatius the Patriarch of Constantinople, called a Council to depose
Gregory Bishop of Syracusa; They desired Pope Leo's confirmation: He delaying
it, dies. Gregory in the mean time prevails against Ignatius, who is cast
out, and Photius put in, and a grievous Schism begun.

9. CCLXII. An. 855. under Lotharius Remigius Lugdun. and 12 other Bishops, are
called a Council at Valence, who made 23 Canons or Decrees, with great Judgment
and Piety, and showed how much more venerable a Council of a few wise Bishops
are, than greater Councils, where the most are weak. Their first work was
against those that they called the Predestinatianos, where Cap. 2. they
determine, [Non ipsos malos Deum ideo perire velle quia boni esse non
potuerunt, sed quia boni esse noluerunt. Cap. 3. Praedestinationem electorum ad
vitam,
and praedestinationem impiorum ad mortem fidenter fatemur? In electione tamen
salvandorum misericordiam Dei praecedere meritum bonum, in damnatione autem
periturorum meritum malum praecedere justum Dei judicium: Praedestinatione
autem Deum ea tantum statuisse quae ipse vel gratuita misericordia vel justo
judicio facturus erat. -- In malis vero ipsorum malitiam praescisse, quia ex
ipsis est; non praedestinasse, quia ex illo non est. Poenam sane malum meritum
eorum sequentem, uti Deum, qui omnia prospicit praescivisse and praedestinasse,
quia justus est: apud quem est, ut S. Augustinus ait, de omnibus omnino rebus,
tam fixa sententia, quam certa praescientia: -- Verum aliquos ad malum
praedestinatos esse divina potestate, videlicet ut quasi aliud esse non
possent, non solum non credimus, sed etiam si sunt, qui tantum malum credere
velint, cum omni detestatione, sicut Arausica Synodus, illis Anathema dicimus.
The sum is, God's mercy goes before Man's merit, but his Predestination to
punishment is only on the foresight of their sin, which he decrees not,
because he causes not.

Cap. 3. About Christ's death they like not those that say he dyed for all that
from the days of Adam till then had been damned; but would have all take up
with this simple Doctrine,
that God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Cap. 4. They conclude that all true Believers regenerate by water and the
Spirit, have their sins washed by the blood of Christ: And they could not have
true Regeneration,
if they had not true Redemption. But of the multitude of the faithful and
redeemed, some are eternally saved, because they persevere; others are lost,
because they persevere not in the salvation of faith which they had received,
and so make void the grace of redemption.

Cap. 6. About Grace and infirmed Free Will restored and healed by Christ, they
exhort Men to stick to the Scriptures, and the Councils of Africa and Orange,
and not to follow the Aniles pene Fabulas Scotorum, (I suppose they mean the
Followers of Johan. Scotus Erignenae, who was murdered by his Scholars 833,
whom Godescalcus followed) lest they should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ: Remembering Christians that while they are vexed with the
prevalency of the wicked in the world, they should not vex the sad
Congregations with such superfluous things.

Cap. 7. They advise, that because Bishops were set over the Cities that were
untryed and almost ignorant of Letters What a Council would those make?
, and unlike the Apostolic Prescript, by which means the Ecclesiastical vigor
is lost, that they would petition the Prince, that when a Bishop was wanting,
the Canonical Election by the Clergy, and the People, might be permitted,
(because the King was used to thrust his Favorites on the People,)
, that Men of tried knowledge and life, and not illiterate Men, blinded by
covetousness, might be set as Bishops over the Flocks.

10. CCLXIII. An. 855. A Council was held at Papia in Italy by the Order of the
Emperor Ludovicus, for the Reformation of the corrupt Clergy; where they
ordered that the Clergy and People choose the Bishops, and yet that the Laity on
pretense of their Electing Power, trample not on the Arch-Presbyter; and that
great Men's Chapels empty not the Churches: (with other old Canons recited.)

11. Lotharius, that so mischievously sought for the Empire against his Father
and Brethren, grew weary of what he had, and divided his 3d part, (which was
the Empire of Italy, with Burgundy and Lorrain,) into three parts, and gave his
Son Lewis the Empire in Italy; and his Son Lotharius, Lorrain; and his Son
Charles, Burgundy; and entered himself into a Monastery: But Charles dying, the
other two Brethren divided his Dominion, and Lions, Belanson and Vienna fell to
Lotharius.

12. We come now to the Reign of Pope Ioane, according to a great number of
their own Historians; but David Blondel has recited the Testimonies of
multitudes on both sides, and after all impartially past his conjecture, that
the Story was not true; whose judgment I reverence, and think most probable.

Whether at that time there was a John the 8th or none till him that some call
John the 9th after Adrian the 2d, is uncertain.

13. Leo dying, (if there was no John or Ioane between) a Schism was made; the
People most choosing Benedict, and the Agents of the Emperor, with part of the
People and Bishops, choosing one Anastasius a Cardinal Presbyter, that had been
Excommunicate by a former Pope. Anastasius thought his choice so sure, that
entering Leonina, (the Roman Suburbs) he went into St. Peter's own Church, and
broke down and burnt the Images, and with a Mattock cast down to the ground
even the Image of Christ, and the Virgin Mary. They went on and imprisoned
Benedict, (quem omnis Romana Plebs eligerat, says Anast. in Bin. p. 659.) But
while the great Men and Officers of the Emperor did their utmost to constrain
the People to consent to Anastasius, they could not prevail, and so they were
fain to yield to the multitude to end the Tumult and Confusion, and Benedict
had the place.

14. By this Story it appears, 1. That this Anastasius was against Images,
and that was like enough to be part of the cause why he had five years left his
Church in Rome before, and refused to appear before Pope or Council. 2. That
when the Emperor and his Officers were so violent for his choice, even after he
had broken down the Images in St. Peter's Church, it is apparent that the Party
even about Rome, and in the West, which was against Images, was not small,
though they made no stir.

15. This Pope Benedict was he that confirmed Hincmarus's Council, which
nullified Ebbo's Ordinations aforesaid, as is to be seen in his first Epist.
Bin. p. 662, etc.

16. An. 856. Charles Calvus, by a Synods concurrence at Carissiac, sent Orders
against Church-Robbers very strict.

And 857, a Council at Mentz was held CCLXIV, where Gunthar, Bishop of Colen,
sent a Letter, that [A terrible Tempest arose, in which the People for fear all
ran into St. Peter's Church: And the Church-beams cracking, as they fell a
praying to God for mercy, suddenly a misshapen Thunderbolt, like a fiery Dragon,
pierced and t^re the Church, and at one stroke killed three men among all the
multitude, (though those three stood in several places) that is, one Priest
that stood at St. Peter's Altar, one Deacon that stood at St. Denis's Altar,
and one Layman at St. Mary's Altar: And six others were struck almost dead,
but recovered. At Trevirs also were many Prodigies.

17. Pope Nicolas 1. is chosen by the Emperor Ludovicus consent, and all the
People. He greatly advances the Roman Seat by his activity, and much by doing
justice to the People that were oppressed by Tyrannical Prelates. He had a
great conflict with John Bishop of Ravenna, who long despised him, and denied
him his subjection: But the Emperor took the Pope's part, and so poor John was
fain to submit, and cry miseremini mei, peto misereri mei, Anast. in Bin. p.
667. and to take an Oath of subjection to the Pope.

18. The great Schism now rose at Constantinople, whether Ignatius or Photius
should be Patriarch; Michael the Emperor deposing Ignatius by the counsel of
his Uncle Bardas, and putting in Photius. The Pope kept up his power by
interposing, uncalled, into all such matters. He sent some Bishops as Legates
to counsel them by a Synod to decide the difference: When these Bishops came
thither, they consented to Photius against Ignatius. The Pope said they were
bribed, and false to their trust, and deposed them, (though he thought he chose
the best he had;) of which more anon.

19. Yet we have not done with worldly Prelates. King Lotharius was weary of
his Wife, and loved a Whore (Waldrada.) He opens his case to the Bishops.
They call a Council, and approve of his Divorce, and his Marriage with
Waldrada. The two great Archbishops of Colen and Triers, are the Leaders. The
Pope is against it, and accuses the Bishops of owning Adultery; They appear at
Rome, and he condemns them of Impudency, while (with some immodest words)
they undertake to justify the thing, (of which more anon.) He charge the
Bishops of heinous Villainy, and they despised him. He condemns the Concilium
Metense At Metz.
, in which the Adultery was allowed.

20. This Pope falls out with Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes, justifying against
him the cause of Rothaldus, whom he had deposed.

He sends Messengers to the King of Bulgaria converted in his days, whom the
Emperor's Officers stop and abuse. The Adversaries of Images were still strong
at Constantinople. Anast. and Bin. p. 670, etc.

Epist. 2. He uses a notable Argument for Images, viz. God is known only in
the Image of his Works: Why then may we not make Images of the Saints? (But why
must Men be compelled to do it, or else be Heretics? and why must they be
worshipped?)

Epist. 5. He is pitifully put to it, to justify the Election of Nectarius and
Ambrose, and yet to condemn that of Photius for being a Layman. And Ep. 6, the
same again in the instance also of Tarasius.

21. The 8th Epistle of this Pope Nicolas to the Emperor Michael, does show
that he had now shaken off the Imperial Power; and therefore charge his
Letters as full of Blasphemy,
Injury, Madness, etc. partly for being so saucy as to bid the Pope, [Send some
to him.] which he says was far from the godly Emperors. Partly for blaming the
deeds of the Prelates, when he says, Their words must be regarded, and their
authority, and not their deeds. Partly for calling the Latin Tongue barbarous
and Scythian, in comparison of the Greek, which he says is to reproach God
that made it. Partly for saying, that the Council that deposed Ignatius, and
set up Photius, was of the same number of Bishops as the first Council of Nice;
where this high Pope's answer is worth the notice of our Papists, Bin. p. 689.
[The small number hurts not,
where Piety abounds: Nor does multitude profit, where Impiety reigns. Yea,
by how much the more numerous is the Congregation of the malignant, by so much
the stronger are they to do mischief: Nor must men glory in numbers, when they
fight not against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, and spiritual
wickedness. -- Glory not therefore in multitude, because it is not the
multitude but the cause, that justifies or damneth. -- Fear not little Flocks,
etc.] This Doctrine was then fittest for the Pope in his Minority: But the
Letter is a Book pleading for the Roman Grandeur, and striving to bring the
Emperor with others under his power.

22. In his Answer and Laws to the Bulgarians, he difliketh their Severities
against one that had pretended to be a Priest, when he was not, and had
baptized many,
concluding that he had saved many, and that they were not to be rebaptized,
Bin. p. 772. No, not though he were no Christian that baptized them, as after
Consul. Cap. 104. p. 782.

To the Case: Who are Patriarchs? he says properly they only that have
succeeded Apostles, which were only three, Rome, Alexandria and Antioch, but
improperly only Constantinople and Jerusalem.
(But why then are not Ephesus, Corinth, Philippi, etc. Patriarchates?) And why
had the rest of the Apostles no Successors? Had they no Churches?

23. This Pope having Western security, threatened Excommunication to the
Emperor of the East, unless he would depose Photius, and restore Ignatius; and
threatened Lotharius, for the cause of his rejected Wife, and the Marriage of
another, as aforesaid; and swaggered against Hincmarus Rhemensis, for his
deposing Rothaldus a Bishop, and forced him to yield, and condemned his Synod
at Metz, and would have proved that Pope Benedict had not confirmed it. He and
other Popes did make the Contentions of Bishops as well as of Princes a great
means of their rising, taking the part of him that appealed to Rome as injured,
(and very often of the truly injured.) By which means they had one Party still
for them, and all injured persons were ready to fly to them for help.

He Excommunicated the Bishops of Colen and Triers. The poor Bishops that would
fain be on the stronger side, began now to be at a loss, to know whether the
Emperor or the Pope was the strongest. They followed the Emperor, and resisted
the Pope a while. The King and Hincmarus forbad Rothaldus going to Rome, and
imprisoned him: But the Pope wearied them out, by reason of the divisions of
the Empire and Kingdom into so many hands of the French Line, that being in
continual suspicion of each other, they needed the Pope's help.

Bin. p. 790. He orders Penance (instead of just death) for one Cumarus that
had murdered three of his own Sons,
viz. That for three years he pray at the Church-door, and that for seven years
he abstain from Wine three days in a week, and for three years to go without
shoes, allowing him to eat Milk and Cheese, but not Flesh, and to enjoy his
Possession, but not have the Sacrament for seven years.

24. His Decretals begin, That the Emperor's Judgments and Laws are below the
Canons, and cannot dissolve them or prejudice them.

Tit. 4. 1. He says, [All Patriarchal Dignity, all Metropolitical Primacy,
all Bishops Chairs, and the dignity of Churches of what Order soever were
instituted by the Church of Rome: But it is he only did found it, and erect it
on the Rock of Faith now beginning, who to St. Peter, the Key-bearer of eternal
life, did commit the Rights both of the Terrene and the Celestial Empire.

Reader, Had not the abuse of Humane Patriarchal Power, and of Excommunications
got up very high, when this bold Pope made this Decree? What! All Churches in
the World made only by Rome? Was not Jerusalem, Antioch, and many another made
before it? Did Christ say any thing of Rome? Did not other Apostles build
Churches by the same Apostolic Commission as Peter had? Is not the Church
built on the foundation of Prophets and Apostles, Christ being the Head-corner
Stone? Did not others build the Church of Rome before Peter did it? Did not
Peter build other Churches before Rome? Where and when did Christ give Peter
the Imperial Power of Earth and Heaven? did he not decide the Controversy who
should be the chief or greatest, with a prohibition of all Imperial Power,
(With you it shall not be so?)

25. But the next Dectee casts Rome as low, as this over-raised it. If any
one by Money,
or Humane-Favor, or by Popular or Military Tumult, be inthroned in the
Apostolic Seats, without the Concordant and Canonical Election of the
Cardinals of that Church, and then of the following Religious Clerks, let him
not be accounted a Pope, or Apostolical, but Apostatical.] By which Rome has
had so few Popes indeed, and so many Apostates, that it has no show of an
uninterrupted Succession to boast of.

26. Tit. 4. c. 7. He claims Authority to absolve Men from Oaths, and all
Obligations made by the violence and constraint of bad Men, and so absolveth
the Archbishop of Triers. (A wicked Decree for Perjury:) (As if in materia
licita, a Man that swears for Fear, were not bound? And as if, Man had not
Free Will, when he is under Fear?)

27. C. 6. and 8. He decrees that none can judge the Pope, nor retract his
Judgments, nor judge of them, (contrary to many General Councils.)

He curses from Christ all that contemn the Pope's Opinions, Mandates,
Interdicts, Sanctions, Decrees, etc. ^. 9.

Yet he says that the Church of Rome may change, and mend its own Mistakes and
Decrees, n. 10.

'Tit. 5. C. 1. No Custom may occasion the removal of any thing established by
full Papal Authority. C. 2. Other men's works approved or reprobate by the
Pope's Decrees, must accordingly be judged, accepted or rejected. C. 3. They
that have not the Decrees are to be reproved, etc.

28. Tit. 6. He brings down Emperors and Kings sufficiently below the Priests,
confining them to temporal things, and not to judge of Priests.

Tit. 7. He rebukes the King for letting none be Bishops but those that he
liked, charging him to admit none at Colen or Triers, till the Pope had notice.
And before he told Emperors, that they must take no care what kind of Lords the
Priests be, but what they say of the Lord; nor to note what Popes be, but what
they do for correction of the Churches; For they are by Constantine called
Gods, and God must not be judged of men, Tit. 3. c. 3. He questions whether
Lotharius was to be called a King, because he was an Adulterer.

29. Tit. 8. c. 1. He decrees that no Bishops be ordained, but by the election
or consent of the Clergy and People.

C. 3. That Primates and Patriarchs have no Privileges above other Bishops,
but so much as the Canons give, and ancient custom has conferred.

30. Tit. 11. c. 1. Is this,
[Nullus missam Presbyteri audiat, quem scit concubinam habere aut
subintroductam mulierem.] That is, Let no one hear the Mass of that Presbyter,
whom he knows undoubtedly to have a Concubine, or a Woman subintroduced.

C. 2. If Priests fall into the snare of Fornication, and the act of the crime
be manifest or showed, they cannot have the honor of Priesthood, according to
the authority of Canonical Institution.

(Yet our Canons will condemn him that refuses to take such an one for the
Guide of his Soul, or to hear him.)

Yet Can. 5. he says, That we must receive the Sacrament from any Priest how
polluted soever, and by the judgment of how many Bishops soever he be
Reprobated, because bad men administering good things, hurt none but themselves;
and all things are purged by faith in Christ.

Tit. 14. Laymen must not judge of the lives of Priests,
nor so much as search into them.

31. CCLXIV. An. 858. A Council at Constantinople placed Photius in the place
of Ignatius, (of which before, and more anon;) Ignatius is banished: we have
not the History and Reasons of the Council.

32. CCLXV. An. 869. A Council was called at Tullum of the Bishops of twelve
Provinces by King Charles, where, besides other Clergy-mens miscarriages,
Wenilo Archbishop of Sens, was accused of Treasonable Defection by the King. In
which it is pity that Bishops below the Pope should have or pretend to the Power
which the King does intimate in these words, Bin. p. 798. [From which my
consecration or sublimity of Kingdom, I ought not to be supplanted or cast down
by any one, without the hearing and judgment of the Bishops,
by whose Ministry I was consecrated King, and who are called the Throne of
God, in which God sits, and by whom he decrees his judgments, to whose
fatherly Correptions, and castigatory Judgments, I was ready to subject my
self, and at present am subject.]

You see here to what power over Kings the common Bishops (as well as the Pope)
were got, by pretense of representing Christ, and of the Power of the Keys.

33. CCLXVI. An. 859. A Council at Constantinople condemned Ignatius, and again
confirmed Photius, who with the Emperor Michael sent to the Pope to satisfy
him of all, and profess enmity to Image-breakers.

34. CCLXVII. An. 860. In a Council at Confluence the five present Kings of the
French Line came to an agreement.

35. CCLXVIII. A General Council was held at Constantinople, An. 861. where 318
Bishops (the same number that was at the first Nicene Council) deposed
Ignatius, and settled Photius, to which the Pope's Legates also subscribed, (the
Papists say through fear;) so that it was Papally confirmed. And yet here was
much done for Images.

36. CCLXIX. The Pope having condemned John Archbishop of Revenna who despised
him, till the Emperor forsook him, in a Council at Rome he submitted himself to
the Pope, and was reconciled.

37. CCLXX. An. 862. In another Council at Rome, Pope Nicolas condemned the
Heresy of the Theopaschites, that (they said, made the Godhead to suffer) it is
like it was Cyril and the Eutychians old verbal Error by communication of
Titles.

38. CCLXXI. An. 862. A Council is held at Aquisgrane, in which King Lotharius
desires counsel about his Wife Theutperge; the Bishops pronounce it his duty
to put her away, she having confessed Incest with her own Brother, and allow
him to marry Waldrade, he professing himself unable to contain. The Pope
condemns the action and them: The Papists say this was but a forged pretense.
I only note 1. If they would deliberately forge so heinous a thing on a Queen,
what Heathens could be worse than such Bishops? 2. Did the Bishops of that age
think that they were bound to obey the judgment of the Pope, who thus opposed
him?

39. CCLXXII. An. 862. In another Council in France (in Villa ad sublonarias)
the three Kings again met for agreement.

40. CCLXXIII. Lotharius appealing, desires a Council in France by the Pope's
consent: All the Bishops of France and Germany meet at Metz, and the Pope's
Legates with them: They and the Legates also subscribe to the King's Divorce,
and to more, which the Pope had before declared against: (Did Bishops then
think the Pope Infallible, or not to be opposed?) The Papists say that the
Pope's Legates were bribed.

41. CCLXXIV. An. 863. The Pope calls his own Council at Rome,
and excommunicateth or curses them all from Christ, and deposes them quantum
in se. But yet offers forgiveness to all, save two, if they will subject
themselves to him. The Bishops stand to it, that he cursed them unjustly: Must
all the Kingdoms be thus ruled and confounded by one Priest, till matters
between a King and his Wife be managed to his will and satisfaction?

42. CCLXXV. In another Council at Rome, An. 863. the Pope curses his Legates
at Constantinople with Photius and Gregory Syracusanus, because they all
crossed his will, which must everywhere bear rule.

43. CCLXXVI. In a Council at Senlis, Hincmarus Rhemensis got Rhotaldus Bishop
of Soissons deposed, and thrust into a Monastery, and another put in his place,
notwithstanding the Pope's opposition, An. 863.

44. CCLXXVII. Hereupon the Pope, in a Council at Rome, condemns this Council
at Senlis, and decrees, That unless Hincmarus and the other Bishops do within
30 days restore Rhotaldus, they shall be forbidden their Ministry, and used as
they used Rhotaldus: But they did not obey him, but put it to the venture.

And whereas the King had forbidden Rhotaldus to go to Rome, and the French
Bishops pleaded this as a just restraint, the Pope answered, That no Imperial
Laws must take place against Ecclesiastical.
And so it came to the question, Whether the King or the Pope was King of
France, or had more power over the bodies of the Subjects? Thus did the Papacy
ascend.

45. CCLXXVIII. A Council of Bishops and Lords together at Pistis, made Orders
for Repentance, and restraint of Rapine and Plunder, etc. An. 863.

46. CCLXXIX An. 864. In a Council at Rome the Pope deposed and excommunicated
Rodoaldus Portuensis his Legate, with Ioh. Hi^^densis, for joining with the
Synod at Metz against his Orders.

47. CCLXXX. In another Council at Rome, An. 865. the Pope restores Rhotaldus:
For Hincmarus at last let him out of Prison, and let him go to Rome, but would
neither go nor send thither any Legates himself, as the Pope required, for his
own and the Synod's defense.

48. CCLXXXI. An. 866. A Synod at Soissons wrote to the Pope about Hincmarus,
and against encouraging false Ordinations, unless after privately confirmed,
etc.

49. CCLXXXII. The Pope was so busy and troublesome with the French Bishops,
making himself Judge in matters that he knew not, and restoring those that they
deposed, that An. 867. a Synod at Tr^cas wrote to inform him of all that had
passed for 33 years; how Ebbo and his Synod of Bishops had slandered and
deposed the Emperor Ludovicus Pius, and how he did it to please Lotharius; and
when Ludovicus was restored how he fled; and when Ludovicus was dead how
Lotharius with the base temporizing Bishops restored him, and after he had been
condemned and resigned his place, returned to the exercise of it and ordained
diverse; and how upon the prevailing of Charles against Lotharius he was cast
out again: and how after Lotharius got the Pope to appoint the hearing of all
again when he was condemned, and how after this he was made a Bishop in
Germany, and Rhemes was ten years ruled by two Presbyters, and how the Pope
Paschal chose this Traitor to preach to the Heathens near him, and how
Hincmarus was chosen, etc. as aforesaid. Such trouble did a Usurper put the
Churches to. Says Harmar to his in Bin. p. 876. Ad hortos a Basilio spectante
Michaele interfectus est.


50. Platina says that some say that after the death of Pope Nicolas the place
was void eight years, seven months and nine days: But others say that it was
void but seven days: so uncertain is the Papal History of succession. The next
that we find inthroned is Haedrian 2d.

51. Michael at Constantinople having been long ruled much by Bardas (who was
for Photius) at last giving up himself to drunkenness and other sins, by the
persuasion of Basilius he killed Bardas, and made Basilius Caesar: And after a
while his vice gave Basilius the opportunity to kill the Emperor when he was
drunk. See Dion. Petavius Hist. li. 1. chap. 12. Yet this Basilius washed his
hands and made many Protestations that he had no hand in his blood. This made
for the Popes advantage: Women and Rebels and Traitors and discordant Princes
did much in raising him. This Regicide Emperor, as a second Phocas finds it
useful to quiet his party by a change countenanced by the Bishop of Rome: And
so he sets himself against Photius and sets up Ignatius again; and searching
Photius's servants, finds a book written of the Acts of the late great Council
at Constantinople, which was for him and against Ignatius, and a defense of
that Council against the Bishop of Rome, in which he dealt severely with the
Pope. This Book the new Emperor sends to the Pope, and there it is read, stamped
upon, stabbed with a knife, and openly burnt (and a miracle is said to be at the
burning of it, some drops of rain that fell, not quenching the fire, but
increasing it.) But their calling Photius a knave and burning his books, and
condemning the council that was for him, will hardly keep the readers of his
yet-preserved learned writings from suspecting that the Popes cause was not
unquestionable, or at least, that the Pope was not taken for the universal
Vice-Christ when Photius and his council did so little regard him. No wonder
then if the Acts of a great council when they were against the Pope are called
[Nesandissimi Conciliabuli prophanat a Volumina, quibus sanctissimum Papam
Nicolaum susur^a fauce latraverat.] Yet our new Papists would make men believe
that none but a few Heretics refused subjection to the Pope before Luther.
Were these Councils Heretics?

52. Here the Emperor Basilius was put to a hard strait about his Bishops: He
wrote to the Pope (vid. Bin. p. 825. 826.) that almost all his Bishops had
miscarried, both those ordained by Photius and those Ordained by Ignatius: they
had turned with the times not knowing how the times would turn, and incurred
such guilt that he desired the Pope to pardon them, lest he should want
Bishops: silencing one party would not serve turn,
while all had been so far guilty. [Tum a sanctissimo Patriarcha Ignatio
consecrati secundum scripturae suae confessionem in veritate non permanserunt;
nec non et de his summis Sacerdot ibus atque Abbatibus qui diversimode
scripserunt, quorum alii vi vel tyrannide, alii vero simplicitate aut levit
ate, quidam vero seductione et versutiis, quidam vero muneribus et honoribus
diversimode decepti sunt -- Imo vero dicendum est quod pene omnes sacrati, tam
priores quam posteriores qui sub nobis sunt, male, et ut non opportebat,
tractati sunt -- Quatenus non Ecclesiae nostrae summis Sacerdotibus et
Sacerdotibus, qui sub omni regimine nostro sunt, commune occurrat naufragium,
propemodum universis illis de falsis et impotabilibus gustantibus iniquitatis
Rheumatibus. Super his itaque postulamus compatientissimum Sacerdotium tuum, ut
manum porrig at humanitatis et eorum dispenset salutem, etc. says Basilius
ibid.

53. Here also another difficulty arose (as there ever does in ravelled works.)
The Pope had been against Hincmarus and his Council for deposing the Bishops
ordained by Ebbo. And yet to subdue the Greeks he was for the deposing of those
ordained by Photius. This made him seem contrary to himself: Anastasius
Bibliothecarius (who then lived and was employed at Constantinople in this
matter) to reconcile the contradiction, says that Ebbo was a true Bishop, but
Photius was not, because he was a Layman before his consecration; and
therefore his ordinations are nullities. This nullifying of ordinations makes
great disturbances in the Church. The present Bishops of England require those
that were heretofore ordained by Parochial Pastors to be reordained, and on
this and such other accounts about 2000 were silenced at one day (Aug. 24.
1662.) The silenced Nonconformists do some of them say that the Bishops have
much less than Photius to show for their authority to ordain. He had learning,
he had the Emperors authority for him: He had lawful Bishops to ordain him; He
had a great Council or two to approve him and confirm him: And though he was a
layman before, so is every one when he comes to his first ordination. And
though he was made Bishop per saltum, so was Nectarius, Thalasius, Ambrose,
etc. And every Uncanonical irregularity nullifieth not the ordination. It has
been ordinary for Deacons to be made Popes: And is not that per saltum? why
does not that interrupt and nullify the Papaci^? But, say they, on this
account 1. Romes succession is long ago interrupted: There having been far
greater incapacities in Simonists, common Adulterers, Perjured, Rebels,
Heretics, Infidels, (as Councils have judged.) 2. And (they say) that so the
English Prelates are no Bishops, being chosen by the King, and wanting that
choice of the Clergy and people, which the Canons have over and over again made
necessary to the validity of ordinations, are more null than those of Photius:
And therefore we owe them (as such) no obedience nor communion.] Thus our
nullifyings and condemnings proceed till most men have degraded if not
unchristened one another. And he that is on the stronger side carries it, till
death or some other change confute his claim, and then the other side gets up
and condemns him as he condemned them. And thus has the Church long suffered
by damning Divines, and domineering or censorious Judges.

54. By the restoring of Ignatius, the Pope got to himself the reputation of
some Supremacy, and obliged a party to him; which however it was not the
greatest at the first, would be greatest when Ignatius his supremacy had
advanced it: And with them he got the reputation of being just, indeed Photius
seeming to possess the seat of one that was injuriously deposed by the mere
will of the Prince, without sufficient cause.

55. Pope Hadrian 2. (Epist. 4. ad Ignat. Constable.) directs Ignatius to forgive
many others, but none of those that subscribed to Photius his great Council at
Constantinople, because they reproached the Pope of Rome; where you may see 1.
How dangerous it was then to be in a General Council, when, if they please not
the strongest, they are ruined: And if they do, it is like enough the next age
will damn them for it. 2. How much more dangerous is it for a Council to be
against the Pope, than to be guilty of many other crimes; and how unpardonable
it is.

56. CCLXXXIII. An. 868. Besides the Popes Roman Synod that damned Photius and
his Book and Constable* Council, there was a Council at Worms, which repealed many
old Canons, of which the 14th. is,
that if Bishops shall excommunicate any wrongfully or for light cause and not
restore them, the neighbor Bishops shall take such to their communion till the
next Synod.

The 15. Canon is, that because in Monasteries there are Thieves that cannot be
found, when the suspected purge themselves, they shall receive the sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, thereby to show that they are innocent.] But this
Canon the Papists are ashamed of.

The 72. Canon allows Presbyters (yea all Christians) to anoint the sick,
because the Bishops hindered with other business cannot go to all the sick.]
This intimates that even then the Diocesses were not so great as ours that
have one or many Counties, else other reason would have been given why the
Bishop could not visit all the sick, than his hindering businesses: Would the
Bishop, e. g. of Lincoln say, I would visit all the sick in Lincolnshire,
Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, Hun^ingtonshire, Rutlandshire, Hartfordshire,
Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, which are in my Diocese, but that I am hindered
by other business? who would take this for the words of a sober man?

57. CCLXXXIV. An. 869, was that Constantinopolitan Council which the Papists
(damning some other^) call the 4th. and the 8th. General Council ended An. 879.
in which but 102 Bishops condemned Photius and settled Ignatius, by the means of
the Emperor Basilius and the Pope,
who had before restored him. Here in Act. 2. The Bishops that had followed
Photius, took the old course, and when they saw all turned cried peccavimus and
craved pardon, and themselves called Photius, such a villain as there had never
been the like. (Bin. p. 882,) They said they sinned through fear and so were
forgiven. Act. 3. Some Bishops that had turned, who were ordained by Methodius,
were required to subscribe to a form proposed; But they told them that the late
times had so vexed men with heinous subscriptions, that they had made a
Covenant or Vow to make no more subscriptions but what they had done already,
and the profession of their faith (like Nonconformists) and desired to be
received on such terms without their new subscription. Act. 4. The Bishops of
Photius's party ordained by him were examined. And Act. 5. Photius himself, who
would not enter till constrained, and then professed as in imitation of Christ
to give them no answer to what they asked him; and is in vain exhorted to
repentance. Act. 6. Many of the Photian Bishops repented and were pardoned:
Others pretended that they had subscribed and sworn to Photius, where Zachar.
Calcedon. showed that the Canons were above the Patriarchs. Here Basilius the
Emperor made a notable speech to exhort the Bishops to repentance, offering
himself to lay by his honor and to lie on the earth, and let them tread on him
confessing his sin, and asking mercy. Act. 7. Photius is again brought in, (and
his staff that he leaned on taken from him) and he denied to defend himself and
to repent, but bid them repent. The Bishops of Heraclea, etc. rejected the
Legates, and pronounced them anathematized that should anathematize Photius,
and appealed to the Canons. Act. 8. They censured a Bishop that was against
Images. Act. 9. They examined some great men that had ^worn against Ignatius,
who confessed they had sworn falsely for ^ear of the Princes; but Leo would not
damn or curse Photius, because he thought the Orthodox were not to be cursed.
The 10th. Act. Contains the Canons which they made; of which the Copies
greatly differ.

58. The 3d. Canon says that [they ordain that the Image of Christ be
worshipped with the same honor as the Gospels; as teaching that by Colors,
which the Gospel does by words: saying, [whoever adores not the Image of our
Savior shall not see his face at his second coming: adding [by the same reason
we venerate and adore the Image of the Blessed Virgin and the Holy Angels, as
the scripture describes them, and of all the Saints. They that think
otherwise, let them be cursed from Christ.]

Can. 6. They anathematize Photius because he did excommunicate and
anathematize the Pope, and all that communicated with him.

Can. 7. No excommunicate men are allowed to make Images.

Can. 8. Is too good for the Devil to let the Church enjoy viz. [That whereas
it is reported that not only the heretical and usurpers,
but some Orthodox Patriarchs also for their own security, have made men
subscribe (to be true to them) the Synod judges that it shall be so no more,
save only that men when they are made Bishops be required as usual to declare
the soundness of their faith: He that violateth this Sanction let him be
deprived of his honor.

The 10th Can. Condemns them that hold,
That Man has two Souls (which they say Photius favored) and cursed them from
Christ.

The 11th. Can. Tells us what men these Bishops were, and what they sought.
It is [That all that are made Bishops bearing on earth the person and form of
the Celestial Hierarchy, shall with all veneration be worshipped by all Princes
and Subjects: and we will not have them to go far from the Church to meet any
commanders of the Army or any Nobles, nor to light from their horses like
supplicants or abjects that feared them, nor to fall down or petition them; If
any Bishop hereafter shall neglect his due honor, or break this Canon, or
permit it to be done, he shall be separated for a year from the Sacrament; and
that Prince, Duke, or Captain two years.

The 12. Can. Princes as profane men be not spectators of that which holy
persons do, and therefore Councils be held without them. Either I understand
them not,
or it is in despite of truth that they say [Vnde nec alias reperimus
Oecumenicis Conciliis unquam interfuisse: Neque enim fas est ut prophani
Principes, rerum quae sacris hominibus gerundae sunt, gerunturve, spectatores
fiant.] Binnius notes [ex praescripto nempe Canonum] turning an assertion de
facto into one de jure, and an universal into a particular, by which license of
expounding what lie or blasphemy may not be justified! And why then have so
many thousand been cursed from Christ by Councils for unskilfulness in words?

59. The 14th. Can. secureth the Bishops admirably in despite of the old
reforming honest Canons decreeing that [A Layman (not excepting Kings or
Parliaments) shall have no power to dispute by any reason of Ecclesiastical
Sanctions, or to oppose the universal Church or any general Synod; for the
difficulty of these things, and agitating them on both sides, is the office of
Patriarchs, Priests and Doctors, to whom only God has given power of binding
and loosing. For though a Layman excei in the praise of piety and wisdom, yet
he is a Layman and a Sheep and not a Pastor. But a BISHOP though it be
manifest that he is destitute of ALL VIRTUE of Religion,
yet he is a Pastor as long as he exercises the office of a Bishop, and the
sheep must not resist the Shepherd.] O brave doctrine for the Roman Kingdom! A
Heathen, or Infidel, or Mohammedan, or Arrian Bishop must not be opposed: He
that is no Christian may be a Bishop. How much to be blamed were the General
Councils that deposed Popes for Infidelity, Diabolism, Heresy, Simony,
Perjury, Blasphemy, Sodomie, Fornication, Murders, etc. when a Pope that has
all these, and no virtue of Religion, is not to be judged by Laymen, or
opposed.

Q. 1. May a Prince save his crown from such? 2. May a man save his Wife from
such, or a woman refuse their copulation, or defend her Chastity against them?
3. What if such are drunk in the Pulpit, are the People bound to be silently
submissive? 4. Why did Pope Nicholas decree that none should hear Mass from a
Priest that lives in fornication? 5. Are Priests above Kings, or are they
lawless?

Yet this very Synod of Bishops in their Epistle to Pope Hadrian says [Cui
con^ictae Synodo, qui tum imperitabant, Michael et Basilius noster,
praesidebant,] And Basilius and Baanes were now among them. And many Princes,
especially in France and Spain have made strict Laws to amend the Bishops.

60. One of the decrees of this Council was that Photius should not be called a
Christian. Bin. p. 899. Col. 2. Yet the Apostle says of the rejected; account
him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. 2 These. 3.

61. In Bin. p. 899. is an epistle of Pope Stepheus to the Emperor Basilius
which contains the radical doctrine of all the Bishops rebellion and pride,
viz. that Princes are only appointed for the things of the Body or this life,
and prelates and Priests for the matters of the Soul and life eternal, and
therefore that the Prelates Empire is more excellent than the Princes, as
heaven is above earth. [Quandoquidem verbis quae ad usum vitae, id est, rerum
praesentium pertinent, Imperium a Deo traditum est, ita nobis per Principem
Apostolorum Petrum, rerum divinarum procuratio est commissa: Accipe quaeso in
optimam partem quae subjicio i.e. I pray you give up your Crown.
-- Haec sunt capita curaeque Principis imperii vestri. Nostri vero cura gregis
tanto praestantior est, quanto altior est terra quam coelum, Audi Dominum -- Tu
es Petrus -- de vestro imperio vero quid dicit -- Nolite timere eos qui corpus
occidunt -- Obtestor igitur tuam Pietatem ut Principum Apostolorum instituta
sequare, magna veneratione prosequare. Omnium enim in orb terrarum, omnis or
do et Pontificatus Ecclesiarum, a principe Apostolorum Petro originem et
authoritatem acceperunt. (O horrid falsehood, as before confuted!)

62. Yet this Council in Breviar. in Bin. p. 905. determine of the Pope, that
being but one Patriarch, he cannot absolve one that is condemned by the other
many Patriarchs.

63. Laying all together I cannot perceive by historical notice, but that both
Ignatius and Photius were both better Bishops than most were to be found; the
first being a very pious man, and the other also a man of great learning and
diligence. But the old contention WHO SHOULD BE CHIEF or greatest, made them
both the great calamity of the Church.

I think it not in vain here to transcribe part of the sum of the life of
Ignatius as written by Nicetas, David, Paphlago who was devoted to him, though
somewhat said already be repeated. Ignatius (being of the blood Royal) was in
quiet possession, when denying entrance or Church Communion to Bardas Caesar
for his reported Adultery, he provoked that indignation in him which deposed
him. Bardas first persuaded the Emperor Michael to assume the Government and
not leave the Empire any longer to his Mother and Sisters. One Gebo then
pretending to be the Son of Queen Theodora, and claiming the Crown, and many
following him, Ignatius is accused as being then on Gebo's side, The Emperor
commands Ignatius to shear his Mother and Sisters, and put them into a
Monastery: He refuses: The Emperor is angry and suspecting him, causes it to
be done by others, and sends Ignatius to the Island Terebinth and kills
Gebo. Within three days some of the Bishops who had subscribed and sworn to
Ignatius, even that they would sooner deny the supreme Majesty of the Trinity,
than without a public damnation they would suffer their Pastor to be deposed,
became agents to draw him to renounce his Place. etc. He refusing, Photius is
made one day a Monk, the next day a Lector, the next a Subdeacon, the next a
Deacon, the next a Presbyter, and on Christ's birthday is made Patriarch; a
great and noble Courtier, the Emperors Secretary or privy Councellor, famous
for skill in things politic and civil, so flourishing in the skill of Grammar,
Poetry, Oratory, Philosophy, Physic, and the study of almost all Liberal Arts
and Sciences, as that he was absolutely in them the Prince of his age, yea, and
might contend with the ancients. For he had a confluence of natural aptitude
and force, of felicity, riches, by which he got a library of all sorts of
books; and being desirous of Glory and Praise, spent whole nights in sleepless
Studies, and after studied divinity, and Ecclestical Volumes. Gregorius Bishop
of Syracuse (a censured Bishop) ordained him: Ignatius is cruelly used, and its
laid on Photius: He sends some Bishops to Rome, and by them says, that
Ignatius gave up his Place. It Is said that some held Ignatius's hand, and by
force wrote his mark, and others wrote the rest: but what is the truth is hard
to know. A General Council is called: The Emperor and all his Princes, great
ones, and almost all the City met at Photiu^'s possession. Baanes and some of
the baser of the Romans are sent to summon Ignatius to the Council, (Bin. p.
867.) He asks them in what Garbs he shall come. They take time and the next
day say, Rhodoaldus and Zacharias Legates of Old Rome by us summon thee without
delay to appear at the holy Ecumenical Council in what habit thou will
according to thy own Conscience. He goes in Patriarchs habit. The Emperor
commands him in the habit of a Monk. No less than seventy two witnesses are
brought into the Synod against him, Nobles and Vulgar; Nic^tas says perjured,
of whom Leo and Theodotacius two Noble men were chief; and some Anabaptists
(that is, such as baptized men again, though not against Infant Baptism.) These
swore that Ignatius, not justly ordained, had twelve years ago usurped the
place. And alas! there wanted not a Canon which would depose a great part of
the Bishops of the world, viz. that called the 30th. Apost. and often renewed.

If any Bishop using the secular power do by them obtain a Church, let him be
deposed.] They left out [And those that Communicate with him] For which Nicetas
accuses the Bishops as falsely saving themselves. And alas! must all the
ministers in England be deposed that communicate with any Bishop that gets a
Church by the secular power?
What a separation than must here be made. And would not this Canon depose
Photius also? The Popes Legates, Bishops, Rhodoceldus and Zacharias, aliique
nefarii homines says Nicetas, cried down Ignatius as Unworthy; then they beat
and odiously abuse the good old man: And then comes the foresaid forced
subscribed confession (or forged.) After this its said that they sent men to
kill him; but by old base clothes and two baskets on his back, he past away
unknown, begging his bread by the way. Nicetas says that an Earthquake shook
the City forty days together, and frightened them to send abroad and proclaim
security to Ignatius, who thereupon surrendered himself. Bardas convinced
sends him safe to his own Monastery, and the Earthquake ceased; and the
Bulgarians moved by famine and the Emperor's gifts, laid down arms and were
baptized Christians. Pope Nicholas excommunicateth Photius, and the Emperor and
all the Court. (Bin. p. 868.) A fire befalls the Church of Sophia. The young
Emperor grows so drunken and profane that he gets a pack of wicked ungodly
men, and makes them in mockery or play his Bishops, and consecrateth a Church
for them,
and makes one Theophilus a jester their Patriarch, to turn Religion into a
scorn, and then says [Theophilus is my Patriarch, Photius is Caesar's, and
Ignatius is the Christians.] And thus they by profane wit derided the Bishops
and Religion itself, to which alas, the Bishops ambition and odious strife did
tend.

Photius was silent at all this. Another Earthquake frightened them again, the
terriblest for a day and a night that had been there known. Upon this one
Basilius a Bishop of Thesalonica went boldly to the Emperor and opened the sin
of his profaneness dissuading him from that wickedness that provoked God. The
Emperor enraged struk out his Teeth,
and caused him to be so scourged that he was like to dye. Photius cared for
none of this, set his mind on the securing his seat and oppressing Ignatius,
magnifying all that took his part, and encouraging false Stories and Calumnies
against the best that were against him.

One of the betrayers and accusers of Ignatius was one of his Disciples, and of
his own name, made Archbishop of Hierapolis, and then lost his Conscience and
Fidelity. (Bin. p. 869.) It was but for presuming to Consecrate an Altar, cast
down by the Russians and new built, which was taken after his deposition for a
breach of the Law and Canons, and two Archbishops, (ready at all times) were
sent to pull down the Altar as Nonconformable, and to carry the stones to the
Sea, and wash them, and then to set them up again. O that they would have washed
their hearts from Pride and Worldly Ambition!

Oh, says Nicetas, What stupidity, what pravity of a perverse mind was this?
What excess of Envy? What study of ambitious Dishonesty? Did thy daily
meditation and night-watches, and innumerable Books teach thee this? Did thy
frequent reading and disputation, and striving for the praise of learning teach
it thee? Did the knowledge of the Old Testament and the New, the sayings of the
Wise, the Decrees of the Holy Fathers, teach thee to persecute a poor man, and
to vex and kill one of a broken heart and spirit? Did not thy tyranical
ejection of him satiate the implacable fury of thy mind, etc? Thus Nicetas.

As much as to say, Much learning, and great power and places, are too often
separated from Honesty, Charity and Conscience.

Here he mentions a terrible Dream of Bardas, and the murder of him by
Basilius's order, and the Emperor's consent; and how basely Photius cried him
down when he was dead, who was his only Friend and Patron while he lived.

Next he tells us how the Emperor, by Photius's persuasion, called a General
Council, which deposed Pope Nicolas, as he had done Phocas Did the Church then
hold that the Pope was the Supreme Ruler and Judge?
. The other Patriarchs and the Bishops were assembled, and the Pope
anathematized: And the Historian blames it as causless; but it was then
commonly held, that a Council might judge and depose any Patriarch.

The Acts of the Council Photius sent to King Ludovicus and others in Italy and
France, that they might depose the Pope (by two Bishops, viz. of Calcedon, and
Laodicea.) It Is said he spoke evil to the Emperor of Basilius, and to Basilius
of the Emperor. Basilius murdereth the Emperor, and the next day deposes
Photius, and thrusts him into an Hospital, and calls home Ignatius; and so gets
Ignatius's Party on his side, to which he resolved to add the Pope: Therefore
sending to Photius for the Patriarchate Writings, and he saying he had left
them all behind him, the Servants of Photius were seen striving about seven
Bags of sealed Papers; which being surprised, were found to be the Acts of the
Council, and the Condemnation of Pope Nicolas. Ignatius was odiously accused
and abused in them. Many Pictures made of him: over one written Diabolus: over
another Principium peccati: over another Filius perditionis: over another
Avaritia Simonis Magi: over another, [Qui se extollit supra omne id quod
dicitur aut colitur Deus:] over the sixth, Abominatio desolationis: and over
the seventh, [Antichristus.] Reader,
how shall a man know what History to believe that characterizeth Adversaries?
and how little is the judgment and applause of man to be regarded, or their
condemnation of us to be feared?

I would not (says Nicetas) mention these things, but that I see the Authors
and their followers own them, and make Photius a holy man.

The next part of the Book, says Nicetas, [Synodicus in Nicol^^ um Pontificem
Romanum tela torquebat, omnisque generis calumnias and atrocia maledicta, in
illius Sancti exauctorationem and damnationem complectebatur, impie ut tragico
prope modo concinuitatus, sane quoque ipsius stygii doctoris magisterio and
Photii ministerio dignus. Gregory, Bishop of Syracuse, wrote them out, and sent
them to the King of France. Who wrote truly, and who falsely, how should we now
know? But this I know,

1. That contending who should be greatest was the sin of the Prelates,
and the plague of the Churches.

2. And that then it was taken for granted, that the Pope deserving it might be
deposed.

The new Emperor Basil sent these Books to the Pope, who burnt them as you have
heard (Great reason: but I would we saw them!) Ignatius being restored,
excommunicateth Photius, and all that were initiated by him, and all that
communicated with him. (It seems they were much alike in the art of damning
men, and separating them from Christ.) Then is Ignatius's Council called, where
102 Bishops damn Photius, depose him, and curse him from Christ; and the
Bishops, to show their holiness and constancy, would not write his damnation
with Ink, but with Christ's own blood; (that is, the Sacramental Wine.) (And
yet ere long they set up Photius again.)
Nicetas blames his Condemners, that went not so far as to prevent his
Restoration. But how can Bishops rule God's Providence, or the mutable minds of
Princes! says he, [Nam qui per reconciliatos erat ejectus, and per hypocritas
damnatus, is per eosdem quasi familiares postliminio recurrens, rursus
Patriarchae thronum per vim invasit -- Cum omnes in sua testimonia and
Chirographa perjuros, ut ipse erat, fieri coegisset, ut extrema primis
deteriora fecisset, omnium conscientias inquinavit and conspurcavit.] Alas! if
the Bishops will be perjured Weathercocks, and, as Hypocrites, cry peccavimus
one year, and go contrary again the next, and change as Princes do, who can
help it?

He says now, new Earthquakes and terrible Whirlwinds did again afright men.
He gives us also many of Ignatius's Miracles, especially when he was dead. He
says Photius prosecuted him with malice when he was dead. He next tells us how
after the death of Ignatius, Photius came to be restored; even by feigning a
Pedigree of Basilius as from the King of Armenia, sound by his skill in
Antiquities; and by his great parts and elegancy winning upon him. He makes
Theophanes the instrument of the deceit. He won the hearts of all the
Courtiers: so that within three days of Ignatius's death he was restored.
Hereupon the Bishops turn round, and they that lately called him all that is
naught, now magnify him,
(Bin. p. 875.) But all that Nicetas calls vere Christianos, abhorred him.

(This makes me remember the words of Erasmus in the life of Dr. Colet
translated by Thomas Smyth, concerning the Bishop of London that then was)
being an acute Schoolman, [I have known, says he, some such that I would not
call Knaves, but never any that I could call a Christian.] Sad Prelates that
Nicetas (and Erasmus) could not call Christians.

But the ambition of Photius tempted them to their mutability: He cast out the
Bishops that were against him, and presently forgave and restored them if they
would but conform. Yea, he dared to re-ordain those that Ignatius had ordained,
supposing him no Bishop; but abhorring all that stopped him in it. But he
proceeded to consecrate anew the Church-Utensils, and say over certain Prayers
(If, says Nicetas, they be not rather to be called Curses.] And (says he) to
make his sin out of measure sinful, when he ordained or preferred any, or
changed Bishoprics, he made them conform by swearing and subscribing to him;
thereby binding all to him whom by Benefices he obliged How often have such Oaths
and Subscriptions been condemned in Councils! And yet alas! --
. So much out of Nicetas.

64. And now Reader, I leave it to thy judgment, whether Gregory Nazianzen knew
not what he said, when he wished there were no [higher and lower] among Bishops;
and when he spoke so much of their ambition, levity and temerity, and of the
evil effects of their Councils in his time. Whether Patriarchal dignity was not
a great temptation, when to the Son of a Prince on one side, and to the great
and noble Secretary of the Emperor on the other side, it seemed a prize worth
the striving for to the death? And whether it have not been the calamity of the
Church, when two such extraordinary men, far above the common rank of Bishops,
shall set an Empire and almost all the Christian Churches into Schism,
Contention, mutual Persecution and Confusion, by so long striving Who shall be
greatest?
and drawing so many hundred Bishops into Faction, Schism, Perjury, and
shameful mutations with them? And whether Christ did not (foreseeing such
things) far otherwise decide this question, Who shall be greatest? in Luke 22.
But if Pride turned Angels into Devils, it is not much to be wondered, if it
turn the Angels of the Churches into the Ministers of the Prince of Pride and
Darkness, and turn many Churches into a Theater of Contention, and a Field of
War.

65. Yet here is one thing further to be noted, viz. the foresaid Contention
that rose about the Bulgarians. These two great Patriarchs of Rome and
Constantinople, were neither of them yet great enough, or satisfied with their
jurisdiction, their desires being more boundless than Alexander's for the
Empire; nothing less than all the world will satisfy one of them at least.
Nicetas says, it was by Famine, and a Treaty, and kind words of the Emperor,
that the Bulgarians turned Christians. Some Papists would give the honor to
the Pope, without proof, and cannot tell us any thing how the Pope converted
them. But when they were converted, they sent to Rome for some Instructors: The
(...) them two, and they received them. But they put the case themselves to the
Council at Constantinople, Whether they were to be under the Bishop of Rome, or
of Constantinople? The matter held a great debate. The Pope's Legates pleaded,
that they had already received Bishops from Rome, etc. The Greeks pleaded, that
their Country was part of the Empire, and under the Bishop of Constantinople,
till they conquered it; and that they found there Greek Churches and Bishops,
who were still there, and the Conquest did not translate them from the Bishop
of Constant. to Rome. How the Controversy ended is hard to know: Some say that
the Council gave them to the Pope, and some say otherwise. But this is
confessed, that this Roman ambition so greatly displeased the new Emperor
Basilius, that it turned him after against the Pope, and inclined him the more
to restore Photius, which he did when Ignatius was dead.

66. Here I would call the Reader to consider, whether the Pope's Universal
Government was in those days believed? even by that Council which was supposed
to be partial (by the Emperor's inducement) on the Pope's side. What place else
could there be for such a strife, whether the Bulgarians were under the
Government of the Bishop of Rome, or Constantinople; if all the World were
under the Bishop of Rome? They will say that it was only questioned, whose
Diocese or Patriarchate they were under?
But Rome never pretended that they were of that Diocese or Patriarchate as
anciently divided. But the question was, Whose Government they were now fallen
under? And would any dispute whether e. g. Westminster were under the
Government of the King, or of the Lord Mayor of London? when all the Kingdom is
under the King. This Controversy clearly shows, that the Church then took
the Pope to have but the first Seat and Voice in Councils, but not to be the
Governor beyond his circuit.

67. It is here also to be noted, that Basil the Emperor's revolt from the Pope
was so great, that Hadrian is put to write sharply to him as accusing the
Bishops of Rome, and derogating from them, admonishing him to repent; but we
find not that this changed his mind.

68. Yet one thing more is here to be observed. In the life of Hadrian the 2d
(Bin. p. 882.) we find that the Pope taking the advantage of Basil's present
state and mind, and the interest of Ignatius much depending on him, sent a new
Libel to be subscribed by all the Bishops, before they should be permitted to
sit in Council. The Greek Bishops grudged at this, and complained to the
Emperor, [That the Church of Constantinople by these offered Libels, was
brought under the power of Rome, by the doubtfulness of Subscriptions.] But
though flebiliter conqueruntur, they complain with tears, the Emperor was angry
with them, and would have it; and some Bishops non sine magno laboris periculo,
libellos quidem vix tandem recipient, with much ado were brought to subscribe,
saying, It was novum and inauditum. The refusers extra Synodum inglorii relicti
sunt, were shut out till they conformed: (Oh! that Inglorii was a cutting word.)

69. The Emperor hiding his anger against the Pope's Legates (for the Bulgarian
Usurpation) gave them great gifts, and sent them home. But at Sea they fell
into the hands of the Sclavonians, who stripped them of their Riches, and the
Subscriptions and Copy of the Council, and kept them Prisoners, and threatened
their Lives: But by the mediation of the Emperor and Pope, they were delivered,
and had some of their Writings again.

70. CCLXXXV. An. 879. Carolus Calvus King of France, unjustly possessed the
Kingdom of Lotharius, which by inheritance fell to Ludovicus. Ludovicus got the
Pope to interpose, who sent his Legates to Charles: But the Bishops had not yet
learned to obey Popes against Kings in power. A Council of Bishops called at
Metz, give the Kingdom to Charles, because he was the stronger. This was called
Concilium Praedatorium,
a Council of Robbers and Traitors: And no wonder, when Bishops must be the
Givers of Kingdoms. Was it not enough for the Pope, to usurp such power, to be
over Kings, and dispose of Crowns, but ordinary Bishops must do the like?

71. CCLXXXVI. Yet another Council against the Pope. King Charles had
authorized Northman, a great man, to receive some Goods that were taken to
belong to the Church. The Pope commands Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhemes, and the
rest of the Bishops of France, to excommunicate Northman.
Hincmarus and the Bishops refuse to obey him, only one Hincmarus Bishop of
Laon, (Laudunum) obeys him, and publishes the Excommunication. A Council is
called at Werm^ria, where Hincmarus Rhem. and the Bishops (the King consenting)
condemn Hincmarus Laudunensis, for disobeying his Metropolitan, in obeying the
Pope. He appeals to Rome: They will not let him go. He writes. Hiucmarus Rhem.
writes largely against him, (though his Nephew) showing how he broke the
Canons, how bad a man he was; how he had neglected his own Charge, left
Children unbaptized, and for private quarrels excommunicated his Flock, and had
silenced and suspended the Ministers under him tyranically, etc.

Reader, Was the Pope's power yet fully received, when a Metropolitan was to be
obeyed before him, and men condemned for obeying him?

72. CCLXXXVII. Yet more sorrow. An. 870. a Council is called in Villa
A^tiniaco (Attigny) I will give you the Story in the very words of Binnius
translated, [When Hincmarus Bishop of Laon, for the cause in the foresaid
Council expressed, had got the Rescript of Pope Adrian on his behalf, and had
notified it to Hincmarus Rhemensis, and to King Charles; both of them, in
hatred to the Bishop of Laon, decreed, That this Synod, called Latrocinalis By
you.
, should be called. There presided in it, Remigius Lugdunensis So great and
holy a man also against the Pope.
, Ardovicus Vesontiensis, Bertulsus Trevirensis, with their subject Bishops,
Herein Hincmarus Rhemensis, with King Charles, was the accuser of his Nephew
Hincmarus, whom he had before consecrated Bishop of Laon. The Action brought
against him was, That he had by Counter-writings defended the rights of the
Apostolic Seat, which the Archbishop of Rhemes did endeavor to impugn and
overthrow Luther was not the first.
. And that, contrary to his Oath of Fidelity in which he was bound to the King,
he had accused King Charles to the Pope of Rome, and had without his license
sent forth writings against him. And when Hincmarus Laudunensis, at the Pope's
command, was ready for his journey to Rome, he was taken and spoiled by his
Enemies, and brought into this false Council. Having heard the foresaid
Complaints against him, he offered a Libel for his defense; but it was
rejected, and not permitted to be read: of which when he again appealed to the
Apostolic Seat, they did not only not accept of his Appeal, but also being
prostrate on the ground, and pleading for leave to defend himself, he was not
heard. Passing Sentence on him, they deposed him from his Bishopric: and
binding him in hard and iron bands, they cast him into banishment: And at last,
which passes all cruelty, his eyes pulled out; they perhaps blinded him that
he might have no hope of returning to his Bishopric.] So far Binnius. And is
it credible that such great and holy men as Remigius, and Hincmarus (even to
his own Nephew set up by him) would do such things as these for nothing? Or
that the Pope was then as high as since?

73. CCLXXXVIII. A Council at Colen, An. 870. for Discipline.

74. CCLXXXIX. An. 871. A Council, Duzianse was called of ten Provinces: where
Hincmar, Laudun, subscribed a promise of obedience to the King and his
Metropolitan. But this did not save him: Therefore he appealed to the Pope
again, who interposed for him, but all would not do, nor serve his turn.

75. Here falls in again the great Controversy of Pope Joan a Woman, but it is
too hard for me to decide. He that will see what is said on each side, may read
Blondel before cited. John the 8th is he that now reigns, whom some late
Writers are willing to believe some called Pope Joan in scorn for his failings.
But he is after Benedict the 3d, Nicolas, and Hadrian the 2d; whereas the fere
omnes, says Platina, the many Writers that mention Pope Joan place her before
them all. And they make John to be a better man than these later do. Platina
calling him John the 9th, says, that Carolus Calvus being dead, Pope John
labored to have his Son Ludovicus succeed him; but the great men of Rome were
for Charles King of Germany,
and therefore laid hold on the Pope, and put him in Bonds in Prison (his
Universal Sovereignty reached not far then.) But he escaping by the help of
Friends, fled into France to the King, whom he unjustly pleaded for, (Ludovicus
Balbus,) and there anointed him.

76. Before this the Pope had anointed Carolus Calvus Emperor, unjustly
confirming what the Bishops had unjustly done, as now he did unjustly stand for
his Son. This contention among Princes, was the means of the Pope's power. Hear
what Binnius himself says of him, page 920. [The Saracens now depopulated
almost all Italy, and all humane help failed in which the Pope trusted to expel
them; and he was fain to buy peace of them by a yearly Tribute: which seemed to
come by the righteous judgment of God, that he might know that by the ill
persuasion of carnal prudence, he had sinfully chosen, created and crowned
Carolus Calvus Emperor, because he looked for more help against the Saracens
from him, than from his Brother Ludovicus; whom, for invading another man's
Kingdom, he should rather by Church-censure have exagitated, as Hadr. 2d. did.]
But when Pope John had stayed a year in France, and the Saracens mastered Italy
without help, he was glad to be Friends with the great men that imprisoned him,
and to return to Rome, and take Charles for Emperor, after all. Yet is it noted
as the rare Honor and Felicity of this Pope, that he crowned three Emperors,
though he did it for two of them traitorously and unjustly, (the honor of a
Pope!) Platina says, he crowned Charles the rightful Heir, Quo ei liberius in
urbe vivere liceret, that he might live at Rome again (lest he should lose all.)

This Charles (says he) also subdued the Normans in France and ^orrain, and
forced them to become Christians, and be baptized: (And yet this is ascribed to
the Pope's converting them.)

77. This same Pope John the 8th, also at the desire of the Emperor Basil, and
the Patriarch of Jerusalem, consented to the restoring of Photius, contrary,
says Binnius, to the Decree of his Predecessors, and of a General Council, and
of all their Oaths.

78. But what are Oaths to a dispensing Pope? says Baronius and Binnius. In
his time Ludov. 11. the Emperor was compelled by A^algisus, Duke of Benevent,
to swear that he would never more invade his Confines, nor revenge his Wrongs:
But the Pope absolved him from this Oath, by the authority of God and St.
Peter, affirming that which he did to save his life,
was no hurt to him, and that it was not to be called an Oath, which was made
against the good of the Commonwealth, by how many Curses soever it was
pronounced. Bin p. 920.

79. There are no less than 310 Epistles of this Pope inserted by Binnius in
his Councils. So Epist. 62. for another Murderer
The 12th is to plead with the Emperor, to forgive and restore Modelgerus a
Murderer; and will you hear the motive? He had fled to Rome, and thereby
merited pardon; Nam pro tanti itineris labor durissimo, quem veniendo
perpessus est, sicut credimus, aliquantulum de peracto scelere indulgentiam
meruit, ejus utique intercessionibus adjutus cui dictum esse a Domino constat,
Tibi dabo claves, etc. Accordingly Epist. 15. he writes to the Bishop to
restore him all his Goods and Dignities, though it was contrived Murder,
because God inspired him to go to Rome, etc.

80. Many of his Epistles are to summon Bishops to come to Rome, and declare or
threaten Excommunication against them if they come not; such an abused thing
was Excommunication, by which the Pope made men his Subjects. Epist. 76, 77,
78, 79. He striveth to draw back the King of the Bulgarians from the Greek
Church, to the Church of Rome, and denounces Excommunication even to old
Ignatius, and all the Greek Bishops of the Diocese of Bulgaria, for ordaining
and officiating there, unless they give up the Bulgarians to Rome.

Epist. 174. He writes to the said King, as if he were fallen from Christ, or
his salvation lost, by submitting to the Greek Patriarch, rather than to him;
See also Ep. 184, 185, 189, 190, 192.
as if the Converts of no Apostles but Peter were saved, And Tibi dabo Claves,
and Anathema's, now are the two words that must subdue the world. The Epist.
175. to the Bulgarian Nobles, and Epist. 176. are to the same purpose. As the
Religion of Saints tends all to Heaven, so did these Popes to the advancement
of their Kingdom. And whereas we now take it justly for a suspicious ^ign of a
proud hypocritical Preacher, that envieth the auditory and esteem of such as
are preferred before him, as if other men's Preaching might not win Souls, as
well as his; these Popes could not endure the crossing of their ambition, when
Kingdoms took not them for their Lords.

Epist. 188. Is to justify a man that baptized his own Child in danger of
death, for which Anselm Bishop of Lemovic. judged him to be separated from his
Wife. Were not these two Bishops judicious Casuists? Was either of them in the
right?

After many other Epistles, striving with and for the Bulgarians, as belonging
to his Diocese, he Epist. 195. chideth Methodius Archbishop of Pannonia, for
turning from his Laws, and in special for celebrating Divine Service in the
Sclavonian Tongue,
which is barbarous, commanding him to do it only in Latin or Greek. You see
how the Pope would edify the Barbarians if he be their pastor. This is the
first Papal decree that I remember against public prayers in a known tongue.

But, alas! his neighbor Italian Bishops had not yet fully learnt the extent
of his authority: sending for many Bishops on pain of excommunication to wait
on him,
and to obey him, old Auspertus Archbishop of Milan was one that disobeyed him;
and being forbidden to officiate by him, conformed not to his silencing and
suspending decree, but went on in his office as a Nonconformist. The Pope sent
two Bishops as Legates to admonish him: He kept them at the door, and set light
by their message; for which the Pope chideth him, Epist. 196.

Epist. 197. He flattereth King Ludovicus to come to Rome and own him, in hope
that he may be Emperor and all Kingdoms subject to him.

Epist. 199, 200, 201, 202, 203. He consents to the restoring of Photius, but
charge him to give up the Bulgarians to his jurisdiction.

Many persons in many Epistles he exhorts to break their Covenants with the
Pagans, and chideth and threatens them that did it not.

Epist. 247. The inclination of Stentopulcher a Pannonian Lord to the Church of
Rome, brought down the Popes heart to dispense with Methodius,
and changed his judgment to give very fair reason why Mass and Gospel and all
might be used in the Sclavonian and all tongues; only to keep up the honor of
the Latin tongue (and his authority) he commands that though the rest be
done in the Sclavonian, yet the Gospel be first read in Latin, and then
translated and read over again in the Sclavonian.

Epist. 250. 251. He approves of Photius's restitution,

Epist. 256. He is fain to chide Auspert Bishop of Milan; that Instead of
fearing his sentence, he laid in prison two Monks sent by the Pope, and taken
on the high way. But his heart came down at last, and he speaks Auspertus fair,
and allows of his ordination of Joseph Episc. Astensis, though irregular.

Epist. 260 and commands his Archdeacon to obey him.

Epist. 261. After this he excommunicateth the Archbishop of Ravenna, and a
great stir there was about that also.

Epist. 292. He had made one Optandus Bishop of Geneva: But Opteramus
Archbishop of Vienna took it to be an usurpation on his right, and laid the
Popes Bishop in a miserable prison; so far was he yet from being where he would
be.

Epist. 294. Having excommunicated Athanasius Bishop of Naples for not breaking
his Covenant with the Saracens, he absolveth him on condition that yet he will
break it. The matter was that the Italians not able to resist the Saracens,
those that lay next them under their power sought to save themselves by truce
and tribute, by which means the Saracens had leisure to come further near to
Rome; and so the Pope to keep them from himself compelled by excommunications
the Lords and Bishops of other parts to break their league, and stand up in
arms to their own destruction.

That you may know what Bishops now ruled the Churches.

Epist. 295. The foresaid Bishop of Vienna gives one reason why he rejected
Optandus ordained Bishop of Geneva by the Pope,
viz. [Because he never was either baptized, made Clerk, acclamed, or learned]
To which says the Pope [This should be covered in silence, because [let us
speak it with your charity] your holiness having nothing of these was yet
consecrated in the Church of Vienna.] was not here good succession, and a holy
Church. Bishops unbaptized that were no Scholars and no Christians.

Epist. 296. One Bishop by an armed band of men carries away another out of
the Church, and the Pope interposeth.

Epist. 297. He again soliciteth Michael. King of the Bulgarians to become his
subject. The poor men that had chosen Christ, were so perplexed between the
Priests that strove who should be their Vice-Christ, and King of Kings, that it
seemed as hard to them to resolve the doubt, as it before was to be Christians.

Yet Epist. 307. shows, the Bishop of Ravenna being dead, that yet the Roman
usurpation was not grown so high as to take the choice of the Bishop out of the
People and Presbyters hands, except in long neglected vacancies (as Geneva
aforesaid.)

Had not this Pope been kept under by Gods judgments, suffering the Saracens so
to ruin Italy as that he still needed the help of Princes, he had been like to
have overthrown Rome by his usurpations, setting both Princes and Prelates
against him: But necessity made him a flatterer of the two Emperors of the
West, the Emperor of the East, the King of France, the King of Bulgaria, the
Princes of Pannonia, and all that he needed, as ambition made him still
striving by Tibi dabo claves, and Anathematizing to affright the world to his
obedience. I say not worse of him than Baronius, Binnius, etc. who have no
other way to deny the Histories of Pope Joan, than by saying that this man's
baser compliance made him called Pope Joan.

Baronius ad an. 879, n. 55. recites an Epistle of this Popes so greatly
complying with Photius even against the [Filioquen] that Binnius would haveus
believe that Photius forged it. And [epistolam ipsam aeterna oblivione dignam
nolui (says he) hisce adjungi.]

81. CCXC. An. 876. a Concilium Ticinense makes Charles Emperor when the Pope
that had crowned Ludovicus before calls Charles, praescitum, praeelectum et
praedestinatum hereto, with all honorable Elogies.

And here comes in a great controversy between the Papists, and the
Protestants;
viz. Whether Kings succeed by inheritance or by the election and making of the
Pope. The Pope thought the craft of putting in a big usurping word, was as good
as a Law to prove their own power to make Kings and unmake them. Accordingly
this Pope when he durst stay from Rome in France no longer, lest he lost all,
(being imprisoned for refusing the right Heir Charles) returns, and speaks
some big words, and turns forced consent into super-Kingly commands, and
says (Bin. p. 1010) eligimus merito et approbavimus] solemniter ad Romani
Imperii sceptra proveximus) et Augustali nomine decoravimus, etc. And to
disable the Kingly claim of inheritance he says, [Neque enim sibi honorem
praesumptuose ass^mpsit, ut Imperator fieret, sed tanquam desideratus, et
optatus, postulatus A NOBIS, ^t a Deo vocatus, et honorificatus ad defendendam
religionem et Christintique servos tuendos, humiliter et OBEDIENTER accessit,
etc. Nisi enim talem cognovissemus ejus intentionem nunquam animus noster
fieret tam promptus ad ipsius promotionem, etc. So if the Pope had not liked
him, the Emperor's hereditary right had never made him Emperor. And the
flattering Bishops say to the Pope (Bin. p. 1010.) ut non vos prius eligeret,
sed contra vos cum et eligeretis et diligeretis: Et nos O Coangelice Papa,
vestigia vestra sectantes et salubria monita recipientes, quem amatis amamus,
quem eligistis eligimus, etc.

And now comes in Binnius with his Comment and says that [would our refractory
novelists,
who with great temerity dare profess that the Roman Popes in the crowning of
Emperors have no other right then barely ministerially to anoint and crown
them, had but known these Acts ( we now know them.
) They would from them have learned that that Pope John (alias Joan) did not
only anoint and crown Charles, but also by Gods instinct did choose him to
govern the Empire, and raised him to that sublime dignity honoring him with
the Augustal name, before he was anointed and crowned by him, and that the
Empire was conferred on him, not by hereditary right of succession, but by the
will of the Pope who chose him and granted it to him.] BE WISE therefore O YE
KINGS, BE instructed ye that are Judges of the earth -- Kiss the Popes foot
lest he be angry and ye perish in the way; If his wrath be kindled, yea, but a
little, etc.

82. CCXCI. An. 879. A concilium Pontigonense confirmed the choice of Charles
where it is said (Bin. p. 1012) et legit Johannes Arietinus Episcopus quandam
schedulam ratione et authoritate carentem: Postquam legit Odo Belgivacorum
Episcopus quaedam Capitula a Legatis Apostolicis, et ab Ansegiso (the Popes
Vicar) et eodem Odone sine conscienti^ synodi dictata, inter se dissona, et
nullam utilitatem habentia, verum et ratione et authoritate carentia, et ideo
hic non habentur subjuncta.]

83. CCXCII. An. 877. A council in Neustria (Normandy under Hincmarus
Rhemensis rebuked Hugo base Son of Lotharius for rebellion and devastation of
the Country.

84. CCXCIII. An. 878. a concilium Trecense where the Pope was present
excommunicated Formosus^ Portuensis (one of the former Popes preachers to the
Bulgarians, and one that was after Pope himself.) Also Hincmarus Laudunensis
was restored blind, and joined with the other that had his Place, (and so one
Church had two Bishops in spite of his uncle Hincmarus Rhemensis that opposed
it, and had both put him in and cast him out.

85. CCXCIV. An. 879. Was a Council of the Popes at Rome for his unrighteous
making Ludovicus 3. Emperor, the Pope challenging the first choice: But
Auspertus Bishop of Milan came not and resisted, and though (as you heard)
excommunicated by the Pope, did help to turn the choice to the right Heir.

86. CCXCV. Besides some petty Council at Rome, there was an. 879. a General
Council at Constantinople of 385 Bishops where Photius was confirmed, and the
former General Council (called the 8th also) abrogated,
and the word [filioque] taken out of the Creed: The Papists say that the Pope
consented only to this as for Photius's restitution, and not for the abrogation
of the former Council; and that Photius corrupted his writing, and so they
would make all writings uncertain. They say that Pope John's epistle is by the
wonderful providence of God found yet without some clauses added by Photius,
whom they call the great architect of lies: But the Greeks will no more believe
the late found Laterane or other Roman Copies, than the Romans will believe the
Greek Copies. And how shall we know which of them to believe? (And how little
does it concern us?)

87. It must be a controversy also whether this Council must be called
Ecumenical: I have often proved that there was never any truly such as to all
the world. There were 385 Bishops which is more than the first Council at Nice
had, or most others: The Popes Legates were there;
Oh but, says Binnius, It was not they but Photius that did preside: therefore
it was not general. Ans. 1. Let the world know then what makes a general
Council in the Papal sense: It does not represent all the Church unless the
Popes Legates preside. So much does it import to know which Priest is the
greatest.

2. But did Binnius forget that he himself affirms that at the first General
Council at Constantinople the Pope did not preside by himself or any Legate.
And yet that is one of the 4th. Councils equalled with the four Gospels; and
the Pope dare not deny it lest the Greeks further hereticate or anathematize
him.

But says Binnius,
It was no General Council because there was many frauds and impostures. Ans.
By that rule Trent had no General Council, nor Florence, etc. And so it is left
to the judgment of all men to nullify such Councils which they can prove to
have had frauds and impostures. And must we also nullify the Papacy of them
that have had such frauds?

88. Is it a grand question whether Pope John confirmed this Council. The
approbation is extant. But the Reprobaters say 1. that he put in some terms of
limitation (so far as his Legates went right) 2. that he after ex umbone
condemned Photius, etc.

But 1. Is it not a General Council if the Popes Legates consent till he
personally confirm it? Were all former Councils null, till the Popes personal
confirmation? what are his Legates for then? 2. As his Legates may mistake, so
may he himself: Is it null then till he rectify his Error? 3. By this we see
how impossible it is to know the new Gosple of the Papists; which is Canonical
from the Apocryphal. For (as Pope Martin's Conciliariter after, so) here and
elsewhere the Popes have so ambiguously given their consent that no wit of man
can tell what is consented to by them, and what not (as their controversies
confessed, etc.

89. At least whether the Pope consented or no, seeing in this Council the
former 8th. General Council was condemned, and the filioque expunged the Creed,
we see how ridiculously our late Papists argue from the consent of Councils to
prove the constant Tradition of the Church,
saying, Did the Council go to bed in one mind and rise in another? Did these
385 Bishops do so? or did the former whom they condemned do so? Is this the
smooth Current of Tradition? and may we know by it what our Fathers held?

90. When the other Legates consented, Marinus, who was after Pope, dissenting,
he was laid in prison thirty days at Constantinople.

In the first Act of the Council, as Baronius tells us, John Bishop of Heraclea
spoke much against the Church of Rome, which he said was the original of all
the mischief that had be^aln them; to overthrow and and cure which this Council
was called. Much also against Pope Nicolas and Hadrian he spoke, but for Pope
John as being for them. In the 2d. Act was read an epistle of the Patriarch of
Alexandria, to the Emperor for abrogating the former 8th. Synod: And Thomas one
of the three Legates of the Eastern Patriarchs that consented to the former
Synod (the rest being dead) made his penitent recantation. Then the epistles of
the Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Antioch for Photius are read, etc. In the third
Act, Pope John's letters were read, as endeavoring the peace of the Eastern
Church; which the Council took as a busy pretending to more power than he had,
and therefore said that they had peace before his letters came, and that they
were superfluous. And whereas he made it his business by this compliance, to
get the Bulgarian Diocese; They said this was to controvert the bounds of the
Empire, and therefore left it to the Emperor. In the 4th Act the Eastern
Patriarchs letters were read, disclaiming their Legates at the last Council, as
being not theirs but the Saracens Legates: and condemning that Council. The
Papists think Photius forged these. Here also Lords professed repentance,
saying that the false Legates deceived them. In the 5th. Act Metrophanes Bishop
of Smyrna is accused of Schism, for being against Photius. Three Canons also
were made. 1. That those excommunicate by the Bishop of Rome should not be
restored by the Bishop of Constantinople. Nor those that were excommunicated by
the Bishop of Constantinople be restored by the Bishop of Rome: (and so Rome
was shut out from troubling them with pretended jurisdiction.) 2. That those
that forsake their Bishoprics shall not return to them. 3. Against Magistrates
that enslave and beat Bishops. In the 6th. Act the Creed was recited without
silioque. And in the 7th. all those that should add to it or diminish are
Anathematized.

91. CCXCVI. A Council of the Popes at Rome excommunicated Athanasius Bishop
and Prince of Naples, for not breaking his league with the Saracens.

92. John dyed. Marinus is made Pope, commanded by his predecess^r, called by
Platina, Martin, who says that he came to the Popedom, malis artibus, and
therefore did nothing and soon dyed. But Barcnius says he lived long enough to
do something, viz. 1. He condemned Photius again, and thereby provoked the
Emperor Basilius; as if Rome did still set the imperial Church in contention,
and hinder peace. The Emperor affirmed that he was no Bishop of Rome, because
he had been ordained Bishop of another place. 2. He destroys what Pope John
had done, who had deposed Formosus preacher to the Bulgarians, and Bishop
Portuensis, and had made him swear that he would never return to the Episcopal
seat, but rest content with Lay-Communion: But Pope Marinus recalled him to the
City and restored him to his Bishopric, and absolved him from his oath, which
Baronius and Binnius doubt not but he had power to do;
yea, and to dispense with the ill acts of the Pope, which he did out of
private affects and partiality.

93. In his time also the Church of Rome used Filioque, in opposition to
Photius; Spain and France having used it before. Because, says Baronius and
Binnius, Photius had wrote about it to the Ignorant and Schismatical Archbishop
of Aquileia. (There was it seems there so many of the greatest Bishops Imperiti
et Schismatici in the Papal sense, as intimates that as the Popes greatness
rose in height, it did not grow equally in length and breadth.)

94. Marinus having reigned a year and twenty days (a short pleasure to sell
eternal happiness for) Hadrian the third succeeded him, and had longer part of
the usurped Kingdom, viz. a year and three months and nineteen days. He also
damned Photius, and was bitterly reproached by the Emperor Basilius, whose
contumelious letters found him dead, and his successor answered them. (Was all
the Christian world now (till Luther) subject to the Pope?)

Platina says of this Pope, that [He was of so great a spirit that in the very
beginning of his Papacy, he straitway decreed that Popes should be made without
expecting the Emperors authority, and that the suffrages of the clergy and
PEOPLE should be free: which was before by Pope Nicolas rather attempted than
indeed begun. He was I suppose encouraged by the opportunity of Charles his
departing with his army from Italy to subdue the rebelling Normans.] Rome was
still on the rising hand.

95. Stephen the 5th. alias 6th. succeeded him. In his time Carolus Crassus the
Emperor is by a convention of Lords and Bishops deposed from his Empire as too
dull and unworthy. (Kings were brought under as elective by the Pope, and now
are at the mercy of their subjects.) Arnulphus a base son of Carolomannus got
an interest in the subjects, Says Baronius and Binnius, But in the 12th. says
P^atina, and in the 8th. say others What certainty is here?
and they deposed the Emperor and set him up. Baronius and Binnius ascribe it
to Gods judgment for Charles his wronging of Richarda a pure Virgin, yet
repudiated by him. They say that he was reduced to such poverty that he was
fain to beg his bread of Arnulphus, and dyed 888 in the 4th year of his Empire.

96. The Letter against the Pope written by the Emperor Basilius the Papists
will not let us see: But this Pope Sthephen' s answer to it they give us, which
runs on the old foundation, traiterous to Magistracy as such. Telling the
Emperor that [The Sacerdotal and Apostolical dignity is not subject to Kings,
and that Kings are authorized to meddle only with worldly matters, and the Pope
and Priests with spiritual. And therefore his Place is as far more excellent
than Emperors, as heaven is above earth] He tells the Emperor that in reviling
the Pope of Rome he blattered out blasphemy against the God of all the world,
and his immaculate Spouse and Priest and the Mother of all Churches: And that
he is deceived that thinks [that the Disciple (Princes) is above his master
(the Priests,) and the servant above his Lord. He wondereth at his taunts and
scoffs against the holy Pope, and the curses or reproaches which he loaded the
Roman Church with, to which he ought with all veneration to be subject, as
King, who made him the judge of Prelates whose doctrine he must obey, and why
he said Marinus was no Bishop, etc. By this the reader may perceive whether yet
all the Christian world obeyed the Pope, or judged him to be their Governor.

97. How Pope Formosus set up Wido Duke of Spoleto traitorously as Emperor till
he was forced to loyalty,
is after to be said.

98. CCXCVII. An. 8^7. A Council at Colen under Charles Crassus, made Canons
against Sacrilege and Adultery.

. 99. CCXCVIII. An. 888. A Council at Mentz,) while they were all in distress
by the depopulations of the Normans) first decreed to pray for the King, and
then tell him that Rex dicitur a Regendo: And if he rule piously, justly and
mercifully he is justly called a King, but if impiously, unjustly, and cruelly
he is a Tyrant.

Can. 10. Whereas former Synods forbad all women to dwell in the house with
Bishops,
or Priests, or Deacons, except Mothers or Sisters; they now forbid these also,
hearing often of the wickedness committed by them, and that Bishops (or Priests)
lay with their own Sisters, and begat Children of them.

But to secure them from all conviction for any such crime it is decreed Chap.
the 12. that no Presbyter accuse any Bishop, nor any Deacon a Presbyter, nor
any Subdeacon a Deacon, etc. And that no Prelate be condemned but under seventy
two witnesses; and the chief Prelate be judged of no man. And a Cardinal
Presbyter not under forty two witnesses; nor a Cardinal Deacon under twenty
six: S^bde aco^s, Acolythes Exorcists, Lectors, Doorkeepers, not under seven:
and these without infamy having Wives and Children.] And indeed that Bishop
that would lie with his own Sister in the presence of seventy two men that had
wives and Children deserved to be blamed.

Chap. 16. One that wilfully murdered a Priest, was to forbear flesh and wine,
and not to be carried in a Coach* and not come to Church in five years, and not
to receive the Sacrament of twelve years after.

100. Binnius here adds an observable note, that Arnulphus is called only
King at first and not Emperor, it being nefas unlawful to assume the name of
Emperor till it were given by the Pope] O brave Pope!

101. CCXCIX. A Council at Metz under the same Norman calamities decreed such
like things. Chap. 2. They decreed that no Presbyter should have more than one
Church (unless a Chapel) and none take money for burials. Chap. 3. that
Mothers or Sisters dwell not in the house with Bishops or Priests. But still
capital crimes were punished but with excommunication and penance. Chap. 7. One
that forced a widow: Another that killed his kinsman, and married his his Wife,
and swore to the Archbishop to forsake her and did not, was excommunicate. And
so were some that gelded a Priest for reproving their filthiness,

102. CCC.
A Council at Worms was called to end a controversy between two Prelates,
Bishops of Colen and Hamburg, striving for Bremen (to have greater Diocesses
and jurisdiction.)

103. Next comes the forementioned Pope Formosus, says Onuphrius the first
Pope that ever was made of one that before had been a Bishop. For the old
Canons often decreed that no Bishop remove from his first place: only when one
was ordained against his will, and not consenting never possessed the Place,
sometimes he was accepted to another. Now was the fourteenth time that Rome had
two Bishops at once by schism. Sergius got in to be Pope, but they forced him
to resign, and banished him. Formosus was well esteemed of for his preaching to
the Bulgarians; but Pope John 8 (some think for reproving his sin) deposed him
(as before said) and made him swear never to return to be a Bishop: But Marinus
absolved him, and he came in thus perjured; notwithstanding the false pretense
of Papists that the Pope can dispense with such oaths; the matter of them being
a thing lawful, but not necessary.

Platina says that he was suspected to have a hand in the tumult that
imprisoned Pope John, and that he came to the Popedom Largitione potius quam
virtue, by gifts rather than virtue, that is, by Simonie.

He did (lawfully if you will believe Baronius and Binnius) create, anoint, and
consecrate Lambert, after his Father Wido, Emperor (that was not Heir:) yet
after consecrated Arnulphus (its like by constraint;) for such things the Roman
Nobles hated him.
But he got Arnulphus to Rome; who revenged the Pope by beheading many of the
Princes that were hasting to meet him, which was not like to win men's love.

. 104. He wrote an honest Epistle to the English Clergy, persuading them to
keep up the ministry, and reproving them for indulging Pagan rites.

CHAP. XI.
The Progress of Counsels till Leo 9th. especially in Italy, France and
Germany, and their Behavior.
. 1. CCCI. ODo Earl of Paris, having Usurped the Kingdom in the Minority of
Charles the simple the right Heir, Fulke Bishop of Rhemes calls a Synod and
deposes him, and sets up Charles (such Power had Prelates). Some say the
French Chose Odo by Arnulphu's Consent; and some say, that he dying, desired
that Charles might have Possession. This was Anno 892.

. 2. The great Devastations made by the Normans, burning Cities, Churches,
Monasteries; and at last forcing Consent for a Habitation in Neustria, I pass
over; and Petavius out of some Writers of their own will tell you, that when
Chartress was besieged by them, the Virgin Marys smock, which King Charles
Calvus had brought thither from Besanson, being carried, cast them into so
great a Terror, that they fled away all in Confusion. Where they had this
Smock, and how many Hundred Years after the Virgin Marys death it was found,
and how they knew it to be hers, and how it was so long kept, and where, and
why it did not many Miracles sooner, till above 900 Years after Christ, are
Questions which I cannot Answer.

. 3. Italy and France were all this while filled with Civil Wars. Wido and his
Son Lambert being dead, Berengarius got Possession of Italy, whom Lewis after
overcame, and was made Emperor at Rome, Crowned by the Pope: But three years
after, taken by Berengarius, was Deposed, and had his Eyes put out. Yet after
this Berengarius was cut off, and Lewis restored and Anointed by Pope John 10.
Rodulphus King of Burgundy was set up by some Italian Nobles against
Berengarius, and overthrowing his Army, was called King of Italy. Berengarius
was killed by Treachery: Rodulphus was soon Deposed, and the Italians made Hugo
Earl of Provence King. At last he joined his Son Lothari^s with him: The
younger Berengarius prevails against him, drives him to Provence; and is
made King: Intending to marry his Son Adalbertus to Adaleidis the Widow of
Lotharius; she invited Otho King of Germany into Italy and married him, who
after is made the first Germane Emperor: Of ^ll which, more after in the
particular Order and place. See Petav. lib. 8. c. 13.

. 4. CCCII. Anno. 893. Formosus had a Roman Council, to Consult of some Relief
of the Ruined Countries, in vain. For now men Secular and Ecclesiastical,
Confounded all by striving for Rule.

. 5. CCCIII. Anno 895. A Council at Tribur in Germany for Church Reformation:
Many of the Canons are to secure and advance the Clergy. The ninth decideth a
doubt, if an Earl (or civil Ruler) Command the People to meet at one place (on
Civil accounts) and the Bishop command them to meet at another on the same day,
none shall obey the Magistrate (or Earls) but he and all his Company shall
obey the Bishop and come to him. Cap. 10. No Bishop shall be Deposed but by
twelve Bishops, no Presbyter but by six Bishops,
no Deacon but by three, Cap. 21. In Controversies,
Laymen must swear, but Clergymen must not be put to swear, Cap. 22. There is
allowed Trial by fire, Per ignem Candenti ferro Caute examinetur.

. 6. CCCIV. A Council at Nantes made more disciplinary Canons.

. 7. Who was next Pope is not agreed: Platina and Onuphrius say, that Boniface
was rightly Chosen, and Reigned but twenty six days, says Platina, or fifteen
says Onuphrius; others (says Platina) say twelve years: Baronius (and Binius)
says, that he was no Pope; and that he did but invade the Pope-dome, and was
homo nefarius, a wicked man, twice before this Degraded: First from his
Deaconship, and next from his Presbyterate, Damned in a Roman Synod under John
the Ninth: He adds, that (both of them) Boniface and Stephen got the place by
Force, Fear and Tyranny, and so it was but one Intruder,
that thrust out another Intruder: (But how then is the Succession secured.
Why, it is added) Yet Stephen is numbered with the Popes by the common Sentence
(or Opinion) because to avoid the danger of Schism, though he was homo
scelestissimus, a most wicked man; yet all the Clergy approved bim,
and the whole Catholic Church, took him for Christ's Vicar and Peter's
Successor. (How prove you that, why, because [Fulke Bishop of Rhemes owned
him!] A Noble proof that all the Christian World did so!

. 8. Say Barronius, and Binius, he began his Pope-dome with that Sacriledg, as
to take the Corpse of Formous out of his Grave, and clothing him in his
Pontifical Robes,
(he set him in a Chair, and says Platina, there judged him as no Pope,
because he had been first a Bishop; which indeed, by the old Canons, nullified
his calling; For Formosus, was the first Pope that had been before a Bishop, as
is said, unless the Emporour Basil truly charged Macrinus with the same):
Having Expostulated with the dead man, Luitpr and. l. 1. c 8.
why he being a Bishop would take the Pope-dome, he cut off his three four
Fingers with which he had Anointed, and cast them into the River Tyber, and
commanded, that all that he had Ordained should be Ordained again: (and so
Conform to him.)

And they wonder with what face of Reason Onuphrius rejects all this as a
Fable, when the Ancient Monuments, Synodal Acts, and Historians testify it. Do
you wonder at this? why it is because he was not willing it should be believed:
a Reason that is not strange to your selves.

. 4. CCCV. Pope Stephen called a Council in which his usage of Pope Formosus
was approved, Bin. ex Baron. p. 1047* so ready were the Bishops to follow the
strongest side, Anno 897
in such things as the Papists mention with abhorrence.
And (say they) this portentum attended the Synod, That the Laterane Church,
the chief Seat of the Pope, by the impulse of an evil Angel fell down quite
from the Altar to the doors: the Walls not being able to stand, when the Chief
Cardinal Door was shaken with the Earthquake of so great a Villainy.

. 10. But here the Authors calling us Novatores (as if such Popes were of
glorious Antiquity) are hard put to it to Vindicate against us the Popes
infallibility! And how do they do it? Why 1st. They say that all that Stephen
did against Formosus, a man stricken with Madness, did it fulfilling the
persuasion of his boiling Rage. But in the lawful use of his Papal Authority,
he defined nothing against Faith or good manners: For the Bishops that were for
this Cause called to the Council, and the Presbyters not unlike to Stephen
himself, did prosecute Formosus with the same hatred; and therefore pronounced
that Sentence against him, which they fore knew would be pleasing to a man
smitten with Fury: so that we confess violent Tyranny, but no Error in Faith
defined or approved by him, Lawfully using his Papal Authority: And yet it were
no prejudice to the Papal Seat, if we grant, that a false Pope, not lawfully
Chosen,
but invading and obtruded, did err in asserting Articles of Faith. Thus the
Author.

Ans. 1. But if you grant this, is not your Succession interrupted? 2. And was
your Church a true Church, when an Essential part was Null? 3. Howver, was it
the Holy Church when an essential Part was such a Villain? 4. Will not your
Argument as well prove every Bishop, Priest, or man Infallible? For no one of
them all can define falsely against an Article of Faith, as long as he lawfully
uses his Power; For it is no lawful use of power that so defines and belieth
God. 5. But is all your foundation of Faith come to this? It is then but
saying, when ever your Pope and Church Erreth, that they did not use their
Power lawfully: And what relief is that to the deceived? How shall we know when
your Popes have used it lawfully, and when not; and so what is true among you,
and what false? 6. And were your Roman Council of Bishops and Priests, all as
bad as this Villainous Pope, and ready to please him in their Decrees: And was
this a Holy Church, and like to be an Infallible Council: And must the World
follow them? 7. And how then shall we know that it was not just so with many
other former and following Councils; and that it will not be so with you again!
O miserable shifts against plain Truth!

. 11. The same great Authors after Luitpraudus, l. 1. c 9. say, that Stephen an
Invader of the Papal Seat, by the faction of the N^bles against Adelbert,
Prince of Etruria, was thrust into prison An. 900. and after he had been Pope
Six Years, being strangled in the same Prison, ended his Days by Gods Vengeance
in an infamous Death]: Yet Platina says, that he died the first Year and third
month of his Reign; and Onuphrius says, he sat one year, two months, and
ninteen days.

. 12. It Is strange that Luitpraudus says, that Stephen condemned the Corpse of
Formosus for being a Bishop before, when Platina and Onuphrius say, that he
himself was Episcopus Anagninus, when made Pope.

. 13. And Platina says, that [This Controversy (against Formosus) was great
and of ill Examples;
seeing that after this, it was almost always kept as a Custom, that following
Popes did either Infring, or wholly undo the Acts of those that went before
them:] And yet were they Infallible?

. 14. The next Pope was called Romanus, whose Life Platina thus Describes:
Romanus as soon as he was Pope, presently Abrogateth and Condemns the Decrees
and Acts of Stephen: For these Popes thought of nothing, but to Extinguish the
Name and Dignity of their Predecessors, than which nothing can be worse, or the
part of a narrower mind: For they that trust to such Acts as these, having no
Virtue themselves, endeavor to raze out the men of Desert, whom through sloth
and malice they cannot match. You shall never find any to envy another Fame,
but one that himself is Contaminated with all disgrace, and despaireth that his
own Name should ever be Famous with Posterity:
These are they that by Fraud, Malice, Craft, and evil speaking, do Bite, Tear,
Accuse, and Worry those that deserve well of Mankind; like cowardly, or
slothful, and useless Dogs, that dare not set upon wild Beasts themselves, but
will bite those that are tied, or in their Dens.] So Platina. -- Ramanus Ruled
but three Months.

. 15. Next Succeeded in the Popedom Theodorus 2. who says Platina followed
the steps of the Seditious: For he restored the Acts of Formosus* and preferred
his followers: and Reigned but Twenty days.

Next came John 9. (or 10. as others) says Platina. [He restored the Cause of
Pope-Formosus, many of the People being against it: whence arose such a
Sedition, that they hardly escaped a Battle. Baronius says, that Ludovicus 4.
was deposed and blinded now by Berengarius, who assumed the Empire; and this
Pope Crowned him, through fear! Yet after he was gone, he called Lambert to
Rome, and with a Synod concuring with him, declared the Coronations both of
Berengarius and Arnulph to be Null, as being extorted; and so took Lambert for
King and Emperor: Did not the Crowns of Princes sit very loose, when it was
but a Popes pretending that he Crowned them through Fear, and they were
presently Deposed? Would these Popes have been Martyrs, or were they Christians
or Gnostics, that would sin, if they were but put in fear? And would not fear
have made them own a Heresy, as well as other sin? On this occasion all was
cast into Confusion: the Pope was fain to fly to Ravenna for protection, to him
whom he had Crowned.

. 16. CCCVI. This Pope called a Synod at Rome (that called Ovetensis, I pass by
as of small moment) An. 904. in which he condemned the fact of Pope Stephen,
decreeing that the Dead are not to be judged by men. But what became of the
Synod of Bishops that had joined herein with Pope Stephen? Why (Bin. p. 1049.)
they turned with the times, and did as such had used to do;
They asked forgiveness, and said, they did it for Fear; and so, he that has
power by Fear or Hope, can make such Bishops and Councils Sin and Repent, and
Sin again, and Repent again, as Interest alters. They were pardoned. But
Formosus preferment from a Bishopric to the Popedom was Voted to be against
the Canons, excusable only by necessity, and not to be imitated but in cases of
necessity: His Ordained Clergy were Restored, and Re-ordinations and
Re-baptizations, forbidden as unlawful.

. 17. CCCVII. Another Synod he called at Ravenna for the same use, when he fled
thither from Rome; of 74 Bishops. Baronius says, He was another Ieremias sent
of God, to pluck up and pull down what Pope. Stephen had done. Platina says [I
think this came to pass because Popes were departed from St. Peter's steps; and
chiefly, because the Christian Commonwealth had idle slothful Princes that
would have Peter's ship thus tossed, lest the Ruler if he look about him,
should cast them out as evil Pilots. Arnulphus was given to pleasure, and
Charles the simple or rather foolish of France, was little better; and so the
Hungarians destroyed and killed in Germany and France, and the Affricans in
Calabria, and had little resistance; Blood and Misery being the common Lot.

He adds, [That this Pope John dying in the 2d. Year and 15th. day of his
Reign, left nothing worthy of Memory behind him, but that He revived some
Seditions that before were almost extinct.

And it is a sad question, that Herveus Bishop of Rhemes put to him (Bin. p.
1048) What to do with those that are Baptized and Rebaptized, and yet after
Baptism live as the Heathens, kill Christians, yea the Priests,
sacrifice to Idols, eat things offered to them? The Pope durst not use
Discipline on these, because they were Novices, lest he affright them from the
Church to Heathenisme again; but left them to the Bishops Discretion and
Experience, to do as he saw best.

. 18. This Pope had a Corrival, which was the 15. Schism: Sergius that had
been made Pope with Formosus, and was put out and Banished, did now get in
again; but John had the stronger part, and cast him out, and Banished him once
again: Onuphr. Chron. p. 28. But had he been but strong enough, the succession
had come down from him, as right.

. 19. Benedict the 4. came next; Nothing says Platina, was done in his time
that is much to be praised; because both Princes, Popes, and Clergy were grown
Debauched; bad Princes making Popes by Tyranny: Now the Line of Charles the
Great, lost the Empire, Ludovicus the Son of Arnulphus being slain by
Berengarius; and so they lost both Italy, Germany, (and after France) by their
own, and the Clergies Wickedness.

. 20. Leo. 5. Came next, Anno 907. Who thrust him in, I find not; but when he
had Reigned but 40. days, his familiar friend Christopher had list to be Pope,
and cast him out, and laid him in Fetters; where it is said he dyed of Grief:
where Platina well notes, that [The saying is certainly true, that Dignities
(or places of preferment) receive more honor from the Men, than the Men do
from the Dignities (or places.)]

. 21. Christopher thus got in by sudden invasion, kept it longer than Leo did,
even near seven Months; and then he that had been twice Pope before, did once
again try for it, and was too strong for Christopher, and put him into a
Monastery. A Holy place then, no doubt, For says Platina [This was the only
refuge of the Calamitous: For in those times bad Clergy Men were thurst into
Monasteries, by way of Banishment, as heretofore into Islands.]

. 22. The Man that did this and got the Popedom, was Sergius 3. who had been
twice before cast out:
says Baron, and Bin. (p. 1052.) [That wicked Sergius (Nefandus) by Albertus
Arms got in: A Man that was the servant of all Vices, and of all Men the most
wicked (Facinorosissimus) invaded the Popedom, and so was by all Men taken for
no lawful Pope: To his horrid Sacrilege, he added the most impudent
filthyness; and by Marozia (a great Whore) the Daughter of that most famous
Whore Theodora, he begot his Son John (after Pope.)] For many Historians tell
us, how these two famous Whores did rule Rome, and make and unmake Popes.

. 23. This Pope undid again all that had been done for Formosus, and against
Stephen: For both the King of France, and Sergius, were Enemies to Formosus,
for setting up other powers against France, and because his party was against
Sergius: But I wonder that Platina tells us, that both Stephen and Sergius took
Formosus out of his Grave, and the one cut off his three Fingers, and the other
his Head; and both cast into Tyber! If this be true, he was taken up again the
first time, and buried again. But I suppose that it was but his Fingers that
were cast in the first time, and the Corpse after; or else he was found after
the first time. Platina says, It is reported, but not of any certainty; that
some Fishermen found the Corpse, and buried it ^t St. Peter's Church, and that
while it was doing, the Church Images bowed to it (It Is well Uncertainty was
put into the Story:) and that some thought this moved Sergius to envy; but that
indeed it was, because Formosus party were against his Papacy. It seems by this
that the Fishermen found him after the first casting into Tyber; or else his
burial by them could not be called the occasion of Sergius fact. So little rest
had this Popes Carcass, being twice buried, twice taken up, twice judged, and
executed after death, and twice cast into Tyber. But says Platina, [Popes now
seeking and getting the Popedom by liberty and ambition, disregarding Gods
Worship, exercised enmity against one another; no otherwise than do the
cruellest Tyrants, glutting their own lusts the more securely, when there are
none left to restrain Vices. This wicked Man for almost seven Years enjoyed the
fruits of his iniquity.

. 24. Here Baronius and Binius forget to answer the great difficulty. 1st. How
the Roman succession escaped from being interrupted. 2. And also, where was the
Roman Church while such Reigned as were no Popes.
3. And also, where was its Holiness and Infallibility, when it had the worst
of Men (as they say themselves) thus set over them as their Heads: But they are
careful, [Nequis pusillanimus ex hoc facto scandalum accipiat, lest weak minded
persons should be scandalized by this: And they tell us as a wonderful
providence of God, That so great was the reverence to the Church of Rome, that
even when such Men invaded the Popedom unlawfully, being even in the Churches
censure rather Apostatical than Apostolical; yet those that did but hear* who
was Pope ( especially the Northern Countries that were far off) obeyed them: so
that any Man may understand by how great a providence God Governs the
universal Church, which when it was set on Fire at the will of Whores, and all
mischiefs and scandals did increase, and it was feared it would be divided by a
great schism; yet God defended it from all heresy and schism, all Nations
persisted in one bond of Faith* and Covent of Obedience.] Indeed Gods
providence is wonderful that saves his true Church from such wicked usurpers;
and keeps a Union of all in Christ: But this is no honor to the wicked
usurpers; when now fifteen schisms had divided them, and many more afterward;
nor was it any honor or blessing, to them that gave up their Kingdoms to such
usurpers. If these were no Popes, but intruding Whore-mongers; was it a
blessing to the World to be deceived, and to take those for Popes, that indeed
were none. But had not they then a seeming Church, and indeed none, when an
essential part was Null.

. 25. CCCVIII. They say that Anno 909. A Council at Soissons ordered some
Reformation.

. 26. Leo called Philosophus Son to Basilius Macedo, this while was Emperor in
the East, who being formerly suspected and imprisoned by his Father, upon some
suggestion of Photius, and Santabacenus was revenged on them, when he Reigned,
and deposed Photius, and put him into a Monastery. This is the rest, that
Ambition procures. Thus Sin is the misery of the Sinner. Alexander his Uncle
was Guardian to Constantine Prophyrus Leo's Son, the Father being Dead: Nicholas
had before been made Patriark, and upon offense deposed, and Euthymius put in
his place. But Alexander deposed Euthymius, and restored Nicholas: and having
spent thirteen Months in Drunkenness and Lust, Bled to Death; and Constantine,
seven Years old, with his Mother Zoe Reigned alone: Constantine Ducas
rebelling, is subdued: The Bulgarians Conquered by Leo Phocas General; See
Peta^^s Hist. or l. 8. c. 1^.
who thereupon aspiring to the Crown, was slain. Eight Years after, Zoe is
removed, and one Romanus Lecapenus made Guardian; and Caesar, He advanced three
of his Sons to the like honor, to strengthen himself, and made his other Son
Theophilact Patriark, instead of Stephen, though he was but sixteen Years old.
He Married his Daughter to the Bulgarian King; and then began to despise the
Emperor, and prefer himself. God punished this, by permitting his own Son
Stephen, to depose and banish him into an Island: At last Constantine awaked,
and deposed them all, and ruled himself, in Drunkenness, and Debauchery fifteen
Years, and then dyed; or as some say, was killed by Romanus's Sons.

After him Nicephorus Phocus a succesful Warrior, but a bad Man, Ruled; The
Church called him bad for oppressing them with Taxes: His Wife Theophanon, and
John Trimisces (who succeeded) killed him. Thus has the World been Governed;
and this is the profit of Ambition.

. 27. The next Pope is Anastatius the 3d. who sat two Years, and two Months.
In this time the Eastern Emperor Leo published Constitutions, which Baronius
and Binius (p. 1053.) deride as ridiculous, in imitation of Justinian, because
he presumed to make Church Laws.

. 28. Lando was the next Pope, Anno 912. and sat 6. Months and 22. Days; say
Baronius and Binius, [This Man at the importunate insta^ce, of that most
potent, most noble, and most impudent Whore Theodora, (who had prostituted one
of her Daughters Marozia to Pope Sergius, and the other Theodora to Aldebert
Marquess of Tuscia, and hereby had obtained or kept the Monarchy of the City,
(who was Pope if this Whore was Monarch) did create John whom she most filthily
doted on, a Presbyter of Ravina, the Bishop of Bononia, and Peter Archbishop
of Ravenna being Dead, he made him there Archbishop. And a little after so
filthy an act, he Died. Luitpraud. l. 2. c. 13.

. 29. Next comes this same Man, Anno 912 John 10. says Platina and others,
the Son of Pope Sergius (by the Whore Marozia say some, but its not like,
because Marozia killed him.) But its more probable* as Onuphrius notes, that
it was not this John, but the next that was Son to Sergius and Marozia. This
Pope says Baron. and Bin. is he that the famous Whore Theodora for great
comeliness of person doted on; and says Luitpraud, got him made Archbishop of
Ravenna, and after Pope of Rome,
that she might not lie with him so seldom, as the distance between Rome and
Ravenna would necessitate. So [say they, this impudent Man being powerful at
Rome, by the strength of a Whore, is made a false Pope and wicked invader of
the Seat] where they show how this Whore obtained her power. But was this no
interruption of the succession neither, nor a nullifying of the Papal Church,
while he sat 13. or as Onuphrius, 14. Years and more. No says Baron. (and
Bin.) He that was an Invader, Theif, and Robber, by the after Consent of the
Roman Clergy, became the lawful Pope of Rome. 1. We see then, what the Roman
Clergy were, that would have such a Pope. 2. But they give no proof of any such
Consent; but say, It is verisimile. 3. And where was the Church till that
Consent, or at least its Holiness. 4. Can such Men's Consent make a Pope of an
incapable person? Will no Wickedness incapacitate?

. 30. Say the foresaid Authors, in this Popes time Sisevandus Bishop of
Compostella, finding the great diversity of the Roman and Mo^^rabick Liturgy,
altered his by the Popes consent.

After Herveus, one Seulphus was Archbishop of Rhemes. Heribert Earl of
Aquitane, considering that the Bishop of Rhemes Anointeth the King of France,
bargained to have his Son made next Bishop; that thereby he might get the
Crown.
In have Seulphus is Poisoned, because they could not stay till he dyed.
Heribert' s Son, not yet Five Years old, is made Archbishop. (O scelus in
auditum, say Baronius and Binius.) This monstrous Election, (say they) never
before seen or heard of in the Christian World, nor perhaps thought of, Pope
John did not only not disallow, but ratifyed. -- And by this Fact, the Infamous
Pope gave an Example to many Princes, not only in that, but the following Ages,
(Alas, for Grief!) to procure Lads that were their Kindred, to be thrust into
the Chief Seats,
(or Bishoprics) to the great Mischief of the Church.] A Work (say they)
indeed, worthy such a Pope, whom an Infamous Woman, by an Infamous Work, had
thrust into St. Peter's Chair.

Qu. Were such Villains as Infallible as others? Did their Love, Honesty, and
Chastity fail; and yet, Were they secured against the Failing of their Faith?
Or, Had they a Sincere Faith, that had no other Grace? And, Could these forgive
Sins, and deliver Souls out of Purgatory?

When he had sat Fourteen Years, or Sixteen, (says Baronius and Binius)
Marquess Wido, by the Persuasion of his Wife Marozia, (Pope Sergius Whore) for
the sake of his Brother Peter, whom they hated, cast him out of his Seat into a
Prison; where shortly after, he was Choked with a Pillow:
And so the Invader, and unjust Detainer of the Apostolick-Seat, had an End
worthy of his Wickedness. And he, that by the Impudent Mother, Theodora, had
violently seized on the Holy Seat, by her as Impudent Daughter, was by God's
just Judgment Ejected, Imprisoned, and Deprived both of it, and of his Life. Ex
Luitpr. and Frodoaldo, Baron.

. 31. CCCIX. Anno 912. A Synod at Confluence, decreed as against Incest, That
none Marry within the seventh Degree of Kindred. Was that Divine Law?

. 32. Two or Three other Synods at Tros^etum are mentioned, about small
Matters; and One at Duisburge, to Excommunicate some that put out the Bishops
Eyes.

. 33. The next Pope, is Leo the Sixth; and Dyed after Seven (or Six) Months,
and Fifteen Days.

. 34. Next, Anno 929. succeeded Stephen the Eighth, (or Seventh) and sat but
two Years,
one Month, and fifteen Days. How they were so fast dispatched, I omit.

. 35. Next comes the Son of Marozia, Pope Sergius his Bastard, called John the
Eleventh: His Mother, and Father-in-Law, Wido, got him in Anno 931. even when
he was a Lad under Age. His Brother Albericus, (says Baronius) did keep this
Pope in Prison to his Death. But the Case was this, (vid. Bin. p. 1055.) [Wido
being Dead, Marozia offers the Dominion of Rome to his own Brother Hugo, on
condition he would Marry her: He accepts the Condition; and secretly entering
the Castle of St. Angelo,
after he had committed Incest with her, his Brother's Widow, he despised the
Romans. When his Son-in-Law Albericus, by his Mother Marozia's Command, poured
out Water to wash his Hands, he stroke him on the Face for pouring too much. To
Revenge this Wrong, Albericus stirred up the Romans to a Defection; and having
by Assault of the Castle, put to Flight bis Father-in-Law Hugo, he commanded
his Mother Marozia, and his Bastard-Brother, the Counterfeit Pope John, to be
kept in Prison; in which the violent Invader dyed, being violently cast out,
after for five Years, and some Months, he had rather filthily Defiled, tban
Ruled the Apostolick-Seat.] Says Binius out of Luitpraudus and Baronius:
Calling him a Monster; and yet Magnifying Rome, because such were Obeyed.

. 36. CCCX. Anno 932. A small Council at Erford in Germany, under King Henry,
decreed, 1. That Holy Days be kept for an Honorable Commemoration of the
Twelve Apostles, and Fasting on the Evens. 2. That no State-Meetings be kept on
the Lord's- Days, or other Holy Days; nor Christians then cited to the Courts
of Justice. 3. Nor when he is going to Church. 4. That scandalous Ministers be
tried. 5. That no private Christian make, or impose any Fast on himself,
without the Bishop, or his Missionaries Consent. (An unreasonable Usurpation!
Must the Bishop needs know all the Reasons that every Man has for Fasting,
and be Judge of them? But sure, the Bishop's Diocese had not then so many
hundred Parishes, and so many Counties, as they have now: Else, by that time,
the Bishop and his Commissary had heard a Hundred Thousand, or Fifty Thousand
Persons, tell him, what Reasons they had to Fast besides the common Fasts, at
any time, or on any special Occasions, much of his time would be taken up.

. 37. Anno 935. A Council at Rhemes against Church-Robbers, etc.

. 38. Anno 936. Leo the Seventh was made Pope, after John the Eleventh. In that
time Hugo, that was got away from Alberic^s, had got an Army, and Besieged
Rome. A Match was made for Albericus to Marry Hugo's Daughter: And so Marozia's
Husband and Son were agreed, by the means of Odo, Abbot of Cluniac.

. 39. Henry, King of Germany, the Glory (says Baronius and Binius) of
Christian Religion, dyed at this time; who, after many other Nations,
Couverted also the King of Denmark to the Christian Faith: and left his Son
Otho, the Heir of his Piety and Valor. Yet are not other Papists ashamed to
say, That all these Nations were Converted by the Pope; who was the great
Scandal, that hindered the Conversion of the World.

. 40. But (say the same Authors) Manass^s, Bishop of Arles, now troubled the
Churcb* Being an Ambitious Man, not contented with his Seat, by the means of
Hugo King of Italy, he also invaded the Bishoprics of Verona, and of Trent,
and of Mantua, and of Mila^ it self! (O now the Church prosper'd!)
Saying, That he did it by the Example of the Prince of the Apostles; who at
once possessed Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria.] Ex Luitpraud. (And could the
Pope blame him, that would be Bishop at the Antipodes, and have all the World?)
But its strange, that Men should talk of Bishops Ambition, as of a strange
thing, in the Year 937.

. 41. Anno 939. Pope Stephen the Nineth was chosen by Otho of Germany, without
the Cardinal-Clergy, who had neither Power, nor Virtue enough, to choose: And
the City was under the Power of Albericus, who Tyrannized over them: And
because he had not the Choice he caused some Fellows so to cut and mangle the
Face of the Pope, that he would never after be seen abroad, but kept close till
he dyed; which was after Three Years. This Otho resolved to Revenge on
Albericus: And also, the War between Hugo, and Albericus, broke out again.
Platina says, That Hugo was about to Revenge the Pope, but then Dyed.

. 42. A Synod was at Narbon, to end the Contention of two Bishops, about the
Extent of their Diocesses, and Jurisdiction.

. 43. CCCXI. If yet you perceive not the sad State of the Church, by Men's
striving for Church-Dignities; a Council at Soissons, Anno 940. will tell you
more. You heard before, how the Earl of Aquitane had got his Son to be made
Archbishop of Rhemes: The Child in coats, was but Five Years old: It happened,
that he was put out again for his Infancy, or Nonage; and Artaldus, a Monk,
chosen in his stead. This Council of Bishops, was to decide the C^^e between
the two Archbishops. The Objection against one, was his Infancy, and his
Father's ill means to bring him in:
The Objection against the other, was Perjury; He had sworn, that he would
never accept an Archbishopric: (Alas! Must the Church of France be Headed by
one of these; Binius, p. 1057. Frodoard. in Chronic.
an Infant, or a Perjured Monk!) The Synod cast out the Perjured Monk, and
judged the Seat to the Infant, as being lawfully Chosen; (Power made it a
Lawful Call.) And the Bishops went to Rhemes, and Consecrated him.

. 44. In the Year 920. the French Nobles, by consent at Soissons, had Revolted
from King Charles; because he took Haganon, a Man of low of Quality, into his
Privy Council, and made him Great: Herveus, Bishop of Rhemes, had partly healed
this Breach. But, Anno 922. it broke out again; and the Nobles chose Robert
King, and Herveus Consecrated him: But this Rebellion was their Ruin. Three
Years after dies Herveus: And the next Year, Robert Fighting against Charles,
was slain at Soissons; yet his Army conquered the King's. Shortly after,
Rodolph Duke of Burgundy, is called in by the Nobles, and made King; as if the
Kingdom had been void. Charles, on pretense of a Treaty, is led by Heribert to
a Castle; and thence carried to Perone, where he dyed, Anno 929. leaving a Son
Lewis to Fight for the Kingdom.
And when Charles was in Prison, Hugo rejected Rodulph, and called Lewis out of
England, to be King, Anno 936. But Hugo and Heribert would be his Masters, and
gave him little Quiet. Heribert dies miserably and Repents. Hugo
Domineering, the King craveth Aid of Otho out of Germany, against him: But
shortly* dies himself, by a Disease got by a Fall in Hunting a Wolf. Lotharius
his Son, succeeds him. In his Third Year, Hugo the Great Duke of Orleance,
dies; and Lotharius the King, Anno 986. His Son Ludovicus succeeded; who dyed
Childless, Anno 987. And in him ended the Line of Charles the Great: For
Charles Duke of Loraine, that was next, was by the Treachery of a Bishop, taken
by Hugo Capet, the Son of the foresaid Duke Hugo, and imprisoned to Death: And
this Hugo got Possession of the Crown. So much briefly on the By of these
Matters; that they after interrupt us not too much: See Dion. Petav. lib. 8. c.
16.

. 45. Marinus 2. (alias, Martin 3.) is made Pope, Anno 943. and Reigned three
Years, and some Months (the common Time of Popes in that Age.) In his time,
Artaldus strove again for the Seat of Rhemes.

. 46. CCCXII. When Bishops would needs be Princes, they taught Princes to
resolve to be Bishops: And as Heribert did at Rhemes, so did the Emperor at
Constantinople put in a Patriark, Trypho, a Monk; on condition, that he should
hold it but till his own Son Theophylact came to Age. When the time came,
Trypho would not Resign: A Council is called; where Bin. ex Curopal. tells you
the State of that Church als^ as too like the Western. The Council being met,
Tryphon makes a Speech to them, and says; That his Adversaries, that had a
mind to cast him out, gave the reason, that he knew not Letters: But that they
might all see that this was false,
and that he could Write and Read, he called for Pen and Paper; and (having
been taught thus much before) wrote his Name thus:
[Tryphon, by the Mercy of God, Archbishop of Constantinople, New Rome, and
Universal Patriark,] (for that was then the Title.) The Emperor receiving the
Paper, (it ^eems, knowing that he could not Read) writes over head [Knowing my
self Unworthy, I Resign the Throne to any that will.] And so sent the Paper to
the Council; and the Bishops (wise and Good Men, you must suppose) Dethroned
Tryphon. The Seat staid void five Months, till Theophylact came to Age; who
then was chosen.

. 47. Anno 946. Agapetus the Second is made Pope, in a time when Wars (between
the Hungarians, and Henry Bavaria, Berengarius and Otho, etc.) made Miserable
the Countries, and Ignorance and Ambition the Churches.

. 48. CCCXIII. A Council at Virdun in France, again tried the Cause between the
foresaid Infant, and the Perjured Bishops, Hugo and Artald;
and they undid what the last had done, and Deposed Hugo, and gave the Seat to
Artald. Yet we have not done with Doing and Undoing: For Pope Agapete now took
Hugo's Part; and wrote to the Bishops of France and Germany, that Hugo that was
in Possession, was to be kept there. But the Papists say, he mistook by Hugo's
Misinformation.

. 49. CCCXIV. Anno 948. Another Council at Mosome was called for the same
Business: Hugo would not come in, but sent the Pope's Letters; which being not
Canonical, but his bare Command, they rejected them, cast out, and
Excommunicated Hugo, till the next General-Council.

. 50. CCCXV. Anno 948. A General-Council of France and Germany is called at
Engelenheim, for the same Cause; almost all France being disquieted about two
Men's striving, who should be the Great Archbishop: The Pope's Legate Marinus,
proved Hugo's Letters false; and Hugo was Excommunicated, and Artald settled.
But the Presence of two Kings, Ludovicus and Otho, did much there-to.

The Bishops thence removed to Triers, (called another Council) where they
judged for King Ludovicus, against Duke Hugo; and Excommunicated some Bishops
Ordained by Bishop Hugo, (that was Ordained in his Childhood.)

And another Council at Rome confirmed these things.

. 51. Now comes the Famous Pope John the Twelfth, the Son of Prince Albericus,
the Son of the Famous Whore: A Child too. Says Baronius and Binius,
(p. 1060.) Quanquam hiuc Legitima aetas aliaque omnia deessent quae inlegitimo
Pontifice requiruntur, tamen accedente postea consensu totius. Cleri, visum est
hunc potius esse Tolerandum quam Ecclesiam Schismate aliquo, quod alioquin
exortum fuisset, dividendam. He wanted Natural and Moral Endowments; even All
Things necessary to a Legitimate Pope, say they: And yet, the After-Consent of
the Clergy made him Tolerable, etc. Qu. 1. But, Did that After-consent make him
a true Bishop? 2. If not, Where is their Succession? 3. Did God authorize the
Clergy, to consent to such a Man? Where? Prove it. 4. If not, Could their
Consent make him a Bishop? Is not all Power of God? And, Does God give it
contrary to his Word? 5. Were not those Clergymen wicked themselves, that
would do so? 6. Did those Doctors presume, that their Readers were such Fools,
as not to know, that Forma non recipitur nisi in materiam dispositam? And that
Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius. An Illiterate Man cannot be a Schoolmaster:
He that is no Christian, cannot be a Bishop; nor he that has not the
Qualifications essentially necessary. All the World cannot make a Physician, a
Lawyer, a Divine, a true Pastor or Bishop, of an Idiot, an Infant, or a Man
that wants Essential Dispositions. To say, he wanted all requisite
Qualifications, and yet that he was a Bishop, is a Contradiction: Materia
Disposita and Forma, being the Constitutive Causes. What if they had made a
Bishop of a Turk, an Infidel, a Corpse, etc? Had it not been a Nullity, and
profane Mockery? 7. What else signify all the Canons, that nullify Ordinations
for less Faults? But the Image of a Bishop, will make but the Image or Carcass
of a Church.

. 52. But, say they, Cum Vniversa Ecclesia Catholica sciret minus malum esse
caput quantum libet monstrosum proferre quam unum corpus in duo secari, and
duobus capitibus informari, eundem toto orb terrarum tanquam verum and
legitimum Pontificem venerata fuit. Answ. 1. What a shameless Dream do you
impose on us, under the Name of, Totus orbis Terrarum? What had the Ethiopians,
the Armenians, yea, or the Greek-Church, to do with Pope John? Or, What was it
to them, how he was called, or what he was? Did not the Patriark of
Constantinople then write himself, the Universal Patriark? (even Tryphon, that
they said, could not write any thing else.) Where is your Proof of this
Universal Concession? Which way did the whole Catholick-Church (or the Tenth or
Hundredth Part of it) signify their Consent? 2. Who taught you to feign the
State and Necessity of such a Church, as must have another Universal Head
besides Christ? You know, that it is the Being of such a Church or Head, (be he
never so Good) that we deny: And you have never proved, nor can prove it. He
only is the Universal Head, who makes Universal Laws, and undertaketh
Universal Teaching, and is an Universal Judge and Protector; none of which any
Mortal man can perform. The very Fiction of such a Head and Body, is Monstrous,
and your Capital Error. 3. How small a part of the Christian World was subject
to the Pope, at that time; though within his reach, he was almost at the
Height of his Presumption? 4. He that wants what is Essential to a true
Bishop, is no true Bishop: But Pope John the Twelfth wanted what what was
Essential to a true Bishop: Ergo, He was none. The Minor is proved: He that
wants the necessary Disposition of the Receptive Matter, and is not Subjectum
Capax, wants that which is Essential to a true a Bishop: (For the Materia
Disposita is an Essential Constitutive Cause; a Subjectum Capax is Essential to
a Relation.) But John the Twelfth wanted the Necessary Disposition of the
Matter ad Formam Recipiendam, or was not Subjectum Ca^ax: Proved. He that
wanted capable Age, and all other Things necessary to a lawful Pope, was not
Subjectum Capax; but wanted the necessary Disposition Receptive. But all these,
you say your selves, Pope John wanted: Ergo, etc.

5. If then the Universal Church had so erred, as to take him for a Bishop that
was none; that Error would not make him a Bishop, no more than it would make a
dead Man alive, or an illiterate Man learned. But this is the Roman Catholic
kind of Proof: You say your selves, That a Whore, and a wicked Son of that
Whore, got Power enough to overtop the Citizens of Rome, and the Clergy, (yet
too like them) and to thrust a wicked incapable Fellow into the Chair. When
that is done, it is known, all good Men dissent and abhor it. But when he has
Possession, they must know that he has Possession: And, What can they do to
help it? What Power have the Ethiopians, Armenians, Syrians, or other Nations
of the Earth, in choosing the Pope of Rome? And if they have none in Choosing
him, What Power have they to examine the Choice, and Depose him? And if they
have no Power, Why or how should they signify their Consent or Dissent? If they
leave your own Matters to your selves, What is that to the Consent of the
Catholick-Church? But some men think, that big Words to the Ignorant may serve
for Proof, even of a Right to Govern at the Antipodes, and all the World.

. 53. His Father Albericus, being Governor of the City, designed the
Succession to his Son Octavian: To which he added the Usurped-Papacy, calling
himself John, The first (say Baronius and Binius) that changed his Name,
(though others say Sergius was the first.) Says Platina; From his Youth, he
was Contaminated with all odious Crimes, and Filthiness: When he had any time
to spare from his Lusts, it was not spent in Praying, but in Hunting. Two of
the Cardinals, moved with the Shame of such a Pope, send Letters to Germany, to
Otho, to entreat him to save Rome from Berengarius, (that Plundered all the
Country) and from Pope John the Twelfth; or else Christianity was lost. John
having notice of this, catches the Cardinals, and cutteth of the Nose of one,
and a Hand of the other. Otho comes into Italy, and took Berengarius, and his
Son Albertus, and Banished them. Yet Baronius and Binius, out of Luitpraudus,
say, That the Pope himself sent for Otho, to Help him. However that was, the
Pope received him as with Honor, and Crowned him the Emperor of Germany, (the
First) and Hungary. The Pope, and all the Great Men of the City, swore over the
Body of St. Peter, that they would never help Berengarius or Adelbert: and the
Emperor departed. But the Pope quickly broke his Oath, and joined with
Adelbert: Which the Emperor hearing, said, He is a Child; perhaps Reproof, and
Example, may yet reclaim him. He returned to Rome, and Adelbert, and the Pope
fled: The Citizens received the Emperor, and promised him Fidelity; and took an
Oath, that they would never Choose or Ordain a Pope, without the Consent and
Choice of the Emperor Otho, and his Son Otho. John fled into a Wood, and lay
there like the Wild-Beasts. (Says Platina.)

. 54. CCCXVI. Otho called a Council at Rome; where the Bishops deposed John,
and made Leo Pope: By which we still see, how obedient the Bishops were to the
stronger Side; or else, that really even those near Rome, did not consent to
John; muchless the whole Catholick-Charch, as Baronius immodestly affirms.

The Council was called, Anno 963. out of Italy, France, and Germany, besides
Roman Cardinals and Nobles. The Emperor first asked, Why Pope John was not
there? The Roman Bishops, Cardinals, Presbyters, and Deacons, and all the
People answered, We wonder your Holy Prudence should ask us this Question;
seeing he so openly manageth the Work^ of the Devil, that it is not unknown to
the Babylonians, Iberians, or Indians. The Emperor required particular
Accusations: Then Peter, a Cardinal-Presbyter, said, That he saw him Celebrate
Mass, and not Communicate. A Bishop, and a Cardinal-Deacon said, That they saw
him Ordain a Deacon in a Stable of Horses. Benedict, and many others said, That
he Ordained Bishops for Money; and Ordained a Boy of Ten Years old, Bishop of
Tudortine. Of Sacrilege, there needed no Witness but Eyesight: Of Adultery,
they said, that they saw it not; but they certainly knew, that he abused the
Widow of Ragnerius, and his Father's Concubine, and Anne, a Widow, and her
Niece; and made the Holy-Palace a common Bawdy House, and Stews. That he put
out the Eyes of his Spiritual Father Benedict, and killed him thereby: That he
killed John, a Cardinal Sub^Deacon, by cutting off his Virilia: That he set
Fire on Houses, went Armed and Harnassed as a Soldier. They all (both Clergy
and Laity) cried out, that he Drunk a Health of Wine to the Devil, (Diaboli in
Amorem.) That he at his Play at Dice, would crave the Help of Jupiter, Venus,
and other Demons, etc. The Emperor said, That Bad Men often accuse the Good;
and lest Malice or Livor should move them, he adjured them, as before God, to
speak nothing untruly against the Pope, and without certain Proof: His
Adjurations were most Vehement. The Bishops, Deacons, Clergy, and all the
People of Rome, answered as one Man, and said, [If both the Things read by
Benedict the Deacon, and filthier and greater Villainies were not committed by
Pope John, Let not St. Peter Absolve us from the Bond of our Sins: Let us be
found tied with the Bonds of Anathema, (or Cursed from Christ); and be set at
Christ's Left Hand, at the Last Day, with those that said to God ^he Lord,
Depart from us, we would not have the Knowledge of thy Ways. If you believe
not Us, believe your Army that saw him, etc.] The Emperor being satisfied by
his Armies Witness also, the Council moved, that Letters of Summons might be
sent to the Pope, to appear and answer for himself. A Leteer was written, as
from the Emperor and Bishops; telling him, That the things charged on him were
such, as it would be a Shame to hear of Stage Players; which, if all were
numb'red, the Day would fail: That not a Few, but All, (both Clergy and Laity)
accused him of Murder, Perjury, Sacrilege, and of Incest with his own Kindred,
and with two of his own Sisters. They say also, (Horrid to hear!) That you
drunk Wine in Love to the Devil; ask't Help of Jupiter, Venus, and other
Demons, at your Dice, etc. We crave you would come, and answer for your self;
and swear, nothing shall be done to you besides the Canons.

The Pope reading this, sent this Answer; [We hear, that you will make another
Pope: If you do so, I Excommunicate you from God Almighty, that you may have no
License to Ordain any, nor to Celebrate Mass.] After this, more Bishops came
out of Germany; and they write again to the Pope, telling him, That if he will
not appear and answer, they shall despise his Excommunications, and turn it
upon himself. He would not be found. The Emperor seeing he would not appear;
told the Council, how treacherously he had dealt by him, entreating him to
come, and help him; and after broke his Oath, and joined with his Enemies. The
whole Clergy, Bishops, and all the People, cry out, An un-heard-of Wound must
be cured with an un-heard-of Cautery; and declaring the Mischief he had done,
craveth that this Monster of incurable Vice, might be cast out of the
Roman-Church; and another put in his Place, that will go before them with good
Example. Then they all cried up Leo the Proto-Soriniarius; which thrice
repeating, upon Consent, they Ordained him, and swore Fidelity to him.

. 54. If now Baronius and Binius say, That the Clergies Consent can make an
incapable Monster a true Bishop, let any one tell us: 1. Whether this Council
did not prove, that the Church did not consent to John? 2. Or, Whether his
utter Incapacity, many express Canons, and the Bishops and Councils Consent,
did not Eject him, and Authorize Leo?

. 55. But here we come to the Core of all the Papists Cheats: When they tell us
themselves of all this Wickedness, they cry out, O the happy Church of Rome!
that though it fail in Manners, yet never fails in Faith. Answ. 1. If General
Councils are sufficient Witnesses, that judged Popes Heretics, it has failed
in Faith. 2. Has that Man true Faith, that wants all things requisite to a
Lawful Bishop, and that drinks to the Devil, and prays to Jupiter and
Venus; and Lives in all Wickedness? What a thing is Popish Faith? 3. Did
Christ mean to pray only, that St. Peter might have such a Faith, as will stand
with Wickedness and Damnation? What the better is any Man of a wicked Heart and
Life, for a dead Opinion called Faith, that will damn him the more deeply for
sinning against it? 4. It is not possible, but that serious true Belief of so
great Things, as God, and Christ, and Glory, will bring a Man to serious
Repentance and Reformation.

. 56. Here Baronius and Binius become this Monster's Advocate, and say, [That
there never was a Council of Orthodox Men, that sinned more against the Canons
and Traditions, than this false Council.] (How false is a Devil-worshipping-
Pope, a Murderer, and common Adulterer, and incestuous Villainies, in
comparison of all his Neighbor-Bishops?) 1. They say, They could not call a
Council without him. Answ. 1. He was no Pope. 2. It Is a Traiterous Fiction to
say, That an Emperor may not call his Subject-Bishops together, to a Council.
3. What if Devilish Villains will make Murders, and Perjury, and Rebellions,
to pass for Duties, and never call Councils; Must the Devil therefore be made
Lord of the Catholick-Church, without Remedy? 4. Who gave your Pope that
Privilege? If Council or Princes, they can take it from him: If Christ, prove
it, or Shame be to him that yields it. 5. That Man is so ignorant of
Church History, or Impudent, as not to be worthy to be disputed with, that
denies, That Princes have called Councils, even the Greatest, and most Honored.

II. They say, There should be Seventy-Two Witnesses; and there was scarce one,
besides the Accusers.] Answ. 1. The whole Council, and People of Rome, and
Army, are VVitnesses, under the most direful Imprecations. 2. The Pope may go
on safely, till God take him in Hand, if he must pass for Innocent till he will
lie with his own Sisters, or murder Men, and cut off their Virilia, etc. before
Seventy-Two VVitnesses! O shameful Holy-Church, that is thus Essentiated!

III. They say He should have been thrice cited. Ans. 1. What! When he would
not be found? 2. Is that necessary to the being of the Sentence?

IV. They say, No delay was granted! Ans. He was not to be found: And to what
was delay necessary, when the Babylonians, Iberians, and Indians had notice of
his Diabolical Life.

V. They say,
contrary to all Councils, the Emperor Condemns him, who may not Condemn any
Clerk. Ans. But you may Condemn Kings and Emperors! Is not this Heresy,
contrary to Romans 13. and the 5. Commandment; How shall Men's Lives, Wives, and
Estates be saved from Clergymen, if Kings may not judge and punish them. This
Doctrine calls for timely restraint.

VI. They say, Execution went instead of Sentence. Ans. Is not a plain Sentence
here expressed?

VII. The Pope is exempt from all humane judgment: The whole Council therefore
were impudent or ignorant to Condemn a Pope, which none ever did but a Heretic
or Schismatic. How many Canons did John and his perjured Adherents violate?
Ans. 1st. That is, such as you are able to call General Councils, Emperors
and Kings, Heretics and Schismatics; if they presume to judge a Heretic,
Schismatic, or devilish Pope. But your faculty proves not another culpable.
2. Did not Solomon judge Abiathar? Did not many Councils Condemn Honorius, and
many other Popes. 3. What a case is your miserable Catholic Roman Church in
then; when Popes may kill, ravish, blaspheme, and destroy and no Man can judge
them, neither King nor Council? 4. Why said you, that the whole Church did
consent to your Pope, when all this Council, and all the Clergy, and People at
Rome thus begged for another. 5. If all your Bishops of Italy, German^,
etc. are utterly impudent or ignorant as you call these; What an honor is
this to the Prelacy of your Church? And is it not because your Popes ordained
them, and like will generate its like. Such other trifl^ng objections they
frame.

57. But now we have two Popes, John and Leo: and to this Day it is not known,
nor agreed among the Roman Doctors, which was the true Pope.
Most say Leo: Baron. and Bin. say, John; and call Leo a Schismatic;
confessing yet, that Scriptores in finiti numeri call him Leo 8th. and own him.
How then shall we derive their succession? John's Kindred got the better, when
the Emperor was gone, and called him again, and cast out Leo. Now we have two
Heads, and so two Churches; the Church of John, and the Church of Leo.

. 58. CCCXVII. Anno 963. A Council at Constable. gave the Emperor Nicephorus Phocas
leave to marry Theophanes, the Widow of Romanus.

. 59. CCCXVIII. Anno 964. The monstrous Beast Pope John got up again, called a
Synod of Bishops: And what will not Bishops do? He is here still called,
The most Godly and most Holy Pope. The Bishops at his motion Condemn Leo, and
those that Ordained him, and those that were Ordained by him. And this Council
Binius justifies, and cries down Leo 8th. as no Pope. But he confesses, that
by the common consent of Writers, Leo was the true Pope; but Scriptorum error
veritati nihil praejudicare potest. Ans. 1. How then shall all the world that
knew not the Case, be sure that Binius and Baronius are to be believed before
all their own Writers, whose common Sentence is against them, and that Romes
Succession from John is good? 2. Remember this when you plead for your supposed
Tradition, that infinite Writers prejudice not the Truth.

. 60. But says Platina, Its reported, that just then John was punished by Gods
just judgment, lest a Schism should have followed. And it is commonly agreed,
that being in bed with a man's Wife, the Devil struck him on the head and killed
him. But some think it was rather the VVomans Husband that did it.

. 61. But yet we are never the nearer conceding, still there are two Roman
Popes and Churches. John being dead, one Benedict is Chosen by the parties,
Totius cleri and populi Romanae Consensu, says Bin. p. 1067. Yet had this
Clergy and People sworn before to Otho, to Choose no Pope without his Consent
and Choice, and tied themselves to Leo. But to to be Perjured, and change with
the Ruling Power, alas how common was it!

. 62. The godly Emperor Otho was offended at these Villainies, and brought an
Army again to Rome: Benedictus made them stand out a Siege till Famine forced
them to yield, and the Emperor set up Leo, and carried away Benedict to
Hamburgh, where he died. And think you but this Pope is therefore by Binius and
Baronius made a Martyr, that by Rebellion and common Perjury was thus set up.

. 63. While Otho was at Rome Anno 964. He and Leo 8. called another Council of
Bishops, Italian, Roman; from Loraine, S^xony, etc. and all the Roman People:
Pope Benedict is brought forth, Benedict the Deacon tells him of his Perjury,
having broken his Oath to Leo and to Otho: Pope Benedict said, If I have
sinned, have mercy on me. The pitiful Emperor with Tears entreated the Bishop
to have mercy on the man: Whereupon, he fell down at the feet of Leo and the
Emperor, and confessed that he had sinned and invaded the Papacy: and
delivered the In signia to Leo: (yet our foresaid Annalist and Historian make
him and not Leo, the true Pope still.) The Council Deposed and Banished him,
but continued him a Deacon as he was before. They removed him to Hamburgh to
prevent new broiles.

. 64. Here Baronius and Binius cry out on the History of L^il^raudus as Forged,
on Crantzius, etc. But there is a great reason why Leo must not be taken for a
Pope: It is because by a Canon of this his Council they gave Otho the same
power for choosing Popes as Charles the great had. O how much Interest
prevails with these Historians judgments.

But alas, Reader, is it not a sad thing to read how fast Bishops and People
did thus Swear and Forswear, and do and undo, making Councils as weather-cocks
that turn with every Wind that is strong? Is this the honor of Prelacy, and
their stability in governing the Church?

. 65. Next comes another John 13th. who was not Chosen till Leo dyed,
and expressly chosen to succeed him; and so by that Account of Baronius and
Binius the Succession was interrupted, Leo being no Pope whom he Succeeded.
But, alas, had it not been for the great Zeal of Otho, that came so often with
Armies to defend them, and to cast out intolerable Popes, what had become of
the Roman Papacy? This John was a Bishop before, (as Formosus was) and so by
the Canons his Election was Null on that account. Almost as soon as he was
settled, says Platina, the Romans having now got a Custom of Expelling their
Popes, (yet Baron, says, the Universal Church owned them,) did by Seditions
tire out this also. By the help of Jofred Earl of Campany, they brake into* the
Laterane House, and took him, and first imprison him, and then send him
Banished into Campania: But John Prince of Campania killed Jofred and his only
Son; and delivered Pope John the Eleventh month after his Banishment: And the
Emperor Otho again brings an Army to Rome, with speed, and casts the
Governor, the Consuls, and the Dearchoues into Fetters; The Consuls he sends
into Germany banished; The Dearchoues he Hanged: Peter the Prefect of the
City, some write (says Platina.) that he delivered to the Pope to have his
flesh torn off; his Beard and Head being Shorn, and he hanged a while at the
head of the Constantinian-Horse, he was set on an Ass naked, with his face
backward, his hands tied under the tail, and so whipped through the Streets till
he was almost Dead, and then Banished into Germany. The Corpse of Jofred and his
Son he caused to be taken up, and to be vilely cast away into diverse filthy
places. Thus did the blind Zeal of a good Emperor Revenge and defend Usurping
Popes.

. 66. A Council at Revenna, of small importance, and one at Rome, to confirm
Glassenbury-Monastery I pass by: and all the English Councils which Spelman
has given us by themselves. But it is worth the noting, that the famous
Dunstan that banished Priests Marriage out of England, was the Favorite of
these two Popes, John the 12. and 13th. even much countenanced by the monstrous
Pope that lay with two Sisters of his own, and made his House as a common
Whore-house, if a Council under solemn Appeals to God, and Execrations, said
true.

. 67. The next Pope according to Platina, is Benedict (though Onuphrius and
Binius put Donus next: says Plat. Cintius a potent Citizen of Rome took him
and laid him in Iayle, and there strangled him: He wondered that neither Otho
nor any other ever Revenged it: But Otho was now near Death, and could not have
leisure to bring an Army out of Germany to Rome, every time that wicked
Citizens and Popes f^ll out: Did the Universal Church own this man also? But
(says Plat.) Benedicts Merits were such as Cintius his reward imports. But
yet it was not well done of Cintius to meddle with the Pope were he never so
bad: But alas (says he) how the World is changed! For in our Age, Popes lay
Citizens, faulty or suspected, in the same Prison, and then Macerate them.

. 68. Donus 2. was Pope but three months: In his short time, the Bulgarians had
almost taken Constant.
says Platina. And Anno 972. a Council was held at Ingelheim in Germany, to
compose Church matters.

. 69. The next Pope (says Plat.) was Boniface the 7th, who ill got the
Popedom, and so lost it. Onuphrius and Bin. say, that Cintius by his command
strangled his Predecessors, and that he Succeeded him. Says Plat. in the
beginning of his Magistracy (for a Magistracy it thus was) by the Conspiracy of
the good Citizens, being forced to leave the City, taking away all the precious
things out of S. Peter's Church, he fled to Constantinople; where he stayed,
till selling all that he had sacrilegiously gotten, he got a great mass of
Money, with which he returned to corrupt the Citizens by Bribes. But good men
resisted him, especially John a Cardinal-Deacon, whom Boniface caught and put
out his Eyes: And the Sedition increasing more and more, either for fear or
remorse, he next made away (or killed) himself: He was Pope 7 months and 5 days
says Platinus. But Onuphrius says (one year, one month and 12 days.) But
other Popes came in between before he died, and he got in again.

. 69. Baronius and Binius say, that Boniface is not to be numbered with the
Popes; If so, 1. Why not many score also? 2. Where then is their uninterrupted
Succession? And where was their Church then?

. 70. Binius makes Benedict 6. next after Donus, and says, He was imprisoned
and killed by Boniface, who Usurped the place.

71. An. 973. A Council at Mutina was to reconcile two Brethren.

. 72. Benedict 7. An. 975. drove away Boniface, and was Pope himself: And so
here were again two Popes: Now Otho 2. had a great Overthrow by the Greeks in
Calabria; and flying by Sea, was taken Prisoner by Pirates, and Redeemed by the
Sicilians; dyed at Rome: And Otho the 3. was Chosen in his place by the
Germans. Writers agree not of the time of Benedicts Reign. In his time they
feign, that at a Council at Winchester in the midst of their Disputes, the
Image of our Lord spoke out for the Monks against the secular Clergy, and so
decided all the Controversies.

And a Synod was at Rome, about the Bishop of Magdeburg, accused.

. 73. CCCXIX. Anno 975. At a Council at Constantinople, Basil the Partiarch is
Accused as Criminal, and Antonius Studita put in his place.

. 74. Pope John 14. (alias 15.) is next at Rome, Anno 984. Binius makes him
succeed Boniface that had killed Pope Benedict, and was fled to Constantinople;
and says, that when Boniface knew that Otho the Emperor was dead, he returned
to Rome, and seized on the Papacy again; and finding John in it, did not only
turn him out, but cast him in Bonds in the Tower of St. Angelo, which was kept
by men of his own faction; and with great Tyranny kept him there four months,
and as a violent and sacrilegious Robber, at last Murdered him by Famine. And
lest any hope should be left to the Emperors Party, he exposed the Corpse of
the dead Pope (for all the Citizens to behold) before the doors of the Prison:
And the People seeing the bare body of the Pope consumed by Hunger, buried him
with Sorrow. In the mean time, the Invader of the Seat, and the cruel Murderer
of two Popes, the odious Paricide, and turbulent thief Boniface the Antipope,
(Oh Horrible!) by Tyranny Invaded St. Peter's Chair: But after four months, by
Gods Revenge, he suddenly dyed (he killed himself said Plat. When he was dead,
even the factious persons on whom he had trusted, Wounded his dead Carcass, and
Dragged it through the City. This Bin. out of Baron. and he exautiquis
Vatican-Codicibus.

And must a Governor of all the World be thus Chosen.

But Platina says, that some say, that Ferrucius, Bonifaces Father, a great
man, murdered John; and others say, he was cast out for Impotency and Tyranny;
and others say, by malevolent Seditious Men. So confused (says he) are the
Histories of those times.

. 75. Next comes John 15. (alias 16) Binius says, that for fear of the like
usage that had befallen his Predecessors, Platina speaks this of John 16.
called by him the 17th.
he left Rome and dwelt in Tuscany; one Cresconius a great man, having got the
Castle of St. Angelo: till the Pope sending to Otho 3. afrighted the Romans,
and made them entreat him to return. But Platina says, That [He burned against
the Clergy with a wonderful Hatred, and therefore was deservedly hated by the
Clergy: especially, because he bestowed all things Divine and Humane on his
kindred, disregarding the honor of God, and the Dignity of the Roman Seat;
which Error (says he) he so Traditioned (or delivered down) that it remains
to this day (This is Roman Tradition) a Comet then appeared, Famine,
Pestelence, Earthquakes, which were thought to be for the Pride and rapacity of
the Pope, and his contempt of God and Man.] So Platina.

. 76. An Instance was given of a Bishop of the contrary Spirit: Adel^ert Bishop
of Prague in Bohemia ^ound the People so contrury to him, and bad, that he
forsook them, and Traveled first, and then entered into a Monastery: And when
he had lived there five years, the people desired him again, and promised
Obedience. A Council at Rome desired his return, which with grief he did; But
they still proved incorrigble, and he again forsook them and went to Preach to
the Hungarians, when he Bapzed the King Stephen, and did much good. Bin. p.
1071.

. 77. CCCXX. Arnulphus Archbishop of Rhemes suspected of Treason, for
delivering up the City of Rhemes to Charles: Called a Synod at Seulis, to purge
himself, Excommunicating them that did it. Anno 990.

. 78. CCCXXI. Hugo Capet having now got the Crown of France, and desirous to
destroy all the Carolines line, upon the aforesaid suspicion got a Synod at
Rhemes, to cast out Arnulphus a Bastard of that Lin^; saying, a Bastard must
not be a Bishop: One Bishop refused; The rest for fear of that King consented,
and cast him out; (so constant were the French Bishops.)

. 79. CCCXXII. Six Bishops, and Nine Presbyters, and Four Deacons made a
Council at Rome, to Canonize Vdalric Bishop of Augusta, Anno 993. upon the
reports of his Holiness and Miracles.

Here let me at once tell the Reader, that he has no cause to think the most
of these Canonizations wholly causeless. But that while Pope and Patriarcks,
confounded all by wickedness and contentious pride; God had many faithful
Bishops and Presbyters that lived holily in quieter and privater kind of Life;
And the Popes that would not endure themselves to live a Godly life, thought it
their honor to have such in the Church that did, and to magnify them when
dead, and past contradicting them. Just like the Pharisees, Mat. 23. that
killed the living Servants of God, and honored the dead, and built them
Monuments, saying, If we had lived in those days, we would not have killed them.

. 80. CCCXXIII. A Synod was called at Moson, to debate the Case between Arnulph
and Gerbert substituted at Rhemes, who so pleaded his cause, that it was put
off to another Synod. Baron revileth some Writings ascribed to the former Synod
at Rhemes, saying, they were this Gerberts* as being Blasphemous against the
Pope: The Centuriators of Magdeb. mention them at large. Did Rome then govern
all the World?

. 81. CCCXXIV. Another Council is called at Rhemes, and Gerbert (that wrote so
Blasphemously against the Pope) is deposed by the Popes means, and Arnulphus
restored: which Gerbert observing, flies to the Emperor to Germany, seems
to repent (as Baron. but surmizeth) and gets higher, to be Pope himself, by the
Emperors means, as you shall hear anon.

. 2. Can any Man think that Popes, that themselves came in by Tyranny and mere
Force, and lived in Wickedness, could have so great a Zeal as is pretended to
do Justice for all others, unless for their own ends?

. 83. John the 16th. (alias 17) is passed over by Binius: Onuphrius says, that
he Reigned four Months: Platina says, he died the tenth Year, and sixth Month,
and tenth Day (a great difference.)

. 84. Gregory the 5th. is next, made Pope (says Plat.) by Otho 3d his
Authority for Affinity: But (says Plat.) The Romans make Crescentius Consul
with chief Power; who presently made John Bishop of Placentine Pope; who came
to it by the consent of the Roman Clergy and People, to whom the choice
belonged, though some leave him out: Otho comes to defend his own Pope;
Crescentius fortifieth City and Castle against him: The People dare not resist,
but open the City Gates: Crescentius and Pope John flies to the Castle;
and in hope of Pardon, yields: Crescentius is Killed by the People in his
passage; John has first his Eyes put out, and then his Life; and Gregory the
Eleventh Month is restored: Binius says, that John's Hands were cut off, his
Ears cut off, and his Eyes pulled out; and after set on an Ass, holding the
Tail in his Hand, was carried about the Streets.

. 85. This Pope and Otho the 3d. agreed to settle the Election of the Emperor,
as now it is on the 7. Electors. The cause of great Confusions,
and Calamities was, that the Emperors did not dwell at Rome; and so left
Popes then to fight, strive, and sin, that else would have lived submissively
under them. Constantine, Carolus Mag. or Otho, might have done much to prevent
or cure all this.

The Papists would fain prove this the work of a Roman Synod, (to settle the
Electors) that they may prove that it is they, that must make and unmake
Emperors. But they can show us no such Council.

Onuphrius has written a Treatise to prove that this was after done by Greg.
10th. For which Binius reprehends him, as believing Aventinus.

But this is a Controversy handled by so many, that I shall refer the Reader to
them: and whether the seven Electors only, or all the Feudatories chose.

Baronius and Binius maintain, that all came from the Authority of the Pope;
that Greg. 5th. Ordained the choice of the Emperor to be by all the
Feudatories of the Empire; that the Council at Lions, under Innocent 4th.
settled it upon Seven, but not all the same that are now Electors; and that the
Princes after settled it on these same Seven, they know not who nor when.

For the right understanding of many such matters; I only mind the Reader of
this one thing, that as the contention of Princes, and the superstitious fear
of Anathematizing had made the Papal, and Prelatical Power then very great, in
setting up, and taking down Princes; so it was usual for their Assemblies,
even those called Councils, to be mixed of Men Secular and Clergy; Kings and
Princes, and Lords being present with the Bishops, as in our Parliaments; and
usually the greatest Princes ruled all. Therefore, to ascribe all to the Pope
and Prelates, that was done in such conventions, and thence to gather their
power to dispose of Empires and Kingdoms, is mere deceit.

86. Platina next names John 17th. alias 18th. but says he was no true Pope
(its impossible to know who was,) but that he corrupted Crescentius with money,
and it cost them both their lives: How he was mangled, shamed, and killed
(though a Bishop before) you heard before.

87. Next an. 999. comes that French Bishop Gerbert He had says Platina, been
Schoolmaster to Otho, and the King of France and other great men.
before mentioned, that wrote so blasphemously (as they called it) against the
Pope (as Aeneas Silvius after did) till he saw some hope of being Pope himself,
by the Emperor's favor first made Archbishop of Ravenna, and then Pope,
Formosus's Case and the Canons that forbid a Bishop to be chosen, were now
forgotten or dispensed with. He had won the Emperor's favor by a rare Clock
that he made, being a good Mathematician: Platina after others tells a terrible
story of his Covenant with the Devil and his confession; But I rather believe
Onuphrius's vindication from that ignorant age.
And the People and Clergy were taught that it was the Emperor's Will that
they should choose him, which to please the Emperor they did: Historians say
that he sold his Soul to the Devil by Covenant, to be made Pope, which
accordingly the Devil distrained and took him away. But Baron, and Bin* say
that Cardinal Benno was the first author of this and many fouler accusations of
the Popes than I have here mentioned; and that he was Schismatical (as taking
the Emperor's part) and so not to be believed. And indeed I am not apt to
believe any that accused men of Magicks in that ignorant age of the Roman
Church; whenas Erasmus says, He that did but understand Greek or Hebrew was
suspected to be a Magician.

Otho 3d. that preferred this Pope gave him two Counties to his Church,
Vercellis and St. Agatha: A heresy Glebar and Baron* mention in his time, soon
extinct. Stephen King of Hungary it is said converted the Transylvanians (which
yet the Papists ascribe all to the Pope.) An hundred fifty nine Epistles of
Gerbert's written before he was Bishop of Rhemes (or Pope) are found with
Nicol. Faber. says Bin. This Oth^ was but a Child of ten years of age when he
was made Emperor.


88. CCCXXV. In a Council at Rome, an. 999 Giester Archbishop of Mentz is
accused for having two Parishes; but struck with a Palsy could not appear, and
the matter referred to a German Council. Bin, p. 1079.

89. Next comes John 16th. as Bin. or 19th. as Plat. who dyed the fifth month.
But though no good be said of him, Plat. notes the great happiness of Italy by
the good Government of Hugo the Emperor's Lieutenant.

90. Next is John 17th. as Bin. or 20th. as Plat. who says Nil dignum memoria
gessit. But what was wanting in the unhappy Bishops God made up in good
Princes. Robert King of France and Henry the new Emperor of Germany (Otho being
dead) being men of very great piety and justice: Holiness was now passed
Eminently to Princes.

91. Binnius records that Leutherius Archbishop of Sens did now begin the
Heresy of Berengarius. It seems then, neither Luther, nor Zuinglius, nor
Berengarius, nor Bertram (alias Ratram) began it. But where will the reader
find that Transubstantiation was yet named, or by any consent received? so that
this is but to confess that yet the doctrine contrary to Transubstantiation did
still obtain: And the name of heresy from Baron. or Bin. signifies no more
against this Archbishop than the name of Magic and Diabolism against Silvester
2. from many Historians.

92. In a Council at Frankford the Emperor Henry, having a great love to
Bamberge, would endow it and make it an Archbishopric. The Bishop of
Wir^^burge would not come to the Council unless it might be joined to his
Bishopric. It seemed a hard controversy. The good Emperor (often prostrate
before them) first, having no Children, dedicateth all that he has to Christ,
and then desires them to consider, that [It was not for the Lord, but for
ambition, and to get more dignity that this Bishop did resist his desire] (his
agent speaking for him.) (Oh that Princes had sooner discerned the evil of such
ambition and aspiring!) At last the Emperor (being present) carried it, and
chose an Archbishop who was ordained to Bamberge.

93. Next Peter Bishop of Abbane is made Pope and called Sergius 4th (The
Canons are here again violated) Now says Bin. was a great prodigy, in a
Church at Rome rose a spring of oil, of which a vessel full was sent to King
Henry, no doubt to call him to take the Empire.]

94. CCCXXVI. An. 1011. A Council at Bamberge endeavored to end some quarrels
among Bishops that strove to get more, and accused one another unjustly to the
Pope; for which the King reproved some of them.

95. An. 1012. Two Popes were chosen and set up; which is the 19th. schism or
double-head of the Roman Church. The Emperor's party chose Benedict the 8th.
The City Party chose Gregory. The Citizens were the stronger at present (and so
long their's was the true Pope.) The Emperor proved strongest at last, and
therefore Benedict became the true Pope (for Hobbes his Law ruled among them,)
[that Right is nothing but Power to get and keep] Gregory had no power to keep
his Place: Ergo he had no right to it: Benedict fled to Germany, and the good
Emperor Henry came to Rome with an Army, and made Gregory fly, and set up
Benedict. Here Henry first instituted the Golden Globe and Cross as fit for an
Emperor's hand and aspect.
Bin. out of Glab. li. 3. c. 8. speaks of the Jews injuring Christ's Image by
a ludicrous crucifixion, and that after the adoring of the cross the same day,
a whirlwind cast down the Houses [omnesque pene Romanos occisos esse] and
almost all the Romans were killed (that is scarce credible,) and that it ceased
not till the Pope had put the Jews to death. Platina says, that this Emperor
Henry and his Wife were so pious that they omitted nothing that might do good.
He overthrew the Saracens, and giving his Sister in marriage to the King of
Hungary converted him and his People to the Faith: And Baron. gives you the
copy of his large grant of Cities and Principalities to the Pope, by way of
confirmation of former grants.

96. They call it a Council at Legio in Spain, where the King and Queen and
Nobles with the Bishops and Abbots, made some Laws for Church Priviledges.

97. CCCXXVII. An. 1017. A Council was called at Orleance in France; where, by
the Zeal of the religious King Robert and the Prelates, the burning of
Heretics were set on foot. Bin. out of Glaber thus recites the matter. One
Italian woman revived the heresy of the Manichee^, and two Clergy men (yet
called Palatii proceres et Regi familiares) received and spread it abroad with
confidence. The opinions are thus recited by Glaber. 1. That the Doctrine of
the Trinity delivered in scripture, is a deceit. 2. That Heaven and Earth are
from eternity without a maker. 3. That the crimes of sensual pleasure shall
have no punishment. 3. That there is no reward for any Christian works, save of
Piety and Justice.
The two leaders Lisoius and Heribertus, and eleven more were burnt to ashes;
and afterward as many more as were found guilty of the same errors. Bin. p.
1083. Here consuming zeal began.

98. CCCXXVIII. An. 1022. A Council at Salegunstad in Germany made many
ceremonious Canons; but decreed c. 16. that none go to Rome without the consent
of the Bishop. and c. 17. that the Popes pardons shall not profit them that
have not fulfilled the time of their penance.

They tell us also of a Council at Mentz, and Gothard's curing a Demoniack
woman.

99. Benedict dying, went to purgatory says Bin. as some apparitions proved,
but he was delivered out of that pain by St. Odilo's prayers, and his Brother's
Alms. (you see how much better it is to be a Saint than a Pope) you need not
question the credit of their intelligence from purgatory.

100. This Pope's own Brother, Son to the Tusculane Earl, by his power
presently seizes on the Papacy. But Bin. ex Baron. would persuade us that
this invaded Pope afterward repented, resigned, and was new chosen by the
Clergy. He was very like to have their votes when he had gotten such power and
advantage: But where was the Roman Church that while?

Now dyed the pious Emperor Henry,
and when he dyed gave up his religious wife to the Bishops and Abbots, as a
Virgin, as he received her; who entered a Monastery accordingly: Conrade his
General succeeded him, and the Pope (John 21 as Plat. 18 as Bin.) being driven
away by the People, Conrade restored him. (so far was the Pope obeyed.)

101. A Council at Lymoges, an. 1029. gave an Apostolical title to Martial
their founder.

102. An. 1^32. Another at Pampilone was about a Bishop's seat.

103. Princes in this age are commended for their piety (especially their zeal
for Rome.) But did the Popes yet amend? The next man that comes in by the same
power as the former, is Benedict the 9th Nephew to John and Son to Albericus;
most say he was but ten years old, some say 18. capable, says Baron and Bin.
of Impudence and luxury; by the tyranny of his Father intruded, An. 1030. And
(say they) being given over to lust and pleasure, and by humane frailty rushing
into impudence, and living to great scandal of the faithful, he was by the
Romans, the Consul Ptolemy favoring it, rejected, or at least gave it up by
the persuasion of the holy Abbot Bartholomew. Whereupon Silvester the 3d. came
into his place, who had been Bishop of Sabine, even by bribery and evil arts;
and did rend the Church by a new Schism: But he had fcarc^ Sat three months,
but Benedict by the help of the Tusculanes returned and cast him out, as an
invader. In the mean time a third man, John Arch-Presbyter of Rome invading the
same seat, brought yet a greater deformity on the Church: And so A THREE-HEADED
BEAST ARISING FROM THE GATES OF HELL did miserably infest the holy Chain of St.
Peter.] These are the words of the Popes grand flatterers. And they tell us
that one Gratian a Presbyter pitying this miserable state of the Church, went
to all the three Popes, and gave them money to hire them all to resign; And so
Benedict as the most worthy being secured of the Revenues of England, deposed
himself; and that he might the more freely execute his lusts betook himself to
his Fathers house, when intruded by force and tyranny he had held the Papacy
eleven years. And when the rest by his example had done the like, each being
contented with his assigned portion of the Revenue, the Church An. 1044. was
restored to its ancient union, peace and concord, the Schism being expelled,
and the tyranny by which it was oppressed taken out of the way.] Thus Bar. and
Bin. But how came this Presbyter to be so honest and so rich? you must know
that when he had got out the three Popes he was made Pope himself, of which
more anon.

. 104. But though these Authors tell us but of four Popes at once, as credible
writers of their own tell us there were six: Wernerus in Fasciculo Tempor.
says [The 14. Onuphr. will tell you better that it was the 20th.
Schism was scandalous and full of confusion between Ben^dict the 9th. and five
others; which Benedict was wholly vicious, and therefore being damned, he
appeared in a monstrous and horrid shape, his head and tail were like an Asses,
the rest of his body like a Bear, So say Platina and many others also.
saying, I thus appear because I lived like a beast. In this Schism there were
no less than six Popes at once: 1. Benedict was expulsed. 2. Silvester 3d. got
in, but is cast out again, and Benedict restored. 3. But being cast out again
Gregory the 6th. is put into his place: who because he was ignorant of Letters
caused another Pope to be consecrated with him, to perform Church-Offices,
which was the fourth: which displeased many, and therefore a third is chosen
instead of those two that were fighting with one another. 6. But Henry the
Emperor coming in deposed them all and chose Clement the 2d.] the sixth that
were alive at once. There is great difference between Wernerus, Onuphrius,
Platina, Baronius, but all confess that there were three or four at once. And
the three were secured of the revenues before they resigned to the fourth; no
doubt leaving him his part: This it is for Bishops to be great and rich, which
will ascertain wicked men to seek them. But if Wernerus say true that this
Johan. Gratianus, made Gregory 6th. was illiterate, he was a strange Roman
Arch-Presbyter before, and a strange Pope after, but greatly to be commended
that would ordain a fellow Pope that could read.

105. This horrid monstrous villain called Benedict the 9th. Canonized Simeon
an Anchorite at Trevirs. Do you think he was not a good judge and lover of
Saints? He crowned Conrade the Emperor who came into Italy to master the Bishop
of Milan that rebelled, say Baron, and Bin. and many other great things he did.

106. Even in these times there were Councils held. 1. One at Lymoges, to judge
St. Martial to be an Apostle, and to agree to excommunicate the soldiers that
robbed and plundered, and to curse their horses and arms, and deny Christian
burial to all the Countries where they prevailed, save the Clergy and poor, etc.
Another at Beauvois on the same occasion. And another at Tribur, unknown for
what.

107. This Pope Gregory 6th. (who was John Gratian the Roman Arch-Presbyter,
that Werner says was illiterate and made him a fellow Pope) is very variously
described: Baron. and Bin. and some others make him an honest man that ended
the Schism. Cardinal Benno makes him Simoniacal that hired them out to get the
Papacy: Baron* and Bin. for this revile him as a malicious liar. They say that
Gregory, for punishing sacrilegious villains by the sword that cared not for
Anathema's, was accused by the Romans that now lived by theft and rapine, as a
Simonist and a murderer. Conrade being dead and Henry his Son made Emperor, he
being in Italy held a Synod at Sutria near Rome where all the four Popes causes
were examined: And the three former were deposed, that is, deprived of the
revenue which was parted among them, and this Gregory 6. (say most authors, and
even Hermannus that wrote in those very times) was deposed, (but says Baron.
he honestly resigned.) And the Roman Clergy being found so bad, that none were
fit for the place, the Emperor chose (say most, or caused to be chosen says
Bin.) the Bishop of Bamberge in Germany called Clement the 2d.

108. The Emperor settling the Bishop of Bamberge, Clem. 2. in the chair,
returned and took the last Pope Gregory with him to avoid contention; and
Clement went after with Hildebrand and dyed by the way the 9th. month after his
Creation. Benedict hearing this invadeth the Papacy again, the third time, even
that villain that was first of the four, and held it eight months after this,
so yet we have diverse Popes.

109. An. 1067. A Council is held at Rome by Clem. 2. against Simony.

110. Poppo Bishop of Brixia is made Pope, by the Emperor and the common
suffrage, say Bar. and Bin. (an. 1048.) But says Platina and others, it is
reported that he made the poison with which the Citizens poisoned his
predecessor Clem. 2. And that he seized on the place by violence without any
c^nsent of Clergy or People, it being now the custom for any ambi^ious man,
that could, to seize on the Popedom; but God, says Plat, as a just revenger
resisted him, for he dyed the twenty third day of his Papacy. Yet the Romans
had again taken an oath in Clem. 2d's. time to choose no Pope without the
Emperor's license. For the Romans were become so wicked and factious that they
were not to be trusted in such a thing.

111. Upon these horrid villainies and schisms Baron. and Bin. again cry out on
the Novatores, for casting these things in the teeth of the R^man Church, as
impudent men. And they say still, 1. That it was not the Church that chose
these Popes (as Benedict 9.) but Tyrants obtruded them. 2.That yet so great was
the power of the Roman Church that even false Popes were obeyed by all the
Christian world.]


Ans. 1. When yet they tell us themselves that even the City of Rome was so far
from obeying them, that they imprisoned, deposed, killed them. And the whole
Greek Church excommunicated them since Photius's days; only the horrid
contentions between the Sons and offspring of Char^main and the Germane
Princes, gave them advantage to Lord it by Anathema's in France, Germany, and
Italy, and such nearer parts, whilst the contenders would make use of them,
and they of the contenders. And horrid ignorance had invaded the clergy, and
consequently the Laity, and subjected them in darkness to this Ruler that
makes so great use of darkness.


2. And if these men uncalled were true Popes, why might not the Turk be one,
or any man that can get the place or Title? Why were not all the 4 or 5 or 6 at
once true Popes? If not, Where was the Catholic Church this while, if a Pope
was a constitutive head or part? and what is become of your Succession? will
any possession jure vel injuria serve for a Succession? If so, Why tell you the
Protestants that they want it? If not, What pretense have you for it? I think
the Protestants can prove a far better succession.


112. Berengarius rose in these horrid days; and it is no wonder if such a
monster as Pope Benedict, and his companions condemned him, and set up the
monstrous doctrine of Transubstantiation. As Tertullian says it was an honor
to ^ Christians to be first persecuted by such a one as N^ro, so was it to the
doctrine of the Sacrament to be condemned by such a one as Benedict 9. and in
the time (as Baron. and Bin. speak) of the three-headed monstrous beast.

113. Rome was now so wise as to be conscious a little of their badness and
unfitness to choose themselves a Pope, and therefore sent to the Emperor Henry
to choose them one. He chose them Bruno a good Bishop of Tullum; who in his
way, at the Abbey of Cluny, met with Hildebrand that went from Rome thither, who
told him that the Emperor being a Layman had no power to make or choose a Pope
Though a King may not ordain a Bishop: Question whether he may remove an
ordained Bishop from one Church to another, the people only accepting him by
free consent?
but the Clergy and people; but if he would follow his advise, he should in a
better way attain his end: so Hildebrand went with him and persuaded him to put
off his purple, and to go in a common habit, and confess that he is not their
Bishop till they choose him, and that he takes not the seat as given by the
Emperor but by them; whereby he won the Romans hearts, and they readily chose
him. And he being called Leo the 9th, after so many monsters, went for a very
excellent Pope. But yet he commanded an army himself against the Normans, and
proved no good or happy Captain, his Army being wholly routed, and himself
taken Prisoner: whom the Normans in reverence released and returned safe. Pet.
Damianus and others lament his Soldiery as his great sin, but Baron. and Bin.
excuse him, and say, all the world now allows it: You see what arguments
serve at Rome: where it was but lately that the first article that a Roman
Council before Otho Mag. brought in against Pope John was that he went
sometimes in Arms: And to be formerly a Bishop was heretofore an incapacity by
the Canons: Yet Rome covers her innovations by pretending antiquity, and
calling others Novatores.

114. But how militant a defender of the Roman grandeur this Leo was, may be
seen in his Epistles in Bin. p. 1096. etc. In the first long one to the
Patriarch of Constantinople and another Greek Bishop, he reproves them for
bold damning of the Church of Rome, and tells them that they were members of
Antichrist, and forerunners of him that is King over all the Children of pride;
and says, who can tell how many Antichrists had have been already? He tells
them how many heretic Bishops they have had at Constable. and of above ninety
heresies in the East; and how by force they raged against the Io^nnites (the
Nonconformists that followed St. Chrysostom;)
what a heretic their Bishop Eutychius was, that said, the body at
resurrection will be impalpable, and more subtle than the wind and air (He
believed Paul that said it should be a spritual body (though not a Spirit.)
And how his Books were burned. He reprehendeth their title of Ecumenical
Patriarch; and says that no Roman Bishop to that day had ever accepted or used
that Title ( Remember that.
) Yet he recites the forged grant of Constantine, saying, that as far as Kings
are above Judges, so all the world must take the Pope for their Head; and that
he gave the Palace and all Rome, etc. to Silvester, and said it was unmeet that
they should be subject to any earthly. Prince that were by God made Governors
of Heaven. At large he thus pleads for the Roman Kingdom of Priests, c^^ding
them that had put down all the Latin Churches and monasteries in the East.]
(yet Baron. and Bin. tell you all the Church on earth obeyed the Pope.)

In his 4th. Epistle he laments that in Africa there was 205. Bishops at a
Council, now there were scarce five in all; and he shows that all Bishops
were of one order, but differenced as the Cities were for primacie, by the
Civil Laws or the Fathers reverence. That where the Pagans Arch-Flamins were,
there were instituted Archbishops to be over the Provinces; where a Metropolis
was, Metropolitans or Archbishops were placed; and Bishops in lesser Cities
where had been Flamins and Counts. But in Africa they were diver^^fyed only by
the times of their ordination; the Bishop of Carthage being the chief.]

In his Epistle 5. he has a good confession of faith, where among other things
he well says, [That God predestined only things good, but soreknew both good
and evil; and that Grace so preventeth and follows man, that yet man's free
will is not to be denied: that the Soul is not part of God, but created of
nothing. He anathematizeth every Heresy, and every one that receives or
venerateth any Scriptures but what are received by the Catholic Church, etc.

In the 6th. again he chides the Patriarchs of Constantinople for the title
Universal; saying that Peter himself was never called the Universal Apostle,
nor did any of his Successors take so prodigious a title. For he is no friend
to the bridegroom that would be loved in his stead, but a Bawd of Antichrist,
rindx;
etc.

His 8th. Epistle is to the Greek Emperor to flatter him, to help him with
Henry against the Normans; In which (to prove the Romans succession) he says
[The holy Church and Apostolic Seat has been too long usurped by Mercenaries
that were no Pastors, rindx;
that sought their own, and not the things of Christ.]

This Pope and Michael Patriarch of Constantinople, were so unreconcilable that
they continued mutual condemnations. Michael is condemned with his Greeks. 1.
For rebaptizing the Papists. 2. For saying that they had no true Sacrifice or
Baptism. 3. For holding Priests marriage, for rejecting the Filioque, etc. Bin.
p. 1116.

. 114. CCCXXIX. An. 1049. A Roman Council was fain upon penance to pardon
Simoniacal Bishops and Priests, because the Cry was, that else almost all the
Churches would be destitute, and the Church service omitted to the subversion
of the Christian Religion, and the desperation of all the faithful. (Where was
the holy Church of Rome now, and its Succession, if the Canons for nullifying
Simoniacal ordinations hold good?)

115. CCCXXX. The Pope resolved to go to France, and Preside in a Council,
which he did, at Rhemes: But many Nobles and Bishops told the King that it was
an usurpation and a Novelty and would enslave his Kingdom: The King forbad him,
yet the Pope came whether the King would or not; And the King went away about
his military affairs, and some Bishops with him, and others stayed.

The Archbishop of Rhemes, and others were accused of heinous Crimes: The
Bishop of Laugres was charged with [entring by Simoniacal heresies, selling
orders, bearing Arms, Murder, Adultery, Tyranny to his Clergy, and Sodomy:
Many witnesses testified all this: One Clergyman witnessed, that while he was
yet a Layman this Bishop violently took his Wife from him, and when he had
committed adultery with her, he made her a Nun.] A Presbyter witnessed that
this Bishop took him and delivered him to his followers, who tormenting him by
many torments, which is more wicked, did with sharp nails pierce his generals,
and by such violence forced him to give them ten pounds of denaries: The Bishop
hearing these accusations desired time and Council, and going to the
Archbishops of Besanzon, and Lions, opens his secrets to them and desires
them to plead his cause. But the man involved in the guilt of such villainies
(who but the day before had been the accuser of a faulty Brother, and seeing
the mote in another eye, had not seen the beam in his own, but moved for the
other man's damnation being himself deservedly to be condemned,) was not only
unable to excuse himself from the objected crimes, but also the tongue of his
advocate (the Archbishop) was by God so silenced that he was not able to speak
a word for his defense. For the Archbishop of Besanzon where he prepared
himself to plead for him and excuse his crimes, suddenly found himself disabled
in his voice by God. And when the Archbishop of Besanzon found himself so
disabled by miracles, he gave sings to the Archbishop of Lions to speak for
this his Brother in his stead; who rising up said that the accused Bishop does
confess that he sold Orders, and that he extorted the money from the said
Priest, but that he did not do the tormenting actions mentioned by him; other
things he denied, but before the next day he fled from the Council. And another
Bishop (of Nevers) confessed that his Parents bought his Place, and deposed
himself: and some other Bishops confessed Simoniacal entrance. The Pope
excommunicated many that fled from the Council. He renewed some old neglected
Canons, lindx;
as 1. That no man be promoted to Church Government without the ELECTION of the
CLERKS and the PEOPLE, etc.

CHAP. 12.
The continuation of the history of Councils and their Bishops till the Conucil
at Constantinople.
1. CCCXXXI. Under Leo 9. an. 1049, a Synod at Mentz, some accused Bishops were
questioned and other little matters done.

2. CCCXXXII. In a Council at 1050. Berengarius his Letters to Lanfrancus were
read, and he condemned (in a blind age.)

3. CCCXXXIII. An. 1050. A Synod at Vercelli condemned Johannes Scotus and
Berengarius and some that defended them.

4. CCCXXXIV. An. 1050. A Council at Coyaca contained the King Ferdinandus of
Castile, and his Queen, Bishops and Nobles (like our Parliaments, and so were
many Councils then:) It is said to be for restoring Christianity (so low was it
grown in the height of Popery and ignorance) having several orders for
reformation. rindx;
The 3d Title says, that wine, water and the host in the eucharist signify
the Trinity. The 5th. says, that Priests must so eat at the feasts of the
dead, as to do some good for their souls, etc.

5. CCCXXXV. An. 1051. A Roman Council excommunicated Gregory Bishop of
Vercelli for Adultery with a widow espowsed to his Uncle, and for perjuries:
But he was after restored to his office on promise of satisfaction: Also all
the whores of Priests were decreed to be made servants at Laterane. Pet.
Damian. et Bin. p. 1124.

6. CCCXXXVI. In another Roman Synod the Pope Canonized a Bishop Gerhard, and
decided a quarrel between two Bishops for extent of their Diocesses,

7. Vict^r the 2d. is next Pope an. 1055. Leo Hostiensis says that no man at
Rome was found worthy. Plat. says that they feared offending the Emperor:
However the Romans sent to the Emperor to choose one for them, and some say
desired this might be the man.

8. CCCXXXVII. Platina says that in a Council at Florence he deposed many
Bishops for Simony and Fornication.

9. CCCXXXVIII. In a Council at Lions, Baronius (after others) says a miracle
was done, viz. says he [The heresy of Simonie having seized on all Italy and
Burgundy, the Pope sent Hildebrand a Subdeacon to call a Council, where an
Archbishop accused of Simony bribed all his accusers the next day into
silence: rindx;
Hildebrand bid him say [Glory be to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost^] He said
the rest, but was not able to name the Holy Ghost: Whereupon he confessed his
crimes, and besides seven and twenty other Prelates of the Churches, forty five
Bishops consest themselves Simoniacks and renounced their places.] What a case
was the Church in when Popery grew ripe? Pet. Damian. mentions six Bishops
deposed by Hildebrand for diverse crimes.

10. By the way it is worthy enquiry whether Hildebrand being neither Bishop,
Priest, nor Deacon, but a Subdeacon only, was any of the Clergy or
Church-Pastors to whom Christ gave the power of the Keys (Yea, lindx;
if he had been a Deacon.) And therefore whether he had any power from Christ
to preside before Archbishops and Bishops in in Councils, and to depose and
excommunicate Bishops. If it be said that he did it by the Pope's commission,
the question recurreth, whether God ever gave Pope or Prelate power to make new
Church Officers whom he never instituted de specie, that should have the power
of the Keys, yea, and be above the Bishops of the Church? And whether Popes or
Prelates may commit preaching or Sacraments to Laymen? if not, how can they
commit the Keys of Church Government to them, or to any as little authorized by
Christ? Indeed baptizing is but using the Key of Church-entrance; And therefore
he that may so let men into the Church may baptize them (which Papists
unhappily allow the Laity.) And if per se or per alium will salve all, whether
Priests may not preach, pray, and give Sacraments by Laymen: And so Laymen at
last put down both Prelates and Priests as needless?

11. CCCXXXIX. An. 1055. They say that this great Subdeacon Hildebrand (the
grand advancer of the Roman Kingdom) did call a Council at Tours, which cited
poor Berengarius and forced him to recant (whether it be true I know not.)

12. To this Council the Emperor Henry sent his Agents to complain that
Ferdinand the great, King of Castile, refused subjection to the Emperor, and
claimed some such title to himself, and (now ignorance, superstition, and
interest having made the Clergy the Rulers of Kings and Kingdoms) the Emperor
desires that King Ferdinand may be excommunicate unless he will submit and
surcease, and all the Kingdom of Spain be interdicted (or forbidden Gods
worship.) lindx;
The Prelates perceived how they were set up by this motion, and made Kings of
Kings, and they thought the Emperor's motion reasonable, and without hearing
King Ferdinand made themselves judges and sent him word that he must submit and
obey or be excommunicated and bear the interdict. The King took time to answer,
and calling his own Bishops together found them of the same mind and spirit,
and so was forced to promise submission. This Baronius, an. 1055. writes ex Io.
Mariano; and Binnius p. 1126.

13. CCCXL. They say that the Emperor dying, left his Son Henry but five years
old, and knew no better way to secure his succession than to desire Pope Victor
to take the care of it: who therefore called a Council at Colen to quiet
Baldwin and Godfrey Earls of Flanders that else would have resisted him. Thus
Bishops in Councils now were as Parliaments to the Kingdoms of deluded men.

14. CCCXLI. At Toulouse, an. 1056. A Council of 18 Bishops attempted
reformation, forbidding (alas! how often) Bishops to sell orders, and other acts
of Simony, and Priests using their wives, and the Adultery, Incest and perjury
of Bishops and Priests; bidding them that are such, repent, and forbidding
communion with men called heretics.

15. CCCXLII. Though Adultery, Incest, Perjury and Simony of Bishops was so
hardly restrained, it seems they would pay for it by superstition; rindx;
for a Council at Compostella decreed (says Baron. ad an. 1056.) that 1. All
Bishops and Priests should say Mass every day. 2. That at fasts and Litanies
(which were perambulations in penitence) they should be clothed in sackcloth.

16. Stephen the 9th. alias 10th. is next made Pope: In his time says Platina
the Church of Milan was reconciled to Rome, that had withdrawn itself from it
two hundred years. Was all the world then subject to the Pope when his Italian
neighbors were not?

17. This Pope lived after his entrance but 6 or 7 months, and they say made
them promise him to choose none in his place till Hildebrand came home to
counsel them: (A great Subdeacon that Rome must be ruled by.) But in the mean
time the new Emperor being but five or six years old, the great men of Italy
turned to the old game and brought in one by strength (Mincius) whom they
called Benedict the 10th. alias 9th. a Bishop; he reigned 9 months, 20 days.
But when Hildebrand came home he got him cast out. This was the twenty first
schism in the Papacy.

18. Hildebrand's crafty counsel was to send to the Emperor to consent to
Gerard Bishop of Florence whom they chose in Italy and called Nicholas the 2d.
An. 1059.
Lest Benedict should get the Emperor on his side; and so Nicholas made
Benedict renounce and banished him: But how shall we be sure which was the true
Pope?

19. This Pope's first epistle is to the Archbishop of Rhemes to advise him to
admonish the King of France for resisting the Pope.

20. CCCXLIII. The Pope's Council at Sutrium deposed Benedict.

21. CCCXLIV. An. 1059. A Council of 113 Bishops at Rome, they say, made
Berengarius recant, but not repent; but as soon as he came home he wrote
against them and their Doctrine.

22. In this Council, says Platina, the Pope made a decree very profitable to
the Church of Rome. Bin. says these were the words (translated) [p. 1666.
First, God being the Inspector it is decreed that the election of the Roman
Bishop be in the power of the Cardinal Bishops: so that if any one be inthroned
in the Apostolic seat, without the foregoing concordant and Canonical election
of them, and after the consent of the following religious Orders, Clerks and
Laity, But others say, the Emperor's consent also was put in.
he be not accounted Apostolical but Apostatical.]

Here it is much to be noted, 1. That this is a new foundation of the Papacy
(by Hildebrand's Council) without which it was falling to utter confusion. How
then does the Roman sect cry down Innovation and boast of Antiquity? 2. Either
the Bishop of Rome is to be chosen as the Bishop of that particular Church, and
then the members of that particular Church should choose him, lindx;
or else as the Bishop of the universal Church (pretendedly) and then the
universal Church should choose him. But the Cardinal Bishops of other
particular Churches are neither the particular Roman Church, nor the universal,
nor their delegates: and so have no just pretense of power.

3. Either this decree was new, or old and in force before: If new, their
Church foundation is new and mutable, as is said: If old, all the Popes that
were otherwise chosen were no Popes.

4. And if it be but necessary for the future, all that after were otherwise
chosen were no Popes.

5. If several ways and parties or powers making Popes may all make them true
Popes, then who knows which and how many of those there are and which is the
true Pope if ten were made at once ten several ways?

6. This confesses that Christ has appointed no way for choosing Popes, nor
given any sort of men power to choose them: else what need Pope Nicholas begin
it now anew? And if so, it seems that Christ never instituted the Papacy: For
can we suppose him so Laxe a Legislator, as to say, a Pope shall be made, and
never tell us who shall have power to do it. Then England may choose one, and
France another, and Spain another, etc. the Bishops one, the Priests another,
the Prince another, and the Citizens another. But if Christ have settled a
Pope-making power in any, it is either the same as Pope Nicholas did, in
Cardinal Bishops, or not* If not, the Pope changes Christ's institution: If
yea, then all those were no Popes that were otherwise chosen, and so where is
the Roman Church and its succession.

7. What power has Pope Nicholas to bind his successors? Have not they as much
power as he? and so to undo it all again? If the King should decree that his
Kingdom hereafter shall not be hereditary but elective, and that the Bishops
should be the choosers of the King, were this obligatory against the right of
his heirs?

8. By this decree, if the Laity and Clerks consent not after, he is still no
Pope.

23. In this same Council (says Bin. ibid.) it was decreed [that no one hear
the Mass of a Presbyter, whom he knows undoubtedly to have a Concubine, lindx;
or Subintroduced Woman.] Quaer. Whether they that make him a Schismatic that
goes from a scandalous, wicked, malignant, or utterly insufficient Priest, and
dare not commit the care of his soul to such a one, be not looser than Pope
Nicholas and this Roman Council was?

24. A Council at Malphia and another at Paris for Crowning King Philip, and
one at Iacca in Spain, of small moment.

25. An. 1061. Was the 22d. Schism or two Popes of Rome, for five years
continuance. The Cardinal Bishops, for fear of the Emperor, chose one that was
great with him, Anselm Bishop of Luca: but the Italian Princes persuaded the
Emperor that it was a wrong to them and him, and chose Cadolus Palavicinus
Bishop of Parma, called Honorius the 2d. rindx;
The Sword was to determinate who was the true Pope: Cadolus came with an Army
to Rome; the Romans, came out against him, and in the Fields, called Nero's; a
great battle (says Platina) was fought, in which many of both sides f^ll, but
Cadolus was driven away. He shortly returned with a great Army being called by
a part of the Romans, that were men of pleasure, and by force seized on the
Suburbs and St. Peter's Church: But the Soldiers of Gotifred put his Soldiers
to flight; and he himself narrowly escaped, the Prefect of Rome's Son with him
breaking through the Romans got possession of the Tower, where they besieged
him till they forced him to yield, and buy his liberty of the besiegers for 300
pound of Silver. Then the Bishop of Colen having the education of the young
Emperor* came to Rome to rebuke Alexander as an Usurper, but by Hildebrand was
so overcome (that the choice belonged not to the Emperor) that he called a
Council which confirmed Alexander and deposed Honorius. The Emperor consented
on condition that Cadolus be pardoned, and Gibert (his promoter, Chancellor of
Parma) made Archbishop of Ravenna, which the Pope consented to and did. Thus
then were Popes and Bishops made.

Q. How shall we be sure, for Cadolus's five years, who was the Pope?

26. A woman called Mathildis a Countess was then the great Patroness of the
Papacy, who furnished military Hildebrand (that did all) with Soldiers to
conquer several Great Men that opposed them, and to set up Alexander and defend
him.

27. This Pope Alexander is said by Bin. and Baron to judge King Harold, Bin.
p. 1132.
of England, an Usurper, to dispose of the Crown to William of Normandy, rindx;
and declare him lawful Successor, and send him a Banner that he might fight
for it and possess it. Thus did this Prelate give Crowns and Kingdoms, as the
supreme judge (made by himself.)

He after required Rent (Peter Pence) from England of William.

28. He made some constitutions for his old Church at Milan. Three thing are
the sum of them and many other Councils. 1. Against Simonie. 2. Against the
Clergies fornication (no Canons cured them of either of these.) 3. That no
Layman judge any Clerk for his crimes: only if Priests live in fornication he
allows Laymen to tell the Archbishops, and if they will do nothing, then to
withhold their duties and benefits till they amend. (But this Binnius notes
was but a temporary extraordinary concession, for the hatred that this Pope had
to fornicating Clergymen.) But if they did but now and then lie with a woman
by chance, and did not obstinately still keep them, they must not so trouble
them.

29. CCCXLV. The foresaid Cadolus or Honorius 2d. was settled Pope by a Council
at Basil, An. 1061. where, say some, many Simoniacal, incontinent, wicked
Bishops decreed that no Pope should be made but out of Italy (which they called
Paradise, that is, Lombardy.)

30. CCCXLVI. A Council at Osborium, An. 1062. contrarily condemned him and set
up Alexander. Though before Platina says that Cisalpini omnes all on the
Romans side of the Alps obeyed Honorius except Mathildis a good woman.

31. Here Binnius thought a Dialogue of Pet. Damian worthy to be inserted, to
prove that Princes may not make Bishops of Rome. In which he would prove that
the Decrees that gave the Emperor such power may be changed, because God does
not always perform his own word for want of man's duty;
And he says, that some men have been sinners and perished for obeying Gods
own Law, and some rewarded for breaking it; which he proves by a profane
quibble. 1. In Judas; as if Christ's words what thou do do quickly, had been a
command to do the thing. 2. In the Rechabites that drank not Wine when Jeremy
bade them; As if Gods Command to Jeremy to try them, had been his Command to
them to do it.

A Council was at Arragon in Spain for we know not what.

32. CCCXLVII. An. 1063. Peter Bishop of Florence being accused of Heresy and
Simony,
and deposed, a Council at Rome renewed Pope Nicolas 2d's. Canons, not to hear
Mass of a Priest that lives with a Concubine or introduced woman: To
excommunicate Simoniacks, etc.

33. CCCXLVII. In a Council at Mantua (to quiet some that yet took Cadolus's
part and accused Pope Alexander of Simony) Alexander is owned, and Cadolus, not
appearing, cast out; who after tried it out (as is aforesaid) by an Army.

34. CCCXLIX. In a Council at Barcelon the Spaniards abrogated their old
Gothish Laws and made new ones, but would not change the Gothish Church rites:
Here also Alexander was owned.

35. An. 1065. A Council was at Rome against incest.

36. Another for the same, the former not prevailing.

37. In a Synod at Winchester, William the Conqueror puts down and imprisons
Bishops and sets up others, for his own interest.

38. CCCL. A Council at Mentz was to have separated the young Emperor and his
Queen, but the Popes Legate hindered it.

39. CCCLI. In a Council at Mentz the Bishop of Constance is cast out for
Simony and many crimes; the Emperor being for him.

40. An. 1072. They say an English Council subjected York to Canterbury and
owned Wolstan Bishop of Worcester accused for being unlearned as he was.

41. CCCLII. An. 1073. In a Council at Ersord the Emperor got the Bishops to
fulfill his will about some Tithes, threatening them that appealed to Rome.

42. Now comes in the Foundation of the new Church of Rome, Hildebrand called
Gregory 7th. An. 1073. a man of Great wit, and for ought I find in the most
probable History not guilty of the gross immoralities, or sensuality of many of
his predecessors; but it is like blinded with the opinion which the Papists
Fifth-monarchy men have received (and Camp^nelia de regno Dei opened and
pleaded for) viz. that Christ's Kingdom on earth consists in the Saints
judging the world, that is, the Pope and Prelates ruling the Kings and Kingdoms
of the earth, he did with greatest animosity set himself to execute his
opinions. And withal, the factions of Rome and tyranny of their petty Princes
and Whores and debauched Citizens, having long made the Papacy the scorn of the
world and the lamentation of all sober Christians, constrained the better part
to beg help from the Emperors against debauched monstrous Popes and their
upholders: And by this means sometimes the choice fell into the Emperors hands,
and sometimes when they were far off, the City-prevailing-part rebelled, and
chose without them, or pulled down them that the Emperors set up: And then the
Emperors came and pulled down the Anti-Popes, and chastised the City faction;
and thus between the Italian and the German powers the City was a field of war,
and the richer by bribes, and the stronger by the sword, how monstrous
villainies soever were set up. It was no wonder then if Hildebrand first by Pope
Nicholas 2. and Alexander and then by himself did resolve to run a desperate
hazard, when he had two such great works at once to do, as first to recover the
debauched and shattered shamed Papacy from this confusion, and then to subdue
all Kings and Kingdoms within their reach to such a Priest-King as was then
under so great disgrace. And tibi dabo claves must do all this.

43. Hildebrand however had the wit to settle himself at first by seeking the
Emperor's consent: And being settled he got Agnes the Emperor's mother and
Guardian mostly on his side. He then began to claim presentations and
investitures and to take the power over the Bishops out of the Emperor's hands,
and to threaten him as Simoniacal, and for communicating with the
excommunicate. The Emperor after some treaty submitted, and was reconciled to
the Pope; but the Pope said he did not amend. The Pope calls a Council at Rome,
where he excommunicated Simoniacks, openly saying that he would excommunicate
the Emperor unless he amended. Guibert Archbishop of Ravenna being there
accuses the Pope for such threats against the Emperor, and got Cincius the
Prefect's Son to apprehend him and imprison him. The People rise up in arms and
deliver the Pope, and pull down Cincius's house to the ground, and cutting off
their noses, banish his family out of the City. Cincius got to the Emperor.
Guibert. Archbishop of Ravenna, Theobald Archbishop of Milan,
and most of all the other Bishops on that side the Alps conspire against the
Pope. (And yet they say that all the world were his subjects.) He calls another
Synod of his own Bishops (for Synods were still the great executioners) where
Gibert and Hugo (one of his Cardinals that was against him) are deposed and
cursed from Christ. This Emperor also calls a Council at Worms, where by the
means of Sigifred Archbishop of Mentz, it is decreed that no man in any thing
obey the Pope of Rome.
Roland a Clerk is sent to Rome to command the Pope to meddle with the
government no more, and the Cardinals are commanded to forsake Gregory and seek
for another Pope. Now the War began between the Sword and the Keys. Gregory by
sentence deposed the Archbishop of Mentz, and the other Clergy that were for
the Emperor; and he Anathematized the Emperor himself,
having first deprived him of all Regal Power and administration (as far as his
decree would do it.) The form of his curse and deposition Platina recites,
where are these words [ I cast him down from his Imperial and Regal
Administration; And I absolve all Christians Subject to the Empire, from that
Oath, by which they have used to swear Fidelity to true Kings:
For it is meet that he be deprived of dignity, who endeavors to diminish
the Majesty of the Church.] (Mark O ye Kings and be wise.)

Some told the Pope that the Emperor should not be so hastily Anathematized: To
whom he answered, Did Christ except Kings when he said to Peter [Feed my Sheep?
when he gave him the Power of binding and looseing, he excepted none from his
power.]

The Emperor wrote Letters to many Christian Princes and States to acquaint
them with the Papal Injuries; and the Pope wrote his accusations of the Emperor
and his own Justification. The Empire was presently all in Division. One part
was for the Emperor, and another for the Pope: Most of the Bishops of Germany
obeyed the Emperor, and some were against him, as excommunicate. Some Councils
were for him, and some against him. And, as Abbas Vrspurgensis said, they did
so often swear and forswear according as Power and Interest moved, one time for
the Emperor, and another against him, that Perjury was become a common thing
both with the Bishops and the Laity. He that will see the many treatises that
Learned men then wrote for the power of Princes against the Papal tyranny and
rebellion may find them in the Voluminous Collections of Michael Goldastus de
Monarchia.

The party that obeyed the Pope chose another to be Emperor, Rodulph Duke of
Suevia: The Emperor requires the Pope to Excommunicate Rodulph: He refuses:
The Emperor calls a Council of Bishops at Brixia: They depose the Pope, and
make Gibert of Ravenna Pope called Clement the 3d. who, says Onuphrius, sat,
21 years, so long had they two Popes, at this 23d. Schism or doubling.

But did the Emperor nothing to prevent all this? Yes, at the motion of the
German Princes to avoid contention, he made an Oath to ask the Pope
forgiveness, if the Pope would come into Germany. The Pope on his way fearing
that the Emperor coming toward him with an Army would apprehend him, turned
back again, and betook him to a strong City of his Patroness one Mathildis a
woman: The Emperor with his Army traveled to him, and came to the Gates of the
City; and in a great and sharp winter frost,
putting off his Royal Ornaments, came barefoot to confess his fault and ask
forgiveness of the Pope. The Pope would not suffer him to come in; He patiently
stayed three days in the Suburbs continually begging pardon, and the Citizens
moved with Compassion; At last the woman Mathildis, and Adelai a Savoy Earl;
and the Abbot of Cluny became petitioners for him, and prevailed for mercy with
the Pope, and he was absolved and reconciled to the Church, having sworn a
peace and promised Obedience.]

I give you the words of Platina all along. And now whether Hildebrand or Henry
was the better man in common morals, I that knew them not, must refer you to
the Historians of that age, of whom some extol the Pope and depreciate the
Emperor, and others honor the Emperor, and deeply accuse the Pope; But if an
Emperor that traveled so far in^o another Country, and put off his ornaments;
and with his Army waited three days patiently in the Suburbs of a woman's City
barefoot in a great frost, begging mercy and pardon of a Priest before he could
be let in, and after this swear obedience to him, I say, If this Prince did not
yet sufficiently submit, but deserve to be turned out of his Empire, though at
the cost of blood and desolation to the innocent Countries,
it will be hard to know when the Obedience and Submission of Kings is enough
to satisfy an ambitious Prelate.

But the Popes Historians say that the Emperor brake his Covenant. It is a hard
thing for a King that promises Subjection and Obedience to a Pope to be sure
to keep his word, unless he foreknew what would be commanded him: when he has
taken away his Power and Kingdom by parts, he may command his life. It Is a
great doubt to me, when God has made Princes the Rulers of Prelates, and
Procurators of his Church; whether it be not a sin against God and their
undertaken office, for these Princes to cast off this trust and work, because a
Pope or Prelate claims it. The Pope still charged him with sacrilege. But I
doubt he expounded his meaning when he deposed him for diminishing the Majesty
of the Church, that is, of the Pope and Prelates.

To proceed in the History: In the 3d. or 4th. battle it was that Rodulph was
slain; and It was the Popes denial to disown or excommunicate Rodulph after so
low a submission of the Emperor, that enraged Henry, and made him think of
another remedy than to be a Prelates slave. The Pope called all the Bishops
that cleaved to the Emperor seditious: He condemns Roland the German Legate
and sends into Germany Legates of his own with a Mandamus, We command that no
King, Archbishop, Bishop,
Duke, Earl, Marquess, or Knight dare resist our Legates, etc. And the Penalty
to the disobedient is terrible, viz. [We accurse him from Christ,
and take from him his part of Victory by Arms.] Sure if Popes had the power of
Victory, they need not so often have fled to Castles, nor to have rid on an Ass
with the face backward, nor to have suffered what many of them have done. All
this he does, [Interposita Dei et B. Petri authoritate, qua nulla potest esse
major.] Did Peter ever think that his name would have thus subdued Emperors and
Kings?

The Pope again in a prayer to God and St. Peter recites the 2d. Psalm, and
tells them how the Emperor would cast off his yoke, and again curses him
from Christ, and deposes him from all his Government, and absolveth all his
Subjects from the Oath of Obedience;
saying, that, he that may bind and loose in Heaven has power to take away on
Earth, both Empires, Kingdoms and Principalities, and whatever men have to give
or take away: If we Judge the ruling Angels, how much more their Servants?
Therefore (says he to the Bishops) Let Kings and all secular Princes
understand by the example of this man, how great your power is in Heaven, and
how much God esteems you, and let them fear hereafter to break the commands
of the Church.] Pass this sentence presently on Henry, that all may understand
that this Son of iniquity fell not from his Kingdom by Chance, but by your
endeavor.] Plat. p. 180.

Rodulph being killed, the Rebels set up the Emperors Son, a Lad, against his
own Father: But at that present he was quieted, and the Emperor went with an
Army into Italy, and first Conquered the Army of Mathildis the Popes Patroness,
and brought his own Pope Clement the 3d. to the Chair, and was crowned by him:
He besieged Gregory in the Castle: Guiscard, a Norman comes with an Army to
fight for the Pope: The Citizens resist him, (the Emperor being drawn out to
Sens.) Guiscard burnt and destroyed that part of the City which is between the
Laterane and the Capitol, and took the Capitol and destroyed it. He gave the
prey of the City to his Soldiers, and delivered Gregory and carried him away
to C^ssinum and Salernum, where he dyed, having reigned 12 years. Bin. says,
that Henry besieged Rome three years before he took it. When Robert Guiscard
had delivered the Pope, he deposed (quantum in se) all the new Cardinals made
by Clement 3. and cursed the Emperor again. Gregory himself says that Italian,
French, and German Bishops were for the Emperor, and they were also for Clement
3. How shall we know then which was the true Pope?

44. No less than ten Books of Hildebrand's Epistles are added by Binnius to
his life. Most of them for the Papal Interest. In lib. 2. Ep. 5. He talks of
Philip King of France as he did of the Emperor, saying he was no King but a
Tyrant, and declaring that he was resolved to take his Kingdom from him if he
did not amend his wicked life.
One of his crimes was resisting the Pope that would set Bishops in his Kingdom
without his consent.

Epist. 13. He tells Solomon King of Hungary, that his Kingdom is the propriety
of the Church of Rome, devoted to it by King Stephen; and reproves him for
diminishing the Roman Kingdom, by accepting Hungary as from the Germans; and
exhorts him to repent and amend.

Epist. 18. He again threatens the King of France to cut off from the Church,
both him and all that give him any Regal Honor or Obedience (O heinous crime!
to keep the 5th. Commandment and Romans 13. 1, 2, 3.) And that this
excommunication shall be often confirmed upon St. Peter's Altar.]

Epist. 28. He suspends (quantum in se) the Archbishop of Breme as an Enemy to
the Church of Rome and for hindering his Legates from gathering a Council, and
refusing to come to Rome to answer it.

Epist. 32. He calls the King of France a ravening Wolf, and unjust Tyrant.

Many great persons he forced to separate after Marriage, because they were in
the fourth degree of Consanguinity.

Epist. 51. He tells the King of Denmark, that not far from Rome there was a
Province possessed by vile and sluggish Heretics, and desires him to send his
Son with an Army to conquer them. What Province he means, I am not certain;
unless it was the Waldenses.

44. Reader,
we are greatly beholden to Binnius who has recorded, as Oracles, 27 sentences
called THE POPES DICTATES, by which you may partly know what Popery is.

1. That the Roman Church was founded only by our Lord. 2. That only the Bishop
of Rome is rightly called Universal. 3. That only the Pope can depose Bishops
and reconcile them. 4. That his Legates must preside in Councils, though they
be of inferior degree, before all Bishops; and may pass on them the sentence of
deposition. 5. That the Pope may depose those that are absent. 6. That with
those that are excommunicated by him, among other things, we may not dwell in
the same house. 7. That to him only it is lawful to make new Laws for the
necessity of the time; and to congregate new people; of Canonical to make an
Abbaty; and contrarily to divide a rich Bishopric, and unite poor ones. 8.
That only he may use Imperial Ensigns or Escucheons. 9. That all Princes must
kiss the feet of the Pope only. 10. That only his name may be recited in the
Churches. 11. That it is the one only name in the World. 12. That it is lawful
for him to depose Emperors. 13. That it is lawful for him in case of necessity
to remove Bishops from seat to seat. 14. That he may ordain a Clerk from any
Church whither he will. 15. That one ordained by him may govern another Church;
and must not take a superior degree from another Bishop. 16. That no Synod
without his command may be called Universal. 17. That no Chapter, nor no Book
may be accounted Canonical without his authority. 18. That his sentence may be
retracted by none: and he alone may retract all men's. 19. That he ought to be
judged of no man. 20. That no man must dare to condemn any one that appealeth
to the Apostolic Seat. 21. That the Greater causes of all Churches must be
referred to him. 22. That the Roman Church never erred, nor, as the Scripture
witnesses, will ever* err. 23. That the Bishop of Rome, if he be Canonically
ordained, is undoubtedly made Holy by the merits of St. Peter, as St. Ennodius
Bishop of Papia witnesses, and many holy Fathers confess, as is contained in
the Decrees of Pope Symmachus. 24. That it is lawful for subjects to accuse by
his Command and license. 25. That he may depose and reconcile Bishops without
Synodal meetings. 26. That he is not to be accounted a Catholic who agrees
not with the Roman Church. 27. That he may absolve the Subjects of unjust men
from fidelity.
These are put by Bin. among Gregory's Epistles, p. 1196. as the Popes
Dictates. If I had not translated them from such an unquestioned Author that
follows Baronius, some would have thought they had been but the forgeries of
some Protestant accuser, and that the Popes have no such tenants. What one is
here that is not false? and how many of them are horridly arrogant? The reading
of them would tempt a doubting man to think that the Pope is the Eldest Son of
the Prince of Pride, exalting himself above all that is called God, and
arrogating Christ's prerogatives, and therefore Antichrist. If any would know
what Popery is; A great part of the description is here given you by their
greatest Pope himself, and by their chief Historians.

45. Much of his 4th Book of Epistles is to require Princes, Prelates, and
People to forsake the Emperor and choose another, and to excommunicate all that
will communicate with him: yet in his 11th. Epist. he recites himself, how
lamentably with tears, three days in the frost barefoot, he begged for pardon,
and how the compassionate People thought the Pope hard-hearted and tyrannical
for not yielding; and that at last two Ladies and an Abbot overcame him to
absolve him.

46. Lib. 4. Epist. 28. He tells the Spaniards also that their Kingdom was St.
Peter's property: But why did he trouble himself to lay claim to particular
Kingdoms? Would not his claim to all the world serve turn for the particulars?

Lib. 5. Epist. 4. He clameth the Isle of Corsica.

47. That it may appear that the presumptuous usurpations of the Pope were not
consented to by many Bishops, he often complains that many Bishops of France,
Italy, and Germany were against him: He abundantly chideth and threatens
several particular Bishops for resisting and disobeying him. Lib. 6. Epist. 4.
he writes thus to the Bishop of Liege. [Having read the Letters of your
Brotherhood, we did not a little wonder that you wrote that which became you
not, in reverence of the Apostolic seat: but that you did with biting
invective reprehend me, for absolving your Parishioner, that lately came to us;
as if the Apostolic seat had not authority to bind and absolve whomsoever we
will and wheresoever we will: Know therefore that we are greatly moved against
your temerity.]

Indeed one of the tricks of the Papal ambition was to be the Asylum of all
wicked fugitives that fled from Church justice in all Countries near them; to
show favor to all condemned sinners that would but fly to Rome, and appeal to
them from the Justice of their Pastors, yea, and of their Princes too, which
made their friends to be rather many than good.

48. And the Church of Rome was not yet rich enough with all the Principalities
it had got: They still kept on the trade of enriching the Pope to save their
souls. Binnius. p. 1233. honors us with a record among Gregory 7th.
Epistles, viz. [In the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in the 6th. year
of the Pontificate of Gregory 7th. I Marro Son of Gisler dwelling in the
Dukedom of Spoletane, for the Redemption of my own and my Parents souls do
give, deliver and offer to St. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and on his Altar,
all that belongs to me of the Castle called Moricicla, etc.] Did Christ think
how easily Rich men might be saved (by giving to the Pope in the name of St.
Peter) when he said, It was harder for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, than for a Camel to go through a Needle's Eye?

49. Lib. 7. Epist. 3. He says [They that are Latins do all of them,
except a very few, praise the cause of Henry, and defend it, and charge me
with too much obstinacy and impiety against him.] And if the Latins did so,
what did the Germans, French, etc? You see here that it was far from all the
world that was subject to the Pope, and took his part in his usurpations.

Epist. 4. He commands a General no more to fight against the King of
Dalmatia, as belonging to St. Peter].

50. Yet this Pope does teach them the truth against deceitful penance or
repentance, Lib. 7. Epist. 10. viz. [We say that it is a fruitless penance,
when men remain in the same fault, or in the like, or in a worse or in one
little less:
He therefore that will worthily repent, must have recourse to the Original of
his Faith, and be solicitous watchfully to keep that which in his Baptism he
promised, viz. to renounce the Devil and his pomps and to believe in God, that
is, thinking rightly of him, to obey his Commands.

51. Epist. 11. He tells the Duke of Bohemia that it is customarily and
doubtfully that he saluteth him with [Apostolical Benediction.] Because he
communicated with the excommunicate: And he denies his request of using or
translating the Divine Service or Offices into the Sclavonian tongue;
because there were many mysteries in it. Thus come up the Prohibition to the
peoplee, to pray understandingly.

Epist. 14. He absolveth the Bishop of Liege from an Oath because, he took it
by force: And commands him to rise up against the imposer with all his power,
he being St. Peter's enemy.

Epist. 21. He tells the King of Denmark of an ill custom among them, that
whatever ill weather or calamity befell them, they imputed all to the ill lives
of Priests.


Epist. 23. He tells our King William the Conqueror that seeing he was on his
side, and is charged by some with all his bloodshed, that now he must be very
obedient to him as his Pastor, and Peter's Successor.

And Epist. 25. He tells them that the Papal or Apostolic power is greater
than the Kingly and must rule it, as the Sun is greater than the Moon.

Lib. 8. Epist. 1. He laments the Corruption of the Church in Armenia: [1.
Because they mixed not Water with Wine in the Sacrament, when all men know that
Blood and Water came from the side of Christ.
2. Because they made not their Chrysm of Balsom, but of Butter. 3. Because
they honored the memory of Dioscorus.] O what Heresies!

Page 1254. in Bin. There is an Oath that Robert Duke of Apulia, Calabria and
Sicily to be true to the Pope, and defend him as holding all these from him;
and there is the Popes grant of them to him, laying claim also to his other
dominions; the denial of which he patiently bears at the present.

52. But lest you think that at least the Kingdom of Spain was fast, all this
while to the Church of Rome, Lib. 8. Epist. 2. He writes thus himself. [By the
Letters of my Legate Richard Abbot of Marseilles you may know how great impiety
is gone out of your Monastery (of Cluny) by the presumption of Robert a Monk,
who imitating Simon Magus, fears not to rise up against the Authority of St.
Peter, with all the craft of his malignity,
and to reduce by his suggestion into their old error an hundred thousand men,
who by our diligence began to return to the right way:] But he hopes that the
Abbot thinks as he, for the honor of the Roman Church. He charge the Abbot
to cast out this man that had so endangred Spain, adding [And by your Letters
diligently acquaint the King who is deceived by his fraud, that he has greatly
provoked St. Peter's wrath and indignation against him, and his grievous
Revenge against him and his Kingdom unless he repent, because he undecently
handled a Legate of the Roman Church, and believed falsehood rather than truth.
Of which that he may worthily make satisfaction to God and St. Peter, as he
has disgraced our Legate, so let him by due humility and condign Reverence,
make himself commendable and devout. For we think meet to signify to him by
you, that we will excommunicate him if he correct not his fault,
and will solicit all the faithful in the parts of Spain to his confusion: And
if they be not obedient to my command,
I will not think much to travel into Spain my self, and there to endeavor
dura et aspera, Things hard and sharp against him as an enemy of the Christian
Religion.] O brave Pope! had not these men a notable Knack or hap that could
sit and talk down Emperors, and Kings, and subdue and dispose of Kingdoms, by
sitting at home and talking big, and telling them that St. Peter was angry with
them?

And who was this King but the great Al^onsus, to whom he writes himself,
Epist. 3. to put away his evil counselors, and hearken in all things to the
Popes Legate, Richard?

53. Epist. 6. l. 8. He commands Soldiers to help Michael the Emperor of
Constant against the Usurper, to make himself judge, and get an interest again
in the Empire: But in vain.

54. Epist. 7. He declares that diverse Princes having sworn and promised him
help, he resolved to come with an Army to recover Ravenna to the Church.

Epist. 8. He rejoices that they had newly found St. Matthew's body, and bids
them now take him joyfully for their patron. These are the grounds of Popish
superstition: The body of St. Matthew that preached to the Abassines in another
part of the world,
is found at Salerno in Italy, a thousand years after he is dead. O that one
knew how to be sure that it was his body, and how it came thither! Diverse such
findings they glory in.

55. Epist. 10. He writes to Orzoceus Prince of Calaris or Sardinia, to
require him as a note of his obedience to St. Peter and concord with the Church
of Rome, whose use it is, to let his Archbishop shave his Beard,
and to command all the Clergy of his dominion to shave their Beards; and if
they obey not, to force them to it, or exclude them. And to be sure of success
he lets him know, (how truly I know not) that many Princes importuned him to
give them leave to invade his Country, but (this righteous ruling Pope) denied
leave to them all, till he had tried whether he would obey him, which if he
would do, he would not only deny them leave to invade him, but also protect
him. Reader, think here. 1. Whether Princes held not their kingdoms loosely
when they where to lose them if they obeyed not the Pope in so small a thing as
the shaving of a Priests Beard. 2. Whether it were not a hard thing for the
Catholic Church then to have concord, when so small a difference as the
shaving or not shaving of Beards were put into their terms of Union and Peace?
Who were the Schismatics then? was it not the makers and imposers of such
laws and terms? 3. Is it not a high power that is claimmed by Popes, when no
Priest in all the Christian world may have so much as his Beard in his own
power, in which nature has given him a propriety? How much more might the Pope
then command all men's purses? 4. May way we not see here on what weighty
reasons, these men condemn God's word of insufficiency, and plead for
traditions, and a necessity of their additional Laws? When Scripture has left
out the shaving of men's Beards, and we had never had such a Law, if such power
as the Papal had not made it? O what discord and disorder would there be in the
Church if we had not so necessary a government! and what confusion would
toleration introduce, if men's Beards were left at liberty! But if Paul called
the heathen Philosophy Vain and [Science falsely so named.] 1 Timothy 6. 20. as
befooling the world with pedantick trifling, and calling them off from their
great concerns, may we not say then that this is vain Government and Order
falsely so named, which thus calls the Church from its primitive purity,
simplicity and unity, when Christians were known by loving one another, to
these childish games, that the Prelates and Priests of the Catholic Church
must be known by their being without Beards? One would suspect this had its
original from Pope Ioane, if there were indeed such a person; and that it is a
Symbol of the Churches sex, as it is called Our Mother; or at least that
Marozia or Theodora instituted it. 5. And do you know which were the more
inexcusable, for silencing and persecuting the preachers of the Gospel? The
Jews that did it because they thought it took down Gods Law, and would bring
the Roman Power on them; Or the Roman heathens that thought the Gospel
destroyed the worship of their forefathers Gods; or the Roman Papists, that
silenced and persecuted men for wearing Beards? 1 These. 2. 16.

56. Epist. 11. When some French Preachers had revived Religion in Sweden; the
Pope, desirous to reap where they had sowed, sends to the King of Sweden, to
tell him his joy; and that what the French taught them they recieved from Rome,
and to desire him to send one of his Bishops to Rome, to acquaint him with
their customs, and to receive his Laws and Mandates. You see by what means Rome
was raised.

Epist. 15. A Bishop gave up his Bishopric: The Pope chides him and commands
him to a Monastery; Rather than do so, he returns to his seat again: The Pope
charge him with the Idololatriae scelus the Crime of Idolatry, for not
obeying him; and writes to them not to recieve him or be ruled by him, as ever
they loved the Grace of God and St. Peter.

The like he does, Epist. 16. by the disobedient Bishop of Narbon, and Epist.
17. by the disobedient Arch Bishop of Rhemes, and Epist. 18. 19, 20. of the
same; and all this in St. Peter's name. Yea Epist. 20. he requires the King of
France (Philip) to join against the Archbishop of Rhemes as excommunicate, as
ever he would have St. Peter's Grace, because his Kingdom and his Soul were in
St. Peter's power. And it is no wonder that they that believe that the Pope is
St. Peter's Vicar and Secretary, and that their souls are in his power, will
give him all their Lands or Kingdoms to save their souls.

57. When the Pope sentenced the Emperor Henry to be excommunicate and deposed,
and was charged to have done this without authority, he wrote his 21 Epist. l.
8. to the Bishop of Metz to prove that he had power to do it; and to absolve
his Subjects from their Oaths of fidelity; saying, that the Scriptures were
full of certain documents to prove it. And his certain documents are Tibi dabo
Claves, etc. and Feed my Sheep; And Kings are not excepted. They are St. Peter'
s Sheep. Bin. p. 1262. he says, that the Head of Priests is at the right hand
of God; but who knows not that Kings and Dukes had their beginning from them
that knew not God, and affected by blind lust and intolerable presumption to
domineer over others, the Devil the Prince of the world acting them, in Pride,
Rapines, Perfidiousness, Murders and all wickedness? who while they would have
the Priests of the LORD to stoop to their footsteps, are rightlyest compared to
him who is head of all the Sons of pride, who said even to Christ, All this
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Who doubts but that
the Priests of Christ are the Fathers and Masters of Kings and Princes, and of
all the faithful? And is it not notorious miserable madness for a Scholar to
endeavor to subjugate his Master, and a Son his Father, and by wrongful
obligations to subject him to his power, by whom he believes that he may be
bound or loosed both in Earth and Heaven? Did not Pope Innocent excommunicate
Arcadius the Emperor? and Pope Zachary depose from his Kingdom the King of
France, not so much for his iniquities, as because he was not meet for so great
power; placed Pepin in his stead, and absolved all the French from the Oath of
fidelity? Ambrose shows that Gold is not so much more precious than Lead, as
the Priestly Dignity is higher than the Kingly Power. Page 1263. Yea even the
exorcists have power over Devils: How much more over those that are Subject to
the Devils, and are his members? And if the exorcist excel so much, how much
more the Priests? And every King when he comes to his end, does humbly and
pitifully beg the Priests help, that he may escape the prison of Hell, and
Darkness, and at the judgment of God be found absolved. But is there either
Priest or Layman that when he is dying begs help of the King for the saving of
his soul? What King or Emperor can by his Office, take a soul by baptism from
the power of the Devil, and number him with the Sons of God, and fortify him
with holy Chrism? And (which is the greatest thing in the Christian Religion)
can with his own mouth make Christ's body and blood? Or which of them can bind
and loose in Heaven and earth? By all which it may be plainly gathered by how
great power the sacerdot al dignity excels. Which of them can ordain one
Clerk in the holy Church? How much less can they depose him for any fault? For
in orders exclesiastical, to depose is an act of greater power than to ordain:
For Bishops may ordain Bishops, but in no wise depose them without the
authority of the Apostolic seat: Who then that has any knowledge can doubt but
that Priests are preferred before Kings? In a word, we must know that all good
Christians are more fitly Kings than evil Princes: For these by seeking the
Glory of God do strenuously rule themselves: But the other seeking their own,
and being enemies to themselves do tyrannically oppress others: These (good
Christians) are the body of Christ. The other (bad Princes) are the body of the
Devil. These so rule themselves, as that they shall reign eternally with the
highest Emperor. But the power of the other brings them eternally to perish by
eternal damnation, with the Prince of darkness, who is King over all the Sons
of Pride. And it is not to be wondered at that And are Prelates so bad too that
rule the Church?
bad Prelates consent to an unrighteous King, whom for their ill got
preferments by him, they love and fear, who Simoniacally ordaining any, do for
a base price sell even God himself. For as the elect are inseperably united to
their head, so the reprobate are pertinaciously confederate against the good
with him that is head of their militia. Was it a mark of a reprobate to obey
the King against the Pope?
Let Emperors and Kings see then how much the Imperial and Kingly dignity is to
be feared, in which very few are saved And are there more Popes saved?
and those that by Gods mercy come to salvation are not made so good (or
eminent) as many of the poor, the Spirit of God being judge: For from the
beginning of the world to these times of ours, we find not in all the
authentic Scripture any Emperors or Kings whose lives were so adorned with
great How few Popes ever wrought miracles?
virtue and miracles, as were an innumerable multitude of the contemners of the
World; though I believe that by Gods mercy many of them have been saved: For to
say nothing of the Apostles and Martyrs, what Emperor or King, was ever famous
for miracles, like Martin, Anthony, or Benedict? what Emperor or King did raise
the dead? cleanse the Lepers? illuminate the Blind? Constantine of pious
memory, Theodosius, Honorius, Charles, Lewis, propagators of Christian
Religion, defenders of the Church, are praised and honored by the Church, but
not noted to have shined with such glory of miracles. Moreover to what Kings or
Emperors names It Is worth the enquiry what is the reason that we have no holy
days, Churches, or Masses named for the honor of Kings save a few of late that
were devoted to the Pope.
are Churches or Altars dedicated? or has the Holy Church appointed Masses to
be celebrated? Let Kings and other Princes fear lest by how much in this life
they would be preferred before other men, by so much the more liable they be to
eternal burnings. As it is written: Wisd. c. 6. Great men shall be greatly
tormented. For they have as many men to be accountable for, as were Subject to
them. ( Ah poor Pope then! that must answer for all the world or Church, even
for those at the Antip^des which Pope Zachary believed not.
And if one religious man find it so great a work to keep his own soul, how
great a labor belongs to Princes, for so many thousand souls? (*) And if the
judgment of holy Church so bind a man for killing one; what will become of them
that for this worlds honor murder many thousands? Who though they sometime cry
Mea Culpa for killing many, yet are glad at the heart for the extension of
their honor, and are not sorry that they did what is done, nor that they have
driven their Brethren into Hell.

The rest of the Epistle exhorts Kings to avoid Pride and Tyranny: As I cite
it historically to show you the Spirit of Papacy, so fas est et ab host
doceri. There is somewhat in it worthy the remembering, that greatness prove
not pernicious to themselves and others, for want of goodness.

58. But sure these Papal arguments savor not of infallibility: May not a mean
wit discern, 1. That goodness gives not right to places of Government without
a call, else the best man must be always King: And then what Pope had Title to
his Seat? Right to Heaven, will not prove a right to Kingdoms: Nor, e contra,
Power to cast out Devils will not prove that the exorcist may cast out the
King, But you use to say that Kings are not for souls but for the body.
nor give him Laws. 2. What though the King be a Scholar to a Grammarian, a
Musician, a Physician? Is it therefore absurd that he be King over these
Masters? What though he must obey his Physician for his life? May he not
command that Physician for the common peace? What though he cannot do that
which a Physician, a Musician etc. can do? May he not rule them for all that?
3. What a discontented mind have such holy Prelates, that cannot be satisfied
with their Title to Heaven, their Miracles, Sanctity, Church-Keys etc. unless
they may also be above Kings, and have the secular power also? 4. And what
cause have Kings and States to look to themselves, that are under such Priests,
where every Clergy man is their Master? And how many superiors then has every
Popish King? Even as many as he has Prelates, Priests or exorcists. Yet I will
confess that if Princes had been as bad still as some of them have been, and as
such Popes pretended; and Popes and Prelates, and Priests had been as
Infallible, Holy, Wise and Peaceable as they have pretended, and had not proved
the shame of Religion and Incendiaries of the Christian World, in so many
generations, it would have tempted men strongly for the interest of Religion
and mankind, to wish that all power had been committed to the Clergy, and that
Campanella's Regnum Dei, or Fift-Monarchy, by Priestly Government of the World,
had taken place. But when their own historians make forty Popes together
Monsters of wickedness, and piety at the same time to be translated to the
Princes, this turns our thoughts another way: Especially when we find still
that a proud, worldly, wicked Clergy, are the great confounders of the World.

59. Epist. 23. He sends to his Legates to demand of the King of France,
that every house do give a penny to St. Peter, if they take him for their
Father and Pastor. It seems the Roman Peter must have money, Rule and Honor
of all the world, though he cry it down in others.

60. Lib. 9. Ep. 1. He suspendeth the Archbishop of Rouen in Normandy, from
consecrating any Bishop or Priest, or Church, because he had not visited the
Pope at Rome, when as men and women came to him from the remoter parts of the
Earth; (The Pope loved much company, and loved not privacy so well as I do.)
and because he had not sought his pallium; though he wrote submissively to him.

61. Even this Pope Ep. 2. l. 9. Professes to the King of Spain [that a Lie is
a sin though it come from a pious intention for peace; but in Priests it is a
kind of Sacriledg.] And if so, Priests had need to take heed that they Lie not,
by swearing, subscribing, declaring or professing any falsehood though a Pope
should command them.

62. In the same Ep. he congratulates that Spain received his Order of service
or Liturgy, because that which they used hitherto had some things contrary to
the Christian Faith.
What? Was the old Spanish Liturgy, heresy?

63. Ep. 3. l. 9. The Pope upon the death of Rodulph, fearing the Emperors
coming into Italy, pretends that now all men advised him to receive the
Emperor, for peace, into his favor and mercy; saying, that almost all the
Italians were for him, and that his Patroness Mathildis was counted mad by her
own Subjects, who would not fight for her and him; and therefore sends to try
whether he could get any help from others; charging them to see that the next
chosen King be one true to St. Peter, and to that end sends them an Oath of
obedience to Saint Peter and his Vicar which the King must take.

64. Ep. 4. He employeth his agents to engage the Norman Duke Robert to help
him with an Army.

And Ep. 5. His Legate having deposed all the Bishops of Normandy that refused
to come to his Synod, he tells him that William King of England, and Duke of
Normandy, though he was not so good as he should be, was more useful and better
to the Church than other Kings, and therefore must not be offended,
and therefore bids him restore the Bishops: and also to pardon some Soldiers,
excommunicated for not paying tithes, because they must not lose the Soldiers.

Ep. 8. He writes to the Duke of Venice, by all means to avoid all
excommunicate persons, and their friendship and favor lest they came into the
snares of the same damnation: For Ana^hema's were the arms by which he subdued
Emperors, and was to do his work.

The like to others in other Epistles. And Ep. 12. He brought one Count Bertran
to swear him fidelity, and to give him all his Country, and honor as Earl of
Provence,
and this for the pardon of his own and his Fathers sins.

65. Ep. 14. He congratulates to the Kings of the Visigoths their conversion to
Christianity; but tells them they must often send to Rome for further instruction.

How frequently he made Archbishops and Bishops travel to him out of other
Kingdoms when his Legates wronged them, many other Epistles show.

Ep. 17. The Norman Duke, Robert, acquainteth the Pope with a Victory which he
had got: He returns him this answer, that he had but done his duty and now as
it was Saint Peter that had given him this victory, if he would not make him
angry, he must now be thankful to Saint Peter, and remember what he owed him,
to help him against the Emperor, Henry, and all his other enemies.

66. Ep. 20. He writes to the Archbishop of Canterbury that he had showed
himself guilty of disobedience which is as Idolatry in that he had not
traveled to Rome to visit the Pope when he commanded him; and tells him that
if he come not by All Saints day next he shall be deposed; for many weak men
that could scarce rise out of their beds, came from other much farther
Countries: and he should lose Saint Peter' s grace if he failed (must they do
so also from the Antipodes?)

Ep. 22. He tells the Count of Angiers (or Anjou) that he should have obeyed
the sentence of his Bishop, though it was unjust. And so every wicked Prelates
power over Princes and all others shall be absolute.

He flattered our King William the Conqueror more than other Kings; but ep. 2.
l. 11. He complains of his punishing a Bishop, telling him that God takes
them as the apple of his eye, and says, Touch not mine anointed; and though
they are naught and very unworthy they must be honored, and being called Gods,
men must not meddle with them.

Ep. 1. Append. (Bin. p. 1278) he tells Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, how
far the Church was from purity in his days; viz. that [The Bishops and such as
should be Pastors of Souls, do with insatiable desire hunt after the Glory of
the World, and the pleasures of the flesh. And do not only themselves confound
all things that are holy and religious, but by their example draw their
Subjects to all wickedness; And that to let them alone is unlawful, and to
resist them how difficult!

So much of the Epistles of Greg. 7th. who seems to be much more against vice
than his predecessors for many ages, but more for tyrannical usurpation and
rebellion than ever any that was before him: And if the better sort of them be
such, what may be expected from them?

67. CCCLIII. An. 1074. In a Council at Rome Priests were forbid marrying, and
all that were married commanded to put away their Wives: The Archbishop of
Mentz trying to do the same in Germany, the whole party of the Clergy (says
Lambert, an. 1074) raged against it, and called the Pope a downright Heretic
that opposed Christ's Law, who forbad putting away Wives except for fornication,
saying, all men cannot receive this saying; and as driving men to fornication:
They went from the Synod, and some were for casting cut the Archbishop of Mentz
and putting him to death: But he spoke them fair. But the Pope went on.

68. CCCLIV. In a Synod at Genesius, the Popes Legate and Anselm Lucens.
excommunicated many that had been against Anselm: whereupon the whole City was
enraged, and forsook Mathildis, and joined with the Emperor, and expelled the
Bishop, one Peter a Canon leading them.

69. CCCLV. an. 1075. a Council at Rome excommunicated five of the Emperors
Family; unless they traveled to Rome and made satisfaction: It excommunicated
Philip King of France unless he satisfied the Nuntii of the Pope: It suspended
the Archbishop of Breme, the Bishop of Strasburg, the Bishop of Spire, the
Bishop of Bamberge, and in Lombardie the Bishop of Papia, the Bishop of Turine,
the Bishop of Placentine, and also Robert Duke of Apulia, and Robert de
Roritello. etc.

70. an. 1075. Was the foresaid Synod at Mentz where the Archbishop seeking to
bring the Clergy to obey the Pope in putting away their Wives, was fain to put
it off to save his life from the Clergies rage.

The English Councils I omit referring you to Spelman, of which one deposed
Wulstan (they say injuriously) etc.

71. CCCLVI. an. 1076. A Council at Worms sentenced the Pope deposed. Two
Bishops awhile refused consent, but at last yielded: And they sent to the Pope,
that thenceforth all that he did as Pope was void.

72. CCCLVII. Hereupon the Pope calls a Council at Rome, which excommunicated
all the German Bishops that deposed him, and the Bishops: of Lombardy as
conspiring against St. Peter, and many French Bishops: And with them the
Emperor Henry; and deposed him (quantum inse) from all his dominions: and
absolved his Subjects from their oaths (as aforesaid.)

73. CCCLVIII. The excommunicate Bishops had a Council at Papia, where they
retorted the Popes Anathema on himself, and excommunicate him.

74* CCCLIX. The Pope calls another Council at Rome, where the Archbishops of
Millan and Ravenna (the Antipope) are excommunicate, and the Emperor's cause
and party again condemned.

75. CCCLX. Another Synod at Rome an. 1078. decreed diverse things for defense
of the Clergies privileges. And it is observable that to that day the old
Canons were in force for nulling all ordinations not made by the Common Consent
of the Clerks and People:
Ordinationes quae interveniente pretio vel precibus, vel obsequio alicujus
personae ea intention impenso, vel quae non Communi consensu Cleri and populi
secundum Canonicas sanctiones fiunt, and ab his ad quos consecratio pertinet,
non comprobantur, infirmas and irritas esse dijudicamus; quoniam qui taliter
ordinantur non per ostium, id est, per Christum intrant, sed ut ipsa veritas
testatur, fures sunt and latrones. Therefore it is no sinful separation to
disown and avoid such obtruded Bishops or Pastors as are not so ordained by the
Common Consent of the Clergy and the People.

76. In this Council the Pope, to keep up some pretensions yet to a power in
the East, excommunicated the new made Emperor Nicephorus Botoniates for
deposing wrongfully the Emperor Michael and his Wife Mary, and his Son
Constantine Porphyrus, and putting them into a Monastery and invading the
throne, whom the Patriarch Cosmas lately set up by Michael, had Crowned: But
thus matters were then often carried.

77. That we may a little take along some of the Greek affairs, note here, that
Zimisces being dead an. 975. the Empire returned to Basil and Constantine the
Sons of Romanus jun. Basil held it 50 years; and Constantine three more.
Against them rose first Bardas Scleros, and then Bardas Phocas. Basil overcame
and subjected the Bulgarians: An. 1028. Argy^us Romanus took the Empire with
Zoe Constantine's daughter (putting away his Wife for her and the Empire.)
After five years Zoe killed him, and took her adulterer and the agent Michael
Paphlago to her bed and Empire. He being afflicted in body penitently turned
Monk, and reduced Zoe to some order: But being dead, she took Michael Calephate
who swear to obey Zoe; but breaking his Covenant, she deposed him and put out
his eyes. And an. 1042. She took to her bed and the Empire Constantine
Monomachus, in whose times the Greeks had diverse losses by the Sueves, and by
the Normans that got Apulia. At which time the Turks being Soldiers under the
Persians, revolted and often overcame them. Zoe and her Sister Theodora having
ruled all, dye. In Constantines time Michael Cerular Patr. of Constable. wrote
against the Church of Rome. Theodora being dead, Michael Stratonicus reigned
one year: who was forced to resign to Isaac Comnenus: 1057. Who being diseased
turned Monk, and made Constantine Ducas Emperor: an. 1059. He dyed 1067
swearing his wife Eudocia not to marry and make a Father in Law to his three
Sons; but she brake her oath and married Romanus Diogenes and made him Emperor:
He is taken in fight by the Sultan, and released, and when he came home his
eyes put out by his own Subjects; of which he dyed an. 1071. and Eudocia is
thrust into a Monastery. Michael Paripinacius, the Son of Constable. Ducas is
chosen Emperor: The Turks and others greatly weaken the Empire: Two Nicephori
usurp: One called Botoniates, helped by the Turks, getting possession, Michael
entered a Monastery, and the other Nicephorus Byennius is overcome and his eyes
put out: Botoniates after three years, is deposed and made Monk by Alexius
Comnenus, who was made Emperor, an. 1081, and being worsted by Robert D. of
Apulia, and having dealt ill with Godfrey and his army going for Palestine, and
beaten by them an. 1096. living 70 years and reigning 37 he dyed an. 1118.
forsaken first of all, and succeeded by his son Calojohannes.

Sect. 78. CCCLXI. A Roman Council an. 1079. Forced Berengarius to recant, and
to own Transubstantiation.

Sect. 79. CCCLXII. An. 1080. Another Roman Council renewed the deposition of
the Emperor, and gave his Empire to Rodulph, the Pope excommunicating Henry,
and saying [Confidens de judicio and misericordia Dei ejusque piissimae matris
semper Virginis Mariae, fultus vestra authoritate, saepe nominatum Henricum,
quem Regem dicunt, omnesque fautores ejus excommunicationi subjicio, and
anathematis vinculis alligo: and iterum Regnum Teutonicorum and Italiae ex
part omnipotentis Dei and vestra,
interdice^s ei, Omnem Potestatem and dignitatem illi regiam tollo, and ut
nullus Christianorum ei sicut Regiobediat, interdico: Omnesque qui^i
juraverunt, vel jur abunt de regni dominatione a juramenti promissione absolvo:
Ipse autem Henricus cum suis fautoribus in omni congressione belli, nullas
vires, nullamque in vita sua victoriam obtineat. Then he gives absolution from
all their sins to all that take part with Rodulph, and blessing in this life
and that to come. Adding [Go on then holy Fathers and Princes I beseech you,
that the whole world may understand and know, that if you can bind and loose
in Heaven, you can on earth both take away the Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, Dukedomes, Marquisates, Earldoms, and Possessions of all men,
according to their merits, and grant them (to others) for you have often taken
away from the evil and unworthy,
Patriarchates, Primacies, Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, and given them to
religious men:
For if ye judge spiritual things, what must men believe that you can do about
things secular? and if you judge the Angels that rule over all Proud Princes,
what can you do with their servants? Let Kings and all secular Princes now
learn, how great you are and what you can do;
and let them hereafter be afraid to set light by the Command of your Church:
And exercise your Judgment so speedily on the said Henry, that all may know,
that he falls not by chance, but by your power; I wish he be confounded to
repentance, that his Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.] O brave Pope!

From this Council the Pope sent* Rodulph a Crown with this inscription --
Petra dedit Petro Petrus diadema Rodulpho. But all this was but as Balaam's
attempt; It destroyed not Henry, nor saved the life of Rodulph, that was after
killed.

Sect. 80. CCCLXIII. An. 1080. The Emperor called a Council at Brixia which
deposed Gregory as [a false monk, the pestilent Prince of all villainy, the
invader of the Roman Seat, never chosen of God, impudently intruding himself by
fraud and money, subverting all Church Order, perturbing the Kingdom of a
Christian Empire; designing the death of Soul and Body to a quiet Christian
Emperor: defending a perjured King; sowing discord where there was concord,
and strife, where there was peace, scandals among brethren, divorces between
Husband and Wife, and shaking all that seemed to be in quietness among godly
men; a proud preacher of Sacrilege and flames, defending perjuries and
murders, questioning the Catholic doctrine of Christ's body and blood, an old
Disciple of Berengarius These were no Protestant Bishops, and either wronged
him, or he was greatly changed.
a follower of divinations and dreams a manifest Conjurer, possessed with a
divining evil Spirit, and so swerving from the true Faith.] And they made
Guibert Pope in his stead (as was aforesaid.)

81. CCCLXIV. A Council at Lions, An. 1080. deposes Manasse Bishop of Rhemes,
for refusing to give account to the Pope, etc.

82. CCCLXV. Another at Avenion, makes Hugo Bishop of Gratianople.

83. CCCLXVI. Another at Meaulx, makes Arnulph Bishop of Soissons.

84. CCCLXVII. Another at Rome, An. 1081. Excommunicateth the Emperor again.

85. CCCLXVIII. An. 1083. another at Rome, the Pope kept three days in sighs
and groans, being besieged, and then dismissed it.

86. CCCLXIX. An. 1084. in another, the besieged Pope again excommunicated the
Emperor, and the new Pope Clement (Guibert Raven.)

87. CCCLXX. An. 1085.
A Council at Quintilineburg condemned two Heresies: The first was the Royalist
Heresy of Loyalty, called the Henricians, from Henry the Emperor, who thought
that the Pope and Prelates had not authority to depose Kings and Emperors, but
were to be Subjects to them. An Heresy, if such, that most Kings are very much
inclined to, as taught them by St. Paul, Romans 13. and by St. Peter himself. You
see, O Princes, if you will be the Popes and Prelates Executioners, that you
must come at last to the Stake your selves, and fall under the Law de Hereticis
comburendis, unless you will be Servants your selves, or trust to some peculiar
chalibeate remedies.

The great argument of the Pope was [The Disciple is not above his Master. One
Gunibert undertook to prove, That the Pope had no such power, but what he had
usurped, and taken to himself, but might be judged. But the foresaid Argument
struck all dead. But might not these Prelates have understood, 1. That the Pope
himself may have a Master in Philosophy, Physic, etc.? And is he not for all
that, Above his Master? 2. Is the King above no Master that teaches him in any
Art or Science? 3. Are not Christ's words plainly to be understood, of
Superiority and Inferiority in eodem genere? The Disciple as such is not above
his Master; but as a King he may: or else Princes give up their Kingdoms to
every Schoolmaster that they choose. 4. This Doctrine sets not only Popes and
Prelates, but every teaching Priest or Preacher above the King; for to such the
King may be a Disciple. 5. This tends therefore to tempt Princes to be
utterly ignorant and brutish;
for fear lest by learning any thing of any Master, they should give away their
Kingdoms. And if Children be Kings by inheritance, what a snare is here laid to
undo them? 6. Does not the Holy Ghost say, Let every Soul be subject; and were
not Peter and the Apostles some of these Souls? Did not Christ himself and
Peter pay Tribute?

But remember again you that are Subjects to such Councils and Prelates, that
it is by them judged Heresy to be Loyal, and to plead for the Clergies
subjection to Kings.

88. The Heresy of Wecilo was here also condemned, that said (as they report
him) That when the secular Men were spoiled of their Estates and Goods, (it is
like by the Ecclesiastics) they were not bound to obey the Ecclesiastics, and
might be received by others, when they were Excommunicate. It was therefore
decreed,
[That whoever was Excommunicate by his Bishop, that Bishop not being himself
Excommunicate, or deprived of his Office, though it were unjustly done, should
by no means be received to Communion (by any other) unless absolved in the
Ecclesiastical manner.] And so God must be disobeyed, that commands the
Faithful to worship him in Sacramental Communion, whenever any proud, malicious
or drunken Prelate will forbid him: And must so live and die, unless his
Masters will repent of their injuries. When as it is usual for one injury to
engage a Man to more, or to continue it, for the justification of the first.

89. Another Decree of this Hereticating Council was, What days to keep the
Spring and Summer Fasts on; and that none eat Cheese or Eggs in Lent. This is
the Roman holiness, and way to Heaven.

Many Archbishops and several Cardinals were here Excommunicate also, for being
for the Emperor against the Pope.

90. CCCLXXI. But the Wars of Councils continuing, a Council was called by the
Emperor at Mentz, where the deposition of Gregory, and the substitution of
Clement (whose Legates were present) was confirmed, and the Condemners again
condemned.

And so we have done with the Life, Letters and Councils of Hildebrand.

91. Pope Gregory dying, Clement alone was Pope one year, and then the Italians
chose Desiderius an Abbot, called Victor the 3d. This was the 23d Schism, or
two Popes at once. Victor lived but a year and three months, and 24 days.
Historians tell us of Famines, and dreadful Prodigies in those days. In that
little time he raised an Army which beat the Saracens in Africa.

92. CCCLXXII. A Council at Capua chose this Victor, An. 1087. and when he was
brought to Rome, they found Pope Clement in possession, and keeping it by Arms:
but when they had fought, Victor's Soldiers proved Victors, and his Title to be
best.

93. CCCLXXIII. Victor had a Council at Benevent, where he damned Pope Clement
and his Bishops, An. 1087. The grand Controversy of those times of the Pope
against the Emperor and other Princes was, about Presentations to Bishoprics,
or Investitures, which the Pope said, belonged to no Layman: Victor' s Council
again judged such Presentations or Collation of Bishoprics to be Sacrilege,
and such Simoniacs that used them: And here it is worth the noting that they
decree, (Bin. p. 1293.) That Penance and Communion may be received from none
but a Catholic: And if no Catholic Priest be there, it is righter to persist
without visible Communion, and to communicate invisibly with the Lord, than by
taking it from a Heretic to be separated from God. For there is no Communion
of Christ and Belial; nor of a Believer with an Infidel: But every Heretic is
an Infidel: And a Simoniac because an Heretic, is an Infidel: For though
Catholics because of the Heretics being over them, cannot have visible and
corporal Communion, yet while in mind they are joined to Christ, they invisibly
receive his Communion.]

Let it be here noted, 1. That this Council confesses that the Sacrament and
visible Communion is not of necessity to salvation: And why not the same of
visible Baptism,
when it cannot be had on lawful terms? 2. That therefore it is no sinful
Separation to refuse such Church Communion as cannot be had on lawful terms, or
but from Heretics, Simoniacs, or Sacrilegious. 3. That this shows that the
Church of Rome has their Succession often interrupted: For by the testimony of
their most flattering Historians, and of General Councils, many Popes have been
Simoniacs; Ergo, says this Council, Heretics and Infidels; Ergo no Popes:
Ergo their Faith failed. 4. That this makes their Bishops, Priests, and
Churches in all their own Kingdoms where Princes have the presenting and
investing of Bishops, to be all void and null,
as being Infidels. And that not only among Protestants none should communicate
with any Bishops that have their Presentation and Investiture from Kings, but
must separate from them as Infidels, but even in Papists Kingdoms they must do
the same.

94. Victor commended Odo, or Otho Ostiensis for his Successor; who is chosen
in his stead against Clement, and called Urban the 2d. He made their old
Patroness Mathildis in her age to marry with an Italian Duke Welpho, on
condition that they should never have Carnal Copulation.
The Emperor came to Rome, and set up Clement: Urban (or Otho) being one that
before had published the Excommunication of the Emperor, Excommunicateth him
again, and goes from Rome, into Italy and France; and sets the Princes upon
the recovering of Jerusalem, Listing 300000 Men, and so reconciled most of
their Strifes at home. The History of this Expedition, Platina briefly, and
many Authors largely give us, to whom I refer you.

Conrade the Emperor's Son rebelleth against his Father, encouraged by the
Pope. The Papal Historians pretend that his Father would have forced him to
Incest, but others think otherwise.

It was this Pope (says Bin. p. 1293.) that appointed the horary Prayers,
called the Office of the Blessed Virgin, to be used by Clergy and Laity, for
success against the Saracens. Having Reigned eleven years, and four months, he
died.

95. CCCLXXIV. An. 1089. Urban in a Council at Rome, repeateth against the
Emperor and Pope Clement what was done before by Greg. the 7th. Clement is
expelled Rome, and driven to renounce. The Holy Wars breed reconciling
thoughts. The Papal Party offer the Emperor his Crown, if he will depose
Clement. His Bishops dissuade him, and he refuses; being otherwise for Peace
inclined to it.

96. CCCLXXV. A Council at Troy in Apulia about marriage of Kinsfolk.

97. An. 1090. A Council at Tolouse deposed the Bishop as criminal, etc.

98. An. 1090. A Council of Urban's at Melfia decreed again, that no Bishop
receive Investiture from any Layman; and that no Layman have right or
authority over any Clerk. Also against false Penance (Hildebrand before had
decreed that Penance, and Baptism, (and so Absolution) profit not impenitent
undisposed Receivers.)

99. CCCLXXVI. A Council at Benevent condemned Pope Clement again.

100. CCCLXXVII. Another at Troy did consult for Urban's interest.

101. CCCLXXVIII. Another at Constance, An. 1094. against married Priests and
Simoniacs, and about the number of Easter and Whitsun Holydays. And the Empress
Praxes departed from the Emperor, accusing the Court of most filthy
Fornication;
perhaps the cause of their Calamities.

102. CCCLXXIX. An. 1094. A Council at Ostio in France Excommunicated their own
King Philip, for putting away his Wife, and marrying another; and again
Excommunicateth the Emperor and Pope Clement.

103. CCCLXXX. An. 1095. A Council at Placentia heard the Cause of the Emperor
of Constable. begging help against the Infidels; and of the King of France; and the
Empress complained how filthily she had been forced by her Husband's command.
It repeated damnations, and decreed that no money be taken for Baptizings,
Chrysms or Burials.

104. CCCLXXXI. A Council at Clermont for the same Causes. It decrees, That if
one injure another on Monday, Wednesday or Thursday, it shall not be reputed a
breach of Peace: but if it be done on any of the other four days, it shall be
judged a breach of holy Peace, and be punished as shall be judged. C. 1.

And that no Clergyman shall receive any Honor (or Preferment) from the hand
of Laymen. C. 15.

And C. 16. That no Kings or Princes make investiture of any Ecclesiastic
Honor.

And C. 17.
That no Bishop or Priest make any promise of Allegiance to a King, or to any
Layman (Ne Regi, vel alicui Laico in manibus Ligium fidelitatem faciat.)
Ligius is Liege, or Ligatus, a Vassal or full Subject.

And C. 19. That no Lay-labourer keep the tenth of his labor, (from the
Clergy;) or receive (from the Clergy) the tenth of his wages.

105. It shows you that ever the Sacrament in one kind was not introduced, in
that the 28th Canon of this Council decrees, that [None communicate at the
Altar, unless he receive the Body by it self, and the Blood by it self, unless
through necessity, or with cautelousness.]

Can. 29. Any one that fled from his Enemies to any Cross, was to be there
protected as in a Church.

But the Jerusalem War was the main business of this Council, by which the Pope
cunningly turned away Animosities and Jealousies from himself, and got the
repute of a Holy Defender of the Church.

106. But in an English Council all the Bishops in the Kingdom save one
(Rochester) would force Archbishop Anselme to renounce the Pope; which Anselme
refusing, and reasoning against, they said that he blasphemed the King, setting
up any in his Kingdom without his consent; and so they jointly renounce their
subjection and obedience to the Archbishop, and abjure the unity of brotherly
society with him,
Bin. p. 1302. You see Luther was not the first that renounced the Pope.

107. CCCLXXXII. A Council at Tours, for the Holy War: where the King of France
Philip was reconciled, promising service to the Pope.

108. CCCLXXXIII. An. 1097. A Concilium Barense was held, for winning the Greek
Church in their necessity; where Anselme of Canterbury got the honor in
disputing of the Procession of the Holy Ghost. The sum of which Disputation is
in his Works.

109. CCCLXXXIV. An. 1098. A Council at Rome gave the King of England time to
repent till Michaelmas, the former Council had Excommunicated him, if Anselme
had not desired delay.

110. An. 1099. Another Roman Council for the Holy War, and Reexcommunicating
Pope Clement, (but what Clement did all this while, is past over here.)

111. An. 1099. Some little Council at Jerusalem put out Arnulph the Archbishop
of Jerusalem as a wicked Man and Usurper, and gave it to the Pope's Legate.

112. An. 1099. Paschal the 2d is made Pope; a little after Pope Clement dies,
who had Reigned with his Competitors 21 years: Being buried at Ravenna after
five years, a Council caused his Carcass to be dig'd up and burnt: Decreeing,
That all the Bishops of the Henrician Heresy, (that is, who were for Emperors
being above the Pope, or not deposable by him, and for his power of
Presentations or Investitures) if they were alive should be deposed;
if dead, should be dig'd up and burnt, (which were most of the Bishops of the
West, if Hildebrand himself mistook not.) O Military Bishops! that can overcome
the dead. No wonder if the Church and Nations be confounded by you, that cannot
let each others Carcasses rest in their Graves; but will dig up the bones of
the Prelates of many Kingdoms, even the greatest part. How many Princes and
Prelates now Papists, are guilty of the Henrician Heresy? Should not their
bones also be burnt if you durst?

113. But the Schism continued, three persons successively being made
Anti-Popes by the Emperor's party; but all of them one after another overcome
by Paschal, who being a Military Pope, did most of his work by his Army, which
he frequently had on foot. In his time Jerusalem, and the Cities about, were
won by Godfrey of Bullen, his Brother- Baldwin, Boemund, Tancred, and the rest
of the Christians; and Godfrey made first King, and Baldwin next; Boemund and
Tancred having Antioch, and after suffering great losses, etc. as you may read
in the Histories.

114. Never did the Papal Rebellion work more unnaturally, than in setting up
the Emperor's Son Henry against his own Father,
as excommunicate and deposed; who being chosen in his stead by the Papal
Faction, overcame him, and took him Prisoner, and kept him till he dyed
(naturally, or violently, I know not) at Liege.

115. Yet was the Pope deceived of his hopes: For this Henry also was of the
Henrician Heresy, and having by the Pope's order kept his Fathers Corpse five
years unburied, because Excommunicate, he came with an Army after to Rome to be
crowned Emperor, and getting into the City, (the Pope's Historians say by
perfidiousness, and others lay the perfidiousness on the Pope) he took the Pope
and Cardinals (that were for him) Prisoners, for denying him to confirm the
Bishops which the Emperor had promoted; and he kept him till he made him
confirm them, and grant him Investitures under his hand and seal, and promise:
But when the Emperor was gone, the Pope took his promise to be null, and brake
it, (he that can dispense with others, may dispense with himself.)

116. Binnius, after many such others, does not only justify the Pope's
deposing of the Emperor; but shamelesly says, that even the Novatores
Haeretici, (as he calls the Loyal and Orthodox) will not deny but that he was
justly deposed, because (says he) in a Letter to Hildebrand, he said himself
he might justly be deposed if he fell from the Faith; and he was deposed for
Heresy, viz. for defending Priests Marriage, selling Benefices, contemning the
Popes Excommunication, and saying that he ought not to regard it.

Ans. 1. Does every word in a Letter that you can distort, forfeit a Crown?

2. Did not the Apostles and ancient Christians obey Heathens, and command it?

3. Was it to the Pope that he forfeited his Crown? How prove you that?

4. Were these Apostolic Doctrines, (that Priests may have Wives, as Peter had,
etc.) a falling from the Faith?

5. Is every Princes Crown and Life at the Pope's mercy, because he may judge
him to be an Heretic?

6. Are not the chief Christian Kings now that are Papists (especially the King
of France) of that which is called, The Henrician Heresy? And may they be so
deposed?

117.
But one thing I desire may be noted of this Henrician Heresy, that the
Emperor did not take away the old liberty of the Clergy and People in choosing
their Bishops: Investiture was not Election, or any determining Nomination, but
like our Inductions an after-consent, and a delivery of possession by a Staff
and Ring, as may be seen in the form of Pope Pasohal's Grant in Nauclerus, Genesis
38. p. 738. [We grant and confirm to you, that you may bestow Investiture by a
Staff and Ring to the Bishops and Abbots in your Dominion, FREELY ELECTED
WITHOUT FORCE AND SIMONY.] And it meddled not with the Presbyters, but was only
a Negative power of freely chosen Prelates induction, who was still chosen by
the inferior Clergy and the People.

118. How the old Emperor was basely deprived by the three Bishops of Mentz,
Colen and Worms; how he charged their Oaths of Allegiance on them; how he
denounced the Revenge of God against them; how he was kept in such poverty,
that he desired for his relief to have been but an Assistant in the Monastery
of Spire which he had built himself, and was by the ungrateful Bishop of Spire
denied; how in his misery he confessed it was the justice of God for the sins
of his youth (Lust) you may see in Sigon. de Reg. Ital. An. 1106. Helmold.
Hist. Sclav. c. 32. Sigebert An. 1106. Albert. Xrantz. Hist. Sax. li. 5. c. 20,
21, 22, 23, 24. compared. As also how his Body was dug up out of his Grave,
and kept five years by his unnatural Son in an unconsecrated place, and after
buried. Thus ended one that had fought (as Historians say) with honor, Sixty
two Battles (more than Caesar had done) a Man (had he duly mastered his
youthful lust) credibly described as of laudable endowments, and one that
showed much zeal for the Clergy, though he was not willing to be absolutely
their Subject.

119. CCCLXXXV. Of the Councils that were in Paschal's days, the first was at
Rome, An. 1102. where the old Emperor Henry the 4th. was again Excommunicate,
and a form of Anathematism made against all Heresies, and in special against
that Heresy that then troubled the Church,
which was [That the Churches Anathema's and Bonds are not to be regarded.] It
was time for Pope and Prelates to call that a Heresy, when by Cursing they had
got their Dominions, and conquered so many Emperors and Kings: But it is a
wonder that when Tibi dabo Claves, would not keep up the credit of the Cursers,
that Cursing again should be able to do it.

Two Councils at London, partly against the Clergies Incontinence, and against
Sodomy, and partly to depose several married Priests, I pass by.

120. CCCLXXXVI. Fluentius, Bishop of Florence, published that Antichrist was
come.
Whether he told them who he was I know not: But An. 1105. A Council of 340
Bishops was there called, to try him for that dangerous doctrine; and finding
that Prodigies and Calamities drew him to believe it, they chid him as a weak
Man, and warned him to talk so dangerously no more, (you may know why.)

121. CCCLXXXVII. When the young Henry began his Rebellion against his Father,
he called An. 1105. a Council at Quintilineburg, where he solemnly called God
and Angels to witness, that it was not out of desire to Reign that he did what
he did, nor to depose his Father, but to restore them to the Obedience of the
Church, lamenting his Father's obstinacy against it: And he professed his
Obedience to the Pope, and drew diverse revolted Archbishops to do the like.

122. CCCLXXXVIII. An. 1106. A Council with the Nobility or Princes was called
by Henry junior at Mentz, where the old Emperor was again Excommunicated, and
forced to resign his Scepter to his Son; and this by those Princes, Prelates
and Nobles, that had sworn Allegiance to him, supposing themselves absolved
from all their Oaths by the Pope. Now it was that the three Archbishops
violently divested him. When he asked them, what was his fault, and they said,
Simony, in the Collation of Bishoprics and Abbeys, he adjured them (the
Bishops of Mentz, and Colen, with the Bishop of Worms) by the name of the
Eternal God, to say whatever he took of any of them: And they said, Nothing. He
thanked God that so far their own tongues justified him, when their Bishoprics
might have brought him no small Sum.

123. CCCLXXXIX. The Pope in a Council at Wastallis in Lombardy, took in some
submitting Bishops.

124. CCCXC. Two Bishops at Jerusalem striving for the place; one put out by
the King, but restored by the Pope, died in his return; the other by a Synod at
Jerusalem was put out, but made Bishop of Caesarea.

125. CCCXCI. In a Council at Trecae, the Emperor's Investitures are forbidden.

126. CCCXCII. Another at Benevent, An. 1108. of the same, decreeing, That if
any take a Benefice from a Lay-man's Presentation, the Giver and Taker shall be
Excommunicated.

And one at London to the same purpose, made King Henry consent against
investing Bishops or Abbots.

Another at Liege, for St. Guibert's Elevation.

127. CCCXCIII. But the Pope's Lateran Council of 100 Bishops is more
considerable, where the Pope breaks his Oath and Covenant to the Emperor as
being constrained, and this by their approbation. The History of the occasion
beforementioned, is here again recited by Binnius out of the Chron. Cassinens.
at large; where you may see that the Emperor swear to the Pope, and the Pope
was thereupon to crown the Emperor as in his proper Rights. The Emperor claimed
to be crowned as to the same Rights that had been granted to Charles, Lewis,
Henry, and other former Emperors: This the Pope denied to do, and so they went
to fight; where on both sides, between the Romans and Germans, so many
thousands were slain, that Tyber was colored with their blood.
How the Earl of Millan that interposed his person to save the Emperor's life
was slain, and his flesh cut in pieces, and given the Dogs by the Romans, and
what other bloody work was there made, the said Chronicle mentions.

The Pope when he crowned the Emperor, and made the Covenant with him,
took the Body of Christ and brake it, taking part himself, and giving the
Emperor the other part, and said, so let him be divided from the Kingdom of
Christ and the Lord, that breaks this Covenant] which now by the consent of
the Bishops in Council he brake.

128. CCCXCIV. A Council at Benevent, to decide a quarrel about Church Lands.

129. CCCXCV. In a Cyperan Council an Archbishop complained, that he was put
out by the Prince Roger of Sicily, and made a Monk against his will; and was
delivered, because God will have no involuntary Service: Another Archbishop
accused, fled.

130. CCCXCVI and CCCXCVII. A Council at Beauvois, not known for what.

One in Syria against Arnulp. Archbishop of Jerusalem, for his Crimes.

131. CCCXCVIII. An. 1116. A Council at Colen Excommunicate the Emperor, (or
declare the Popes Excommunicate;) but he forced some to receive him.

132. CCCXCIX. An. 1116. In a Lateran General Council (as they called it) it
unhappily fell out, that the Pope who had before called the Emperor's claim an
Heresy, (as Councils had before named it, The Henrician Heresy) could not
here disclaim and revoke his Act, without confessing his fault, in granting
that power to the Emperor, and confirming it by Covenant and Oath. He tells
them that he is but a Man, and so a Sinner, and lamenting his sin, begs their
prayers to God for pardon, and then anathematizeth all that he had written, and
desires them to do the like. Hereupon a crafty Bishop (Bruno Signinus) said,
Let us give thanks to God, that we our selves have heard the Pope condemn that
Privilege that contains Pravity and Heresy:
And if that Privilege contain Heresy, then he that made it was an Heretic.]
This put them all to their shifts; and Ioh. Cajetan angerly said, [Dost thou
call the Pope an Heretic here, and in our hearing? The writing that our Lord
the Pope made was Evil, but not Heresy. Another Bishop said, [Nay it ought not
to be called Evil; For to deliver the People of God is good, by the authority
of the Gospel, which commands us animas ponere, to lay down our Souls for the
Brethren: And that which the Pope did, was to deliver the People of God.]

O holy Bishops and Councils,
that take it to be no sin to lie and forswear, if it do but deliver the People
of God! But the Pope's patience would not hold at the charge of Heresy, but
after great expectations, he told them that [That Church had never had Heresy:
yea, the same Church had quelled all Heresies -- And Ego rogavi pro te, Petre,
secureth it. As much as to say, Though I confessed an Heresy before I was aware,
now I tell you, the same thing is an Henrician Heresy in others, and none in
me.

133. CCCC. An. 1116. A Roman Synod to end a strife between the two
Monasteries, Cluniacens. and Cassinens.

134. Platina tells us how the Pope sent the Pisans to fight against the
Saracens at Sea; and when they were absent, the Lucenses sought to take their
City, but the Florentines honestly came and repelled them; for which the Pisans
gave them two Porphyretice Columns.

Also that Mathildis (Maud) the Pope's great Defender now dying, enriched the
Pope, with bequeathing her Principalities to Rome. And that Vincentius, an
excellent Author, says, That she was burnt with two thousand more in a great
Fire that happened at Florence. And being Sainted, diverse places say, they have
her Body.

Bernard was the glory of this Age.

Platina tells us also of a bloody War and Sedition in Rome, upon the Pope's
denying a Boy of ten years old, to succeed his Father as Prefect of the City;
the Pope being forced to remove: That the Emperor came with an Army again to
Rome, where a Bishop crowned him again, the Pope being in Apulia, who after
returned and dyed.

135. Now comes the 24th Schism, or two Popes at once; Job. Cajetan Cardinal
is chosen at Rome, by the CLERGY, SENATE, and PEOPLE of Rome, Bin. p. 1315. The
Emperor sends to demand the confirmation of Pope Paschal's Covenants: He
denies, and as at his choice a great Citizen, Cincius Frangipanis, offended at
the choice, threw him down, trod on him, and imprisoned him, till the People
rose and forced Frangipanis to restore him safe; so the Emperor now set up
another Pope, Gregory VIII. And Cajetan, called Gelasius the 2d, got some
Italian Princes to help him, and when the Emperor was gone he came to Rome, and
scuffling awhile, was fain to go to France, and dyed after a year and five
days, Gregory reigning three years, and some being for one, and some for the
other.

In this time King Baldwin and Tancred had a great overthrow near Jerusalem.

136. CCCCI. Pope Gelasius with a Synod at Capua, Excommunicateth the Emperor
and Pope Gregory (who, it is like, requited him.)

After at Vinna in France he called a Synod, and dyed.

137. The Bishop of Vienna in France, (kin to the Emperor and the King of
France) is chosen Pope in France: He prevails with the Emperor to give up his
Investitures, and so makes a joyful Peace. He overcomes Pope Gregory VIII.
and imprisoneth him in a Monastery. In his time Baldwin was again overthrown,
and the Venetians took many Islands from the Greek Emperor, for hindering them
to relieve Jerusalem by Sea.

138. CCCCII. The first Council under Calixtus the 2d was at Rhemes, whither
went Turstan chosen Archbishop of York, upon promise to King Henry, that he
would not receive the Pope's blessing: But he stuck not to break his word;
therefore the King banished him, or forbad him his Dominions.

Here four Tenants of Guilbert Porretane a Schoolman were condemned.

1. That Divinitas and Deus are not the same (in signification.)
2. That the three Persons are not unum aliquid. 3. That besides the Persons
there are eternal Relations, which are not the same as the Persons, etc. 4.
That it was not the Nature of God that was incarnate.
These they condemned, whether rightly understanding Porretane I know not: But
if Schoolmens Quirks must make work for Councils, and Councils will be their
Judges, what work will there be?

139. CCCCIII. Another at Colen, An. 1119. the Emperor was Excommunicated.

140. CCCCIV. In a Lateran Council called General, the Emperor (says Otto
Frising.) seeing the People fall from him when he was Excommunicate, and
fearing his Fathers case, yielded to resign Investitures, which he after
performed, An. 1122.

And An. 1122. CCCCV. A. Roman Council settled the Cassine Monastery of
Benedictines in their Independency, save on the Pope alone, against the envy
and complaints of the Bishops.

141. CCCCVI. A Roman Council finished the Peace with the Emperor.

And An. 1124. one at Toulouse called some Religious men Heretics.

142. Calistus dying, Theobaldus, called Caelestine, is chosen by the Fathers;
but Lambert called Honorius the 2d, by the help of Leo Frangipanis, a great
man,
came after him, and got the greater power, and got and kept possession. This
was the 25th Schism, which the Emperor's resignation of Investitures prevented
not.

143. CCCCVII. An. 1127. A French Council about the Templars Habit: And one at
London 1125, and another 1127. where because Mat. Paris opens the shame of
the Pope's Nuncio, and others, Binnius revileth him.

144. Arnulphus,
a famous Preacher, was murdered in Rome, for Preaching against their Pride,
Covetousness and Luxury. Platin.

145. Two Popes are next chosen: (the 26th Schism) 1. Gregory called Innocent
the 2d. 2. Peter called Anacletus. Onuphrius: Panuinus says, that Innocent had
but 17 Cardinals Votes,
and Anaclet had 21. And yet Innocent being the stronger, is by them taken now
for the true Pope, and the Succession is from him.

146. Pope Innocent presently becomes a Soldier, and gets an Army to fight
with Roger Prince of Sicily, for claiming Apulia: The Pope and Cardinals at the
second Battle are taken Prisoners, by the coming of William Duke of Calabria to
help his Father. Roger gently releaseth them: They come to Rome, and find Pope
Anaclet in possession; who got Roger of Sicily, and the People of Rome that
were for Innocent, to be for him, (says Platina.) Innocent dares not stay, but
goes into France; thence into Germany, where Henry being dead, and Lotharius
made Emperor, the Pope got him to swear to help him: The Emperor and Pope come
against Rome with two Armies. The Antipope Anacletus is not to be seen; till
the Emperor was gone home, and Innocent at Pisa, and then he appears as Pope
again. Lotharius comes with another Army, and drives away Anacletus, and
Roger of Apulia into Sicily.

147. The Romans now rose up against the Pope, and claimed the Civil Government
of Rome by a Senate. The Pope hereupon deprived them of their Votes in the
Election of Popes, and deprived all the Clergy also of theirs except the
Cardinals, and confined the power to the Conclave of the Cardinals alone. This
was the first time that the old way was overthrown, and all the Canons broken
by one Pope in revenge against the Romans for rebelling against his Civil
Government,
and helping Anaclet. Till now, Clergy and People chose the Bishops. Hildebrand
began to set up the Cardinals power, but denied not the Clergy and People their
Votes in Comitiis.

148. The Greek Emperor's Legate now had a dispute with the Pope's Party, to
prove the Roman Church erroneous for the Filioque, of which see Plat. in Inoc.
2.

149. CCCCVIII. and CCCCIX. and CCCCX. The Pope Innocent being above seven
years in France and Germany, damned Pope Anaclet and his Fautors in a Council
at Clermont, and in another at Rhemes, and in another at Liege. And 411,
another at Pisa did the like. And 412 one at Mentz was about a Bishops
quarrels. And 413, one at Estampes condemned Anaclet; Innocent's presence
prevailing there, and Anaclet's presence at Rome.

150. Lotharius dies, and Conrade is Emperor. CCCCXIV. Innoc^nt, An. 1139.
calls a great Council called General upon his return at Rome, to condemn
Anaclet again.

159. Anaclet dying, another Pope called Victor is chosen against Innocent, and
the Schism continued: and after five months being too weak, gives it up.

160. In England, says William Malmsbury, and Binnius out of him, p. 1325. two
Bishops (of Salisbury and Lincoln) built the great Castles of Newark,
Shirburne, Devises, Malmesbury, and held the Castle at Salisbury, etc. The
Nobles complained to the King of the Bishop's greatness, and building so many
Castles, as of ill design. At an Assembly or Parliament at Oxford, the Servants
of some Earls and these Bishops fought for Quarters: The Bishops Servants
prevailed, and Blood was shed, and the Nephew of an Earl wounded near to death,
and all was on an uproar. The King (Stephen) took the advantage, and made the
two Bishops deliver up the Keys of their Castles, lest they prepared to be for
the Empress Maud in time. The Bishop the King's Brother was the Pope's Legate;
he calls a Council at Winchester, and summoneth the King, where he and other
Bishops pleaded against the King, that he violated the Canons, wronged the
Church, invaded the Bishops Propriety, etc. But a French Bishop of Rouen
pleaded for the King, that no Canon allowed them those Castles, and that in
danger of Wars all Princes would secure such places; and so far got the better,
as that they durst not proceed against the King, who told them that if any went
to Rome to complain against him, they must not think easily to return into
England.

161. CCCCXV. An. 1140. A Council at Soissons condemned Peter Abailard's Books
to the Fire; but says Otto Frising. (and Bin. ex eo) they would not hear him
speak for himself, suspecting or fearing his skill in disputation, his great
acuteness being famous. His Heresy was, That whereas (says Otto) the Church
holds the Three Persons in the Trinity to be res distinctas, See in the
Schoolmen what they hold; particularly Menrisse de Trinit. And Peta^ de Trinit.
, distinct things; Peter used an ill similitude, and said that [As the same
argument or speech is Proposition, Assumption and Conclusion, so the same
Essence is the Father, Son and Holy Ghost] and this was judged Sabellianism.
But sure, 1. Peter never meant this similitude should hold in all respects. 2.
Sure this asserteth unhappily such a difference as is between the Whole and the
Parts, if he had meant it to be fully simile. And that makes a greater
difference inter personas, than the Schools allow. But be the Man Heretic or
not, what justice was in these pitiful Prelates that condemned him, and durst
not hear him speak? Is such Hereticating much regardable?

162. CCCCXVI. Another Synod (Senonensis) got St. Bernard among them, who
debated the case of Peter, and he appealed to the Pope, who condemned him, and
yet says that Peter denied many of the words, and all the sense that was
charged on him: but names five Errors, worthy his condemnation, if his indeed.

163. Binnius from W. Malmesbury (who was present) recites another Council at
Winchester, King Stephen being taken Prisoner by some Lords, and the Londoners
pleading for his liberty, his Brother the Pope's Legate was against him, and
accused him, Excommunicating diverse Lords that were for him.

164. CCCCXVII. A Synod at Jerusalem against the Patriark of Antioch, the
Prince, and the Pope's Legate being against him: Accused of many Crimes he would
not appear, and was deposed and imprisoned, and scaping out went to Rome for
help, and was there poisoned. An unlearned bad Man Haymericus is put into his
seat.

165. Innocent dying,
Caelestine the 2d was the first Man that ever was ordained or made Pope
without the Peoples Election, says Binnius himself ex Onuphr. by the Cardinals
privately alone, according to Pope Innocent's Order. An. 1143. in Conrade's
Reign; he dyed within six months. In his time the Christians lost Edessa to the
Turks.

166. Pope Lucius the 2d comes next, and lives but 11 months. In which he set
the Emperor Conrade on a fruitless Expedition toward Jerusalem, to the death
of multitudes.

167. A Gallican Council against Abailardus, who is said by Plat. and Pet.
Cluniac. to repent and dye a holy death.

168. Eugenius the 3d, a Companion of Bernards, is next Pope: The Romans rising
for their Civil Government, expel him: He goes into France, makes an
Archbishop against the King's will, who swears he shall not enter the City.
Bernard persuadeth the King to repent, and to expiate his sin by an Expedition
(with Conrade) to Jerusalem, where both lose men, time and cost. The Pope
overcomes the Romans, and makes them promise that the Senators shall hold of
him: he again withdraws, and dies.

169. 1. Note here, that the Civil Government of Rome it self fell not till
lately into the Pope's hands, and that by the same means as he conquered
Kingdoms.

2. Note how far he was from ruling all the World, when for so many Ages the
City of Rome it self contended against him.
But the dependent Prelates in all Nations of Europe were his strength, who
perceived that Tibi dabo Claves, might be abused for themselves, as well as for
the Pope; and the Policy of Popes was in those days to do all or most by
Synods, and thereby to make the Prelates perceive that it was their Power,
Interest and Rule as well as his. But now the case is quite changed with this
unchangeable Church; Councils now are needless, because scarce to be trusted.

170. Passing by a Council at Wesel for the Jerusalem War, a (CCCCXVIII)
Council at Paris fell again upon the Scholastic Bishop of Poictiers, Gilbert
Porretane. In his Visitation he spoke some words too hard for his Hearers, and
his two Archdeacons getting Bernard on their side, (a Man more devout than
Scholastically acute) they accuse the Bishop of Heresy again; having had
success lately against Peter Abailard, the Bishops were ready to receive the
Charge. The Articles of Accusation were these: 1. That he said,
Divinam Essentiam non esse Deum. 2. Quod Proprietates personarum non essent
ipsae personae. 3. Quod Theologicae personae in nulla praedicarentur
Propositione. 4. Quod divina natura non esset incarnata.


And some lesser, as 1. That attenuating man's merits, he said None merited but
Christ. 2. Evacuating the Sacraments of the Church, he said None were truly
baptized, but those that were to be saved: And such like other things. The Pope
and the Prelates heard the Charge: Two Masters are brought out against him, who
swear that they heard some of these things from his mouth; many wondering that
learned Men used Oaths instead of Arguments, (says Otto Frising.) After many
Charges and Urgencies, he said, [Audacter confiteor Patrem alio esse Patrem,
alio Deum, nec tamen esse hoc and hoc.] that is, it is one thing to be God, and
another to be the Father, (or the words are not of the same signification) and
yet God is not one thing, and the Father another thing.] The hardness of these
words seeming a profane Novelty, provoked the Bishop of Soissons to say, [What
say you, That the Being of God is nothing?] having not read or understood
Austin, that says, [Sic aliud est Deo esse, aliud subsistere; ^icut aliud Deo
esse, aliud Patrem esse, vel Dominum esse: Quod enim est ad se dicitur: Pater
autem ad Filium, and Dominus ad servientem creaturam.]

The Bishop of Soissons misusing a saying, [Cum quis diceret, Socratem esse
nihil diceret.] He turned the Auditory against himself; and they asked
Porretane to open why he so distinguished the Persons; who answered, [Quia
omnis persona est per se una.] which puzzled or amazed them, and ended that days
work.

The next day he was accused of Novelty, for saying that [The three persons
were tria singularia.] The Archbishop of Rouen aggravating it, said that [God
should rather be called unum singular, than tria singularia.] At which many
were offended, because Hilary says, [Sicut duos Deos dicere profanum est, ita
singularem and solitarium dicere sacrilegum est^-Et nihil solitarium ex divinis
Sacramentis ad suspicionem audientium and occasionem blasphemantium
proferamus.] But Porretane told them, that by singular, he meant nothing but
excellent and incomparable. In this manner Porretane, Bishop of Poictiers, was
examined, and modestly answered them many days; till the Pope perceiving that
these School-niceties being too hard for him, durst not determine them, nor
gratify Bernard (though his Friend) and the Hereticating Bishops and Clergy,
but craftily put it off to a General Council. This is all out of Otto Frising.
recited by Bin. p. 1332.

You may see here what work Hereticating Prelates and Councils were inclinated
to make. If all the Schoolmens subtle Assertions (sound and unsound) must thus
be tried in General Councils, and all that was disliked, called Heresies,
though it would have shamed the Prelates ignorance, it would have afrighted
daring Wits from their presumption; and since I have seen the tendency of
Cartesianism, Gassendianism, and other Epicurean Follies, I did not care much
if we had some such ignorant Prelates to afright these bold Philosophers also.

I have often marvelled why General Councils that understood not the Hebrew
Tongue, (nor the Pope's Western Councils the Greek) have no more exercised
themselves in Councils to judge of Scripture, Copies, and Translations. And I
have thought in what words and manner they would have prosecuted such debates:
sure falsifying Scripture is of as dangerous consequence as these School
presumptions. Some will think it is well that the Councils for above 1000 years
had so few that understood the original language, or else they would have so
tossed and torn, and sensed and nonsensed the Scripture, that they would have
made it quite another thing.

171. CCCCXIX. Yet we have not done with Heresies. A Council at Rhemes, called
by the banished Pope, tried a mad man, an illiterate Rustic, called Eum, one
unworthy to be called an Heretic, says Otto Frising, who said he was the Son
of God, etc. whom they sent to Prison, where he dyed.

In the same Council Gib. Porretane, Bishop of Poictiers, is again called,
where their Subtilties were disputed over again; and Bernard Abbot Clareval.
being his chief Adversary* upon Porretane' s exception to some of his words,
saying, Scribantur, went and drew up some Articles of Faith, seeming contrary
to Porretanes, and got many Bishops to subscribe them. The Roman Cardinals took
this heinously, and came all together to the Pope, and told him, That it was
they that of a private Man made him Pope, and that he must know that it was
they that were the Cardines, on which the Axis of the whole Church did turn,
and that he must not now be his own, but theirs, and not prefer private and new
Friends before his old common ones. And that his Abbot Bernard with the
Gallicane Bishops, had audaciously presumed to lift up their Necks against the
primacy and top of the Roman Seat, which only does shut and no man opens, and
opens and no man shuts; which only may discuss matters of Faith: And even when
absent, may not receive prejudice of this honor from any. But, behold these
Frenchmen, contemning our faces, (or presence) have presumed to write their
Belief, without consulting us, as if they would pass a definitive Sentence on
the matters that have been handled before us: which had it been done at Antioch
or Alexandria, had been void -- How then durst these usurp in our presence --
We will therefore that you presently rise up against thus temerarious Novity,
and delay not to punish their Contumacy.] And so they had like to have run into
a Schism: But the Pope and Bernard spoke them fair, and Bernard said, They
wrote not as Determiners, but to give account of their own Faith, when
provoked; and so pacified the Cardinals. But this Tumult hindered the deciding
of the Case: But, says Otto, whether Bernard was decived by humane infirmity,
or Porretane escaped by hiding any thing by his great learning, I must not
determine.

172. CCCCXX. Another Council An. 1150. the banished Pope held at Trevers,
where Bernard told him of the Revelations of a Woman Abbess called Hildegardis:
The Pope sent some to her; she returns him a writing of her Revelations, which
he read, admired, and by Bernard's persuasion honored her with a Letter: But
what they were is not mentioned.

173. Conradus; called Anastasius the 4th, is next Pope, and dies after a
year, four months, and 24 days. The glory of his time is said to be Ricardus de
Sancto Victore, a famous Writer, specially de Trinitate, and Gratian, Lombard,
and Comestor.

174. Hadrian the 4th, an English man, is next Pope. The Romans by request and
threats, importune him to permit their Consuls to govern them as heretofore. He
resolutely denies them. They wound one of his Cardinals. He Excommunicateth
and Curses them.
(Quaere, Whether Rome was the Catholic Church when it was Excommunicate?)
They had before desired him to come to the Lateran, which he refused, till they
should turn out one Arnoldus Brixianus, called by him a Heretic and Disciple
of Abailard. The People (says Platina) took this ill, and so hurt the said
Cardinal (I doubt the Romans themselves were for Heretics.) The Pope curses
William of Sicily for invading the Church Lands. The Greek Emperor offers to
help the Pope, and to give him much Gold also, if he shall but have three
Maritime Cities in Apulia, where he has won them. This afrighteth William to
offer the Pope all again, if he may but he called King of Sicily. The Pope
denies it. William angry, over-runneth Italy. The Pope repenting, grants him
his desire. The new Emperor Frederick also coming with an Army into Italy, took
some Cities belonging to the Church, and gave them up to the Pope: But when he
came into the City to be crowned, the Citizens enraged at the Pope for denying
them their Civil Government, shut the Gates (the Emperor's Army being without)
and fell on many of the Pope's Followers, and the Germans, beat some, and
killed many. The Emperor hereby provoked got in his Army, and killed many of
the Citizens, and had done more, but that the Pope dissuaded him: Yet was the
Pope and he fain to go round about to the Lateran, to avoid another Battle.

Platina mentions the Pope's Cursing William of Sicily, and absolving his
Subjects from their Oaths that they might Rebel, but says nothing of the
Emperor's after-quarrel with the Pope, occasioned by a Letter of the Pope's
rebuking him, for not helping the Bishop of London, says Binnius, and refusing
an offered Bishop of Ravenna.

The Pope's Epistles against the Emperor, etc. Binnius leaves out. At last the
Romans again rising against him, he goes to Anagria, and dies.

175. An. 1160. Roland is made Pope, called Alexander the 3d; and Octavian,
called Victor the 4th, is made Pope by others, and sat four years, and seven
months. This is, says Onuphrius, the 27th Schism, or double Papacy. Three more
succeeded Clement, to keep up the duplicate before Alexander dyed, of whom one
Reigned five years, and another seven.

Alexander addresseth himself to the Emperor Frederick to heal the Schism; who
therefore bids both the Popes come to him, that he may hear the Case: But
Alexander himself refuses, and gets away. The Emperor sends two Bishops to
him to summon him to a Council; Alexander refuses to appear. The Bishops go to
Octavian (Victor) and the Emperor calls a Council, and this Council with the
Emperor make Octavian the confirmed Pope. (Quer. Whether this was not as good
Authority as Alexander's greater number of the Cardinals?) Hereupon Alexander
curses the Pope Victor, and the Emperor, and sends Letters to Christian,
Princes to tell them that he did it justly: (Wonderful! that Empires and
Kingdoms could be then disposed of by Cursing!) The Emperor seizes on many of
the Church-Cities. Alexander returns to Rome, but finds so many against him
that he durst not stay there, but flies into France, invited by King Philip;
and there again at a Council, curses the Emperor. The Emperor Frederick
destroys Milan, and translateth thence to Colen the supposed Bodies of the
Magi, or three wise men that came to Bethlehem!
(Is it not strange what brought them to Milan? and how they came all to dye
there together? and how all their Bodies came to be known? O the wisdom of
Rome!) The rest of the Italian Cities and States raise an Army against him; he
sends to the King of France to end the Schism, by bringing Pope Alexander
with him to a Council, where he would meet him with Victor. Divo is the
appointed place between France and Germany: The Emperor with Victor and some
Kings comes to the Council; Alexander refuses, because he called it not, and
calls another at Tours in France. The Emperor angry returns to Germany, and
sends Victor into Italy, where he dies, and Guido, called Paschal the 3d, is
chosen after him. The Romans chose Consuls that were Alexander's Friends, and
send for him to Rome, and receive him. The Italians then arm against the
Emperor; who comes with an Army into Italy, and takes Ancona. The Greek
Emperor is drawn to promise the Pope a great Army against Frederick, so he
would unite the Empire and Churches again. This afrighteth the Emperor. The
Tusculanes and the Abanes had a War with the Romans that oppressed them with
Tribute, and gave the Romans a grievous overthrow. The Emperor besieges Rome;
William of Sicily sends help to the Pope. The People of Rome entreat the
Emperor for Peace, which he promises, on condition the worthier Pope may be
chosen, and the Schism ended. The Pope Alexander hearing of this, flies
secretly by Ship. The Plague drives the Emperor from Rome; he goes into
Germany. The Pope's Friends in Italy get strength. The Greek Emperor Emanuel
sends yet larger offers to the Pope, if he would restore him the Western
Empire by Reunion. Pope Paschal dies. The Tusculane Cardinal, called Calistus
the 3d, is chosen in his stead, and reigned seven years, (says Onuphr.) But
the Tusculanes refusing him, he goes to Alexander, and resigneth to him all
his right in Tusculum. Whereupon the Tusculanes receive Alexander, who there
heard the Ambassador of Henry King of England, purging him of the guilt of the
death of Tho. Becket; and sent into England two Cardinals with power to examine
all the matter; who imposed on the King, though swearing he was innocent, that
for Penance he should maintain Soldiers for Jerusalem, and for three years
should have an Army against the Barbarians, and defend the Church-liberties in
his Land, and not hinder Appeals to Rome; All which he swear: [By which, says
Platina, he merited that the Title of the Kingdom of England should be
transferred on him,
and his Heirs, by the Pope's consent: whence it is observed that all the Kings
of England do recognize (or acknowledge) the Rights of the Kingdom from the
Pope of Rome.] A just Reward for their serving the Titular Servant of Servants
in his pestilent Ambition! That he should thence take them for his Vassals, and
take himself for the disposer of their Crowns; stooping to such Priests, does
make them Kings of Kings.

Yet Alexander has not got possession of Rome it self, so far was he from
being received by all the world; and so low did he condescend as to offer the
Citizens, [That if they would receive him, he would come in peace, and meddle
with nothing but Divine matters,
leaving to them the care of secular things: And when they would not grant him
this much, he went to Signia.] Was this man truly the Bishop of Rome, that had
no more of the Citizens consent so much as to dwell among them? There he
Canonizeth the Archbishop of Canterbury, Tho. Becket, for a Saint. The Emperor
enters Italy, and takes many Cities, but the Venetians owning the Pope, and
he being wearied with Wars, at Papia treats of a Peace. But this not taking,
the Emperor shortly returned with another Army into Italy, but was so hard put
to it by the Millanois and others in one fight, that he narrowly escaped death
himself. This one loss made the Nobles that followed him say, That they
suffered this, because they fought unlawfully against the Church; and if he
made not his peace presently with the Pope, they would go home: So that the
Emperor was forced to submit to the Pope, for fear of being forsaken by his
Subjects and Soldiers. At Venice they met, and the Emperor kissing the Pope's
feet, credible Historians say,
That the Pope trod on his Neck scornfully, and profanely repeating the words
of the Psalm, [Thou shall tread on the Lion and Adder, etc. Ps. 91. 13.) But
Baronius and Binnius will not believe this, though as Fowlis notes, p. 261. it
is recorded by Ciaconius, Masson. and abundance more of their own Historians,
and preserved in the Archives of the Library at Venice, and the Picture of the
Story hanged publicly in the Senate House.

The Emperor's severity against them of Milan was not for nothing: They not
only brake their Oath by Rebellion, but when his wife Beatrix came to see the
City,
set her on a Mule backward with the tail in her hand, and so led her in scorn
from one Gate out at the other: What may not such provocation do to an Emperor?

The stir that there was about the Emperor's holding the Stirrup to Pope Urban,
is recorded by diverse Historians: And how the Kings of France and England did
the like by Alexander; And how this on debate was said to be their due.

The truth is, the Papists Princes of Europe themselves are beholden to the
Protestants, for redeeming them from Servitude, and their Kingdoms from the
mere will and mercy of the Pope.

176. The Pope having conquered the Emperor by Cursing, is past doubt now of
Conquering Rome, (for such Men were Bishops by Conquest, and not by Consent.)
To Tusculum he goes, and now demands of the Romans, that they abrogate the
Office of the Consuls: But finding this too hard a task to be done at once, he
makes a bargain with them, that none should by the People be chosen Consuls,
till they had taken an Oath of Fidelity to the Pope, in his own proposed words,
and that they would never do any thing against his dignity. And so Alexander
goes the third time to Rome, and calls a Council; but quickly dies, when
after twenty years contention, he thought he was new settled in peace, An. 1185.

177. Onuphrius, after Radavicus Frising. Joan. Cremon. Abb. Ursperg. etc.
says that it was this Pope Alexander, that first ordained that the Clergy and
People being excluded from the Election of the Pope, (and so he was no true
Bishop) the choice should be in the Cardinals shut up in Conclave, and go by
two third parts of their Votes, to avoid Schisms for the time to come.
Onuphrius says, that he had the writing of Pope Lucius the 3d, that says, he
was the first that was chosen by the Cardinals scrutiny, (though the Cardinals
in a looser way were lately made Electors before.)

He that is no Bishop, is no Universal Bishop or Pope:
But he that is not chosen by the Clergy or People of that Church, is no
Bishop. The Minor is proved by the Canons of many Councils.

178. The Epistles of Alexander are so full of Usurpation and Treason against
Princes, that Binnius thought it best to omit them, and give you but the
Titles: But those that concern England are in Mat. Paris, whom Binnius
refers you to, though he often reproach him for speaking truth. Many are about
Tho. Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, and against the Emperor and the King of
England, forbidding the Coronation of Henry the 3d, and suspending Roger
Archbishop of York for Crowning him, and such like, to show how he was King of
Kings.

179. CCCCXXI. Of the Councils in Alexander's time recorded by Binnius, the
first is An. 1160. at Papia called by the Emperor which voted Victor Pope, and
condemned Roland, called Alexander. The Letters of the Emperor and the Bishops
tell us,
that this Council consisted of immunerable Bishops and Abbots, and that the
Emperor, after a good Speech, departed, and left all to their judgments: And
that it was there proved by the Oaths of many Witnesses, that Victor was chosen
by the full consent of the People and Clergy, and some Cardinals, and that,
twelve days before Roland was chosen; and that Roland was present and
contradicted not, but bid them obey him that was chosen: And that after being
Chancellor he stole out of the City, and the major part of the Cardinals having
before the death of the last Pope entered a Confederacy, to choose none but one
of themselves that confederated (against the Emperor) they secretly chose
Roland; the People and Clergy (a multitude subscribing) all desiring Victor:
There or four Kings also consenting to accept him, when the Council declared
him the only true Pope, and Roland a perfidious Usurper.

Here is all the Romans,
Clergy and People, the Emperor and many Princes,
and a Council of innumerable Prelates of Germany, Italy, etc. against the
major Vote of an upstart sort of Men called Cardinals, that had confederated
treacherously before: And yet the Roman Papacy is by Succession from this Man,
that was no true Bishop himself.

CCCCXXII, CCCCXXIII, CCCCXXIV, CCCCXXV. An. 1161. Alexander got a Council at
Clermont, and another at Newmarket, and another at Belvacum; and An. 1164.
another at Tours, to curse the Emperor and Pope Victor. The French taking his
part, (and the English at last) kept up the Schism and Contention.

The Reader must take this notice by the way, that such Meetings as we call
Parliaments, the Popish Historians often call Councils, that they may draw Men
to think that what Parliaments did was done by Clergy Power; And when Lords,
Commons and Bishops met in the same Assembly, some called them Parliaments,
and some Councils; And as Spelman says, page 529. The same Assemblies were
indeed mixed, and partly Civil or Royal (as he calls them, because called by
the King) and partly Ecclesiastical. But among the Romanists, Councils are
greatly advanced by this ascribing to them the Acts and Power of Parliaments.

Accordingly the Parliament at Clarendon is called a Council by Binnius,
(CCCCXXVI) by the reproachful name of Conciliabulum, because they settled the
Rights of the King as Ruler of the Clergy, and would not let the Pope be King
of England, (which is the Henrician, or Royal Heresy, to be punished by Fire
or other death on Kings themselves, when the Pope is big enough to do it.) In
this Council or Parliament, Thomas of Canterbury, and the rest of the Bishops
concurred with the rest (for fear.) But Thomas when he came home repented, and
imposed so strict Penance on himself, that the Pope hearing of it, was sain in
absolve him.

180. CCCCXXVII. An. 1171. Binnius says, that Ireland being given to the Pope
as soon as they became Christians, the Pope gave it to King Henry the 2d, as
soon as he had conquered it; and a Council at Cassel was called for Reformation.

Note here, 1. That the Pope has great reason to seek the Conversion of the
Kingdoms of the world, if they are his when they are converted.

2. That it is no wonder if five parts of six of the world be still Infidels,
or at least that they are unwilling to yield to Popish Christianity, when
Heathen and Infidel Kings must lose their Kingdoms, and become Subjects to the
Pope, if they turn to Popish Christianity.

3. That it has long been a cunning way of Bounty with Popes, to give Princes
their own Kingdoms and Conquests, when they cannot take them from them.

CCCCXXVIII. An. 1179. was the Synod at Venice for reconciliation.

181. CCCCXXIX. An. 1180. Alexander being at peace, called a Council at Rome,
which they call General, or the 11th General Council approved at Lateran: In
which are many reforming Canons, and many for the Papal power. The first is (as
aforesaid) to confine the power of Pope-making to two third parts of the
Cardinals only. Another to degrade those ordained by the three Anti-Popes.
Another that no one have many Churches, etc. And the last against some called
Cathari, Patrini, or Publicani as Heretics, giving those Indulgences that will
fight against them, and absolving all Inferiors from all Fidelity and Duty to
them, etc. Some think that these were the Waldenses, some the Albigenses. But I
have elsewhere showed (against Mr. Danvers) that there were several sorts then
in those Countries, some Manichee Heretics, and some good Christians called
Waldense!, and Albigenses, but against the Pope and his Superstitions, whom the
Papists would jumble together to disgrace the best: who were, as some of their
own Writers (e.g. Sanders lib. 7. de vis. Monar.) say, A portion of the
Henricians, that is, of the Emperor Henry's Heresy, that held the Pope's false
usurping Excommunications were to be contemned (not as from Henry their
Teacher) that is, they were Royalists, and against the Pope's ruling the abused
world by the Cursing way.

182. To this Council, Crab and Binnius have annexed a voluminous Appendix of
Decrees, of which many are notable. As that no Bishop may suspend a Presbyter
without the judgment of his Chapter. That a Perjured Clergyman is to be
perpetually deprived,
and may not govern a Church. That in case of ambiguity of words, we must have
recourse to the common understanding of them, with diverse others.

183. Alexander dying, Lucius the 3d is the first chosen by the Cardinals,
according to Alexander's Lateran Council, (as is aforesaid.) And to perfect the
Papacy, having got the choice of the Bishop out of the hands of the Clergy and
People of Rome, his Flatterers next persuade him to put down the Order and Name
of Senators,
which attempting, his Party by the Cities insurrection had their eyes put out,
and the Pope forced to leave the City; and at Luca, while he provoked Princes
to send Soldiers to Jerusalem and Asia, he dyed.

184. CCCCXXX. One Council this Pope had at Verona, as they say, where the
Emperor Frederick met him, and solicited him to restore all the Bishops and
Clergy deposed that had adhered to him and the Anti-Popes. The Pope consented,
but said he could not do it without another Council: (By which it appears,
that this at Verona was no true Council.)

185. Urbanus the 3d is next Pope, called Turbanus, as an Incendiary, by Ab.
Ursspergens. but better spoken of by Platina; he sat above one year. It Is said
that he dyed of grief for the loss of Jerusalem in his time.

CCCCXXXI. A Council he had at Paris, they say, for Jerusalem, too late.

186. Gregory the 8th succeeds him two months, and dies.

187. An. 1187. Clement the 3d succeeded him, who importuneth the Christian
Kings to recover Jerusalem.
The Emperor Frederick, the King of France, and Richard King of England, go in
person. The Emperor was drowned in Asia, as he was wa^^ing himself in a River.
The rest do much, but all to little purpose, but to the great destruction of
many Christians. The Pope sends an Army into Sicily to claim it for the
Church, because the King dyed childless: There also bloody havoc is made.

An. 1188. An Assembly at Paris furthered the Holy War, (Binnius will call it a
Council.)

188. Though this Clemens sat but three years, and five months, he ended the
long War between the Romans and the Pope, granting them their Senators, but
deposing their Patricius or Head, that Union might not strengthen them.

189. Caelestine the 3d comes next, who to get Sicily from Tancred, gets out
of a Nunnery a devoted Virgin that was the Heiress, and marries her to the
young Emperor Henry the 6th, and gives him with her the Kingdoms of Sicily and
Naples, (when he can get them) and so wholly obliges him to the Church; and to
surrender Tusculum, which the Romans utterly demolish. Sicily the Emperor gets,
and puts out Tancred's eyes, but Naples was too hard for him, his Soldiers
dying of the Plague.

How the King of France and the King of England disagreed in Palestine; and how
the King of France returned home, and treacherously joined with John the King's
Brother, to invade the King of England's Dominions, and so called him from
attempting the Siege of Jerusalem, and how he was taken Prisoner by the way
home, many Histories acquaint you.

190. Binnius out of Urspergens. tells us, how this Pope that had sent the King
of France into Palestine, for his repudiating his Wife after, interdicted the
whole Kingdom of France the use of holy thing. O horrid Villainy, worse than
Heathenish!
For one Man's Family-sin, to forbid so great a Kingdom to worship their God
and Savior. Saladine when he had taken Jerusalem, dealt better with the
Christians. O bewitched Princes and People, that by their degenerate Prelates
would be brought to suffer or submit to such a wickedness, contrary to the
nature of all Religion! O wicked Prelates and Clergy, that would obey an
Usurper in suc^ a wicked Interdict! But the King of France grievously punished
his Clergy for the Fact. For it was done by the Pope's Legate and the Bishops at
a Council at Divion: (the CCCCXXXII. here.)

191. Next comes the great Pope Innocent the 3d, (a young man of 30 years old
called Lotharius) An. 1198.

192. The Duke of Saxony, Otho the 4th, succeeds the Emperor Henry the 6th.
But Philip of Suevia is his Competitor, and the King of France was for Philip
(Henry's Brother) and the Pope for Otho, hating Frederick's Line. Some say
Philip conquered and deposed Otho, but Petavius, after diverse others, says,
that they agreed that Philip should Reign quietly during his life, and Otho
afterward succeed him. After ten years Otho, a Palatine of the Rhine, kills
Philip, and Otho again Reigns quietly, marrying Philip's daughter. But
seeking to possess Apulia and Calabria by Arms, and not obeying the Pope's
Prohibition, the Pope Excommunicateth him first, and after sentenceth him
deprived or deposed, which at his command, the Archbishop of Mentz publishes;
which Otho despising, the Pope to show that he can make and unmake Emperors and
Kings, sets up Frederick King of Sicily, Henry the 6ths Son by C^nstantia, (the
Nun formerly, says Binnius, which Petavius denies) and commands all to take
him for Emperor. The King of France stands for Frederick, and the King of
England for Otho. Otho is overcome being forsaken and dies for grief; and
Friderick (a young man twenty years old) prevails.

193. Passing by the English and Scottish Councils, (for the Sabbath or Lords
day.) CCCCXXXIII. The Roman Council that deposed the Emperor Otto for rebellion
against the Pope was, An. 1210.

194. This Pope excommunicated our King John for rejecting Stephen Laughton
Archbishop of Canterbury: Yea, he deposed him quantum inse,
and interdicted Gods worship to the whole Kingdom, for six years three months
and fourteen days. (O wicked Bishops and Priests that would give over the
worship of God because an Usurper forbad it!) The Pope gave the King of France
commission to seize on England. King John is constrained to please the Pope.
What wars were hereupon in England, and how he gave up his Kingdom at last to
the Pope, and to hold it as of him, our own Historians certify us, yea, and
how he offered the King of Morocco to turn Mohammedan for his help.

195. CCCCXXXIX. Next comes the famous 4th. Laterane Council called by the
Papists the 12th. General, approved of 400 Bishops and 800 other Fathers (for
others they have) an. 1215. Regn. Frider. 2.

In the first Cap. is the Creed and their Transubstantiation asserted, as the
way of Union between Christ and us, we taking his flesh as he took ours: and
that no one can make this Sacrament but a Priest ritely ordained according to
the Keys of the Church which Christ gave to the Apostles and their
successors. But the Sacrament of Baptism saves by whom soever it is ritely
done.

The 2d, Cap. condemns Abbot Ioachim's doctrine who opposed Lombard as making
a quaternity for saying that Quaedam summa res est Pater Filius et Spiritus
Sanctus, et illa (res) non est generans, nec genita, nec procedens, which the
Council owneth.

The 3d. Cap. is this [We excommunicate and anathematize every Heresy That is
so called by themselves so that not only the denying of transubstantiation but
also the Henrician heresy, that is, Royalty, or that Kings are not to be
deposed by Popes is here included; and all Royalists to be exterminated or else
the King to be deposed for not doing it.
extolling itself against this holy Orthodox Catholic faith which we before
expounded, condemning all Heretics by what names soever called: having indeed
diverse faces, but tails tied together, because they agree in vanity in the same
thing.

And being damned let them be left to the present secular power or their
Bailiffs to be punished by due animadversion: the Clerks being first degraded
from their orders; so that the goods of such damned ones if they be Laymen be
confiscated, but if Clerks, let them be applied to the Churches from which they
had their stipends.

But for those that are found notable only by suspicion, unless they show their
innocence by a congruous purgation, according to the considerations of the
suspicion and the quality of the person, let them be smitten with the sword of
anathema (cursed from Christ) what upon suspicion?
and avoided by all till they have given condign satisfaction: so that if they
remain a year excommunicate, they be then condemned as Heretics.

And let the secular powers be warned and induced, and if need be compelled by
ecclesiastical censure, what offices soever they are in, that as they desire to
be reputed and taken for believers, so they publicly take an oath for the
defense of the faith, that they will study in good earnest to exterminate to
their utmost power, from the lands subject to their jurisdiction, all
Heretics, denoted by the Church; so that every one that is henceforth taken
into any power either spiritual or temporal,
shall be bound to confirm this Chapter by his oath.

But if the temporal Lord required and warned by the Church, shall neglect to
purge his country of this Heretical filth, let him by the Metropolitan and
other Comprovincial Bishops be tied by the bond of excommunication: And if he
contemn to satisfy within a year, let that be signified to the Pope, that he
may denounce his vassals thenceforth absolved from his fidelity (or allegiance)
and may expose his country to be seized on by Catholics who exterminating the
Heretics may possess it without any contradiction, and may keep it in the
purity of faith, saving the right of the principal Lord, sobeit he himself put
no obstacle hereto nor oppose any impediment: The same Law notwithstanding
being kept about them that have no principal Lords.

And the Catholics that taking the badge of the Cross shall gird themselves
for the extermining of Heretics, shall enjoy that indulgence,
and be fortified with that holy privilege which is granted to them that go to
the help of the holy land.

And we decree to subject to excommunication, the believers and receivers,
defenders and favorers of Heretics; firmly ordaining, that when any such an
one is noted by excommunication, if he contemn to satisfy within a year, let
him thenceforth be ipso jure made infamous, and not be admitted to any public
Offices or Councils, nor to chose any to such, nor to be a witness; and let him
not have power to make a Will, nor to witness, nor have succession to any
inheritance. And no man shall be compelled to answer him in any business (or
suit) but he shall be compelled to answer others: And if he be a judge, his
sentence shall be void, and no Causes shall be brought to his hearing: If he be
an Advocate, his plea (or defense) shall not be admitted: If a Register, the
instruments made by him, shall be of no moment at all, but be damned with the
damned Author. And the like we will have observed in the like cases. But if he
be a Clergyman, let him be deposed from all office and benefice, that as he is
in the greater fault, the greater vengeance may be exercised on him.

And if any, after such are marked by the Church, shall contemn to avoid them,
let them be smitten with the sentence of excommunication till he give due
satisfaction. And let no Clergyman give such pestilent persons the
ecclesiastical Sacraments, nor presume to give them Christian burial, nor
receive their alms or offerings: otherwise let them be deprived of their
offices, and never be thereto restored without the especial indulgence of the
Apostolic seat. And so the Regulars on whom this shall be inflicted, that
their privileges be not kept in that Diocese, in which they presume to commit
such excesses.

And because some under pretense (or form) of Piety, denying (as the Apostle
says) the virtue (or power) thereof, challenge to themselves the authority to
preach, when the same Apostle says [how shall they preach unless they be
sent:] Let all those be tied with the bond of excommunication, who being
prohibited, or not sent do presume publicly or privately to usurp the office
of preaching without authority received from the seat Apostolic or the
Catholic Bishop of the Place: And if they speedily repent not, let them be
punished with other competent punishment.

And we moreover add, that every Archbishop or Bishop by himself or his
Archdeacon, or fit honest persons shall twice or once in a year, go about his
parish where Fame says that Heretics dwell, and shall there compel two or
three men of good testimony, or if he see fit, the whole neighborhood to
swear,
that if they know any Heretics there or any that seek secret conventicles, or
that differ in life or manners from the common conversation of the faithful, he
will study to tell them to the Bishop. And let the Bishop himself call the
accused to his presence, who unless they purge themselves of the guilt
objected, or if after purgation made, they relapse into the former perfidie
shall be Canonically punished. And if any of them refusing by damnable
obstinacy the bond of an oath, will not swear, let them be for this very thing
reputed Heretics.

We will therefore and command,
and stritcly command in the virtue of obedience, that the Bishop do watch
diligently through their Diocese, for the effectual execution of these things,
if they will Escape Canonical revenge. And if any Bishop be found negligent and
remiss in purging his Diocese from the leaven of Heretical pravity, when this
appears by certain signs, let him be deposed from his Episcopal office, and
another fit man be substituted in his place, who will and can confound
heretical pravity.



The 4th. Chap. is against the Greeks for rejecting the Roman Pope, and and so
far abhorring the Latins, that if Latin Priests did but celebrate at their
Altars, the Greeks would not use them again till they had washed them, as being
defiled: yea, they rebaptized those that the Latin Priests baptized (the world
did not then obey the Pope, how insolently soever be trod on the divided
Princes of the West, by the conspiracy of their Prelates.) And here he was used
in his kind, and hereticated and excommunicated, and cursed as he did by others.

The 5th. Chap. [was to confirm the old Patriarchate O bountiful Pope!
on condition they receive the Pall from the Pope, and swear fidelity and
obedience to him, and make those under them to do the like] O daring challenge
and innovation!

And yet Chap. the 9th. they grant that diversity of Rites by Bishops of their
own languages and customs be used, so they will but be the sworn vassals of the
Pope.

And yet Cap. 8 in their direction for inquisition, even this Council decreed
that the accused be admitted to speak for himself, and not only the words of
the witnesses but their names also to be told him and published, and the
exception and replies admitted, lest by suppressing their names,
men be emboldned to defame, and by excluding exceptions emboldned to swear
falsely.]

Because the supposed Heretics got ground by preaching, the Cap. 10. decreed
the setting up of Preachers instead of the Bishops or to help them, because
they wanted ability or time.

The 13. Cap. was to forbid making any more new Religions, there were so many
made in their Church before.

The 17. Cap. was against Bishops that sat up feasting, drinking, or prating
till after midnight, and lie in bed the next morning and come not four times in
a year to Mass, and then talk with Laymen at the time of worship.

Cap. 43. forbids all Clergy men that have not temporal estates under them,
to take any oath of allegiance (or fidelity) to any Layman.

The 44. is to invalidate Lay-Ruler's Laws about ecclesiastical matters (as
Glebes, Mortuaries, etc.) the rest I pass by.

196. In this Council besides the Albigenses and Abbot Ioachim, Almaricus a
learned man was condemned; they say he said that All Christians were Christ's
members,
and (they add, how truly is doubtful) suffered by the Jews with him: that
Christ's body was no more in the sacrament than in another thing: That Incense
as offered in the Church is Idolatry: That every Christian is bound to believe
that he is a member of Christ: That if Adam had not sinned there should have
been no generating in Paradise nor difference of sexes.] We must take these
things on the report of such as Sanders, with some other that they charge on
him; for which when they had killed him with grief, they dig'd up his corpse and
burnt it, as they were then burning multitudes of the living.

197. In this Council Stephen Laughton Archbishop of Canterbury was deposed
for taking part with the Barons of England against King John; whose case was
now become the Pope's when he had given him his Kingdom: in so much that when
the Archbishop confessed and begged absolution, his Holiness answered [By St.
Peter, Brother, thou shall not so easily get absolution, who have done so many
and so great injuries, not only to the K. of England,
but to the Church of Rome.].

198. Let the Reader note, that 1. General Councils are the Papists religion.
2. That this is one of their greatest approved General Councils. 3. That
therefore by their Law and Religion, they are bound to exterminate all
Protestants, and that all Princes must be deposed that will not execute it, and
their dominion given to others that will. 4. That all Protestants and others
called Heretics are dead men in Law and want but judgment and execution where
their Law is in force.
5. That the Henrician heresy is one that is judged such by their Councils. 6.
That therefore not only all Protestant Kings, but all Papists that are for the
safety and power of Kings against the Popes pretended power of condemning and
deposing them, are Heretics to be exterminated and burnt (by many Canons.) 7.
Therefore Kings are beholden to the Protestant reformation (disabling the Pope
to execute his Laws and Religion) for their Crowns and lives. 8. That when ever
any King or others set up Popery and the power of their Laws and Councils in a
Kingdom that is reformed, the subjects are presently dead men in Law, being to
be destroyed as Heretics, (though Policy or want of power may hinder the
execution.) 9. Qu. Whether it be lawful for any King (or in his authority) so
to destroy his Kingdom, or to make all (or the generality of) his subjects dead
men in Law? 10. Whether by these Laws the Pope and his consenting Bishops have
not published themselves to be hosts Regum et Regnorum, if not humani generis;
and are not so to be esteemed?

199. Note also that D. Heylin, in his Certamen Epistolare against me,
answers, that it is not Kings but temporal Lords that are mentioned in this
Council; and that he and Bishop Tailor, and Bishop Gunning, and Bishop Pearson
in their dispute published by Terret or Johnson, and others before them, have
maintained that these Canons were but proposed by Pope Innocent, and not
consented to and passed by the Council. But to the first It is clear 1. that by
Domini Temporales Councils ordinarily mean Emperors and Kings as well as any
others. 2. That the words of the Council are express [eadem nihilominus lege
servata circa eos qui non habent Domin^s principales.]

And to the 2d. I answer 1. The Church of Rome actually takes this for one of
their approved General Councils, and will not be beholden to our Bishops for
their friendly favor and excuse: And therefore it is all one to us whether the
Council consented or not. 2. Mr. Henry Dodwel in his late considerations how
far Papists may be trusted by Princes, etc. page 167 and page 174 etc. has
fully answered all the reasons given by these Bishops (as Terret did in part
before;) and has added abundant proof that these Canons were passed in that
Council. 1. From the Council at Oxford where Stephen Laughton himself was. 2.
From Mat* Paris who is alleged for the contrary. 3 From Gregory 9th's
decertals. 4 From the case of John Blunt elect Bishop of Canterbury recited by
Mat. Paris an. 1233. 5. From Otto the Pope's Legate. in M. Paris an. 1237. and
that London Council. 6. From the Popes Letter to Otto an. 1238 in M. Paris. 7.
From Honorius the 3d's condemnation of Rich. de Marisco Bishop of Durham. 8.
From P. Clement the 5th's Bull for King Philip the Fair. 9. From the Council of
Tarragon. 10. From the Council at Vienna under Clement 4th. 11. From the
General Council at Lions under Gregory 10th. 12. From the Sabine Council in
Spain. 13. From a Council at Toled^ under Benedict 12th. 14. And from the
Council of Trent, 15. From the Common sense of the Case of Abbot Ioachim. 16.
And of the word Transubstantiation. 17. And of annual confession: All taken as
settled by this Council.

So that as the Papists will not accept of this Charity of our Bishops in
excusing their Religion from this part of guilt, so there is little place
indeed for an excuse.

200. The Papists themselves though they have many other Councils and instances
to prove the Popes Claim and Practice of deposing Princes, yet will not let go
this as being a famous General Council: But when here in England they would
excuse their Religion from Rebellion, they use to say, that this being not an
Article of Faith, but a Canon of Practice they are not bound to take it as
infallible. To which the said Mr. Henry Dodwell ibid. page 185. has largely
answered, to which I refer the Reader; adding only, that That which must be
Believed to be of God is not always matter of practice, yet what must be done as
by the wi^ of God, must always be, first the matter of faith: we must believe
that it is God's will before we can obey it as his will. The full answer see as
aforecited.

201. In the performance of the Laws of this Council multitudes called
heretics were burnt: Their St. Dominick preaching to the people to persuade
them to take arms under the Sign of the Cross to destroy the Heretics,
for to get pardon of their sins, so that from first to last many hundred
thousand (some say two millions, but that seems too much) were killed in
France, Savoy, Germany, Italy, and other Countries: see Sam. Clerk Martyrol.
and Archbishop Usher de^success. Eccles. Thus has Papal Rome been built and
maintained by Blood, Rebellion and Confusion, under pretense of Church Purity,
Unity and Government, and all by the pretended KEYS.

202. Honorius 3d. succeeds Innocent: He confirms the Dominican, and
Franciscan Religions and Sainteth Francis. He procures a new expedition
toward Jerusalem, and the destruction of many. The Emperor Friderick follows
his predecessors, and invadeth Italy, conquereth Sicily and Apulia (being his
own by his Mothers title.) But the Pope excommunicateth him, and by the
mediation of John King of Jerusalem (in title) he is absolved.

203. CCCCXL. Stephen Laughton being restored, a Synod at Oxford passed many
general excommunications,
and there numbered all the Holy Days to be kept, and made several Canons; One
good one was, [that every great Parish have two or three Presbyters, because of
the greatness of the work, and if one should be sick, etc. Another (repeated
many old Canons) that no fees be taken for Sacraments or Burials: etc. Another
that no Clergy-m^n should keep their Concubines PVBLICKLY in their lodgings,
nor else where go to them with scandal] (A good caution! for their credit.)

204. CCCCXLI. A German Council lamenting that Clergymen kept their Concubines
publicly and would not dismiss them, forbids this public keeping of them, C.
1, 2, 3, 5. But deals gently with them. But C. 6. those that preach when the
Bishop silenceth them, it [maketh infamous and intestable,
casting them out without hope of mercy or restitution, ab officio et
beneficio, and rendering them incapable for the time to come.

Here the Popes Legate demanded out of every Cathedral two Prebends to be given
to Rome (And great reason that he that gives all, even Bishoprics and
Kingdoms should have some again, even what he will.) But it was denied.

205. CCCCXLII. Also in a Synod at Westminster An. 1226. the Pope demanding two
Prebends out of every Cathedral, the King answered that the matter belonged to
all Christendom, and when he saw what other Kingdoms did herein, he would give
his answer.

206. Gregory 9th. is next Pope: He commands the Emperor Friderick 2d. to go
recover Jerusalem, and excommunicateth him a^ a dissembler for his delays: He
re-Sainteth St. Francis and St. Dominick. He absolveth the Emperor upon his
payment of an hundred and twenty thousand ounces of Gold for damage. The
Emperor says Mat. Paris was forced to return from Jerusalem, and make a truce,
because the Pope took his Cities in his absence and sought to betray him to the
Sultan.
The greatest sedition and heresy (says Platina) rose at Rom^ that ever was
there, so that the Pope was banished; But a plague ended it that left scarce
the tenth man alive. Again the Senators and the Pope agree not about
Legislation, and the Pope is fain to be gone again, and gets the Emperor to
promise him that their conjunct forces should assault the Romans. The Emperor
fails, and bids his Soldiers help the Romans, himself departing, the Pope by
money bireth them to help him, and recovereth Rome. He sends preachers abroad
to call men to the holy War: He Sainteth Elizabeth daughter to the King of
Hungary. An Army goes into Asia with Theobald King of Navarre and others, and
is overthrown. He would go to Rome, but is kept out: The Emperor takes many
Cities in Italy: Gregory's party get him into the City: He again curses the
Emperor, and deposes him from his Empire (by his presumptuous sentence.) The
Venetians help the Pope. The Emperor afflicts them: The Italians are divided.
In Pistoria two brothers, one called Guelph was for the Pope, and the other
called Gibel was for the Emperor, the City was (...) and the name of Guelphs
and Gibellines filled Italy with confusion. The Romans were again falling off
from the Pope, but he went among them Carrying the heads of the Apostles (you
must believe it,) and by supplication and speeches moved the People to pity
him, and got them to fight against the Emperor; which cost them and others of
the Church party in Italy dear. The Pope calls a Council to depose the
Emperor again (to kill one man twice.) But the Emperor way-layeth them, and
takes many Cardinals and Bishops, and Imprisons them by the Pisanes help:
Gregory dyed for grief in his 14th. year (or 15th.)

This is that Pope that by the help of Raymund made the Books of Decretals. So
much out of Platina. Binnius adds that the Emperor went with an Army into
Asia in performance of his vow and received Jerusalem yielded to him: And made
ten years truce with Saladine, and therefore was again excommunicated by the
Pope.

207. In this Popes time,
says Bin. the Divines of Paris after long disputation defined, that it is a
mortal sin for any man to have two benefices, when one of them suffices to
sustain him.

208. Multitudes of the Albigenses were burnt and killed as Heretics.

209. CCCCXLIII. A Council at London under Otto the Popes Legate was held An.
1237. the King sending first to charge them to do nothing against his rights,
and leaving one to see to it. The Legate was in danger for opposing
Pluralities, the Bishop of Worcester and multitudes theatning resistance, and
it was suspended.

210. Coelestine the 4th is next Pope, but not by the Laterane Canon by two
third parts of the Cardinals: some say he lived 18 days, some 17 some 14, some
say two Schismatics were between.

211. The seat was void a year and eight months and more: the Emperor keeping
many Cardinals in prison, but at the request of Baldwin of Constantinaple he
released them.

212. Innocent 4th. is next chosen, who of a Cardinal-friend became by interest
a Pope-enemy to the Emperor; and daring not to stay in Italy, fled into France,
and there calls a Council of Bishops (with these he hunted Princes,) and
excommunicateth or curses the Emperor: where says Matthew. Paris An. 1245 one
Priest being commanded to publish the curse, he does it thus. [Good People, I
am commanded to pronounce excommunication against the Emperor Frederick,
the Candles put out and Bells ringing: But not knowing the reason, though I
know the hatred between them, and that one does the wrong, but which I know
not; as far as my power reaches, I excommunicate and anathematize him that
does wrong, and absolve him that suffers the wrong, which is so hurtful to all
Christendom. And at Lions the Pope curses him again: The Emperor despised the
Popes deposition, and would not give up his Crown, for fear of his curse. The
Popes party choose Henry Laudgrave of Thuringe Emperor, who is quickly killed
besieging Vlm, (as some say) that party chose William Earl of Nassau after him:
Henry the Son of Friderick was drawn to rebel, and being overcome by his Father
soon after died. And the Emperor not long after him, by what death it is not
agreed, some say poisoned, others say stifled by Mansfred his base Son; some
say, he continued impenitent; others that he repented of his opposing the Pope
(not probable): some speak ill of him; others extol him for Learning and
worthiness.

193. Frederick being dead, the Pope travels France, and Matthew. Paris says,
that at his leaving Lions, a Crier called the Citizens (who had long
entertained him) to his farewell; and that Cardinal Hugo made his farewell
Speech, telling them what good they had done the City: For when they came
thither they found three or four bawdy houses,
but at their departure they left but one: But this one reached from the East
Gate of the City to the West gate.

194. The Pope returns into Italy, and seeks to get men to ruin Conrade
the late Emperor Fridericks Son: The King of Englands brother Richard is first
invited, but deni^d due help, and refuses; King Henry the third himself at
last is drawn in, and furnishes the Pope with a great deal of money, and the
Croisado Soldiers are turned against Conrade from the relief of Palestine:
Bitter accusations against him are published by the Pope, which Conrade
answers: He and Robert Grosthead the famous Learned holy Bishop of Lincoln
dying near together, Mat. Paris an. 1254. p. 893.
the Pope bids all that belong to the Church of Rome to rejoice with him,
because these two their greatest enemies are gone. And if such wise and holy
men as this Bishop, were numbered with the enemies of the Pope, we may
conjecture what he was and did, and whether all the Christian World were then
his Subjects, and whether Rome then needed reformation.

195. But though the King of England had so far served him, it was not enough:
Nothing less than all would serve, as Matthew. Paris, tells us, when the King
would yet be King, and did not fully obey the Pope: which he manifested in his
rant against this rare and excellent Bishop of Lincoln, the occasion of which I
think well worthy of our recital; as it is in Matthew. Paris Anno 1453. page 87^.
872. (A credible Monk though often reviled by Baron. and Bin for telling truth)

This Bishop was one of the famousest men in the whole world for knowledge,
piety and justice: The Pope had sent him an order (as says Matthew. Paris, he
often did to him and other English Bishops) to do somewhat which the Bishop
judged to be unjust. It was not so bad as an interdict to silence Christ's
Ministers; but whether it was the promoting of bad Ministers, or hindering or
excommunicating good men, some such thing it was as you may see by what
follows: The Bishop writes a Letter to the Pope and Cardinals in which he
tells them [That he would obey the Apostolical precepts: but that was not
Apostolical which was contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles;
Christ saying, he that is not with us is against us: And that cannot be
Apostolical that is against Christ: as the Tenor of the Popes Letters were:
His non obstante so often repeated, showed his inconstancy and his blotting the
purity of the Christian Religion, and perturbing the peace and quiet of
Societies; a torrent of audaciousness, procacity, immodesty, lying, deceiving,
hardly believing or trusting any one; on which innumerable vices follow. And
next after the sin of Lucifer, which in the end of time will be that also of
Antichrist, the son of perdition, whom the Lord will destroy with the Spirit of
his mouth, there neither is nor can be any other sort of sin, so adverse and
contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles and the Gospel,
and so hateful, detestable and abominable, as to kill and destroy souls by
defrauding men of the care of the Pastoral office and Ministry: which sin those
men are known by the most evident testimonies of the sacred Scripture to
commit, who being placed in power of pastoral care,
do get the salary of the pastoral office and ministry, out of the milk and the
fleece of the sheep of Christ, who are to be quickened and saved, but
administer not to them their dues: For the very not administering of the
Pastoral ministeries, is by the testimony of Scripture, the killing and
destroying of the sheep: And that these two sorts of sins, though unexpectedly
are the very worst, and beyond all comparison exceed all other sort of sin, is
manifest by this, that they are, in the two existent fore^aid things, though
with disparity and dissimilitudes, directly contrary to the best things: And
that is the worst, which is contrary to the best: And as for these sins, as
much as in them lies, one of them is the destruction of the Godhead it self,
which is superessentially and supernaturally best: and the other is the
destruction of that conformity and dei^ication (of souls) by the gracious
participation of the Divine beams, which is the best thing essentially and
naturally. And as in good things, the cause of good is better than the effect,
so in evils, the cause of evil is worse than the effect is manifest, that the
introducers in the Church of God, of such most mischievous destroyers of (holy)
formation and deification in the sheep of Christ, are worse than the destroyers
(or murderers) themselves; the nearer to Lucifer and Antichrist, and in the
greater degree of mischief (or priority) by how much the more superexcelling,
and by the greater and diviner power, given by God for edification and not for
destruction, they were the more bound to exclude and extirpate such most
mischievous murderers (or destroyers) from the Church of God: It cannot be
therefore, that a holy Apostolic Seat, to which all power is given by our Lord
Jesus Christ the holy of holies, for Edification, and not for destruction as
the Apostle testified, should command, or require any thing that bordereth on
or tends toward so hateful, detestable, and abominable a thing to Jesus
Christ and so utterly pernicious to mankind, or by any way endeavor any thing
that tends thereunto. For this were either a defection or a corruption or an
abuse of Christ's own power, which is evidently most holy and most full; or it
were an absolute elongation from the Throne of the Glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the next sitting together of the two foresaid Princes of darkness,
and of hellish punishments, in the chair of pestilence. Nor can any one with
unspotted and sincere obedience (who is a subject and faithful to that same
Seat, and not by schism cut off from Christ, and that holy Seat) obey the said
mandates and precepts, or any endeavors whatever, and whenever they come,
yea though it were from the highest order of Angels, but must necessarily
contradict them and rebel with all his strength (or power): And therefore
Reverend Lords, from the duty of obedience and fidelity, in which I am bound to
both the parents of the holy Apostolic Seat, and from the Love which I have to
Union in the body of Christ with it; I do only, filially and obediently
disobey, contradict and rebel, to the things which in the foresaid Letter are
contained, and specially, because as is before touched, they do most evidently
tend to that sin which is most abominable to our Lord Jesus Christ, and most
pernicious to mankind, and which are altogether adverse to the Sanctity of the
holy Apostolic Seat; and are contrary to the Catholic Faith. Nor can you
discretion for this hint conclude (or decree) any hard thing against me;
because all my contradiction and action, in this matter, is neither
contradiction, nor rebellion, but the filial honor due to the Divine Father,
and of you. Briefly recollecting all I say; the sanctity of the Apostick Seat
can do nothing, but what tends to edification and not to destruction: For
this is the plenitude of power, to be able to do all to edification: But these
things which they call provisions, are not to edification, but to most manifest
destruction. Therefore the blessed Seat of the Apostle cannot accept them,
because flesh and blood has revealed them which possess not the things that
are of God, and not the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is in Heaven.

196. When the Pope heard this Letter, says Mat. Paris p. 872. Not containing
himself through wrath and indignation, with a writhin aspect and a proud mind,
he says; who is this doting old man deaf and absurd, who boldly and rashly
judges my doings?
By St. Peter and St. Paul, if our innate ingenuity did not move us, I would
precipitate him into so great confusion that he should be to the whole World, a
Fable, a Stupor, an example and a prodigy.
IS NOT THE KING OF ENGLAND OUR VASSAL. AND I SAY MORE OUR SLAVE. WHO CAN WITH
OUR NOD IMP^RISON HIM. AND ENSLAVE HIM TO REPROACH.

These things being recited among the Cardinal brethren, with much ado
asswaging the rage of the Pope, they said to him, It is not expedient, O Lord,
that we decree any hard thing against this Bishop himself: For that we may
confess the truth, the things are true which he speaks: We cannot condemn
him. He is a Catholic; Yea a most holy man; more religious than we are more
holy and excellent than we, and of a more excellent life; so that it is
believed that there is not among all the Prelates a greater, no, nor any equal
to him: This is known to the whole Clergy of France and England: Our
contradiction will not prevail: The truth of this Epistle, which perhaps is
already known to many, may stir up many against us; For he is esteemed a great
Philosopher, fully learned in Greek and Latin, a man zealous for justice, a
Reader of Theology in the Schools, a Preacher to the people, a Lover of
chastity, a persecutor of Simonists: These words said the Lord Aegidius, a
Spanish Cardinal and others, whom their own Consciences did touch. They
counseled the Pope to wink at all this, and pass it by with dissimulation,
lest tumults should be raised about it: especially for this reason, that, IT IS
KNOWN THAT A DEPARTVRE WILL SOMETIME COME.] so far Mat. Paris.

197. Yet neither this Bishop nor the Historian flattered Princes, but both of
them sadly lament the oppression and other sins of King Henry: And the Bishop
commanded his Presbyters to denounce excommunication against all that should
break the Magna Charta, the Charters heretofore granted, foreseeing, says Mat.
Paris, what the King would do. And he sharply reprehended the Friar Minors,
that would not tell Great men of their sin, when they had nothing to lose
(Cantabit Vacuus, etc.) having chosen poverty that they might be freer from
hindering temptations.


198. When he lay on his death bed at Bugden in Huntingtonshire, he told Ioh.
Aegidius his learned friend, that he took them for manifest Heretics, that did
not boldly detect and reprove the sins of great men, and thereupon reprehended
and lamented the sins of Prelates, but especially the Roman; reciting their
putting unworthy and bad men into the Pastoral office, for kindred or
friendship sake. The third day before his death, he called to him many of his
Clergy, and lamenting the loss of souls by Papal avarice, groaning he said,
Christ came into the world to win souls, Is not he then deservedly to be called
Antichrist, who fears not to destroy souls? God made all the World in six
days; but to repair man he labored above thirty years: And is not a destroyer
of souls then judged an enemy of God and Antichrist] etc.


Next he goes on to show how sinfully the Pope by his non obstante overthrew
even the rights that his Predecessors had granted, vainly pretending that they
bind nothing because par in parem non habet potestatem, and what evils to the
Churches he had done, and adds [I saw a Letter of the Popes, in which I found
inserted, that they that make their Wills, or that undertake the Cr^isado, and
to help the holy land, shall receive just so much indulgence Or pardoning.
as they give money, etc. And so goes on, naming his imposing men that cannot
preach, or strangers of other languages as Pastors on the people, and his
covetous and greedy devouring all the wealth he could get, concluding

Ejus avaritiae totus non sufficit orbis,
Ejus luxuriae Meretrix non sufficit omnis.
And that he drew Kings in for his own ends, making them partakers of the prey.
Prophesying [that the (...) will not be freed from Egyptian servitude, but by
the mouth of (...). These things are small, but worse will follow within three
years] sighing and weeping out these words, his speech failed him and he died.

And ibid. Mat. Paris says, that the same night that he died wonderful Musical
sounds and Ringings were heard near in the Air by several friars, and by Fulk
Bishop of London (then not far off) who said when he heard it, that he was
confident their reverend Father, Brother and Master, the Venerable Bishop of
Lincoln was passing out of the World to Heaven.

The Bishop being dead, Id. ibid.
the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln fell out in
striving, who in the vacancy had the power of giving Prebends: wherein the
Archbishop by Power utterly oppressed them.

And M. Paris p. 880. affirms that Miracles were done after the death of this
Bishop by his virtues at Lincoln, and yet confesses some of his faults and his
sharp thundering against Monks and Nuns,
etc.

199. The same Author tells us, p. 883. anno 1254. that the Pope was so
unmeasureabley wrathful against this holy Learned Bishop, that when he was
dead, he would have taken up his bones and cast them out of the Church, and
purposed to precipitate him into so great infamy, that he should be proclaimed
a Heathen, a rebel and disobedient to the whole world; and he commanded a
Letter to that purpose to be written to the King of England, knowing that the
King would be mad enough against him The Bishop was for Magna Charta and the
countries liberties.
and ready enough to prey upon the Church: But the next night the said Bishop
of Lincoln appeared to him in his episcopal attire, with a severe countenance,
an austere look and terrible voice, he came and spoke to the Pope that was
restless in his bed, pricking him in the side with a violent thrust with the
point of his pastoral staff which he carried, and said; miserable Pope
Senebald! Do thou purpose in disgrace of me, and the Church of Lincoln to
cast my bones out of the Church, Whence did this timerity befall thee. It were
better that thou, advanced and honored by God, should honor those which are
zealous for God; even when they are dead: Henceforth God will give thee no more
power over me: I wrote to thee in the spirit of humility and love; that thou
should correct thy many errors: But with a proud eye and a bewitching heart
thou have despised wholesome warnings: Woe to thee that despispest: Shall thou
not be despised.] And the Bishop Robert departing, striking as with a lance,
the Pope, who when as is said he was pricked, groaned aloud, he left him half
dead, and with a mournful voice groaning with sighs; His Chamberlains hearing
him, being astonished asked him, what the matter was. The Pope answering with
sighs and groans, said; The terrors of the night, have vehemently troubled me;
nor shall I ever be well again as I was! Oh, alas, how great is the pain of my
side! A ghost has pierced me with a lance: An he neither eat nor drank that
day, feigning that he was inflamed with feavours that streightened his breath;
And Gods revenge and wrath did not so leave him.

Not long after the Pope, not sensible of Gods warnings by his Servants, but
setting about warlike and secular matters, he prospered not in them, though he
laid out great care and labor and cost: But Wars, yea, the Lord of hosts being
against him, his army which at great charges he had sent against the Apulians,
under the conduct of his Nephew William, being scattered, conquered and
confounded, perished with their Captain mortally wounded. They say there were
there slain of Soldiers and valiant stipendiary's of the Pope, four thousand
men: And the whole Country of the Romans lamented the shedding of so much
Christian blood. The Pope then went to Naples, though weakened as with a
plurisie in his side, or as wounded with a lance: And Cardinal Albus physic
could not help him. For Robert of Lincoln spared not Sin^bald of Genoa, And he
that would not hear him warning him when alive, felt him peircing him when dead
Nor did the Pope ever after enjoy one good day till night, nor one good night
till day, but sleepless and molested. Thus M. Paris.

200. M. Paris, p. 896 anno 1254. says that Henry the third of England obliged
himself and his Kingdom unjustly Quod tamen (says he) nec face^e potuit, nec
debuit.
to the Pope, under pain of being disinherited, to pay all the treasure which
the Pope should lay out in his War for the King (that is, to have made him King
of Sicily) And that the Pope having no mercy on England prodigally wasted its
money, but those vast sums got by rapine were all lost.

201. The same Author says p. 897. that when Pope Innocent lay dying (after
the stroke of the Bishop of Lincoln and the loss of his Army) and his followers
lay crying about him, he opened his dying eyes, and said, what do you mourn for
you wretches? Do I not leave you all rich? what would you have more? And so he
died.

202. CCCCXLIV. Anno 1245. Innoncent calls a Council called General (their
13th. Approved) at Lions of 140 Bishops, where he heaped up accusations against
the Emperor, whom Thaddaeus his agent defended: And at last pronounced himself
an excommunication and deposition, absolving all his Subjects from their Oaths
and Allegiance,
and excommunicating all that should own and help him.

Here you see that more than one of their approved General Councils are for
Rebellion and perjury, and the Popes deposing Christian Emperors.

In the same Council sad Complaints were made from England of the pillaging or
woeful impoverishing of the land by the Pope and King, but the Pope heard all
silently and would give no answer.

203. At this Council the Pope importuned the Electors to choose another
Emperor: some refused and stuck to the Emperor, saying that it belonged not
to the Pope to make or unmake Emperors: Others obeyed him, and set up Henry of
Hassia. Or Nassau or Holland, as they diversely called him.
But the Emperor while he lived kept up his possession, so far as to make the
Pope repent, and says Trithemius was a weary of his life: But all Germany,
Italy, etc. were confounded by the schim, or contention, one half (as is
aforesaid) called Guelphes following the Pope and Henry, the other called
Gibelines cleaving to the Emperor Frederick, to the shedding of abundance of
Christians blood and the desolation of Countries, and the shame of Papal
tyranny.

204. Anno 1254. Alexander the 4th. was Pope. Matthew. Paris tells us of a
terrible dream that he had of Pope Innocents damnation, or misery: But the
fault of his writing is that he was too credulous of dreams and visions. He
tells us also of twenty Miracles done at Lincoln for the sake of the late
Bishop Robert. And that at a Parliament in London, the greatest which has been
seen, all the Nobles Ecclesiastical and Civil, demanded of the King that the
choice of the Lord Chief Justice,
the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Treasurer should be in the Parliament (or
their common Council) as of old was usual, Mat. Paris p. 904. 905.
and just; and that they should not be removed without notorious faults, which
the Kings secret Councillors persuaded him to deny. Prelates and Nobles being
grieved by exactions express it, etc.

205. Here the said Monk, Matthew. Paris, exclaimeth O the steril solicitude of
the Roman Court! their blind ambition! Though holy, yet often deceived by the
Council of bad men: Why do thou not learn to moderate by the bridle of
discretion, thy violence, being taught by thing past, and so often chastised by
experience. In thy losses we are all punished, etc.

Thou now endeavourest to make two German Emperors, which must cost
inestimable treasure whence soever taken, and both uncertain of the dignity,
etc.

206. At that time the Lords and Prelates of England crying out of the King
Hen. 3d. as false and oppressive, and pillaging Churches and People to maintain
his profuseness, the Bishop of Hereford laid a Plot which the King accepted,
that getting the hands and seals of a few Bishops he would go to Rome, and get
power from the Pope to gather the King as much money as he needed. So to Rome
he went, and there found the Pope in great grief and care himself for money, to
pay vast debts that his Wars had cost him: The Bishop told him that the King
who had engaged his Kingdom to be forfeited, if he paid not the Popes debts,
would help him to money if he would be ruled by him, and write to the Bishops
and Churches to grant the King such help as they could well do. The Pope gladly
gave leave to the Bishop to write what he would; And home he went, and
Eustandus a Legate was sent from Rome to see all done: says, M. Paris, p. 911.
anno 1255. The Legate was prepared and ready in all things to the destruction
of all England to obey the will of the King which was tyrannical, and to bind
the oppressed contradictors in the bonds of Anathema. Rustandus comes with the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Hereford is empowred by the Pope
to gather moneys, for the Pope or King: A Parliament is called at Westminster:
They refuse and go home. The Popes Letters press the Collection: A Council of
Bishops is called at London, so much money is demanded, says M. Paris, as
would have enslaved or undone all the Kingdom. The Bishop of London protested
he would lose his head rather than consent: The Bishop of Worcester said he
would be hanged first: The rest follow them. The King is angry and threatens.
The Earl Marshal in anger, when the King called him Traitor, answered, thou
lie, I never was a Traitor nor will be: The King threatened to send men to
thresh out his corn and fell it to humble him: The Earl told him, if he did so
he would cut off the threshers heads and send them him: some interposed for the
time: The Lords refused to meddle with the Kingdoms business, or to impoverish
themselves, and were dissolved.

Rustandus again Congregateth the Bishops at London. They did nothing again:
says M. Paris, too boldly, p. 917. [Si enim sive just sive injuste per dictum
Magistrum Rustandum suspend^retur quis, vel excommunicaretur, Rex quasi Leo in
abscondito, quaerens quem devoraret post 40 dies omnia direperit infiscata:
Papa and Rex v^lut Pastor and Lupus, in ovium exterminium confoederati, omnibus
ruinam minabantur. And then says he, like blind men groping for the wall, the
Council were divided, and as English men are used to do, every one shifteth for
himself (or seeks to save himself.) Tithes are now paid by the Clergy to the
Laity; They are granted for the Magna Charta which was not kept: They are
granted as for the holy land and turned against Christians in Apulia: Many lies
and false oaths are imposed, says M. Paris, p. 919.

The next year the Clergy were called again, 1256. Rustandus the Legate said,
All Churches are the Popes: Leonard the Prolocut r^ answered, yes, to defend;
not to enjoy and appropriate; as we say, All things are the Prince's; that is
to defend; and not to disperse; And this was the intent of the founders. The
Legate angry at this answer, commanded that henceforth without a Prol^cutor
every man should speak for himself, that they might be known; which astonished
and silenced all. He commanded them to subscribe a Lie, that they had received
such sums of money of foreign Merchants and Usurers; which they said, it wa^
good Martyrdom to die for the refusing of. Page 920.

Here is annexed by M. Paris, A charter of King John confirmed by Pope Innocent
3d. ordering that all Bishops be freely elected without the Kings hinderance by
the Church vacant, and cursing all that otherwise come in, page 921.

207. At that time the Romans imprisoned a great Citizen Beaucales for his
justice. But Platina says this was done in Victor the 4ths. days.
The Bononians detain many Romans pledges for him: The Bononians are
interdicted sacred things: but they yield not, till Beaucalco is delivered. M.
Paris anno 1256.

The Letters of Pope Alexander and his many exactions, see farther in M. Paris
this year.

208. Anno 1257. says M. Paris, some went to Rome for the Bishopric of Ely,
and the Church of St. Edmunds, and gave and promised so vast sums of money as
astonished men with wonder. Whereupon the Pope made a new Law that every Elect
Bishop should come personally to Rome, hoping to have the like prey from others.

209. Anno 1258.
says M. Paris, p. 910. The Pope that claimed the Kingdoms of the World was
mastered in Rome, by the foresaid Senator Braucaleo, who being delivered from
Prison was beloved of the people, executed the Malefactors and his enemies;
forced the Pope to stay his excommunication and humble himself, and beg his
mercy.

210. The same year the Pope pretends anger to the King of England for not
temperating his excesses; and threatens to excommunicate him: The King is
afraid, and sends him money, and stops his mouth, p 910.

211. Against the Parliaments will the King again hearkeneth to the Pope, that
offers now the Kingdom of Apulia to Edmund his younger Son, as he did before
to Edward the Elder. But the Parliament denies him money, which he screweth
from the Abbeys and Churches.

212. says M. Paris, Sewale Archbishop of York now died a Martyr (though
without blood as many do) having constantly fought against the Tyranny of the
Roman Court oppressed by the Pope, wrote earnestly as Rob. of Lincoln had done
to the Pope to cease his tyranny. In his sickness (sath M. P.) he called for
water which was fetched out of the Well, and it was turned into excellent Wine.
p. 969.

213. How the Parliament of Barons at Oxford this year 1258. entered their
Confederacy and resolution to stand against the King for their Liberties,
Charter and Justice, M. Paris, p. 972 and many others tell you. And p. 974 how
the Londoners joined with them; and how many of the Lords were poisoned.

214. Braucaleo the Roman Senator having humbled the Pope, pulled down the
Castles of the Tyrants and Rebels, put to death the kindred of many Cardinals,
and died. The Pope forbade the Citizens choosing another without his consent.
They laugh at him and choose Braucaleo's uncle* M. P. p. 984.

215. This Pope Alexander of whom M. Paris speaks so much evil, says Binnius
post obitum suavem sui memoriam reliquit, dying 1260. And Pl^tina praises him,
in whom you may see more of his life, and Wars against Maufred, etc.

216. Next comes Urban 4th. Patriarch of Jerusalem: of whom no great matters
are recorded. He ordained Corpus Christi day.

217. Next comes Clem. 4th. a French Lawyer a Widdower, and then Bishop. His
first good work was to go to Perusium in the habit of a beggar: His life is
praised by Platina, Onuphius, Binnius, etc. How he made a Frenchman Charles
King of Scicily, and Apulia, and how Maufred was killed and conquered, etc. I
need not trouble the Reader in reciteing.

218. CCCCXLV. In his days Canisius has found a small Council at Vienna for
reforming some things in the Clergy, Bin. p. 1492.

219. Next comes Gregory 10th.
But the Seat was vacant first almost three years: So long the Church of Rome
was extinct, if the Pope be an essential part (as they would have him even of
the Universal.)

220. CCCCXLVI. In his time a Council at Lions (called the the 14th. Universal
approved one by them) was held: in which the poor Emperor of Constantinople,
Michael* Paleologus being in danger at his wits end came in person to flatter
the Pope in hope of help. There also was decreed the shutting up of the
Cardinals at Elections for fear of vacancies as had happened by discord and
delays. The Pope interdicted the Florentines, because the Guelphes refused to
receive the Gibelines, which quarrel still cost bloody Wars. Rodulph is made
Emperor, and the Pope dies.

Onuphrius further opens the Reasons and Rules of the Cardinals being shut
up; viz. Clem. the 4th. being dead, the Cardinals (as is aforesaid) were all so
desirous to be Popes themselves, that they were two years and nine months
contending, and could not possibly agree. Philip King of France and Charles
King of Sicily came themselves to Rome to entreat them, but departed without
success. Yet they invoked the Holy Ghost every day to help them. At last the
Cardinal Bishop Ioh. Portuensis deridingly prayed them to uncover the houses,
for the Holy Ghost could not come in through so many covered roofs: At last by
Bonaventures entreaty, they chose Theo^ald a Viseount and Archdeacon that was
with our Prince Edward going to fight in Palestine: And the said Cardinal
Portuens. made these Verses on their choice, anno. 1271.

Papatus munus tulit Archidiaconus Vnus,
Quem Patrem patrum fecit discordia fratrum.
221. Innocent the 5th. comes next; the first after the shutting up of the
Conclave. He sought to end the Italian Wars, but died before six months reign.

222. CCCCXLVII. A Council at Sal^zburge is published by Conisius, as in Greg.
the 10ths. days, but it seems liker to be after* which condemned Pluralities,
nonresidence of Priests, and their being in Taverns (or Alehouses) and playing
at Dice, and their wearing long Hair and sine Clothes, and restrained
supernumerary begging Scholars, and ordered that the Bishop should imprison
such as profaned holy things after they were excommunicated or suspended: It
seems that Bishops had by this time got coercive power; but they used it not
to bring the unworthy to the Sacrament, but to keep the unworthy from it and
from other profanations.

223. Next Ottobonus, that was Pope Innocent the 4ths. Nephew, and Legate of
England at the Barons Wars, is chosen Pope, but died before his Consecration,
within forty days, but got the name of Hadrian the 5th.

224. Next comes Pope John the 22th. as Platina, the 19th. as Binius, and the
21st as most, the 20th. by Onuphrius, 1276. He was a Physician, made Bishop,
inverecundi and socordis ingenii, says Platina, so foolish that he boasted
how long he should live, when presently the house fell on his head, and he died
by it in seven days after. Suffridus (says Binius) says that he was writing
an heretical perverse book, when the room fell, and cried out after, O, what is
become of my book? Who will finish it? which says Binius, if true, He died the
first year.
shows the wonderful Providence of God for his Church. But had this Pope been
infallible, had he been in a Council?

purposed to revoke the decree for shutting up the Cardinals in Conclave, and
this man finished the revocation, and till the days of Celestine 5th. that
renewed it, it stood revoked, says Onuphrius.

225. Next came Nicholas 3d. after six months contention and vacancy. King
Charles as Senator presiding and pleading for a French Pope. He is commended
much, save that he set up all his own Kindred too much.

226. After three years reign, eight months and fifteen days of Nicholas came
M^rtin 2d. vulgo 4th. says Binius and Onuphrius a Frenchman: In his time, the
Greek Emperor Paleologus (not keeping his promise to the Pope) joined with
Peter King of Arragon, who claimed Sicily as his Wives inheritance; and though
the former Pope had set him on, this was against him, restoring King Charles to
be Senator at Rome, and siding with him, because he was a Frenchman: But the
fatal Sicilian Vespers killed all the French, and Peter overcame Charles and
took his Son, and Charles and the Pope shortly died of Fevers.

But before he died the Pope played the old Game, excommunicating and cursing
King Peter,
and gave his Kingdom for a prey to any one that would get it, and absolved all
his Subject from their Oath of Allegiance, and signed Croisado's (Soldiers
under the sign of the Cross) to fight against him.

227. Honorius the 4th. comes next (his Brother being Senator at Rome) He
confirmed the same Anathema against Peter King of Arragon, who shortly after
died of a wound received in fight by the French. The Pope dies (and the seat
is void ten months) 1287. after two years Reign.

228. Anno 1287. CCCCXLVIII. A Council was held at Herbipolis by the Popes
Legate, endeavoring to have got the tenth penny of the Estates of the Clergy
for the Pope, and of the Laity for the Emperor (by their joint consent.) But
Siphridus Archbishop of Colen, and Henry Archbishop of Trevers stoutly
opposing, frustrated both their Conciliary designs.

229. Anno 1288 came P. Nicolas 4th. a Religious Man, General of the Minors,
when he had four years together labored in vain to stay the blood in Italy,
between the Guelphes and Gi^ellins, and to reconcile the French and English,
and to relieve the Christians in Palestine, he died: And the Cardinals, though
for liberty they went to Perusium, kept the Church headless two years and three
months by contention, though Princes in vain endeavored to persuade them to
agreement. (Are these no intercessions of the Succession?)

In this time died Mich. Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople, and the Clergy
and Monks would not suffer him to be buried in holy ground,
because in the Council at Lions, he had consented to the Church of Rome,
Platina. Was this a true Reconciliation of the ^reek Church?

230. Anno 1286. CCCCXLIX. A Council at R^v^nna (in Honorius time) made some
Canons for Reformation.

231. Anno 1291. CCCCL. A Council at S^lts^urg for reconciling some Christians.

232. Anno 1292. CCCCLI. The Archbishop of Mentz held a Council at
Aschaffenburge which they say did many good things; It is not known what.

233. Anno 1294. After two years and four months vacancy Caelestine the 5th. a
Religious man of solitary life is chosen Pope* If ever there was a good Pope it
is likely this was one: But he was no sooner settled by common applause, but the
Cardinals, especially Bened. Cajetaenus a subtle man persuaded him that his
simplicity and unskilfulness would undo the Church, and urged him to resign.
King Charles and the people dissuade him, and are only for him: But the
Cardinals prevailed, and he resigned; And going to his solicitude again, the
Cardinal Ben. Cajetaue that got him to resign, sent him Prisoner to the Castle
of Fumo, where (at best) he died of grief: Some write that Cardinal Cajetane
got a way to speak through a Pipe put into the Wall as if it were some Angel,
to charge him to resign; He was too good to be a Pope.

234. The deceiver that got him out, succeeded him, called Boniface the 8th.
(by Bin. 7th.) 1294. This is he of whom it is said, Intravit ut vulpes,
regnavit ut Leo, exivit ut Canis. He raised Wars to prosecute some Cardinals
and the Gibelines: While he lived wickedly he set up a Jubilee, proclaiming
Pardon of all sins to them that would visit limina Apostolorum, that is,
himself: A terrible Earthquake made him for fear set up a hut of boards in an
open Meadow, lest the houses should fall on him: He dug up the body of one
Hermane, that had twenty years been honored as a Saint, and burnt it as a
Heretics. He sent a Bishop to Philip^ King of France to entreat him to go
fight in Palestine, and threatened him when he could not entreat him. The King
imprisoned the Bishop. The Pope sent to require him to release him, saying
openly, that the Kingdom of France was divolved to the Church,
for the contumacy of Phillip and his violating the Law of Nations; and bid him
Anathematize him, and absolve all Frenchmen from the Kings Oath. The King let
go the Bishop, but forbad all his Subjects going to Rome or sending any money
thither, and not enduring his insolency, he assembled his Nobles and declared
the Popedom void by Usurpation and unjust entrance of Boniface, and appealed
to a Council; He Coined money with this Inscription [Perdam Babilonis nomen]
The Pope called a General Council, where he gave the Kingdom of France to
Albert the Emperor, Anathematizing the King. The King would not play with him,
but sends Sciarra and Nogarete to Italy to proclaim his Appeal: But Sciarra in
a mean habit^ gets together many friends, that the Pope had oppressed and
surprizeth him in his Fathers house, breaks open the doors, carries him from
Avignia to Rome a Prisoner, where the thirtieth day he died of grief, of whom
says Platina [Thus died Boniface, who endeavored more to put terror than
Religion into Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations and People; and to give
Kingdoms and take them away to expel men and reduce them at his pleasure,
unspeakably thirsting for gold, which way ever to be gotten. Let all Princes
Ecclesiastical and Secular (says he) learn by this man's example to go before
the Clergy and people,
not proudly and contumaciously, as, he did, but holily and modestly as Christ
and his disciples, and true imitators, and choose rather to be loved than
feared, from whence the ruin of Tyrants deservedly comes.


235. Anno 1297. CCCCLII. Bin. says, a Council (Lugdunense) decreed that
Princes should not tax their Clergy, nor the Clergy pay them without the Popes
Consent.

236. Anno 1302, CCCCLIII. The Popes General Council at Rome excommunicateth
the King of France as aforesaid. His Army follow their Captain Pope.

237. Benedict the 11th. alias the 10th. alias the 9th. is next chosen Pope,
(much praised): who excommunicated Sciarra, and absolved King Philip, and died
before nine Months.

238. Anno 305. Enters Clemens the 5th. the Bishop of Bourdeaux,
who called the Cardinals to France, and settled the Popes Court there, where it
continued seventy years, till the Church and great buildings at Rome were
desolate and ruinous, says Platina. In his time Albert the Emperor was killed
by his Nephew: Italy confounded by Wars: The Pope curses and interdicteth the
Venetians, the Florentines, the Lucenses: Requires the new chosen Emperor of
Luxemburge to come to Rome for Coronation; He enters Italy; some Cities fight
against him, some yield: At Rome demanding money, they resist, and it comes to
force, and he is driven back: After many bickerings and Cities taken, he dies,
as is said (says Plat.) Poisoned in the Eucharist by a Monk. Two fight for the
Empire, Lodovic. Bavour and Frederec* Austriae: Lodovicus conquereth and makes
himself Emperor. Clement burns two as Heretics, makes P. Caelestine the
5th. a Saint*
writes his Clementinus, and dies, and again there was no Pope, for two
years, three months and seventeen days.

239. CCCCLIV. A Council at Saltzburge to get money (Tenths) for the Pope.

240. CCCCLV. Another there Anno 1310. declaring some penalties.

241. CCCCLVI. Another at Mentz to extirpate the Templats, where some of them
rusht in and appealed to the next Pope, protesting they were killed and burnt
wrongfully, without being heard speak for themselves.

242. CCCCLVII. But the great Council called by them the 15th. General Council
approved, was at Vienna near France, on this occasion. King Philip having got
the Popedom, for Clem. the 5th. made him promise to condemn Pope Bonif. the
8th. and all his Acts: When he had possession, he found himself in a straight,
and Nicholas Cardinal Pratensis advised him to please the King with the hopes
that a General Council would do it most effectually, and to get the Council out
of his Country and power: which being done the Council frustrated the Kings
expectations: The King accused Pope Boniface of Simony, Heresy, and Perjury,
in forty Articles. His crimes were not denied, but they justified him to be a
true Pope, and found him not an Heretic.

In this Council the Templars were condemned and put down, and their Lands
given to the Jerusalem Hospitalers, or Knights of Rhodes (which they say King
Philip thought to have got) some say the Templars were falsely accused of
Heresies (and the Masters and others burnt): Others say, truly. The most
probable, is that some particular Men of them (no new thing among Soldiers)
committed many Villainies, and the rest suffered for their sakes.

In this Council the Heresies of Petrus Ioan^is a Disciple of Abbot Ioachim,
were condemned, which were three. 1. That the rational Soul, as rational, is
not the form of humane bodies. 2. That habitual grace is not infused in Baptism
(that is always and to Infants). 3. That Christ's side was pierced with the
Lance before he was dead.

In this Council the Fratricelli and Dulcinists were Condemned, and also eight
Heresies of the Beguines and Beguards; which were these (all for perfection,
which Quakers and some Friars now seem to be too much for in profession, as we
all are in desire) 1. That man in this life, may get such a degree of
perfection, as that he may become impeccable (or sinless) and so to rise to no
higher a degree of grace: Else, say they, if one might still increase he might
grow better than Christ.

2. That when one has atteined that degree, he ought not to fast or pray:
Because then sensuality is perfectly subject to the Spirit and reason, so that
a man may then freely grant his body what pleases him.

3. That they that have got this degree of perfection and the Spirit of
liberty, are not subject to humane obedience, nor bound to any precepts of the
Church, for where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

4. That thus a man may get final beatitude in all degrees in this life, as
well as in that to come.

5. That every intellectual nature is naturally blessed in it self, and the
soul needs not the light of glory for the seeing and enjoying of God.

6. That to exercise virtues is a note of imperfection.

7. That to kiss a Woman is sin, because nature needs it not; but copulation
is not, because nature requires it, when one is tempted.

8. That one ought not to rise and to reverence at the elevation of Christ's
body, because he must not descend from the altitude of his contemplations so as
to to think of the Sacrament or Christ's humane body.



It seems these were such fanatiks as some Friars are.

In this Council the decrees called Clementines were passed; in which are
specially noted by Binius, some things de fide, as follows.

I. That it is heresy to call in doubt, or assent that the substance of the
rational or intellective soul is not truly and perfect the form of man's body.

II. That whereas Divines differ about the effect of Baptism, some saying that
to Infants sin is remitted, but not Grace conferred; others saying that the
fault is remitted and virtues or informing Grace infused as to the Habit,
though not yet for use, we attending the general Efficacy of Christ's death,
which by Baptism is equally applied to all, judge the second opinion more
probable and agreeable to the sayings of the Saints and modern Doctors of
Theology, the sacred Council approving this, which says, that both to adult
and infants in baptism informing grace and virtues are given.

III. If any one fall into this error that as pertinaciously to affirm that
Usury is no sin, we decree that he be punished as an Heretic, and the
ordinaries and inquisitors for heresy may proceed against such as against
heretics.

IV. And it is decreed that if any Communities or Officers shall presume to
write or dictate that usury should be paid, or being paid should not be fully
and freely restored, let them be excommunicate, and they shall incurr the same
sentence that do not as far as they can blot out such statutes out of the
books of the said Companies, that shall keep such customs.

Also that Usurers be compelled to show their books of accounts.

243. Here the Pope and the Bishops in a General Council have judged diverse
points to be heresy, and consequently their contraries to be Articles of
faith: And for Heresy they curse, burn and damn men.

1. I overpassed their Article that Christ was dead before his side was
pierced, which is true: But whether an Article of our Creed necessary to be
understood to Salvation, let the Church Creed be witness.

2. Its well, that the possibility of sinless perfection is made a heresy by
them (for we must daily pray for pardon): But why then do they talk so much of
the possibility of keeping all Gods Law, that is of never sinning; and talk of
perfection, and works of Supererogation?

3. Do not they make an Article of Faith of a Logical Arbitrary Notion (that
intellectual Souls being the Bodies form) who knows not how ambiguous the word
form is? An Aristotle supposes a Corpus organicum, besides the Soul; and that
Corpus has its form qu^ Corpus. I imagine, that these Bishops meant the same
thing, that I do, and that our difference is but of the fitness of words; but
^will so far venture on their heretication as to say, that forma Corporis,
forma Animae, and forma Hominis, are diverse: That Corpus organicum qua tale
has its proper form, which denominateth it such; which is not the Soul: That
the Soul being a substance has its proper from which denominateth it, and
which it retains, when separated from the Body: And that the intellectual
Soul is forma Hominis, but improperly called forma Corporis: I will venture on
their Heretication, to tell them my opinion, and I think their Error and
Presumption to thrust such things on Men under the penalties of cursing,
burning, and damnation,

4. Their Article of Faith about the effect of Baptism (That all that are
bapti^ed at Age and Infants have both pardon and infused inf^rming habitual
Grace, I take for unproved, and have elsewhere proved it to be false in all
probability, as universally taken.

5. The Article of Faith, That Usury is a Sin, does hereticate many great
Divines, more Lawyers, and most Cities, Corporations, and Companies in the
World: No doubt, but all Usury is a sin that is against either Mercy or
Justice: But that some Usury may be an Act of great Charity, many wise men
think past doubt: We have known some get estates of many thousand pounds a year
by trading with money taken upon Usury, when perhaps some that Leant that
money, had nothing but the Use to buy them bread and course clothing, and keep
them from perishing. How many thousand Great Men, Lawyers and Citizens are to
be cursed, burnt, and damned by this Canon, for holding some Usury to be
Lawful: Nay, how many for not restoring it when taken; when perhaps, an Orphan
took it of a rich man to save them from famine. This is the benefit of
hereticators.

244. Anno 1311. Was a Council at Ravenna CCCCVIII. for Discipline and
Reformation of the Churches manners, with many superstitions.

245. CCCCLIX. Anno 1314. Another at Ravenna, was like the former.

246. Next comes Pope John the 20th alias 21th. alias 22th. alias 23th. He
lived at Avinion: He thought souls were kept in some receptacles from the ^ight
of God till the Resurrection: He damned those that held that Christ and his
Apostles possessed no Propriety (Platina thinks contrary to the Gospel.) He
tormented to death Hugo Bishop of Cature for being against him. He cursed and
excommunicated the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, and many other great men: Italy
was all in Wars in his days. The Emperor set up another Pope in Italy against
him, Nicol. the 5th. which was says, Onuph. 28th. Schism at Rome, was not he
that was at Rome liker to be Bishop of Rome, than he that was in France.) But
the Pope Nicolas after three years Reign was catched by one that would merit of
Pope John, and sent to him, and put in Prison, where he soon died: and John
died at Ninety years Old after Nineteen years Reign, leaving more money behind
him, than any Pope that ever went before him.

His process against Lodov. the Emperor, They forbad any below a Bishop to
examine or judge a Priest as his ordinar^.
you ^ay see in Freherus History Rer. Bohem. and others more at large.

247. CCCCLX. Another Council at Ravena, Anno 1317. to the same purpose with
the former, where the manners of those times may be noted in the crimes
forbidden: The 3d. Can. shows that men had then the place of Archdeacons
before they were ordained Deacons, and the places or benefices of Abbots,
Deans, Archpresbyters, Prelates, (Praepositi) before they were ordained
Priests: And the Cannon requires such to be after ordained within a year.

Can. 18. Excommunicateth all Lay Magistrates, that take a Priest or Clerk in
arms or in any excess or sin, and keep him, (that is imprison him or punish
him) and do not send him to his Bishop; or that sending him to the Bishop do
openly shame him, by sending him with trumpets or armed men, or with his arms
hanged about his neck.

248. CCCCLXI. Anno 1322. A Concilium Sabinense had many of the like orders to
restrain the vicious Clergy, and yet Can. 3. excommunicate secular Judges that
compel them to answer at their Bar. Especially they are large in imposing
penalties on those that publicly keep Concubines in their houses (and have not
the modesty to fornicate more secretly.) If they put not away their Concubines
in two Months they must lose the third part of their tithes, and after other
two months another third part, and at last the other third part, and after be
incapable of preferment, etc. These are gentler penalties than a differing
opinion is punished with under the name of a heresy.

249. CCCCLXII. Anno 1324. A Council at Toletane to the like purposes.

250. CCCCLXIII. The two Popes called two Councils against each other as
Heretics (were neither in the right.)
John in a Council at Avignion proved Nicolas the 5th. a heretic for holding
that Christ possessed nothing as Proprietor; Nicolas called a Council in Italy
which condemned John as a heretic for holding the contrary: Thus the
hereticators were hereticated.

251. The French now got the Power of the Papacy,
and another French man was chosen Pope Anno 1334. called Benedict. 11. alias
12th. He renewed the excommunication and deposition of the Emperor Ludov. and
claimed the Empire to himself, concluding that being vacant it fell to the
Church (see to whom Kingdoms escheat): whereby he set all Italy in Wars in all
the Cities, giving them to the Rulers as the Popes Leiutenants, and persuading
the Romans also to depose the Senatorean power as of the King, and to exercise
it themselves under the Church: He lived above seven years Pope.

This Pope contrary to his Predecessor defined that souls sufficiently purged
enjoy the clear vision of God before the resurrection.

252. CCCCLXIV. Anno 1339.
A Toletane Council decreed among other things that every Rector of a Church
and their Vicars under pain of excommunication do every year write the names of
all their Parishioners that come to years of discretion, and consign (confirm)
all that are confessed, and excite them to come to the Sacrament; But if they
have not received it, let them abstain unless it be by the Counsel of their own
Priest. And those that confess not, after a year to expel from the Church, and
deny them ecclesiastical burial.

253. Anno 1342. Another Frenchman (Bishop of Roven) is made Pope at Avignion:
Clem. 6. All Italy and Naples was put into the flames of Wars. He forced the
Germans to set up another against the Emperor Lodov. Bavarus, which was
Charles Son of John the 11. of Bohemia. Charles sends bound to the Pope, a new
Senator Nicolas Rentii that ruled all at Rome. He made a new Jubilee; he
labored in vain to reconcile King Edward of England to the French, the English
conquering their Navies and taking Calis, etc. The Colenses and Trevinuses
having contributed money as to a Turkish expedition, that Pope liberally
rewarded them, by granting them license to eat Eggs and Milk-meats on any
fasting days out of Lent.

254. CCCCLXV. Anno 1347. A Toletane Council against Simony, etc.

255. Anno 1352. Innoc. the 6th. is made Pope of Avignion: The Emperor
Lodovi^* died.
All Italy was still kept in blood: One Barnacellus Lorded it as Ruler at Rome:
The Pope craftily lets Nicolas Gencii out of Prison to set up against him;
Nicolas gets the better and kills him: but domincering too much is next
killed himself. 1347. The new Emperor Charles is Crowned in Italy. The Romans
put the power into seven Citizens called Reformers of the common wealth. The
Pope sets Hugo King of Cyrus against the Reformers, and bids him pull them
down. But trouble came near him: Our King Edward conqer^d the French, and took
the King and his Son Philip Prisoners, nobly releasing the Prisoners upon
promise that they would fight against him no more, which they presently brake;
The Pope dies.

256. Having long said nothing of the Greek affairs, I here only briefly say,
that the utter confusion of their imperial Successions by murders and
Usurpations, and the continued confusions of their Church affairs ever since
the divisions of the Orthodox Nestorians, Entychians, Monothelites, etc makes
it both a hard and unpleasant task to give any exact account of their Bishops,
Synods and manifold contentions, which furthered the ruin of the Empire. Their
divisions gave the Latins opportunity to take Constantinople 1204. which they
kept 58 years, and then lost it. Baldwin was the first Latin Emperor whom the
Bulgarians conquered, and took Prisoner Anno 1205. and kept sixteen months, and
then put him to death. Henry his brother succeeded him 1206 and died 1216.
Peter succeeds him that married his sister (or daughter) and is quickly slain
by Theodorus Lascaris. Robert succeeds his Father Peter 1261. Theodore
Lascaris was Emperor chosen by the Greeks and kept Court at Nice: He def^ated
the Turks, and slew their Sultan, and died, 1222. John Ducas his Son in Law
succeeds him, and 1255. his Son Theodore Lascaris succeeds him and died
1259. leaving a Son John of six years old: Michael Paleologus putting out John's
eyes at ten years old, usurpeth the Empire, and by a stratagem of Alexius
Caesar with 800 men takes Constantinople; and feigned a reconciliation with
Rome, and died 1282, and for his seeming reconciliation with Rome his Son
Andronicus and the Clergy denied him Christian burial. Andronicus succeeded:
His Son Michael dying, his Grandson Andronicus deposes and banisheth him, and
takes the Throne: he reigned 8 years, and died 1341. He committed his two Sons
to Ioh. Cautacuzenus: The Eldest Son John reigned 27 years, and Manuel his
brother succeeded him 1384. and his Son John succeeded him 1419. Constantine
the 8th. began 1445, and Anno 1453, May 29th. the Turks took Constantinople;
and set up their Empire.

257. Anno 1355. Under Innocent the 6th. was another Toletane Council: short
and sweet; worth the noting: (by authority of Blastus Archbishop of Toletan.
Viz. [Lest faithful Christians should be burdened with the weight of sin (or
faultiness) by transgressing provincial Constitutions, when Divine piety has
mercifully put them under an easy yoke and light burden, we ordain, the holy
Council approving it that the Provincial constitutions of our Predecessors and
that shall be made hereafter, unless it be otherwise expressly ordained in such
as shall be made, shall oblige the trangressours only to the penalty of them,
but not (ad culpam) to faultiness (or sin)

Its worth the Inquiry how far all other Canons and humane penal Laws are thus
to be expounded.

258. Anno 1362. Another French man is made Pope, called Urban the 5th. He sent
Aegidius to fight for him in Italy (still broiled in Wars,) and died.

259. Anno 1370. Petrus Bellfortis that was made Cardinal before he was 17
years old is made Pope of Avignion, and called Greg. the 11th. So far was all
the world from obeying the Pope, that Italy still fought against him: Thither
he sends an Army, bloodshed and misery overspreadeth the Country. The Pope at
last saw that his absence gave his Enemies advantage, and not daring to let the
French know lest they should have stopped him, he slipped away to Rome, and thither
removed his Seat, that had been at Avignion 70 years, to the great joy of the
City, impoverished by the absence of the Court.

260. Anno 1378. Gregory the 11th being dead, the People of Rome flock to the
Cardinals, and cry to them to choose no more Frenchmen least the Seat be again
removed, but an Italian, and the best man that could be found, least all should
run to utter confusion. Thirteen Cardinals were Frenchmen and four Italians:
The French were for a French Pope; but they fell out among themselves, while
part of the French were for one, and part for another, by which it fell out
that Barthol. Episc. Barensis, a Neapolitane was chosen, an extraordinary good
Pope. The Cardinals cried out that the People of Rome had by tumult, force, and
arms constrained them to the choice of this man (Urban 6.) and they fled to
strong holds; but at last came to Rome and owned the Pope: But when he told
them, that he would not go to France, and reproved their wickedness, and told
them how severely he resolved to punish them if they amended not, they got away
and declared, that Urban was a false Pope, chosen by the Peoples tumults and
force, where the Cardinals were not free, and that the Seat was void, and they
chose another (Cardinal Gebennensis) and called him Clement 7th; And so whereas
for seventy years there had been a Pope at Avignion, and none at Rome, now for
forty years more there were two, one at Avignion, and one at Rome (and
sometimes three). And indeed it passes my skill to know how the Avignion Popes
were Bishops of Rome, who never saw Rome, nor any of the People, any more than
he is a true Schoolmaster that never saw the School or Scholars.

And now the two Popes fall to fighting for it; and the French Pope sending an
Army of Britons against the Italian Pope; at first they beat the Romans, but
next were so destroyed by them, that few escaped home to bring the news.

The Italian bloody Wars still continue, especially between the Venetians and
Geno^eses. Then had the Venetians the first Guns: The Neapolitans also were
ruined by Wars, their Queen siding with one Pope (Clement) was destroyed by
Charles that was for the other (justly strangled, as she had used her own
Husband). The Duke of Anjou also came with a great Army into Italy from Pope
Clement to destroy Pope Urban; but the General died, and the Soldiers
scattered and returned home: The Pope then desired of King Charles that his
Nephew might be Prince of Naples; and being denied, threatened Charles, and
cited him to Nucena, who came at his Summons, but with an Army: The Pope
escaped to Genoa; and King Charles upon his Fathers death called home to
Hungary, was murdered.

The Pope puts seven of his old Cardinals in five Sacks,
and drowneth them in the Sea: But to be strong enough, he makes no fewer than
twenty nine new ones in one day. He went to Naples, thinking to surprise and
deject the Kings two Sons, but was defeated. Italy still flamed with War: He
made 54 Cardinals, of which he killed five, and deposed seven, and died, says
Platina, little lamented, as his Epitaph shows, as being rustic and
inexorable, though one of their best: He died after eleven years, An. 1389.

. 261. CCCCLXVI. An. 1388. A Council is held at Palentine in Spain, under the
Cardinals of the Antipope Clement, about Shavings and Church-Orders.

. 262. An. 1389. Boniface 9. alias 8. is chosen at Rome, and Clement dead in
France, Pet. de Luna is chosen there, called Benedict 13. The Italians were
still the furthest from Unity and peace, all the Cities almost in war against
each other: so far were they from Eminency in Religious love and concord, that
they had not the common quietness of Heathens. The Pope went to Perusium to
reconcile them there; where to show what his power was over them, the people
killed fourscore of the Nobles before the Popes face, which he took ill, and
departed. He got possession of the Government of Rome; he required Annals, that
is, half a years value of every Benefice of him that received it: All, says
Platina, save the English granted it, and they would yield it of no Benefices
but Bishoprics. Had the Pope indeed been Head of all the World, Annals would
have come to a considerable Rent: But going so far as the Antipodes to gather
it, would have made it come shorter home than the Spanish Gold and Silver does
from the West Indies.

Instead of winning men by Preaching, the Popes Arms now subdue Perusium and
many Italian Cities to him: Platina says, that his own Father that saw the
man, told him, that a Priest clothed in white, carrying a Crucifix, with
certain Hymns to the Virgin Mary, came from the Alps with a grave and pious
look, so preaching, that all the people followed him, even Nobles as well as
others; and that he pretended that he went to visit the Holy Fathers at Rome;
but the Pope suspected that he meant to be Pope, or get too much interest, and
sent Soldiers and took him, and burnt him to death; some saying that he had
some error, others saying no such thing was ever proved by him, but it was
reported by the Pope to hide his cruelty.

In these times, says Platina, Chrysoloras Byzantinus brought Greek Learning
into Italy, that had been silent five hundred years.

. 263. An. 1404. Boniface dying, Innocent 7. is chosen at Rome, one part of
Europe being for him, and another for the Avignion Pope. Tumultuante tota
Italia, says Platina, Tota Italia ad arma respiciebat: Five and twenty Cities
revolted from the Vicecomites, and set up new Governments. (What Concord did
the Pope keep in the World?)* Platina says he was not only slothful, but could
not endure to be told of his duty. The Citizens of Rome petitioned him to
endeavor the ending of the Schism, the King of France and the Avignion Pope
being inclined to peace:
For answer he sent them to his Nephew Ludovicus to be murdered, who presently
killed eleven that came to consult with him, casting them out at a window,
saying that was the only way to cure Sedition and Schism: Upon this the City
takes Arms for revenge; the Pope and his Nephew fly to Viterbium; Ladislaus
King of Apulia helps the Citizens, they fall upon the Courtiers, take the
Capitol, and other places, etc. The Pope sends an Army against them that
overcomes them, and forces them to beg his return: He dies 1406. after two
years and 23 days Reign; and so there was only the Avignion Pope.

. 264. An. 1406. Gregory 12. is chosen at Rome, taking an Oath (as Innoc. 7.
did) to resign, if the Unity of the Church required it: The Princes of France
had made their Pope Benedict 13. take the like Oath: The Princes and Cardinals
ashamed of two Popes, and two Churches, pressed them both to summon a Council;
they cunningly would not agree of the place, and so forced the doing it without
them.

. 265. CCCCLXVII. To put a show on the business, Greg. calls a Council at
Aquileia, whether by long delays he creeps with a few to do nothing.

266. CCCCLXVIII. And the other Pope, Bened. 13. Anno 1409, also calls his
Council in Arragone of his Subjects: which calls it self a General Council,
and pronounce him the true Pope, and no Schismatic or Heretic, and Greg. to
be the Usurper, but exhort him to endeavor Unity.

. 267. CCCCLXIX. The two Popes giving no better hopes, some of the Cardinals of
both sides slipped from them, and by the Countenance of the Florentines and King
Ladislaus, chose Pisa for a General Council, where they met and summoned both
the Popes, who scorned them; and they deposed them both as Heretics and
Schismatics,
says Binius, forbidding all Christians to obey them, and they chose a third,
Alexander 5. and the two old ones kept up still; and so there were three Popes
at once.

. 268. An. 1409. Alex. 5. is chosen, much commended, but died in eighteen
Months, some say; says Antoninus, poisoned by a Clyster: But to show himself a
Pope, in that little time he deposed King Ladislaus, and gave his Kingdom to
Lewis Duke of Anjou.

. 269. Balthazar Cossa is next chosen, called by some Ioh. 21. by others 22. by
others 23. and by Platina Ioh. 24. (so little are they agreed of their
succession) Platina says the Cardinals of Greg. were yet poor, and he hired
them with Money to Create him: He got Sigismund King of Bohemia chosen
Emperor, and would have had the Council to be at Rome. Italy continued still
in blood, the Popes having parcelled it into so many small Principalities, to
secure it against the Emperors; no part of the whole World lived from Age to
Age in such continual War and confusion. This Pope, says Onuphrius Panvinus,
viz. fuit bello and armis quam Religioni aptior, utpote qui neque fidem norat
neque Religionem, rebus profanis magis quam Divino cultu accommodatus. How he
was accused, deposed, imprisoned; how the other two Popes Greg. 12. and Bened.
13. were all deposed with him, and Martin 5. chosen; the next Chapter shows.

CHAP. XIII.
The Council of Constance, Basil, and some others.
. 1. CCCCLXX. AN. 1414. the Council of Constance was called by the means of the
Emperor Sigismund, and the consent of Pope John, who the more trusted the
Emperor because he had promoted him: There were then three Popes, Bened. 13.
in France, whom the Kingdoms of France, Spain, Arragon, England, and Scotland
followed; and Greg. 12. and John 23. at Rome, that divided the rest of the
Papalines. It was not certainly to represent the Trinity, but to profane the
Name, and abuse the Kingdom of the blessed Trinity. Oct. 28. P. John called by
them Sanctissimus Dominus Noster, enters the City, Nov. 5. The Pope began the
Council. Nov. 16. was the first Session, the Pope speaking to them, and his
Bull being read, showing that he would have had the Council at Rome, but the
miserable case of Rome (by contention and confusion) hindering, it was agreed
with the Emperor to be at Constance, commanding to be there for the peace of
the Church, and appointing a Weekly Mass to be said for obtaining Gods
blessing, and pardoning a years penance for every Mass to every Mass-Priest
that said it, exhorting all to fasting and prayer for good success, charging
them to look after Errors, especially those that rose from one John Wickliff,
and also to reform the Church, etc.

March 2. 1415. The Pope took an Oath, for the peace of the Church, to lay down
his Popedom, if the other two Popes would do the same, and the Emperor kissed
his feet.

The Cardinal of Florence read these Decrees: 1. That the Council was lawfully
called. 2. That it will not be dissolved by the departure of the Pope, or other
Prelates. 3. That it be not dissolved till the present Schism be healed, and
the Church reformed in Faith and Manners, in Head and Members. 4. That it be
not removed but on just cause. 5. That the Bishops depart not.

2. In the fourth Session they decreed that the general Council representing
the militant Catholic Church, has its power immediately from Christ, to which
every man of what State or dignity soever, though it be Papal, is bound to obey
in the things that belong to Faith, and the extirpation of the said Schism and
the general reformation of the Church in head and members. 2. That the Pope
withdraw not himself or the Officers, and if he should, or should thunder out
Church censures against them or any adhering to the Council, they are void. 3.
That no Translations, Promotions, or Cardinals be made to the prejudice of the
Council. 4. That three of each Nations be chosen to judge of departures, etc.
But the Pope fled and sent them word that it was not for fears, but for his
health.

3. Sess. 5.
The Emperor being among them, they decreed again the Power of the Council as
immediately from Christ, which the Pope and all must obey; and that the Pope is
punishable if he disobey; that he is bound to surrender in any case of great
and evident profit to the Church; that he unlawfully departed; that if he will
return and perform his promise, he shall be safe.

Next, they proceeded to condemn the Books of John Wickliff, and to prosecute
John Huss.

Next they applied themselves to the Emperor to reduce the Pope, who told them
he was in the hands of the Duke of Austria; but if they pleased he would write
to him, or try to fetch him by force, etc.

. 4. Sess. 6. They order the Procuration for the Popes Resignation to be
demanded, and Process to be made against John Huss, and Hierome of Prague. A
Letter is read from the University of Paris to the Pope, to submit to the
Council.

. 5. Sess. 7. They accused Hierome of Prague for not appearing, and summoned
the Pope, promising him safe Conduct, sed salva Iustitia etc.

. 6. Sess. 8* They condemned Wickliff's Bones to be dig'd up,
upon 45 Articles, instead of 260 which they had gathered. Art. 1. was:

1. That the substance material of Bread and Wine remain in the Sacrament of
the Altar.

2. The Accidents of Bread remain not without the substance.

3. Christ is not identically and really in his proper bodily presence in the
Sacrament.

4. If a Bishop or Priest live in mortal sin, he Ordains not, Baptizeth not,
Consecrateth not.

5. The Gospel says not that Christ instituted the Mass.

6. God ought to obey the Devil. A calum^^.


7. If a man be contrite aright, outward confession is needless and
unprofitable.

8. If the Pope be a Reprobate, and wicked, and so a Member of the Devil, he
has no power over the faithful given him by any but Caesar.

9. Since Urban the 6. none is to be taken for Pope, but we must live as the
Greeks, V^der the Turks.
under our own Laws.

10. It is against Scripture that Churchmen have possession (that is, they
should not labor to be rich.)

11. No Prelate should excommunicate any one, unless he know that God has
first excommunicated him: And he that so excommunicateth, is thereby a
Heretic, or Excommunicate.

12. A Prelate that excommunicateth a Clerk who appealed to the King, or to the
Council of the Kingdom, is thereby a Traitor to the King and Kingdom.

13.
They that give over Preaching, or hearing Gods Word, for men's Excommunication,
are Excommunicate, and in the Day of Judgment shall be judged Traitors to
Christ.

14. It is lawful for a Deacon or Presbyter to preach the Word of God without
the Authority of the Apostolic Seal, or a Catholic Bishop.

15. No one is a Civil Lord, or a Prelate, or a Bishop, while he lives in
mortal sin. (The meaning of this is, no open wicked man is a Subject capable of
such Authority given by Christ, as shall warrant him to use the place, but his
acts may be valued to others in many cases) Dispositio materiae est necessaria
ad formam recipiendam: As an Infidel can be no Bishop or Pastor.)

16. Temporal Lords may take away temporal goods from the Church, from a
Possessor habitually criminal, and not only in act. (Not from the sacred use in
general,but from that man that forfeiteth them.)

17. The people may correct their Delinquent Lords (This is not to be believed
to be Wickliff's sense, till they cite his own words, which no doubt limit it
to the cases.)

18. Tithes are mere Alms, and the Parishioners may take them away for their
Prelates sins.

19. The special prayers applied by Prelates and Religious men to one person,
profit him no more than the general ones, caeteris paribus.

20. He that gives Alms to Friars is thereby Excommunicate (that is, he sins
by cherishing wilful idleness.)

21. He that enters the private Religion, either of the Possessing or the
Mendicant Friars, becomes less fit and able to keep the Commandments of God.

22. Holy men that made private Religions, thereby sinned.

23. The Religious living in private Religion, are not (therein) of the
Christian Religion.

24. Friars are bound to get their living by the labor of their hands, and not
by begging.

25. They are Simoniacal that bind themselves to pray for others for a temporal
reward (or price.)

26. The prayers of Reprobates (wicked men) avails not to any.

27. All things come to pass by necessity.

28. The Confirmation of Youth, the Ordination of Clerks, the Consecration of
Places, are reserved to the Pope and Bishops for covetousness of temporal gain
and honor.

29. Universities, Studies, Colleges, Degrees, and Masterships in them, are
introduced by vain Gentility, and profit the Church as much as the Devil does.

30. The Excommunication of a Pope, or any Prelate, is not to be feared,
because it is the Censure of Antichrist.

31. They that found Cloisters sin, and they are Diabolical that enter them.

32. To enrich the Clergy is against Christ's Rule.

33. Pope Sylvester, and the Emperor Constantine, erred in enriching the
Church.

34. All the Order of Begging Friars are Heretics; and those that give to them
are Excommunicate.

35. They that enter Religion (as Friars) or any Order (of them) are thereby
disabled from keeping Gods Commands, and so of coming to Heaven, unless they
forsake them.

36. The Pope, and all his Clergy that have Possessions, are therefore
Heretics, and the Secular Lords and Laics that consent to them (to their
great riches.)

37. The Church of Rome is the Synagogue of Satan; and the Pope is not the
immediate and nearest Vicar of Christ and the Apostles.

38. The Decretal Epistles are Apocryphal, and seduce from the Faith of Christ,
and the Clerks that study them are fools.

39. The Emperor and Secular Lords were seduced by the Devil to enrich the
Church (excessively he means) with temporal goods.

40. The Election of the Pope by Cardinals was introduced by the Devil.

41. It is not necessary to Salvation to believe the Church of Rome to be the
Supreme among other Churches.

42. It is foolish to trust to the Indulgences of the Pope and Bishops.

43. Oaths made to strengthen humane Contracts and Civil Commerce, are unlawful.

44. Augustine, Benedict, Bernard are damned, unless they repented of having
possessions, and instituting and entering (private) Religions; and so from the
Pope to the lowest Religious (Friar) they are all Heretics.

45. All Religions (that is Orders of Friars) were introduced by the Devil.

This Article about Necessity of Events, I see in Wickliff's Books is his own,
and many here cited are true; but no doubt but many of them are perverted by
their wording them, and leaving out the Explicatory Context.

The Council forbad his Books, and condemned them to be burnt, and reprobated
every one of all these foresaid Articles, with all the 260.

The Duke of Austria most humbly begged the Emperors pardon for receiving the
Pope.

. 7. Sess. 9. The Citation of the Pope is read, and Commissaries and Judges
appointed; and a Letter read from the University of Paris, instigating the
Council to their duty (for their honest Chancellor Gerson was here.)

. 8. Sess. 10. The Popes Suspension was read. The Sess. 11. the Articles
against the Pope are read, which were proved; which were in sum as follows.

Art. 1. That the Pope John from his Youth was of a naughty disposition,
impudent a liar, rebellious against his Parents, given to most Vices, and so
was, and still is accounted of all that know him; Cardinals, Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. witness it.

2. He gathered riches by Symony, and wicked means.

3. By these Symoniacal riches he purchased a Cardinals place at great rates.

4. Possessing Bononia as Legate by tyranny and cruel exactions, inhumanely and
impiously he ruined the people, without all Justice or Piety, etc.

5. Getting thus to be Pope, like a Pagan he contemned all Divine Offices.

6. That he is the oppressor of the poor, the persecutor of Justice, the Pillar
of the unjust, the Statue of Simoniacks, the servant of the Flesh, the dregs of
Vices, a stranger to Virtue, flying public Consistories, wholly given to
sleep, and other fleshly desires; wholly contrary to Christ in life and
manners, the Glass of Infamy, and the profound Inventer of all wickednesses (or
malice) so scandalous to the Church, that among faithful Christians that knew
him, he was commonly called THE DEVIL INCARNATE.

7. That as a Vessel of all sins, he repulsed the worthy, and gave all Offices,
Benefices and Church-promotions to the bad that would give most Money for them.
What was the Church then. ^


8. Hereby the whole Church, Clergy and People, fell under infamy and scandal.

9. That of all these he was often admonished and humbly entreated.

10. That he was worse after than before, laying all pretense of Justice, and
openly selling all to the worst that would give him money.

11. That growing yet stronger in Vices, he made diverse Officers purposely to
manage his Simony (as his Bailiffs) for all fat Cathedrals, Abbeys Monasteries,
Priorles, and vacant Benefices reserved, etc.

12. That he charged his Registers to receive all the money before they
granted, etc.

13. That he appointed certain Merchants to put vacant Benefices in the
Balance, and grant their Petitions that offered most for them.

14. He ordered that no Petition for a Benefice be offered him, till it were
signed by the Refundary, who then was to pay it out of his own Estate if he
took too little.

15. That against God and his Conscience he often sold his Bulls to Eminent men,
in which he wrote, that they that had Benefices had resigned them to him, and
that by lying forged Resignation, which never was made, sold them again for
great sums, and beggared many.

16. By this it came to pass, that without all difficulty he that gave most,
carried it: And the same course was held in Sacraments, Indulgences,
Dispensations, and other Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Gifts.

17. That he usually sold the same Benefice diverse times over to diverse
persons, or to the same, silencing Claims of Right; whereby the whole Church
was defiled with Simony, Which Councils have judged Heresy.
filled with the unworthy, both in higher and lower Prelacies, etc.

18. That he refused to Confirm those that were Canonically Elected, unless
even to satiety they glutted him with Money, putting the unworthy in their
stead, and translated men against their wills from their Churches, that he
might sell them dearer.

19. That promising Church-Reformation in the Council at Pisa, he called one at
Rome, and being there publicly admonished, being incorrigible by the Devils
instinct, did worse.

20. That he sold for Money Indulgences at the hour of death, the Predication
of the Cross, Absolutions from fault and punishment, Concessions of Churches
and portable Altars, Consecrations of Bishops, Benedictions of Abbots, Relics
of Saints, Holy Orders, power in Confession to absolve from sins, and Acts that
may be ministered only by the Operations of the Holy Ghost for Grace.

21. That one Nic. Pistorius, a Florence Merchant, and the Popes Secretary, a
Lay married man, was made by the Pope his Legate Apostolical, sent into Brabant
to exact and receive a Subsidy, which was the tenth part of the fruit of all
Benefices in diverse Cities and Diocesses, and to excommunicate the refusers by
a certain deputed Sublegate, Like a Lay Chancellor and his Surrogate.
and suspend Colleges, Covents, Chapters, etc.

22. That he authorized this Nicholas to grant to all persons, of each Sex, for
Money to choose their Confessors, that might absolve from fault and punishment,
by which the Merchant got vast sums of Money, seducing the people.

23. That all the Premises are known, true, proved, etc.

24. That Anno 1412. Ambassadors from the King, Bishops, and Universities of
France, admonished him charitably of this scandalous, infamous Simony.

25. That he amended not by it, but did worse.

26. That he is defamed of all this in all Kingdoms of the Christian World.

27. That he abused Rome and the Churches Patrimony, exhausting the people, and
imbursing it himself, by Taxes, Gabels, etc. Many instances are added.

28. For these things many Crimes, Sacriledges, Adulteries, Murders, Spoils,
Rapine and Thefts were committed in Rome, through his fault.

29. It is the common voice, opinion, assertion and belief, that in these, and
innumerable other evils, he is the greatest Dilapidator and Dissipator of the
Church Affairs that ever was, scandalous to the Universal Church, a Witch, a
Murderer, a Killer of his Brethren, Incontinent, in all things serving the
Vices of the flesh, of infinite crimes, called infamously Balderinus.

30. That all this is notorious by common fame, repute, etc.

31. That he has sold the goods of Cardinals, Bishoprics, Parishes,
Colleges, Priories, etc.

32. And this not only in the City about (many instances named.)

33. That he destroyed University Studies, by taking the Salaries to himself.

34. Besides, he laid such burdens on the Parsons, as forced them to sell the
Church-goods, Ornaments, and Books.

35. That hereby the whole Church was notoriously scandalized.

36. The Infamy was so great, that Princes and the Emperor besought him to
amend.

37. Hereupon he promised to amend, and to call this Council.

38. But he went on, and did worse than before.

39. He forbad the righting of the injured in judgment.

40. That the Bishop of Salisbury, and other English Ambassadors, admonished
him to amend, and he gave them ill words, and threatened, and abused them.

41. That at Constance he swore to resign for Peace.

42. And he promised to submit to the judgment of the Council.

43. He bid all say what they would against him.

44. He was humbly entreated by the Council to perform his word.

45. Yet thought by hiding himself to evade.

46. Yet he professed before that he intended not to depart.

47. And when the Church longed for peace, by the Council he plotted to
dissolve the Council, and so fled in a disguized habit.

48. He fled to Schafhausen, and commanded some Cardinals and Bishops to come
to him.

49. Thence he fled to Lauffenberge, and toward Brisac.

50. The Council desired his return.

51. He denied to answer, but fled to Nurenburg to frustrate the Council.

52. He is an obdurate sinner, and incorrigible Fautor of Schism, etc.

53. That all this is notorious, and the common repute of men.

54. And all the premises are the common fame and voice. Here somewhat is left
out.

And they begin as anew; 1. Declaring his wickedness from his Youth.

2. That he is notoriously suspected to have poisoned Pope Alexander, and h^s
Physician Daniel.

3. That he committed Incest with his Brothers Wife, and with the holy Nuns,
and ravished Maids, and committed Adultery with Wives, and other crimes of
Incontinence.

3. That he Simonaically sold six Parish Churches in Bononia to Lay men, who
set Priests in them at their pleasure.

4. That for Money he sold the Mastership of the Order of S. John of Jerusalem
in Cyprus to a Child of five years old, Bastard to the King of Cyprus, with the
fruits of Vacancies, and spoils of the last Master, etc.

5. That he would not recall this, but on condition.

1. That the K. of Cyprus should be paid (by them that succeeded) all the Money
back which he gave to the Pope.

2. That the Pope should have more, six thousand Florins of Gold, which the
Prior of Rhodes paid, and for which the Hospitallers are yet in debt.

3. He reserved for the said Bastard the Magistral Chamber, worth two thousand
Florins.

4. That the said Pope John gave Friar Iacobus de Vitriaco, an ancient man, and
expressly professing the Hospitallers Religion, an Absolution from his Vows,
Rule and habit of Religion, and reduced him to a Secular life, and Marriage,
etc. for six hundred Ducats.

Many other Articles I pass by, as tedious to be repeated: One was, That he was
a notorious Simoniack, and a pertinacious Heretic: Another was, That often
before diverse Prelates, and other honest men, by the Devils persuasion be
pertinaciously said, asserted, dogmatized, and maintained, that there is no
Life Eternal, nor any after this: And he said, and pertinaciously believed,
that man's Soul dies with the body, and is extinct, as are the Bruits: And be
said, that the Dead rise not, contrary to the Article of the Resurrection, etc.

He sent an Epistle to the Emperor to beg mercy etc.

. 9. Sess. 12. The Articles being showed the Pope, his Answer is recited: Viz.
That he repented of his filthy departure, and ratified all the Councils Process
against him, and would give no other Answer to their Charge, affirming, that
the Council of Constance was most holy, and could not err; and was the Pisane
Council continued, and he would never contradict the Council, but publicly
confess that he had no right in the Papacy: That he would be much pleased that
the Sentence against him might be quickly passed, and sent him, which with all
reverence he would receive, and as much as in him lay confirm, ratify,
approve, and divulge; and did then ratify, approve, and confirm all their
Process against him, and promise never to gainsay them.

The Council decreed, that when the Papacy was void, none should be chosen
without them, and they that attempted it should be punished, and the Election
be void.

Next the Definitive Sentence of Deposition was past against him.

Next they decreed, that none of the three present Popes should ever be elected
again.

. 10. Sess. 13. The Council decreed, that though Christ after Supper
instituted, and to his Disciples administered the Sacrament in both kinds, Bread
and Wine, etc. And though in the Primitive Church the faithful received it in
both kinds, etc. yet the contrary custom of the Church should be a Law, which
may not be reprobated without the Churches Authority, or changed: And to say
that this is sacrilegious and unlawful, is erroneous, and the pertinacious
Assertors to be proceeded against as Heretics (that is, burnt.)

Thus they take power to change Christ's Sacrament, and that when they suppose
it to be his very blood that they deny men, and make it Heresy and death to
obey God before them. This was the Reforming Council.

Next they decree, that any Priest that gives the Sacrament in both kinds
shall be excommunicated, and used as a Heretic, even by Secular Power, that
is, burnt.

. 11. Sess. 14. Carolus de Malatestis recited in the name of Gregory 12. his
Renunciation of the Papacy, and Greg. approved the Council. The Council
absolveth all men from his obedience, etc. confirm some of his Acts, require
the third Pope to resign, and declare him, if he refuse, a notorious
Schismatic, and pertinacious Heretic.

. 12. Sess. 15. After a severe Decree for silence, and no contradiction, the
Articles of Heresy charged on John Huss were read, the sum of many is as
follows.

1. As Christ is both God and Man, so the consecrated Host is the Body of
Christ, at least in Figure, and true Bread in Nature.

2. That he declares to the heretical liars about the consecrated Host, that
they can never declare or understand an accident without a subject.

3. This is my body, is such a figurative speech, as John was Elias.

4. The madness of feigning an accident without a subject, blasphemeth God,
scandalizeth the Saints, and deceives the Church.

5. Its foolish and presumptuous to desine, that the Infants of the faithful
are not saved, dying without the Sacrament of Baptism.

6. The light and brief Confirmation by Bishops, solemnized only by the Rites
said over, was introduced by the Devil, and to delude the people in the belief
of the Church, and that the solemnity and necessity of Bishops may be the more
believed.

7. Against Oil, anointing Children, and the Linen Cloth, as a light Ceremony,
etc.

8. Vocal Confession made to a Priest, introduced by Innocent, is not so
necessary as he defines: He that by thought, word or deed offends his
Brother, it suffices him to repent by thought, word or deed.

9. The Priest hearing Confession as the Latins do, is grievous and
groundless, etc.

A good life is a good sign of a true Minister.

The ill life of a Prelate substracteth the Subjects acceptance of Orders, and
other Sacraments; and yet in case of necessity they may receive of such,
piously praying that God will make up himself by these his Diabolical
Ministers, the work or end of the Office which they are sworn to.

Ancient persons that despair of children may lawfully marry for temporal
commodity, or mutual help, or to excuse Lust.

Words of Marriage, de praesenti, I take thee for my Wife, frustrate words de
futuro, to another, I will take thee for a Wife.

The Pope that falsely calls himself the servant of the servants of God, is in
no degree of Evangelical service, but worldly; and if he be in any order, it is
in that of Devils, serving God more culpably by sin.

The Pope dispenses not with Simony, being the Capital Simonist, vowing rashly
to keep a most damnable state.

That the Pope is summus Pontifex is ridiculous: Christ never approved such a
Dignity in Peter, or in any other.

The Pope is the Patron of Antichrist; not only that single person, but the
multitude of Popes from the time of the Churches Donation, the Cardinals,
Bishops, and other their Accomplices, is the compounded monstrous person of
Antichrist: And yet Gregory, and other Popes that did good in their lives
fruitfully repented at last: Peter, and Clement, and other helpers in the
Faith, were not Popes, but Gods helpers to edify the Church of Christ.

That this Papal Preeminence had its rise from the Gospel, is as false, as that
all Error arose from the first Truth.

There are twelve Procurators and Disciples of Antichrists, the Pope,
Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials, Deans,
Monks, forked Canons, false Friars, and Questors.

Its as clear as the light, that he is greatest, and next Christ in the Church
Militant, that is most humble, most serviceable, and most loves the Church in
the love of Christ.

He that unjustly possesses any good thing of God, takes another by theft.

Grace is necessary to dominion: (He means, 1. Not of right before men, but
God. 2. Nor of special grace only, I suppose,

Without the Law of Christ inwarldly, Charters and Papers give not ability and
justice.

We must not by gifts cherish a known sinner, being a Traitor to God.

Diverse are against temporal power or right in wicked men in mortal sin: But I
suppose that he means only such a defect as will disable himself before God
to receive his approbation and reward, but not such as will disoblige the
Subject, or lose his property in foro humano.

Many more there be, that Friars and the foresaid twelve Orders of Antichrist
are not of God, and some Philosophical Opinions; which how far Huss held them,
I take this Catalogue for no proof without his words, the Context and
Explication.

All these are mentioned as taken out of Wickliff; but Huss is condemned for
these following Articles.

. 13. 1. That there is one holy Universal Church of all the Predestinate.

2. That Paul was never a Member of the Devil.

3. That Reprobates are not parts of the Church, for no part of it finally
falls away, Predestinating Love never forsaking him.

4. Two Natures, the Divinity and Humanity, are one Christ.

5. The same as before.

6. Taking the Church for the Predestinate, it is an Article of Faith.

7. Peter was not, nor is the Head of the Catholic Church.

8. Priests of wicked lives polute the Priestly power.

9. The Papal dignity arose from the Emperor, and the Popes prefecture and
institution flowed from Caesar's power.


Diverse of Popes and Priests that live wickedly are not the Apostles Successors.

Delivering men to Secular powers (because excommunicate) is to imitate the
Scribes and Pharisees above Christ.

Ecclesiastical obedience is obedience after the Priests invention without any
express authority of Scripture.

All humane Acts are distinguished into virtuous and vicious.

A Priest of Christ living after his Law and understanding the Scripture, and
desirous to Edify the people, ought not to obey the Pope or any Prelate that
forbids him to preach, and excommunicateth him.

Every one made a Priest has a command to preach and must obey it,
notwithstanding excommunication.

By Church Censures of excommunication, suspension and interdict, the Clergy
keeps the Laity under their feet for their own exaltation, and multiply
avarice, protect malice, and prepare the way to Antichrist; It is an evident
sign that such Censure, proceed from Antichrist, in which the Clergy
principally proceed against those that open the nakedness of Antichrists
wickedness, which the Clergy will for themselves usurp.

If the Popes be wicked men and reprobates, then as Judas an Apostle was a
thief and traitor and son of perdition, so they are no heads of the Church,
when they are no members.

The grace of predestination is the bond of the Churches union with the head.

A wicked and reprobate Pope and Prelate is equivocally a Pastor, and truly a
thief and robber.

The Pope should not be called most holy.

Right election makes not him that comes not in by Christ to have right.

Wickliffs 40 Articles were unjustly condemned.

There is no spark of appearance that there must be one head in spirituals to
rule the wh^l^e Church,
that must always converse with it, and be conserved.

Christ Ruled his Church better throughout the world by his true Disciples
dispersed, than it is by such monstrous heads.

The Apostles and faithful Priests of the Lord, did strenuously regulate the
Church in things necessary to salvation, before the Office of a Pope was
introduced, and so would do, were there no Pope, to the end of the world.

There is no Civil Lord, no Prelate, no Bishop, while in mortal sin. (Of which
often before.)

These Articles are mentioned which they say were proved against him.

It is to be noted that Huss called God to witness that he never preached nor
owned many of these Articles which false witnesses brought in against him,
and yet renounceth nothing that he held. And whether he or his accusers,
better knew his mind and faith its easy to conjecture.

They condemned Huss to be burnt; and condemned another Article, that any
Subject may kill a Tyrant (that is, an Usurper) by any secret or open means.

Then they made an Order against Robbers of such as came to the Council, and
went back.

. 14. Sess. 16. Deputies are appointed to go to Arragon to the third remaining
Pope Bend. 13. to resign; and other matters.

The Sess. 17. was an honorable dimission of the Emperor.

The Sess. 18. about the Councils Bulls, etc.

The 19. Sess. was against Hierome of Prague, where they recite a long
Recantation which they say he made, and from which they said he afterward
revolted.

Also the Council decreed that they might proceed against Heretics,
notwithstanding the safe conducts and promises of the Emperor,
Kings, or Princes, by what Bond soever they tied themselves therein, though
the Heretics had not appeared, but trusting herein: And that the said
Emperor, Kings, etc. having done what in them lies, are no way obliged by
their promises.

The 20. Sess. Decreed a monitory against the Duke of Austria on behalf of the
Bishop of Trent, about estate.

The rest was about the Ejection of Pope Benedict the 13th. They swore to
certain Capitula about it.

15. Hierome of Prague having recanted through fear, repented and openly
professed, that he dissembled and stood to his former doctrine and was
condemned.

16. Many following Sessions are against Pet. Luna, or Bened. the 13th. and
treating with the Arragonians about him: He refused to resign, being lest sole
Pope (I think chosen by more Cardinals than the rest) in the 37 Sess. they pass
Sentence against him.

17. Sess. 39. It is decreed that there should be henceforth General Councils
celebrated, One five years after this, another seven years after that, and
thence forward every ten years one: Or if there fall out another Schism, then
within a year, none of the contending Popes being presidents; with much more
about the Councils.

Next they frame a Profession which every Elected Pope must make, viz. [That he
firmly believes and holds the holy Catholic Faith, according to the
Traditions of the Apostles, of General Councils, and other holy Fathers,
especially the eight holy General Councils, viz. Nice, Constable. 2. Ephesians. 3.
Calced. 4. Constant. 5. and 6. Nic. 7. Constant. 8. As also the Laterane,
Lugdune, and Vien. and to hold that faith unchanged in every title, and to
confirm even to life and blood, defend it and predicate it, and every way to
prosecute and observe the rite of Ecclesiastical Sacraments delivered the
Catholic Church.

Sess. 40. There are eighteen heads of reformation named: And the form of
Electing Popes decreed. Sess. 41. An Oath for the Electors. Otho Columna
Cardinal is made Pope: Wickliffes errors again repeated, and Husses, some
Constitutions of Frederic. 2. Confirmed, and the Council dissolved.

18. Platina tells us, that Pope John was deposed only by those that had
adhered to him,
before the other parties came. He was kept Prisoner three years, none but
Germans, whom he understood not, attending him: Gregory died of grief, that
Carolus Malatesta had too hastily published his resignation, which he hoped to
frustrate by delay. Benedict refusing to resign, the Arragonians and Spaniards
forsook him as obstinate. The Scot stuck last to him: Platina says Huss and
Hierome were burnt for saying that Church men should imitate Christ in poverty,
when their wealth and luxury was the common Scandal. There was great joy at the
choice of Martin. 5. but Rome and Italy were still in Wars and confusion.

19. Gregory was preferred till he died, and this P. John so odiously described
by the Council is yet after some years imprisonment made Cardinal Bishop of
Tusculum. O what Bishops then had the Church!

20. For all the confirmations of this Council the decrees of a Council being
above the Pope, are said by most Papists to be unapproved, because the Council
of Florence and Laterane judged the contrary to be true.

21. Pope Martin found Rome decayed, Italy in Wars, and at five years end
summoned his promised Council at Papia: Few came, and the plague forced them to
remove to Senae, when Alphonsus King of Arragon sent Orators to plead the Cause
of Bened. 13. whereby Martin for fear of a Schism was fain to dissolve the
Council; and appointed the next seven years after at Basil, not trusting Italy;
where he had long Wars himself, as afterward he stirred up against the Bohemian
Hussites, after 14 years, aged 63 died of an Apoplexy; much praised.

22. CCCCLXXI. This Concilium Senense we need say no more of.

23. One would have thought that after this stir one more sober Pope should
have been chosen: Eugenius 4th. was the next, of whom more after. He has
presently a War and much bloodshed in the streets of Rome, with the
Columnenses. Italy is still in Wars: The Pope is again assaulted: The Romans
set up seven agistrates: Eugenius flies: they pursue him with stones; he
escapes to Florence; leaves the Castle guarded, which continued the City-War a
while. The Emperor coming into Italy he would have resisted but could not, who
peaceably came and went. It were tedious to relate all his and others Wars in
Italy; Platina and many others do it.

The Council at Basil beginning, he would have removed it to Bononia: The
Emperor and Council resist, and threaten him, and he confirms it; for, says
Platina, he had scarce breathing time from vexing Wars. He recovereth Rome (and
other places) Pulcellus a Leader he hanged, when he had pulled off his flesh
with hot Pincers: He turns his War against Alphonsus King of Arragon; the
City of Preneste he utterly destroyed, as rebellious: The Council at Basil
frightened him; but Sigismund dying, and Albert D. of Austria chosen Emperor,
he ventured to call it away to Ferraria. Ioh. Paleologus contrived thither, in
false hope of succor from the West, put some Reputation on his Council: The
Plague drove them to Florence; there the pretended Reconciliation of the Greeks
and Latins was made, of which many Histories speak at large, especially the
Greek Edition of that Flor. Council. The Wars still continued round about him:
The Council at Basil deposed Eugenius, and made Amadeus D. of Savoy (a Pious
man) Pope, called Faelix 5. Eugenius held on and yielded not; Blood and Murders
still filling Italy: He died aged 64. An. 1447. making first twenty seven
Cardinals, etc.

. 24. CCCCLXXII. This great Council at Basil began 1431. and ended 1442. the
History of it is too large to be much recited. The Bohemians exasperated by the
burning of their Teachers, and the Popes Excommunications, and the Decrees to
burn them, defended themselves by Arms under Zisca, and were usually
victorious: They were therefore invited to the Synod, which they received with
tears of joy; but for the sake of the case of Huss and Hierome, durst not trust
their safe Conduct, till after the promise of many Princes, and the Synod. They
sent fifteen; the Bohemians four days pleaded their four Articles: 1. For the
Sacrament in both kinds.
2. For correcting and eliminating public sins, or crimes. 3. For liberty to
preach Gods Word. 4. Of the Civil Power of the Clergy.

Ioh. Rag^sinus answered the first, calling them Heretics; and others
tediously (many days upon one point) answered the rest; and dispute begat
dispute, and so some motioned a reconciling Conference: But they could not
agree, and the Bohemians returned, and the Council sent many of their Members
with them to Prague, whom the City received civilly, and heard them, exhorting
them to their Opinions; but they still desired satisfaction in their four
Articles. Many Debates there were, and by explication of the terms they came to
understand each other, and a fair beginning of reconciliation was made; but the
first Article of the Sacrament in both kinds stuck so, that they could not get
over it, though the Council confessed that they had power to dispense in it.
But though there be reason enough for all these reque^^s (for the opposing
public wickedness, for leave to preach Gods Word, and for Church-mens
forbearing Civil coercive Government, unless made the Magistrates Officers) yet
such reasonable things are hardlier obtained than more disputable matters;
because flesh and blood, worldly interest, and the Devil, is most against them:
And of this great famous Council of Bishops, after Petitions, and some good
words, and hopeful approaches, they could never one of them be obtained, but
tricks were devised to elude their hopes, and inconveniences pleaded that would
follow such Concessions; (the ordinary way of the carnal Clergies hindering
Reformation.)

. 25. The first Session being for introduction, to show their lawfulness, in
the second Session they decreed, as did that at Constance, that a General
Council is above the Pope, in matters of Faith, Schism, and Reformation: And
Sess. 3. that the Council may not be dissolved: And they admonish the Pope to
retract his Revocation, and to own and assist the Council.

After they declare, that the Pope may not make Cardinals, etc. during the
Council.

. 26. Sess. 22. They condemned a Book of Augustinus de Roma, a Bishop of
Nazareth, that had many Phanatick Expressions; as that Christ daily sinnet^ in
us, because of our Union with him, though sinless in himself; that only the
Elect, and not all the Justified, are Members of Christ; that besides the Union
of Love, there must be another Union with Christ; that the Humane Nature in
Christ is truly Christ, and the Person of Christ, and the Person of the Word;
that Christ loves his Humane Nature as much as his Divine; that the two
Natures are equally lovely; that the Soul of Christ sees God as clearly as the
Godhead, etc. Thus works the temerarious mind of man.

. 27. Sess. 24. There is a Treaty for a more General Council and Union with the
Greeks; and the place assigned at Basil, Avignion, or Savoy; and to defray the
charges, money to be gathered of Christians, who, if they give as much as will
keep their houses a Week,
are rewarded with the pardon of all their sins, where the liberality of their
Pardons is expounded; viz. it is only the pardon of such sins de quibus cord
contriti, and ore confessi fuerint, which their hearts are contrite for, and
their mouths confess; and these are pardoned on a further condition, that
besides this money given, they do for a year fast one day every Week more than
else they were obliged to do by the Church; and if they be Clerks, say every
such day seven Psalms, or a Mass; if Laics, seven Pater Nosters, and seven Ave
Mary's: And if it had not been for the Bishops, might not a contrite Confessor
have been certainly pardoned without such formalities.

. 28. In diverse following Sessions they prosecute Pope Eugenius, and declare
the Council at Ferrary to be but a Schismatical Conventicle, and they establish
these Catholic Verities, or Articles of Faith.

Sess. 33. 1. That a General Council represents the whole Church,
and has its power immediately from Christ, and that over the Pope, and every
other person; and that this is a truth of Catholic Faith.

2. That such a Council lawfully congregate, may not without their own consent
be dissolved, prorogued, or transferred; and that this is an Article of
Catholic Faith.

3. That a pertinacious repugner of these Verities is to be judged a Heretic.

. 29. Sess. 34. They depose Pope Eugenius as a sentenced, notorious, obstinate
persisting Rebel against the Precepts of the Universal Church, and a daily
violater and contemner of the Canons, a notorious perturber of the Peace and
Unity of the Church of God, and a notorious scandalizer of the whole Church, a
notorious Simonist, incorrigible perjured person, devious from the Faith, a
pertinacious Heretic, with much more sucb.

. 30. Here I would crave the Readers consideration:
1. If this extraordinary Great Council erred in all these matters of fact,
whether the judgment of a Council be a good proof of the Papists sort of
Tradition?

2. If they erred in these Articles of Faith, whether it weaken not both their
Tradition and grounds of their faith; and whether such an heretical perjured
Popes consent would have made them Infallible?

3. Whether their General Councils be not contradictory de ^ide, as this, and
that at Florence and Lateran expressly are.

4. Whether a great part of the Church of Rome, and their last named Councils,
be not Heretics in the judgment of this Council?

5. Seeing Pope Eugenius continued when the Council had deposed him as a
Simonist, and perjured pertinacious Heretic, and all their following
succession is from him, is there not a nulli^y in that succession?

. 31. Sess. 36. They decreed the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary,
as a point of Faith; and yet many of their Doctors take it yet as
undetermined, and many still are of the contrary mind.

. 32. After this follow Decrees about Election of a Pope, and they make the
Duke of Savoy Pope, Faelix 5. and so we have two Popes again.

Onuphrius calls this the thirtieth Schism: He continued Pope above nine
years, and then resigned to Eugenius for Peace. Sess. last: They recite the
Heresies of Pope Eugenius, as against the foresaid Verities.

. 33. Next is added the Bull of Pope Nicholas the 5. approving the Acts and
deeds of the Council at Basil: And then are diverse Synodical Epistles and
Answers, specially proving Councils above the Pope, and against his Crimes, and
of the justness of his deposition, very large; as also against his Conventicle
Council, and against his Adherents, that is, most of their Church since, with
Answers to his Invectives, and Monitories to draw men from his obedience. In
the Appendix are many more Epistles and Orations, and a Treatise of the
Patriarch of Antioch, to prove the Pope above Councils. There are many Epistles
of the Pope against the Council, and of the Emperor to the Council, and of
many other Princes.

. 34. The Bohemians Epistles place their main cause upon the four forementioned
Articles: I. The Sacrament in both kinds. II. That the Word of God may be
freely, publicly, and truly preached by those that it belongs to. (for they
were silenced, etc.) III. That Civil Dominion they mean not all Propriety, but
Power of the Sword, or force over men's Estates and persons, which is the
Magistrates) as a deadly poison be taken from the Clergy, (they spoke from
feeling.) IV. That public, and great or heinous sins, may be extirpated from
among the vulgar of the faithful by lawful Powers. This was the Religion of the
Bohemians, and the denying of these was the cause of all their cruel
Persecutions, and the blood there shed.

. 35. In confutation of these Demands are adjoined four Treatises of the four
Preachers that spoke against them: What Cause so great or plain, that men
cannot talk against with many and confident words. I. Ioh. Ragusius
acknowledged* the regulating sufficiency of the Scripture,
has has an Oration (a Treatise) against the Sacrament in both kinds.

II. Aegidius Carberius Decanus Cameracensis has a Treatise (four days
Oration) against their request, for correcting heinous public sins; where much
learning and reading is poured out, to save sin: And in particular it is
maintained,
that the Clergy may not be punished by the Laity (some few cases excepted) not
being therein their Subjects. (It seems the Bohemians would have had wicked
Priests punished) And it is specially pleaded, that no wickedness of Clergy or
Laity will warrant any Nation to separate from their Unity (that is, Roman
Government;) and to that end, the badness of the Church Militant to be endured
is described.

When he comes to the Popes pardons, he denies that Pardons a culpa and poena
are usually the Popes style; whereas I have before cited their express words so
speaking often:
And he honestly maintains out of the Schoolmen, Bin page 319.
that God only can give pardon a culpa, save as any Priest as instrumentum
animatum may vi clavium dispose the receiver, and declare Gods pardon, and
remit part of the temporal punishment; but sometimes the Pope remitteth part of
the Church-penances, and so it is that Priests are said to forgive sins. (Mark
this, against our present Papists, that reproach the Protestants for this
Doctrine.)

III. Next is Henr. Kalteisen, a Dominican Inquisitors Oration against the free
preaching of Gods Word by Ministers: (for this would have undone the Pope and
his Clergy:)
The Bohemians, whom he confuteth, maintained: 1. That Gods Word is so perfect,
See the old Reformers Doctrine.
that nothing should be added or diminished. 2. That the wickedness of Priests
is the great cause of the peoples ruin. 3. Against Venial sin as against Gods
Counsels differing from Laws. 4. That every Priest and Deacon is bound to
preach Gods Word freely, or else sins mortally; and after Ordination he should
not cease (that is, when he was forbidden by silencing Bishops, or others) no
not when excommunicated, because he must obey God rather than man; and that
Bishops are bound to preach as well as Presbyters.

The Answer first notes, that Papa non est nomen Ordinis sed Iurisdictionis;
that Gods Word is Incarnate, inspired, written; that it is expounded by the
same Spirit that inspired it: (But has the Pope the same gifts of that
Spirit?) That the Inspired Word is public or private; that the Bishops Decrees
in Councils are Gods public inspired Word: (see here the Enthusiastical
pretense of Episcopal Inspiration, is the ground of all the Roman Usurpations
and tyrannies, and deposition of Princes) to them he applies, He that hears
you, hears me; whence he gathers the danger of disobeying that Council (and
so the Popes Heresy.) The rest is worth the reading, but too long for me to
repeat:
Much of it is to show, that Reading and Massing is more needful than
Preaching, and that every Priest that Masseth is not bound to Preach; there
needs many Mass-Priests, and not so many Preachers; and that silenced
excommunicated Priests are bound to cease preaching, and obey the Prelates: But
he had the wit to add (if silenced for a reasonable cause)
and to confess that Sententia injuste lata a suo judice si errorem inducat,
vel poceatum mortale afferet, nec timenda est nec tenenda.

Page 364. He denies that it is any Precept of Christ: 1. To receive the Cup,
2. Or that Priests Preach, 3. Orto abolish all mortal sin, 4. Or for the Clergy
not to be Civil Governors, etc.

IV. Ioh. de Pole^nar Archdiacon. Barcinon. has a Treatise of three days
speech for the Civil Power of the Clergy, in which he mis-spendeth much time in
disputing for their Propriety, when as the Bohemians took Dominion for Empire,
or civil forcing power of Government, and for inordinate possessions of
Lordships and great wealth.

. 36. The Papists confess that this Council was Universal, and rightly called
and confirmed; but they pretend that it was partly reprobate by the Popes
removal of the Council, and that Pope Nicholas 5. approved it but in part. It
began 1431. and continued above eleven years.

. 37. CCCCLXXIII. An. ^438. A Council at Bridges concurred with this at Basil,
making the Pragmatical Sanction, decreeing that a General Council be called
every ten years, and confirming the Council at Basil.

. 38. CCCCLXXIV. Next comes the Anti-Council at Ferrary and Florence, where
the attempt for Union with the distressed Greeks was made, all the passages
whereof are so fully opened in the Greeks History, published by Dr. Creighton,
that I shall say no more of it.

Here note, that there were two General Councils at once; and how could they
both (or either of them) be truly Universal:
The Papists call it the sixteenth.

. 39. After many Wars, Eugenius the deposed Pope died, An. 1447. (having made
twenty seven Cardinals (against the Council of Basils Decrees) from whom is
their succession) and Nicholas the 5. succeeded him: Italy still continued in
bloody Wars; Pope Faelix at last resigned; and so there was once more but one
Pope. And that you may see still how far the Pope was from governing all the
World, the City of Rome was again seeking to recover their Liberties,
and had a Plot against him, one Steph. Hircanius being the Chief, and the Pope
secured himself by hanging many of them.

40 The Emperor of Constantinople, and those Bishops that pretended a Union
with Rome, in hope of help, found the people and Clergy there utterly averse to
come under the Pope, and they had no help from him, nor any of their desired
successes; for now the Turks took the City, and killed the Emperor, and many
thousands more, and 1455. the Pope died.

. 41. CCCCLXXV. A Council at Tours about Church Orders decreed praying often for
the dead, forbad Clandestine Marriages, and Massing in unconsecrated places,
etc.

. 42. CCCCLXXVI. A Synod at Lions to end the Schisms between the two Popes done
by the Emperor Frederick, who desired King Charles concurrence.

. 43. An* 1455: Calixtus the 3. is made Pope; he raises a Sea Army against the
Turks, the Patriarch of Aquil^ia being Captain: Rome was still in War: He
claimed the Kingdom of Naples to the Church for want of Heirs; an Antipope
was also made, called Clement 8. but being persuaded to resign, he accepted a
Bishopric: Many Cities in Italy ruined by Earthquakes, whose ruins Platina
says he saw with admiration: He made a new Holy Day for Christ's
Transfiguration.

. 44. Next comes Aeneas Sylvius, called Pius 2. one of the most learned of all
the Popes, especially an Orator: He was against the Pope for the superiority of
Councils at Basil; but when he was made Pope, he recanted it. In his Epistle to
his Father he excuses himself for having a Bastard, and for fornication,
(particularly with an English Woman that lodged in the same house with him)
telling him, that he was not an Eunuch, and remembering his Father what a Cock
of the Game he had been himself; but among the Popes he was a wonder of
worthiness: He was vehement for a War with the Turks, but could not so far
quench the flames of War at his own doors in Italy, and other Christian
Countries, as to accomplish it. Platina records many of his Sentences,
among which are: [Every Sect established by Authority, is void of humane
reason: If the Christian Religion had not been approved by Miracles, it should
have been received for its honesty: The Mortals measures of Heaven and Earth
are more bold than true: Astronomy is more pleasant than profitable: The
Friends of God are happy here and hereafter: There is no solid joy without
virtue: They that know most, doubt most: Artificial Orations move fools, not
wise men: As all Rivers flow into the Sea, so all Vices into great men's Courts:
Flatterers rule Kings as they list: Princes hear none so readily as accusers:
The tongue of a flatterer is the worst plague to a King: He that rules many,
is ruled by many: He is unworthy the name of a King, who measures the public
affairs by his own commodity, etc. Ill Physicians kill bodies, and unskilful
Priests souls:
Virtues enrich the Clergy, Vice impoverisheth them: Marriage was for great
reasons forbidden Priests, and for greater is to be restored to them: He that
too much pardons his Son, cherishes his Enemy: The covetous never please
men, but by dying: Lying is a servile vice, etc.

You may see his R^cantation in Binius, where his Dignity raised him so high as
to say, That the Greek and Latin Doctors with one voice say, that he cannot be
saved that holds not the Unity of the Roman Church, and all those Virtues are
maimed to him that refuses to obey the Pope, though lying in sackcloth and
ashes he fast and pray day and night, and seem in other things to fulfill the
Law of God, because obedience is better than sacrifice, and every soul must be
subject to the higher power; and it is manifest that the Pope of Rome is placed
in the top (or Crown) of the Church, from which (his power of Government) we
know that no Sheep of Christ at all is exempted.

O then how much worse is the case of the Abassines, Armenians, Greeks,
Protestants, even three fourth parts of the Christian World, than of the
Heathens, being all certainly damned for not believing in the Pope: How much
more necessary to Salvation is it to please and honor the Pope, than any Angel
or Saint in Heaven? But how false is it that the Greek and Latin Fathers all
agree in this?

. 45. Paulus 2. succeeds Pius, a man just and clement, says Platina himself;
yet, says he, before he was Pope, he could get what he would by begging, even
with tears, of the Pope and great men: And when he was Pope, all about him
sounded with Wars, and Benefices were theirs that would give most for them; and
in his fears somebody muttering, that one Callimachus had a Plot against him,
he set all on tumult to find out the Conspirators, when there was no such
thing: He had before cast out of their places all the College of Abbreviates
that had bought their places under Pius, of whom Platina being one, and not
getting Audience and relief, wrote him a Letter, that they would go to Princes,
and get a Council called to relieve them: For this he was accused of Treason,
and laid in Irons by a long imprisonment: And after his release, upon this
Dream of a Plot, he and many more were not only imprisoned, but tortured and
tormented to force them to confess that which never was: Many died of the
torments, even of the worthiest young men of the City. After a long time poor
Platina with a broken body is delivered, but the Prisoners at last were accused
of Heresy, that they might not seem to have suffered for nothing: Platina's
Heresy was, that he had praised Plato, and the Gentile Learning, and had
disputed about the Godhead, which was a questioning it; and the Pope himself
was so much against Learning, that he used to call studious men Heretics, and
to persuade men that their Sons must learn no more than to read and write. Here
Platin^ ends his History; and had he known other Popes as well as he did
this, perhaps he would have praised their Justice and Clemency, as he does this
Pope, by the effects.

. 46. Sixtus 4. is next, who also spent his days in Italian War and bloodshed:
Wonderful! that our late Papists think that all the Christian World has still
obeyed the Pope, when none have so much fought against him as the City of Rome,
and the Italians: Onuphrius (who here begins the Supplement of Platina)
tells you modestly of his Wars, and his horrid treachery against the
Florentines, when to get his will on them, he appoints Conspirators to murder
the two Brothers, Julian and Laurence Medices, of whom the Archbishop of Pisa
was one: They assault them in Gods Worship in the Temple, and kill Julian; but
Laurence wounded, is locked up by the Churchwardens in the Vestry; The Citizens
rose before the Execution could be finished, and hanged the Archbishop, and
Poggius and all their Companions in Ropes out at the Windows, strangling also
the rest of the Conspirators. The Popes Plot being disappointed, he makes War
against the Florentines, and interdicteth them all public worship: (the Popes
ordinary profane Usurpation, forbidding whole Cities and Kingdoms all such
public worship of God, which Robert Groshead said was the part of Antichrist,
and the Devil.) The wisdom of Laurence Medices ended the War when it seemed
near the consuming flames; and the Turks invading Italy, terrified the Pope
into a peace with the Florentines: But still Italy was imbrued in Wars.

. 47. Though the Council of Basil had determined the Immaculate Conception of
the Virgin Mary,
yet this Pope to reconcile the Dominicans and Franciscans that preached
against each other as Heretics for differing about it* did decree, that on
pain of Excommunication neither Party should call one another Heretics for it:
By which it appears how little indeed the Decrees de fide of General Councils
signify with Popes themselves when their Interest is against them.

. 48. CCCCLXXVIII. A Toletane Synod renewed diverse good Canons for reforming
the Clergy; as that none be ordained that cannot speak Latin; to dimini^h the
Priests maintenance that still publicly keep Concubines; that Clergymen play
not at Tables, and such like.

. 49. Next comes Innocent 8. the Italian Wars continuing: He raised an Army to
get the Kingdom of Naples as his own; but being beaten,
and repenting, he made peace; yet after again deposed the King for not paying
him his Rent: He ruled those at Rome and Italy that he could conquer, as the
rest of the Popes did before him.

. 50. Alexander the 6. is next, who (says Onuphrius) having four Bastard-Sons,
and two Daughters, set himself wholly to make them great: The Cardinals bribed,
chose him that was the worst of them all, and justly were destroyed by him: See
Paul. Iovius, and Gui^c^ardine.
The old Italian Wars now ran in the proper Channel: Caesar Borgia, one of the
Popes Bastards, being a Cardinal, laid by his holy Order, and set himself to
conquer all the Princes of Italy: Historians fill a Volume with his Acts, the
cruel murders of Princes and people, surprise of Cities, basest treachery, too
long to be by me recited: He murdered his own Brother, many of the chief of
Rome, and got possession of most of Italy, killing the former Lords, and their
Sons: The Vrsin* overthrew his Army, and the Pope flattered them with confident
promises into a Peace, till they foolishly trusting him, he got them into his
power, and murdered them: Some Cardinals the Pope commanded to drink poison,
and at last having more great men to dispatch, Cardinals and Citizens at a
purposed Feast, the Pope ordered his Butler to prepare poisoned Wine for them,
and mistaking the Cup, he gave it to the Pope, and his Son Caesar: The Pope
died of it; but Caesar being young, and diluting his Wine, was recovered, but
his Army hereby scattered. If you would see the History of this Monsters
cruelties, read Paulus Iovius: I recite now but what Onuphrius says, who
concludes that this Popes Virtues were equal to his Vices, (so far goes a
little in a Pope) and yet that he had the greatest perfidiousness, savage
cruelty, unmeasurable covetousness and rapacity, inexhausted lust of getting
Empire to his Son by right or wrong, when business permitted, giving up himself
to all pleasure without difference, but most given to Women, by whom he had
four Sons, and two Daughters; the chief was Vannocia Romana, whom he kept as
his lawful Wife, for her beauty, alluring manners, and mavelous fruitfulnes:
His Comedies, Sports, Gladiators, he mentions more fully: Never was there
greater license to Hackers and Murderers, and never less liberty to the people:
A huge number of Informers (or Accusers;) death was the punishment of the least
ill word (against him;) all places were full of robbers or assaulters, so that
there was no safe going in the City by night, nor out of it by day; Rome that
was the refuge and sanctuary of all other people heretofore, was now become a
Slaughterhouse, or Butchery. Thus Onuphrius of a virtuous Pope.

. 51. The Pope being dead, Caesar Borgia seizes on the Castle, and would have
forced the Cardinals (being yet sick of his poison himself;) but by the rising
of the people his Soldiers are stopped, and he agreed to depart, and Pius 3. is
chosen, said to be one of the better sort, but lived but 26 days, and died of a
sore Leg, suspected to be poisoned.

. 52. Next comes Julius 2. a Military Pope, who spent his days in Italian
Wars, especially against Alphonsus Duke of Ferrary, and Ludovicus King of
France: In a cruel Battle 20000 are said to be ^lain near Ravenna, the French
having the Victory, but losing their General, and multitudes of Nobles and
Commanders, and were so weakened, that by hired Helvetians, and the English and
Spanish that invaded them at home, they were driven and drawn back.

. 53. CCCCLXXVIII. A Council at Tours in France met against the Pope.

. 54. CCCCLXXIX. A General Council at Pisa 1511. gathered against him to call
him to account: He had sworn to call a Counc^l within two years, and did not;
and so some Cardinals call it, by the Emperor Maximilian and Ludov. K. of
France his will (as they said.) The Pope excommunicateth the King of France,
and calls an Anti-Council to Rome; this of Pisa removed first to Millan, and
then to Lions in France.

. 55. CCCCLXXX. Now comes the great Anti-Council at the Lateran, which they
call the seventeenth approved General one, 1512. begun by Julius against the
Pisane Council, and ended 1517. under Leo 10. The Pope thought Rome the safest
place to rule them, and obtain his will; and for all the numerous Bishops of
Italy, this General Council had but 114. Bishops: Qu. Whether any of them came
from Abassia, Egypt, Armenia, Greece, or the Antipodes, and were the
Representatives of all the Christian World? yet they had a dull cheat herein to
deceive the ignorant, and put the name of the Alexandrinian and Antiochian
Patriarch on two Fellows of their own, as in a Play the parts of Princes are
acted by the Stage Players: But when the Monothelites had a Council of
innumerable Bishops under Philippicus, that was not to be called General. He
that is so idle may read a Volumn of the twelve Sessions of this Council, and
there find who said Mass such a day, and who such a day, and who sung a Gospel
and Te Deum, and such like: And he may read diverse Orations, among which their
great learned Cajetane's is the chief, condemning the Pisane Council, and
confessing that of the three Popes, Nullus eorum aut certus quidem aut absque
ambiguitate verus Petri successor existimaretur: Another Oration by Christopher
Marcellus, Sess. 4. tells the Pope that he is, [Vnus Princeps qui summam in
terris habet potestatem, teque omnis aevi, omnium saeculorum, omnium gentium
Principem and caput appellat] tantae reipublicae unicus and supremus Princeps
es, cui summa data poiestas, ad divinum injunctum imperium, tuum est. He calls
the Church his Spouse, and says, he has given satutem vitam and spiritum, and
says, that he is alter Dens in terris. You see what Popes are.

Stephen, Archbishop Patracens, and Bishop Torcell^n, does Poetize (...)
Saphicks.

Omnium splendour, decus and peren^^
Virginum lumen, genitrix superni,
Gloria humani generis Maria, Vnica nostri.
Sola tu Virgo Dominaris astris,
Sola tu Ter^e, Maris atque Coeli
Lumen, inceptis faveas Inclyt^ nostris.
Vt queam sacros resecare sensus,
Qui latent chartis nimium severis;
Ingredi and celsae, duce te, benigna Maenia terrae.
The business of that Council was to frustrate that at Pisa, and condemn it;
and so to save the Pope, and to condemn the French pragmatical Sanction, as
injurious to the Roman power; to which end they read a Renunciation of it, of
Ludovic^s 2. to Pope Pius 2.

Pope Julius died, and Leo 10. was chosen in the midst of the Councils
Sessions: They pretended War against the Turks, but in vain.

. 56. One Decree here past which nulleth utterly the Papal Succession,
viz: Sess. 5. (That a Simoniacal Election of a Roman Pope is plainly null, and
does confer no Right or Authority to the elected) which is plainly declarative;
therefore when they confess the Simoniacal Election of so great a number of
their Popes successively, where is the true succession.

. 57. In the eighth Sess. a Decree past against them that say the Soul is
mortal, or that it is but one in all or many: And they confute the truth, by
pretending to confirm it, saying, that the Soul is per se and essentialiter
forma corporis; For then the separated Soul loses its essence, and so is no
Soul, or else is forma corporis, when corpus is not corpus organicum.

For the cure of this, they decree that none study Philosophy above five years,
unless they join Divinity with it: And they forbid Printing and Preaching
unlicensed.

. 58. This Leo the tenth was excellently prepared for the Papacy; Wars had
dipossest his Father at Florence, and the King of France, Lewis 11. for his
Fathers sake,
had honored (or dishonored) him with an excellent and rich Archbishopric,
when he was a Child: You may conjecture at what age, when as he was scarce
thirteen when Innocent 8. made him a Cardinal, to gratify his Father Laurence
Mediees, who had given his Daughter to Francis the Popes Son; but because of
his Nonage, he staid yet from Rome: when he was Pope, he would fain have had
peace in Italy if he could, being wholly addicted to ease and voluptuousness:
He hired the Helvetians for his Militia against Francis King of France, but
they were destroyed by the French, and the Pope was glad at last to beg a
peace. Having unbounded desires of Empire, he picked a quarrel with the Duke of
Vrbane, and assaulted him with Arms, and dispossessed him of his Country, whence
he fled, and ungratefully banished D^rista^s, and his Brother Alphonsus a
Cardinal, who studying revenge, was destroyed by him: The Pope sought to
ensnare the Duke of Ferrary, but failed; the French in Italy conquer the
Emperor and Helvetians; the Turk wins Syria and Egypt; the Pope sits
barefoot to pray against him, bringing forth all the Consecrated Dishes, the
Saints Relics, Images, etc. in pomp, and the Tyrant presently died of a
Cance^^ The Pope falls on diverse Cardinals; Cardinal Alphonsus he
imprisoneth, and appoints a Blackamoor to break out his Chamber, and strangle
him: Having hereby lost the love of many of the old ones, in one day he makes
one and thirty new Cardinals, that he may be sure of help; Paulus Baleon he
beheaded, Amadeus Ricinatius he hanged: It was this Pope that is commonly said
to have said to Pet. Bembus his Secretary, What profit does this Fable of Jesus
bring us in.

. 59. But now begins the fatal time, Anno 1517. Martin Luther began to cry down
their sin, and draw the people of Germany from them; and Zuinglius, and many
others doing the same, the light brake forth, and the darkness vanished. I need
not write the History of it, which is so commonly known or published: The Pope
published a Bull against him, in which he numbereth his supposed Errors; you
may see them in Binius, page 653. in Leo the tenths life, how John Frederick
Elector of Saxony bore Luther out, how Philip of Hassia seconded him, how the
University of Wittenberge clave to him, and especially Philip Melancthon, that
excellent man; how the Free Cities, with many Princes, came in to them, and
joined; how many Petitions and Disputations there were about it; how the
Augustine Confession was written, and the Apology for it; how it turned to a
War; how the Elector of Saxony, and Philip Landgrave of Hass^a, were taken
prisoners; how Maurice of Saxony, siding with the Emperor, was made Elector,
and John Frederick dispossessed; how the same Maurice after, to vindicate Philip
of Hassia, took Arms against the Emperor, and forced him to flight, and
finally to some degree of toleration for the Protestants. All these things the
History of the Reformation, written by diverse, tells you at large; as also
how many great and excellent Divines were suddenly raised up to stand for
Reformation, as soon as Tyranny was so far abated as that men might freely show
their minds, it soon appeared that most had been long subjugated to the Pope
more by violence than by consent: when the Emperor was necessitated to a
Toleration, he consulted for some abatement to procure Concord, and by
Agricola, Sidonius, and Julius Pflug (an Antinomian turned back to Popery) drew
up a middle form of worship, called the Interim, which he would have all
conform to till a General Council, which divided the Reformers among
themselves, while some as moderate; and to avoid total ruin of the Church,
yielded to part, and others refused, and multitudes of Ministers were therefore
ejected and persecuted. This great Emperor, Charles the Fifth, after long
Wars, and many Victories, and sharp Persecutions, was at last weary of all, and
resigned his Empire, See the History of Charles, Prin^e of Spains's death.
and betook himself to a private life in Spain, where he died, strongly
suspected of repentance and inclination to the Reformed Doctrine himself: He
bequeathed nothing (as was usual) to any Religious House, or Order: There were
found papers about him for the Protestant Doctrine of Justification; his
Confessor, and another Doctor that attended him, were hereupon suspected of
Heresy, and one persecuted, and the other put to death by the Inquisition.
Thus error, sin, and worldly violence are never true to themselves, but must
be repented of at last, and none can stand to them when the light prevails.

. 60. But to return to Pope Leo, when he had made above forty Cardinals,
exercised many cruelties, and made a League with the Emperor against the
French, to drive them out of Italy, when his Arms had prevailed, and the French
were expelled, and Milan recovered, and some Cities restored to the Church
(that is, to the Pope) the excessive joy for the Victory so ^oved him,
that (says Onuphrius) he fell into a Fev^r, of which he died, but not without
suspicion of poison. The same Onuphrius (whom I follow) says, that (he was a
diligent observer of divine things, given to the sacred Ceremonies, but he was
profusely given to Voluptuousness, Hunting, Hawking, Luxury, splendid
Feastings, Music, and to get money sold Cardinalships, invented Offices, etc.
and yet was the most liberal of all the Popes that ever had lived to that day,
excessively loving Music, etc.) This was Papal Piety, by which he merited a
Monument inscribed OPTIMO PRINCIPI LEONIX. etc. says Onuphrius: (In all his
life he desired nothing more ardently than the highest glory of liberality,
from which other Priests use to be very far off.) Perhaps for this glory
Tecelius must get money by selling Pardons, which began his fall: Verily they
have their reward, says Christ of Hypocrites, that do their Alms to be seen of
men.

. 61. It is to be noted, that as the great ignorance and wicked lives of the
Roman Clergy were the great advantage to Luthers success,
(as the gross idolatry and wickedness of Heathens was to Christianity of old)
and the Learning and Piety of the Reformers were the means of their common
acceptance; so hereupon the Papacy perceived a necessity of greater Learning,
and some Reformation, for its own defense from utter ruin: whereupon many were
awakened, and addicted to seek Learning, and some Provincial Councils made some
Canons for amending the Clergies lives; so that their increase of Learning* and
some amendment of manners, was occasioned by the Protestants; yea, the Popes
themselves have since then been far less vicious and turbulent than before.

. 62. And all Christian Princes have cause to be thankful to the Reformers,
and to acknowledge that from them they have now the safety of their Crowns and
Dignities, and their peace; and by them, of Subjects, they are restored to a
great degree of freedom, I mean even those that yet are Papists, the Pope dare
not now damn them as Henrician Heretics, as he long had done; he dare not be
so bold in taking away, and giving Kingdoms; he dare not execute his Laws
against Princes Investitu^es, nor excommunicate them, and depose them, and
absolve their Subjects, nor interdict whole Kingdoms* and shut up Church
doors, nor so much as openly profess that he has power from God, and S. Peter,
to depose Kings according to their Merits, and to set up others in their stead.
O how much quieter is Italy, Spain, France, Germany, etc. since the
Reformation, and how much less troubled with Papal terrors and wars, than
heretofore; and all is for fear lest if the Pope should anger them, the rest of
the Princes should forsake him. Heretofore if one Kingdom stood up against the
Pope, the rest were ready blindly to obey his Commands, to fall upon them and
destroy them: But now the Reformed Nations have more strength to defend
themselves, and those that shall join with them: The truth is, it is
Reformation that has made even the Papists Princes Freemen.

63. The History of all the Roman horrid bloody cruelties, by which they
labored to suppress Reformation, I here omit, because (as it well deserves)
it is written in many large volumns by it self: I mean the bloody murders of
the Albigenses, Waldenses, Bohemians, the cruelties of the Inquisition in
Spain, Belgia and other parts: The Massacre in France. The burning people in
England and the murders in Ireland, and in other countries: you may read them
at large in many Histories: In Thuanus, Sleidan, Illericus, Morney, Perin,
Moreland, the Belgian, and French Histories: Foxe's Acts and Monuments, and
summarily in Mr. Sam. Clerks Martyrology: And Carrion, M^lancton, Micreleus, D.
Paraeus, Vignerius, Scull^tus, Bucholcer, Fuactius, and many others give you an
account of the Reformation. And the Lives of the German Divines, written by
Melchior Adaunes, yea and of their Lawyers, Physicians and Philosophers, gives
not an unpleasant light into that History: So that for me here to treat of the
Reformation in a large volumn (to do what is so often done already) would be
incougruous.

The making of Urban the 6th. the Emperors Schoolmaster Pope, and the Wars in
his time; The Succession of Clement the 7th. and the Italian Wars in his time,
between the Emperor and the French and others, and the taking of Rome by the
Emperor (Charles the 5th.) army under Charles Duke of Bourbon, and all the
progress of their broils, Historians have at large recorded; and therefore I
shall pretermit.

64. The day before Charles the 5th. was chosen Emperor, the Senate of Electas
chose John Frederick Duke of Saxony; but he ingenti animo recusavit, refused
it; and being asked whom he thought most eligible, he said none but Charles was
fit. For this noble mind, he was offered 30000 Florens of money, which he
constantly rejected: And when they urged him that 10000 might be given to his
servants, he said, let them that will take it, but he that takes any shall not
stay to morrow with me, and taking horse went his ways, lest they further
troubled him: Thus says Erasmus, Epist. l 13. ^p. 4. I was assured of by the
Bishop of Liege that was presen^t] See B^^^^zar Chronol. p. 533.

65. The Reformation forced the German Bishops to make many reforming Canons,
at Colen, etc. Among those of an Augustine Synod our own strife about
communicating makes me think of no loss of time to recite their Catalogue of
persons that were to be denied the Sacrament of Communion, viz. as follows.

1. Heathens, Infidels and Heretics. 2. The Excommunicate. 3. All men at a
time of common Interdict. 4. Men that go from their own Parishes for it. 5.
Those that are under age: And distracted, possessed, Idiots. 6. Those that are
troubled with crudity of stomachs (till cured.) 7. Infamous persons, as
Juglers, Players, Jesters, etc. 8. Women that wear Men's apparel. 9. Separatists
and Conventiclers. 10. The Sect of the Beggars of Lions. 11. The superstitious.
12. Those that have not contrition and confession, living in sin. 13. That live
in notorious wickedness, as Adultery, Usury, etc. till their actual
reformation. 14. Deserters of Marriage unallowed. 15. Those that play much at
Dice. 16. That are given to drunkenness, gluttony, comessations, spend days in
Taverns; And if they amend not they are to be put to death. 17. That detain
other men's goods. 18. That break and spoil Temples. 19. That encroach on others
lands and grounds. 20. Servants that being corrected refuse their duty to their
Master after it. 21. They that use false weights and measures. 22. That pay not
Tithes. 23. That delay to execute Testaments. 24. That obstinately despise the
Customs of the Church, and meet elsewhere. 25. That disturb the Preachers, or
go out of Church contemptuously. 26. That will not hear Mass and stay the end.
27. That use unnecessary labor on the Lords day or holy days. 28. That marry
secretly. 29. That slothfully or contemptuously refuse to learn the Lords
prayer, and Creed. 30. That blaspheme or profanely swear. 31. That reproach
and dishonor Priests. 32. Murderers, Enemies, revengeful and oppressors. 33.
That preserve not carefully their Childrens Lives. 34. That make Laws against
Church Liberties, or Judge by such Laws, or lay burdens and exactions on
Churchmens persons or goods. 35. Those that judge that money received on Usury
is not to be restored.

66. The Reformers accusations of the Popish Clergy had this effect, to make
them confess many of their faults, especially drunkenness, and Whoredom, as
being the cause of the peoples distaste and desertion; see the Orations at the
Councils of Augusta, and Trevers; and the Council at Trevers made strict Canons
against them, especially for removing Concubines from the Priests. And one at
Colen 1549. is large for some reformation; but especially careful to keep out
true Reformation, forbidding the books of Protestants by name. Among other
things they forbid baptizing Children in private houses, except Kings Children,
etc. And another Council at Mentz has the whole sum of the Roman Doctrine and
Discipline at the best, save the matters of the Papacy; and these late
provincial Councils made Canons in the frame of them, not much of our English
Canons and our Articles of Religion set together. And another Council at
Trevers repeateth their disciplinary Canons in part, and adds more.

67. The History and Canons of the Council of Trent are sufficiently published;
and Pope Pius his Oath conjoined; so that I need not speak of that which I
intend not to make any part of the matter of this Epitome, which extends but
to the time of Luthers Reformation.

68. Even after the Reformation, the Pope could not live in Italy without
fighting: Pope Julius the 3d, fought with Octavius Farnesius at Parma; Pope
Paul sought with the King of Spain: but was beaten: He set sixteen Cardinals
over the Inquisition (the defense of his Kingdom): He imprisoned Cardinal
Morrovius suspected of heresy, absolved after by Pope Pius the 4th. who yet
strangled Caraffa, and beheaded Cardinal Leonard, Count Montarius, etc.

69. Cardinal Charles Borrhomeus (sainted by them) at diverse Millane Councils
showed a great deal of Reforming, and some deforming zeal. In the first Council
I shall note that they decreed that men once admitted to the Communion, and
returning to their sin, be no more admitted till the Priest see that they have
actually reformed their lives. And that before any young persons first receive,
they shall some days be examined, and taught the use and reason of the
Sacrament, Priests notoriously criminal must not say Mass till they amend their
lives. No Physician must give physic to any after four days sickness that is
not confessed to the Priest (on pain of excommunication). Bishops are forbidden
to stand when Princes sit, no not for saying Grace at meat: nor otherwise to
depress and abject themselves to Princes. Parish Priests must have a book of
the Names, Sex, Age, and State of every Parishioner. Whores are to dwell in
their assigned places, and to be known by their apparel from others. Dancing,
Plays, Dice, Selling, etc. forbidden on the Lords days and holy days. Indeed
the Roman Religion was never set out with greater advantage of piety and
reformation than in the copious Decrees of Carolus Borrhomeus in the Milan
Councils: To which a Council at Aquileia added, ends Binnius his History of
Councils.

70. In all this History of Councils, Bishops and Patriarchs it appears that
Corruption optimi est pessima; As the sacred Ministry in pious humble wise,
peaceable and sincere men, has been Gods great means of planting, ordering,
preserving and increasing his Church, and converting, edifying, and saving
Souls, and such to this day are as Paul called Timothy (not the Church) (A
Pillar and Basis of the truth in the Church, which is the House of the Living
God) the Husbandmen that still cultivate the Vineyard of the Lord, while with
self-denial, and faith, and heavenly minds, they labor to promote holy
WISDOM, LOVE, SPIRITUALITY and PEACE, abhorring pride and worldly designs, and
being mostly little noted in the Histories of the Church, as not appearing in
the turbulent and public affairs of the world: so contrarily Pride, and
worldliness, seeking Dominion, favor and wealth, to feed also sensuality with
fleshly pleasure, by Satan's great diligence have corrupted sacred Societies,
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Conversation, and when the Prince of pride
and darkness, the God of this World, could not directly expugne Christianity,
he has under pretense of Government, Unity, and Advancement to the Church, set
his Malignant Ministers in the Chairs and Pulpits of the Church to do his work,
and fight down piety, love and peace in the name of Christ, and as it were by
his Authority; and instead of persecuting Heathens, Satan has set up
contentions, dividing, and silencing, and persecuting Prelates, to smite the
true Shepherds, and scatter the Flocks; and as for Faith and Order, to tread
down the true life of Faith, Love and Order, and to be the Capital Enemies of
the Church, while they would make themselves its Heads, Advancers and
Defenders; so that the chief good and the chief mischief has come to the
Church by the means of the Pastors: And no Schisms, no Heresies, no
Persecutions have been more grievous, than those that have been caused by a
tyrannical and contentious Clergy; witness all the Conciliary Episcopal
Schisms, Wars, and Bloodshed mentioned in this Collection; witness the many
hundred thousand Albigenses, Waldenses, and Bohemians murdered, as for the
Faith and Church; witness the 30000. or 40000. at once murdered at the French
Massacre; witness the horrid cruelties of the Inquisition; witness the Volumes
of burned and otherwise murdered Protestants; and witness the Irish Zeal
stirred up by their Clergy, that murdered two hundred thousand in so narrow a
room as that small Country, and in so few Weeks: And whoever is the Antichrist,
certainly in Rome, and the Militant Tyrannical Church-Clergy is found the blood
of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus; and as proud contentious Patriarchs and
Prelates ruined Religion and the Empire in the East, and gave it up to
Mohammedan darkness and cruelty, so have they under the name of Christianity
impugned the Christian Interest in the West. I end with G. Heebert:

Only the West and Rome do keep them free
From this contagious infidelity:
And this is all the Rock whereof they boast,
As Rome will one day find unto her cost;
Sin being not able to extirpate quite
The Churches here, bravely resolved one night
To be a Church^man, and to wear a Mitre,
The old debauched Ruffian would turn Writer:
I saw him in his Study, where he sat
Busy in controversy sprung of late:
A Gown and Pen became him wondrous well,
His grave aspect had more of Heaven than Hell;
Only there was a handsome picture by,
To which he lent a corner of his eye:
As Sin in Greece a Prophet was before,
And in old Rome a mighty Emperor;
So now being Priest, he plainly did profess
To make a Jest of Christ's three Offices;
The rather since his scattered juglings were
United now in one, both time and sphere:
From Egypt he took petty Deities,
From Greece Oracular Infallibilities;
And from old Rome the liberty of pleasure,
By free dispensing of the Churches Treasure:
Then in memorial of his Ancient Throne,
He did surname his Palace Babylon:
Yet that he might the better gain all Nations,
And make that name good by their transmigrations,
From all these places, but at diverse times,
He took five Vizards to conceal his Crimes.
From Egypt Anchorisme, and retiredness,
Learning from Greece, from old Rome stateliness;
And blending these, he carried all men's eyes,
While Truth sat by, counting his Victories;
Whereby he grew apace, and scorned to use
Such force as once did captivate the Jews;
But did bewitch, and finely work each Nation
Into a voluntary transmigration:
All post to Rome; Princes submit their Necks,
Either to his public Foot, or private Tricks:
It did not fit his Gravity to stir,
Nor his long Journey, nor his Gout and Fur;
Therefore he sent out ABLE MINISTERS,
Statesmen wi^^in, Councils by Anathema's.
without door Cloysterers;
Who without Spear, or Sword, or other Drum,
Than what was in their Tongue, did overcome;
And having conquered did so strangely rule,
That the whole World did seem but the Popes Mule:
As new and old Rome did one Empire twist,
So both together are one ANTICHRIST;
Yet with two Faces, as their Ianus was,
Being in this their old cracked Looking-glass:
How dear to me, O God, thy Counsels are!
Who may with thee compare!
Thus Sin triumphs in Westerns-Babylon,
Yet not as Sin, but as Religion;
Of his two Thrones he made the later best,
And to defray his journey from the East,
Old and new Babylon are to Hell and Night,
As is the Moon and Sun to Heaven and Light.
CHAP. XIV.
LEst this treatise be mistaken and abused to the dishonor of the Christian
Religion, Church or Ministry I add two papers which I long ago published for
the Ministry 1. Against profane Malignants, 2. Against Sectarians, especially
those called Seekers, as also Papists and others that for interest or faction,
deny or vilify the Pastors.

One sheet for the Ministry; Against the Malignants of all sorts.
AS man's first felicity was attended with the malice of the Serpent, so is the
wonderful work of his Restoration. The promise of Reconciliation by the seed
of the woman, is joined with a proclamation of open war with the Serpent and
his seed. The enmity was hottest in the Devil and his seed against Christ
himself, who bare and overcame it; and is become the Captain of our salvation,
that his Church may overcome by his Cross and Strength, and Conduct; The next
degree of malice is against his officers: the most eminent, the General
Officers had the hottest assault; and his ordinary Officers bear the next: That
we shall be hated of all men for the name of Christ, (Mat. 10. 22.) is still
verified to our experience. Not only the openly profane abhor us for our work
sake, but false-hearted professors that turn from the truth, do presently turn
Malignants against the Ministry; and many weak ones that are better minded, are
dangerously seduced into a guilt of the sedition. To all these I here proclaim
in the name and word of the Lord, Numb. 16. 26. [Depart I pray you from the
tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in
all their sins.] Which I shall now open to you.

1. The office of the Ministry is an undoubted Ordinance of God, to continue in
the Church to the end of the world. No man can pretend that they ceased with
the Apostles, for it is Gods will that ordinary fixed Presbyters shall be
ordained in every Church, Acts. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 2.
And Pastors and Teachers are appointed for the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, and edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come
to a perfect man, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. A Ministry authorized to Disciple the
Nations, baptize and teach them, is instituted by Christ as King and Savior,
and have his Promise to be with them always to the end of the world, Mat. 28.
18, 19, 20. The same necessity and work continues; still souls are born and
bred in darkness, and how shall they be saved without believing, or believe
without hearing, or hear without preaching, or we preach without sending? Romans
10. 13. 14, 15. There is a clearer word in the Gospel for the Ministry then the
Magistracy; though enough for both. Our own call I shall sp^ak of anon.

2. These Malignants set themselves against the Principal members of the body
of Christ, that are in it as the eyes and hands to the natural body, 1 Cor. 12.
16, 19, 27, 29. Ephesians. 4. 11, 15. The Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. The Overseers of the flock that is purchased
with Christ's blood, Acts. 20. 28. They are the chief members, 1. in office, 2.
ordinarily in gifts for edification of the body: 3. and in grace. Now a wound
in the stomach or liver is more mortal to the body, then in the hand: and the
loss of an eye or hand is worse then the loss of an ear.

3. These Malignants are therefore principally enemies to the Church it self.
They take on them to be only against the Ministers, but it will prove most
against the people and whole Church. If they smite the Shepherds, the sheep
will be scattered. How can they more surely ruin Christ's family, then by
casting out the Stewards, that must rule, and give the children their meat in
due season, even milk to the babes, and stronger meat to them of full age, Heb.
5. 12, 13, 14. Luke. 12. 42. Mat. 24. 45. What readyer way to ruin the Schools
of Christ, then by casting out the Teachers that he has appointed under him?
Or to ruin his Kingdom, then to reject his officers? Or to wrong the body,
then to cut off the hand, and pull out the eyes, or to destroy the principal
parts? Was it not Ministers that planted the Churches, and converted the world
and have ever born off the assaults of enemies? Where was there ever Church on
earth that continued without a Ministry? The great Kingdom of Nubi^ fell from
Christianity for want of Preachers. The Nations that have the weakest and
fewest Ministers, have the least of Christianity; and those that have the most
and ablest Ministers, have the most flourishing state of Religion. All over the
world the Church does rise or fall with the Ministry: Cut down the Pillars, and
the building falls. He is blind that sees not what would become of the Church,
were it not for the Ministry? Who should teach the ignorant, or rebuke the
obstinate, explain the word of truth, and stop the mouths of proud gain sayers?
What work would heresies, and division, and profaneness make, if these banks
were cut down; when all that can be done is still too little. It must needs
therefore be mere enmity against the Church, that makes men malignant against
the Ministry.

4. The design of the maligners of the Ministry is plainly against the Gospel
and Christianity it self. They take the readyest way in the world to bring in
Heathenism, Infidelity and Atheism, which Christianity has so far banished,
For it is the Ministry that Christ uses to bring in light, and drive and keep
out this damnable darkness, Acts 26: 17, 18. [I send thee to open their eyes,
and turn them from darkness to light, etc.] Why are so many Nations Infidels,
Mahometans, and Idolaters, b^t for want of Ministers to preach the Gospel to
them? These Malignants therefore would take down the Sun, and banish
Christianity out of the world.

5. And they hinder the Conversion of particular souls, and so are the
cruellest wretches on earth. Though an Angel must be sent to Cornelius, it is
not to be instead of a Preacher, but to send him to a Preacher, Acts 10. Though
Christ would wonderfully appear to Saul, it is to send him to Ananias for
instruction, Acts 9. Though the Jailer must feel an Earthquake, and see
Miracles, it is but to prepare him for the Ministers words, Acts 16. Philip
must be carried by an Angel to expound to an Eunuch the Word that must convert
him. The Ministry is Gods instituted settled way, by which he will convert and
save the world, as truly as the light is the natural way by which he will
corporally enlighten them Acts 2. 18. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Mat. 5. 14. Romans 10. 14. Do
you think so many souls would be converted if the Ministry were down? Do you
not see that the very contempt of them, that the scorns of the ungodly, and
opposition of Malignant Apostates have occasioned, does hinder most of the
ignorant and profane from receiving the saving benefit of the Gospel? How many
millions of souls would these wretches sweep away to Hell, if they had their
will? While thousands are in damnation for want of the light, they would take
it from you, that you might go there also. Do you not understand the meaning of
these words, against Christ's Ministers? Why the meaning is this: They make a
motion to the people of the Land, to go to Hell with one consent, and to hate
those that are appointed to keep them out of it. They would take the bread of
life from your mouths. They are attempting an hundred times more cruelty on
you, than Herod on the Jews when he killed the Children, or the Irish that
murdered the Protestants by thousands; as the soul is of greater worth then the
body.

6. These Malignants against the Ministry are the flat enemies of Christ
himself, and so he will take them and use them. He that would root out the
inferior Magistrates, is an enemy to the Sovereign; and he that is against the
officers of the Army, is an enemy to the General; Christ never intended to stay
visibly on earth, and to Teach and Rule the world immediately in person; but he
that is the King will Rule by his Officers; and he that is Prophet will Teach
us by his Officers; and therefore he has plainly told us, [He that hears
you, hears me; and he that dispiseth you, despises me; and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16.] O fearful case of miserable
Malignants! Durst thou despise the Lord thy Maker and Redeemer, if he appeared
to thee in his glory! to whom the Sun it self is as darkness, and all the world
as dust and nothing? Remember when thou next speak against his Officers, or
hear others speak against them, that their words are spoken against the face
of Christ, and of the Father. I would not be sound in the case of one of these
Malignants, when Christ shall come to judge his enemies, for a thousand worlds.
He that has said, [Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; and
has rebuked Kings for their sakes, Psalm. 105. 15. will deride all those that
would break his bands, and will break them as with a rod of iron, and dash them
in pieces as a potters vessel, Psalm. 2. 3, 4, 9. And as he has told them
plainly, [Who so despises the Word shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 13.] And [he
that despises, despises not man, but God, 1 These. 4. 8. So he has told us
that it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then
for such, Mat. 10. 15. Many a thousand prouder enemies then you has Christ
broken; and look to your selves, for your day is coming. If you had but
stumbled on this stone, it would have broken you in pieces; but seeing you will
strive against it, it will fall on you, and gri^d you to powder, Mat. 21. 44.
And then you shall see that he that made them his Ambassadors, will bear them
out and say, [In as much as you did it to these, you did it to me.] And you
shall then say, Blessed are they that trust in him.

7. It is apparent that these enemies of the Ministers are playing the Papists
game. Because the just disgrace of their Ministry, was the ruin of their
Kingdom; therefore they hope to win of us at the same game. They know that if
the people were brought into a hatred or suspicion of their guides, they might
the easier be won to them. They tell us in their writings, that not one of ten
of our people but takes his faith on trust from their Teachers, and therefore
take them o^f from them and they will fa^l: but they delude themselves in this:
For though the ungodly among us have no true faith of their own, and the Godly
must lean on the hand of their supporters, yet there is in them a living
principle; and we do not as the Papists priests, teach our people to see with
our eyes, and no matter for their own: but we help to clear their own
eyesight. Doubt not but the most of the sects in the Land that fall against
the Ministry, are knowingly or ignorantly the agents of the Papists. For the
principal work of a Papist is to cry down the Ministry and the Scripture, and
to set all they can on the same work.

8. These sects that are against the Ministry do all the same work as the
Drunkards, Whore-mongers, Covetous, and all ungodly persons in our Parishes do:
And therefore it seems they are guided by the same spirit. It is the work of
Drunkards and all these wicked wretches to hate, and despise, and revile the
Ministers, and to teach others to say as they. And just so do Quakers, Seekers,
Papists and all other Malignants reproach the same Ministers: And yet the blind
wretches will not see that the same Spirit moves them.

9. It is apparent that it is the Devils game they play, and his interest and
Kingdom which they promote. Who fights against Christ's Officers and Army, but
the General of the contrary Army? What greater service could all the world do
for the Devils, then to cast out the Ministers of Christ? and what more would
the Devil himself desire, to set up his Kingdom and suppress the Church?
Wretches! you shall (...) see your Master, and he will pay you your wages
contrary to your expectation. Read Gods word to a Malignant, Acts 13. 10.

10. These Enemies do reproach as faithful a Ministry as the world enjoys,
and their malice has so little footing, as that the result must be their own
shame. Among the Papists indeed there are Mass-Priests that can but read a
Mass, whose Office is to turn a piece of Bread into a God: And yet these the
Malignants either let alone, or liken us to them. The Greeks, and Ethiopians,
and most of the Christian World, have a Ministry that seldom or never preach
to them, but read Common Prayer, and Homilies. The most of the Protestant
Churches have a learned Ministry that is so taken up with Controversies, that
they are much less in the powerful preaching and practice of godliness: Above
all Nations under Heaven, the English are set upon Practical Divinity and
Holiness, and yet even they are by Malignity chosen out for reproach. Alas,
scandals in the Ministry, (as drunkenness, swearing, etc.) among other Nations
are but too common: but in England Magistrates and Ministers combine against
them. Ministers are still spurring on the Magistrates to cast out the
insufficient, negligent and scandalous; and desire and use more severity with
men of their own profession, than with Magistrates, or any others in the Land.
In nothing are they more zealous, than to sweep out all the remnant of the
scandalous: And for themselves, they are devoted to the work of the Lord, and
think nothing too much that they are able to perform, but preach in season and
out of season, with all long-suffering and Doctrine; and yet Malignants make
them their reproach.

11. It is abundance of pride and impudency, that these Malignant Enemies are
guilty of. They are most of them persons of lamentable ignorance; and yet they
dare revile at the Teachers, and think themselves wise enough to rebuke and
teach them: Many of them are men of wicked lives; and yet they can tell the
world how bad the Ministers are. A Railer, a Drunkard, a covetous Worldling, an
ignorant Sot, is the likest person to fall upon the Minister; and the Owl will
call the Lark a Night-bird. Alas, when we come to try them, what dark wretches
do we find them! and should be glad if they were but teachable: And yet they
have learnt the Devils first Lesson, to despise their Teachers.

12. And O what barbarous ingratitude are these Malignant Enemies of the
Ministry guilty of! For whom do we watch, but for them and others? Can they be
so blind as to think a painful Minister does make it his design to seek
himself, or to look after great matters in the world? Would not the time, and
labor, and cost that they are at in the Schools and Universities, have fitted
them for a more gainful trade? Do not Lawyers, Physicians, etc. live a far
easier, and in the world a more honorable plentiful life? Have not the
Ministers themselves been the principal Instruments of taking down Bishops,
Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebends, and all means of preferment? And
what have they got by it, or ever endeavored? Speak malice, and spare not. Is
it any thing but what they had before? Even the maintenance due to their
particular charge. Unthankful wretches! It is for your sakes and souls that
they study, and pray, and watch, and fast, and exhort, and labor, to the
consuming of their strength; and when they have done, are made the Drunkards
Song, and the scorn of all the wicked of the Country; and when they spend, and
are spent, the more they love, the less they are beloved. In the times of this
greatest prosperity of the Church, they live under constant hatred and scorn,
from those that they would save, and will not let alone in sin. And what do
they endure all this for but Gods honor, and your salvation? Would we be
Ministers for any lower ends? Let shame from God and man be on the face of such
a Minister! I profess, were it not for the belief of the greatness, and
necessity, and excellency of the Truths that I am to preach, and for the will
of God, and the good of Souls, I would be a Plowman, or the meanest Trade, if
not a Sweep Chimney, rather than a Minister. Must we break our health, and lay
by all our worldly interest for you, even for you, and think not our lives and
labors too good or too dear to further your Salvation; and must we by you,
even by you, be reproached after all? God will be Judge between you and us,
whether this be not inhumane ingratitude; and whether we deserve it at your
hands?

13. Yea, it is Injustice also that you are guilty of. The labourer, says
Christ, is worthy of his hire, Luke 10. 7. (Mark that, you that call them
Hirelings) The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Especially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine. And will you throw stones
at their heads for endeavoring to save your souls? Will you spit in their
faces for seeking with all their might to keep you from Hell? Is that their
wages that you owe them? But blessed be the Lord, with whom is our reward,
though you be not gathered, Isa. 49. 5. But as you love your selves, take heed
of that Curse, Ier. 18. 20. [Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have
dug a pit for my soul: Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for
them, and to turn away thy wrath from them, etc.] O how many a time have we
besought the Lord for you! that he would convert you, and forgive you, and turn
away the evil that was over you: And when all these our prayers, and groans,
and tears shall be remembered against you, O miserable souls, how dear will you
pay for all!

14. And is it not a wonder that these Malignants do not see what evident light
of Scripture they contradict; and how many great express Commands they violate?
They break the fifth Commandment, which requires honor as well to spiritual
Ecclesiastical Parents, as to Civil and Natural. And he that curses Father and
Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in darkness, Prove. 20. 20. The eye that
mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the
Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, Prove. 30. 17. Did
these wretches never read, 1 These. 5. 12. We beseech you brethren, to know them
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to
esteem them very highly in love for their work sake, and to be at peace among
your selves.] And Heb. 13* 17. [ Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your souls as they that must give
account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is
unprofitable for you.] And Heb. 13. 7. Remember them which have the rule over
you, who have spoken to you the Word of God.] And so ver. 24. And 1 Timothy 5. 17.
The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, etc.] with abundance
more such passages as these? Do not you feel these fly in your faces when you
oppose the Ministers of Christ? Does a Thief or Murderer sin against plainer
light than you?

15. These Malignants sin against the consent and experience of the Universal
Church of Christ till this day. The whole Church has been for the Ministry,
and instructed by them; and as the Child does seek the Breast, so did newborn
Christians, in all Ages, seek the Word from the Ministers, that they might live
and grow thereby. And all the Nations of the Christian World are for the
Ministry to this day! Or else they could not be for Christ, and for the Church,
and Gospel. Is it not plain therefore that these Malignants are dead branches,
cut off from the Church, that are so set against the Spirit and interest of the
Church?

16. Moreover they sin against the experience of all, or almost all the true
Christians in the world. For they have all experience, that Ministers are
either their Fathers, or Nurses in the Lord: And that by their means they have
had their life, and strength, and comforts; their sins killed, their graces
quickened, their doubts resolved; the taste of the good Word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come? May we not challenge you as Paul often does his
Flock, Whether you did not receive the illuminating sanctifying Spirit by the
Ministry, if ever you received it? I tell you, it is as much against the new
and holy nature of the Saints to despise the Ministers of Christ, as it is
unnatural for a Child to spit in the face of his Father or Mother. And the
experience of sound Christians will keep them closer, and help them much
against this inhumanity, what ever Hypocrites may do.

17. And if these Malignants had not Pharaohs heart, they would sure have
considered, that the experience of all Ages tells them, that still the most
wicked have been the Enemies of the Ministry, and the most godly have most
obeyed and honored them in the Lord; and that this Enmity has been the common
Brand of the rebellious, and the forerunner of the heavy wrath of God; and
that it has gone worst with the Enemies, and best with the Friends of a godly
Ministry. Do I need to prove this, which is so much of the substance of the Old
Testament, and the New? Was it the Friends or Enemies of all the Prophets,
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, that Scripture and all good Writers do
commend? Do not the names of all Malignants against the godly Ministry stink
above ground, as the shame of mankind, except those that are buried out of
hearing, or those that were converted?

18. Nay such as are noted for the highest sort of the wicked upon Earth; worse
than Drunkards, Whorem^ngers, and such filthy Beasts! The Persecutors of Gods
Ministers have been ever taken as walking Devils: And the hottest of Gods wrath
has fallen upon them. Take two instances; 1. When the Jews went into Captivity,
this was the very cause, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. [But they mocked the Messengers
of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, till the wrath of the
Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy. 2. And when the Jews
were cut quite off from the Church, and made Vagabonds on the Earth, this was
the very cause, Acts 28. 28. Be it known therefore to you, that the salvation
of God is sent to the Gentiles, and that they will hear it.] 1 These. 2. 15, 16.
These Jews [both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us: and they please not God, and are contrary to all men, forbidding
us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved to fill up their sin
always; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.]

19. It is the Devils own part that these Malignants act: For it is he that is
the great Enemy of Christ, and the Saints, and he that is the Accuser of the
Brethren, which accuses them before God day and night: And is not this the
work of Quakers, Drunkards, Papists, and all Malignants? But the Lord will
rebuke them, and be the glory of his servants, Zach. 3. 1, 2. [He showed me
Joshua the High Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan
standing at his right hand to resist him. And the Lord said unto Satan; The
Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem.]

20. These Malignants do most of them condemn themselves; for they honor the
Ancient Ministers of Christ that are dead, even while they oppose and hate the
present that are living, who are the nearest Imitators of their Doctrine and
life that are on Earth! The name of Peter, and Paul, and John they honor, and
some of them keep Holy Days for them; and at the same time hate and reproach
those that preach the same Doctrine, and that because they tread in their
steps. They honor the names of Austin, and Chrysostom and Hierom, and other
Ancients; and hate those that preach and live as they did. They speak
honorably of the Martyrs that were burned to death for the Doctrine of Christ;
and at the same time they hate us for doing as they did. What difference
between the Calling, Doctrine and lives of those Martyred Ministers, and these
that are now alive? O wretched Hypocrites! do you not know that these Apostles,
Fathers, and other Ministers did suffer in their time from such as you, as we
now do, and more? Hear what Christ says to such as you, Mat. 23. 29, 30, 31.
[Woe to you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites; because ye build the Tombs of the
Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the Righteous, and say, If we had been
in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the
blood of the Prophets: Ye are witnesses to your selves, that ye are the
children of them which killed the Prophets: fill ye up then the measure of your
Fathers: Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation
of Hell?]

21. Moreover, these Malignants do harden themselves against the fresh^st of
the Judgments of God, which some of their own hands have executed; and justify
the Presecutors, and succeed them in their fury. Have you forgotten what God
has done here against the Papal Enemies of the Gospel and Ministry, in 88. and
the Powder Plot, and many other times? Have you already forgotten how the
persecutors of a godly Ministry have sped within these sixteen years in England
and Ireland? And dare you now stand up in their room and make your selves the
heirs of their sin, and punishment, and justify them in all their Malignity?
What do you but justify them, when you rave against and revile the same sort
of Ministers, and many of the same persons, whom the former Malignants
persecuted? and oppose the same sort of Ministers that the Papists burned? And
would not you do the like by them if you had Power in your hands? Can any wise
man doubt of it, Whether Papists, and Quakers, and Drunkards, that now make it
their work to make the Ministry odious, would not soon dispatch them if they
could? Blessed be the great Protector of the Church, for were it not for him,
our lives would soon be a prey to your cruelty.

22. And indeed if these Malignants had their wills, they would undo
themselves, and cut down the bough they stand upon, and destroy the little hope
and help that is yet le^t for their miserable souls: It is for the sake of Gods
servants among them that judgments are so long kept off them. And as long as
the Gospel and Ministers remains, salvation is offered them: the voice of mercy
is calling after them, Repent and live. They have the light shining in their
eyes, which may at last convince them, as Paul was convinced of his
persecution: the voice which they despise may possibly awake them. Though they
have less hope then others; yet there is some, But if they had their will, and
were rid of the Ministry, alas what would the forlorn wretches do? Then they
might damn themselves without disturbance, and go quietly to hell, and no body
stop them, and say, [Why do you so?

23. And I pray you consider what it is that these men would have? What if the
Ministers were all cast out? would they have any to do Gods work in their
stead, or none? If none, you may see what they are doing: If any, Who, and
where are they? Is it not horrible Pride if all these silly souls do think that
they can do it better themselves? And what else do Quakers and all these sects
that are the enemies of the Ministry? Do they not go up and down the Land, and
say to the wisest holiest Teachers, as if they took them by the sleeve, [Come
down and let me preach that can do it better: Come down thou deceiver and
ignorant man, and let me come up that am wiser, and better, and known more: Out
with these proud Lordly Preachers, and let us be your Teachers, that are m^re
holy, and humble, and self-denying then they.] Is not this the loud language of
their actions? And can you not hear the Devil in these words of highest Pride
and Arrogance? But really Sirs, do you think that these men would teach you
better? And is there enough that are wiser and better then we to fill up our
rooms, if we were out? Do but prove that, and you shall have my consent to
banish all the Ministers in England, to some place that has greater need of
their labor, that they may no more trouble you that have no need of them, and
keep out better.

24. Lastly, consider on what senseless pretenses all this enmity against the
Ministry does vent it self. You shall hear the worst that they have to say
against us, (though but briefly) and then judge.

1. The Quakers say, We are idle drones that labor not, and therefore should
not eat. Answ. The worst I wish you, is, that you had but my ease instead of
your labor. I have reason to take my self for the least of Saints, and yet I
fear not to tell the accuser, that I take the labor of most Tradesmen in the
Town to be a pleasure to the body in comparison of mine; (though for the ends
and the pleasure of my mind, I would not change it with the greatest Prince)
Their labor preserves health, and mine consumes it: They work in ease, and I
in continual pain: They have hours and days of recreation: I have scarce time
to eat and drink: No body molesteth them for their labor; but the more I do,
the more hatred and trouble I draw upon me. If a Quaker ask me, what all this
labor is, let him come and see, or do as I do, and he shall know.

2. They accuse us of covetousness and oppression, because we take tithes or
hire, (as they call it.) Answ. 1. Is it not malice or sacrilegious covetousness
that frames this accusation? Whose are the Tithes? are they ours or theirs?
The same Law of the Land that makes the nine parts theirs, does make the tenth
ours. If we have no title to the tenth, they have none to the rest. We ask none
of our people for a farthing. They give it not to us: It was never theirs. When
they buy or take leases of their Land, it is only the nine parts that they pay
for, and if the tenths were sold them, they should pay themselves a tenth part
more. And would these men make all the people thieves and covetous, to take or
desire that which never was their own? Nay would they have them rob God, to
whom for his service the Tithes were devoted? Read, Mal. 3 8, 9, 10. Romans 2.
22. Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 6, 9. And whether Tithe it self be of Divine
institution still, is more then they are able to disprove. Sure I am, when
Christ told them of tithing mint and cummin, he says, These ought you to have
done, and not to leave the other undone, Mat. 23. 23. 2. But most certain I am
that God has made it our duty to meditate on his word, and give our selves
wholly thereto, 1 Timothy 4. 15. and that we may [Forbear working, and not go on
warfare at our own charge; and sowing to men spiritual things, should reap
their carnal things: Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things,
live of the things of the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Alter? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.] 1 Cor. 9. 6, 7, 13* 14. 3. And
know you not that the primitive Christians gave not only the tenths, but all
that they had, and laid it at the Apostoles feet? to show that the Gospel
teaches more clearly then the Law, the necessity of Dedicating our selves and
all that we have to God. 4. And yet I must say, that we are content with food
and raiment. Most Minist in England would be glad to give you all their tithes,
if you will* but allow them food and raim^^t for themselves and families, and
such education for their children as is fittest to make them serviceable to
God. And I hope it is no sin to have mouths that must be fed, or backs that
must be clothed. What! must Gods Ministers above all others be grudged food
and raiment, and that of the Lords portion, which none of you pay for? I fear
not to imitate Paul stopping the mouths of malicious accusers, and to tell you,
that the Ministers, whose expenses I am acquainted with, do give 500. pence,
for 50. that they receive by gift from their people: and that they take all
that they have as Christ's, and not their own, and if they have never so much
they devote it wholly to him, and know he is not beholden to them for it: and
some of them lay out in charitable uses, much more then all the tithes that
they receive for their Ministerial maintenance. And if the Quakers that accuse
them of covetousness, would cast up accounts with them, I doubt not but it will
be found that they receive more by gift then Preachers, and give not the fourth
part so much when they have done.

3. Another accusation is, that we preach false Doctrine, and deceive the
people. Answ. It Is easy to say so of any man in the world: But when they come
to prove it, you will see who are the deceivers.

4. Another is, that we are persecutors, and like the Priests of old, and so
all the reproofs of them and the Pharisees belong to us. Answ. This is soon
said too: but where is the proof? For themselves we have no mind to be troubled
with them. Let them let us alone, as long as we will let them alone. But yet
they shall be taught one day to know, that if the Magistrate stop the mouths of
such railers and abusers of God and men, he does no more persecute them, then
he persecuteth a thief when he hangs him; or then Paul persecuted Hymenaeus
and Philetus when he delivered them up to Satan; or Elymas, Acts 13. 11. or
then Peter persecuted Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5. or then God would have had
the Churches be persecutors against the woman Iezebel that was suffered to
teach and seduce the people, or against the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans which
God hated, Rev. 2. 15, 20. If hindering sin, be persecuting, the calling of a
Magistrate is to be a persecutor, Romans 13. 4. and all parents m^st pesecute
their own children.

5. Another accusation is, that we are against the preaching of any but our
selves. Answ. Who does not desire that all the Lords people were Prophets? But
yet we know all are not Prophets, 1 Cor. 12 29. nor Teachers. We would have
none of Gods gifts in our people buried, but all improved to the uttermost for
his glory. But we would not have men turn Ordinary Teachers, that are neither
sound, nor able, nor sent; nor every self-conceited ignorant man, have leave to
abuse the name and word of God, and the souls of men. What would you have more
then is granted you? When any unordained man that is judged competent by the
Commissioners of Approbation (of whom some are Soldiers) may be a constant
preacher, and have fullest maintenance, as well as Presbyters?

6. Another Charge is, that we are some weak, and some scandalous. Answ. We do
all that we are able to cast out such; and I think never more was done. The
Magistrate sets his Guard at the door, and lets in none but whom he please: and
sure if he knew where to have better than those that are in, he would put them
in, or else he is too blame: If he do not know, will you blame him for using
the best that he can get? But if you will come and help us to cast out any that
are vicious and unworthy, we will give you thanks.

7. Another Accusation is, that we differ among our selves, and one says one
thing, and another another thing. Answ. 1. And are all these Sects that oppose
us better agreed among themselves? Enquire and judge. 2. Do not all preach one
Gospel, and the same Essentials of the Christian Faith? And we expect not
perfect Unity, till we have perfect Knowledge and Holiness; which we dare not
boast of, whatever Quakers do.

8. Another Accusation is, that we are not true Ministers. And why so? Because
we have not an uninterrupted succession of lawful Ordination. Answ. This
Objection is the Papists, who have little reason to use it, while it is so
easy a matter to prove so many interruptions of their Papal succession. At
large and often have we answered them, and are still ready to deal with any of
them herein, and to prove; 1. That an uninterrupted succession of right
Ordination, is not of necessity to the being of the Ministry. 2. And if it
were, we have more to show for it than they. If others stick on this, let me
tell them, that Magistracy is as truly from God as the Ministry: And let ever a
King on Earth show me an uninterrupted succession giving him Title to his
Crown, and I will show him a more undoubted succession or Title to my Ministry.
But here is no room to discuss this Question.

9. Object. But you are Parish Priests, and no true Ministers, because you have
not true Churches. Answ. All the Christians in our Parishes that consent are
our Flock: And we undertake to prove the truth of such Churches, not only
against scorn, but against all the Arguments that can be brought.

10. Object. But you have not the Spirit, and therefore are no true Ministers.
Answ: And how prove you that we have not the Spirit? The approvers admit none
but such as they think have the Spirit. He that is sanctified has the Spirit:
Prove us unsanctified, and we will resign our Office. Object. You read your
Sermons out of a Paper; therefore you have not the Spirit. Answ. A strong
Argument! I pray you take seven years time to prove the consequence. As wisely
do the Quakers argue, that because we use Spectacles, or Hour-glasses, and
Pulpits, we have not the Spirit. It is not want of your abilities that makes
Ministers use Notes; but it is a regard to the work, and the good of the
Hearers. I use Notes as much as any man, when I take pains; and as little as
any man when I am lazy, or busy, and have not leisure to prepare. It Is easier
to us to preach three Sermons without Notes, than one with them. He is a simple
Preacher that is not able to preach all day without preparation, if his
strength would serve; especially if he preach at your ^ates.

11. Object. But the true Ministry is persecuted; but so are not you, but are
Persecutors of others. Answ. 1. For our persecuting others, be so merciful as
to prove it to us, that we may lament it. If punishing wicked men and Seducers
be persecuting, not only Paul was such, that wished they were cut off that
troubled the Galatians; but God himself would be the greatest of all
persecutors, that will lay you in Hell without repentance, and then you will
wish your old persecution again. And if we be not persecuted, what means the
reproaches of you and all the Drunkards and Malignants about us? But I pray you
envy us not our lives and liberties, and a little breathing time. Do you not
read that [The Churches had rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and
Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied? Acts 9. 31.] Envy not a little
prosperity to the Church. Does not Paul pray that the Gospel may run and be
glorified, and that we may be delivered from unreasonable wicked men, 2 These.
3. 1. Sometimes you can say that more glorious days are promised, and that the
Saints shall rule the world. Unmerciful men! It is but a while ago since we had
our share of sufferings! Since that the Sword has hunted after us! Many of our
Brethren are yet in America, that were driven thither: at this time in Spain,
and Italy, and Germany, and Savoy: Alas, what do our Brethren suffer in the
same Cause and Calling that we are in! And do you reproach us with our mercies,
if we be out of the Furnace but a little while, in one corner of the world?

Object. 12. You work no Miracles to confirm your Doctrine. Answ. It is true;
nor do we need: It is confirmed by Miracles long ago. If we brought a new
Gospel, or as the Papists, gave you not our Doctrine on the credit of
Scripture, but Scripture and all on our own credit, then you might justly call
for Miracles to prove it: But not when we have nothing to do but expound and
apply a Doctrine sealed by Miracles already.

Again, I say, Let any Prince on Earth that questions our Calling, show his
Title to his Crown, or any Judge or Magistrate to his Office; and if I show not
as good a Title to mine, let me be taken for a Deceiver, and not a Minister.

Christian Reader, as ever thou would be sanctified, confirmed, and saved,
hold fast to Christ, Scripture, Ministry, and Spirit, and that in the Church
and Communion of Saints, and abhor the thoughts of separating them from each
other.

A second Sheet for the MINISTRY; Justifying our Calling against Quakers,
Seekers, and Papists, and all that deny us to be the Ministers of Christ.
THe corruption of the Romish Church being most in the Errors and Vices of the
Priests, which made men abhor the offering of the Lord (1 Samuel 2. 17.) the
reproach which they brought upon themselves, did much prepare men to hearken to
the Reformers: The observing of this, and of the necessary dependence of the
people on their Pastors, has caused the Papists to bend their force against
the Ministers of the Reformed Churches, and to use all their wit to defame
their Persons and Callings, and make them seem ignorant, unworthy, or no
Ministers to the people. On this Errand they send abroad their Agents; this is
the saving Gospel that the Seekers, Quakers, and their Brethren preach; that
the Scripture is not the Gospel, or Word of God, and that we are no true
Ministers. Whatever Doctrine we are preaching, the Opposers work is to call us
Deceivers, and ask, How we prove our selves true Ministers? My work therefore
at this time, for the sake of the ignorant in our Assemblies, shall be, to
acquaint them with our answer to this demand. And I shall give it you in order,
in certain Propositions.

Prop. 1. Both in the Old and New Testament there is mention of two distinct
sort of Ministers of Gods appointment. First, such as received some new
Revelation^ (either a Law, or a particular Message) immediately from God; so
that the people could not be sure that their Doctrine was true, till they were
sure that the men were sent of God. These were called Prophets in the Old
Testament, and Apostles, Prophets, etc. in the New. So Moses received the Law
from God; and the following Prophets their particular Messages. So the Apostles
received the Gospel from Christ; and so did the Seventy, and other Disciples
that conversed with him; and other Prophets and Evangelists had it by immediate
inspiration. All these were necessarily by Miracles, or some Infallible
Evidence to prove their own Call, before the Hearers could receive their
Doctrine: for this was their Message; [The Lord has commanded me to say thus
or thus to you] or [The word which the Lord spoke to me is thus or thus] This
sort of Ministers the Papists and Seekers do confess.

But besides these, there is a second sort of true Ministers, whose Office is
not to receive from God any new Doctrine, Law, or Message; but to proclaim the
Laws already delivered, and teach men the Doctrine already revealed, and to
oversee and govern the Churches of Christ according to his Laws, and to go
before the people in the worship of God: The Prophets and Apostles did both
these; both reveal the Doctrine which they received from Christ, and teach and
guide the Church by it when they had done; but the latter sort of Ministers do
but the latter sort of the work. The Papists and Seekers cheat men by jumbling
all together, as if there were no Ministers of Gods appointment, but those of
the former sort; and therefore they call for Miracles to prove our Ministry.
Here therefore I shall first prove, that the second sort of Ministers are of
Gods Institution. 2. That such need not prove their Calling by Miracles, though
yet God may work Miracles by them if he please. 3. That we are true Ministers
of Christ, of this sort.

1. Christ found such Ministers under the Law, that were to teach and rule by
the Law before received, and not to receive new Laws or Massages, I mean the
ordinary Priests and Levites, as distinguished from Prophets. These Priests
were to keep the Law, and teach it the people, and the people were to seek it
at their mouth, and by it they were to judge men's Causes: and also they were to
stand between the people and God in public worship, as is expressed, Deuteronomy: 31.
26. Josh. 23. 6. Neh. 8. 1, 2, 3, 8, 18. and 9. 3. Levit. 1. and 2. and 4. and
5. and 7. and 13. and 14. throughout, Number. 5. and 6. Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Mal. 2. 7.
Ier. 18 18. The Prophet had Visions; but the Priest had the Law, Ezekiel 7. 26.
Isa. 8. 16, 20. Hag. 2. 11, 12. Number. 1. 50 1 Chronicles. 9. 26. and 16. 4. 2 Chronicles
19. 11. and 20. 19. and 30. 17, 22. He was called, A Teaching Priest, 2 Chronicles.
15. 3. Lev. 10. 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 24. 8. 2 Chronicles 17. 7* 9. Ezekiel. 44. 23. 2 Chronicles.
35. 3. And Christ himself sends the cleansed to the Priest, and commands them
to hear the Pharisees that sat in Moses Chair, though they were no Prophets: so
that besides the Prophets that had their message immediately from God, there
were Priests that were called the Ministers of the Lord, Joel 1. 9. 2. 17. and
Levites that were not to bring new Revelations, but to teach, and rule, and
worship him according to the old. For Moses of old time has in every City them
that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Acts 15. 21.
The Jews rejected Christ because they knew him not; nor the voice of the
Prophets which are read every Sabbath day, Acts 13. 27. And even unto this day,
when Moses is read, the Vail is on their heart, 2 Cor. 3. 15. And they that
would not believe Moses, and the Prophets (thus read and preached) neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead, Luke 16. 29, 31.

2. And as Priests and Levites were distinct from Prophets before Christ, so
Christ appointed besides the Apostles and Prophetical Revealers of his Gospel,
a standing sort of Ministers, to 1. Teach, 2. Rule, 3. And worship according to
the Gospel which the former had revealed, and attested, and proved to the
world. These were called Overseers, or Bishops, Presbyters, or Elders, Pastors
and Teachers; and also the Deacons were joined to assist them, Acts 14 23. They
ordained them Elders (not Prophets or Apostles) in every Church, Tit. 1. 5
Titus was to ordain Elders in every City: Timothy has full direction for the
ordaining of Bishops, or Elders and Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.

That their work was not to bring new Doctrine, but to teach, rule, and worship
according to that received, I now prove, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things that thou have
heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also] Mark, that its the same, and not a new
Doctrine; and that as heard from Paul among many witnesses, and not as received
immediately from God: and others were thus to receive it down from Timothy. And
v. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.] It is not to bring new Truths,
but rightly to divide the old. And 2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form of words
which thou have heard of me (not which thou had immediately from God) in
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus; that good thing which was committed
unto thee, keep, by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us. The Holy Ghost is to
help us in keeping that which is committed to us, and not to reveal more, 2 Timothy
6. 13, 14. [I give thee charge in the sight of God, that thou keep this
Commandment without spot, unrebukable, till the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. There was a form of Doctrine delivered to the Church of Rome, Romans 6.
17. And 1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor,
especially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine. You see their work was to
rule and labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. Till I
come, give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine; meditate upon
these things: give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to
all: Take heed unto thy self, and unto the Doctrine: continue in them; for in
doing this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.] 1 Timothy 5.
6. [If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a
good Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith, and of good
doctrine, whereunto thou have attained.] Mark here the description of a good
Minister of Christ; one that is nourished up in the words of faith, and good
doctrine, (which is the use of Schools and Universities) and having attained
it, makes it his work to teach it, and put others in remembrance of it, Tit. 1.
7, 9, 10, 11. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God -- holding
f^ast the faithful word as he has been taught, (mark that) that he may be able
by sound doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gainsayers: For there are
many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, whose mouths must be stopped, who
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, etc.] So 1 Timothy 3.
1, 5. The Office of a Bishop is to rule and take care of the Church of God:] To
take heed to themselves, and to all the Flock, and feed the Church of God; and
to watch hereunto, according to the word of Gods grace, which is fully and
wholly delivered by his Apostles, and is able to build us up, and give us an
inheritance among the sanctified: as Act. 20. 28, 20, 27, 35, 32. 1 These. 5.
12, 13. We beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you (this is their Office) and to esteem
them very highly in love for their works sake (and not revile them as the
servants of Satan do) and be at peace among your selves, Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24.
Remember them which have the rule over you, which have spoken to you the word
of God: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Salute all them that
have the Rule over you: The Elders of the Church are to pray with, and for the
sick Jam. 5. 14. They must feed the Flock of God among them, taking the
oversight of it, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. Thus you see their Office and work.

2. And that they were not to bring any new Doctrine, further appears, in that
they have a charge to Preach no other doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 3. Nor to be tossed
as children with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. Nor carried about with
diverse and strange doctrines, Heb. 13. 9.

3. Yea, if any man bring not the doctrine of Christ, we must not receive him
into our houses, or bid him God speed, lest we be partakers of his evil deeds,
for he that abides not in this doctrine has not God, 2 John 9. 10, 11. Gal.
1. 8. 9. [Though we or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel to you,
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said
before, so say I now again: If any man preach any other Gospel to you then that
ye have received, let him be accursed.] And Romans 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you
Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them] 1 Timothy 6. 3. If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is proud,
knowing nothing, but doting. -- ]

4. And if all Ministers must be receivers of new Doctrines, the Church would
never know when it has all, but would be still obeying an imperfect Law. 5.
And it would be an oppression to the Church instead of a Direction, to be so
overwhelmed with new Doctrines and Precepts. 6. And it would accuse Christ, the
Lawgiver, of such mutability, as wise Princes are not guilty of; to be still
changing or adding to his Laws. 7. There was great occasion for the New
Testament or Gospel, upon the great work of our Redemption: but there is no
such cause for alterations since. 8. The Priests before Christ were not to
receive new Laws, as is said. 9. The Companions of the Apostles that wrought
Miracles, had not all new Revelations; but did it to seal up this Gospel. 10.
What need we more then actual experience, that God does not give New
Revelations to the world, and none since the Scripture times, have sealed any
other by Miracles.

And thus I have proved to you the two sorts of Ministers: as Paul plainly
distinguishes them, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12. Ephesians 2. 20. There are Planters and
Waterers, Master builders that lay the foundation, and others that build
thereon: Other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid: but every man
that builds hay or stuble and loses his work, does not nullify the
Ministry. We are built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ being the head cornerstone: but we are not built on the foundation of
every Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Bishop or Deacon: Though both in their places
(Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers) are given for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the
body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. That we might be one united Body, having one
fixed standing doctrine, ver. 14, 15, 16. And how shall we escape if we neglect
so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him: (mark whence the Church receives it)
God also bearing them witness (but not every Elder or Teacher) both with signs
and wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost according to
his own will, Heb. 2. 3, 4.

Prop. 2. And now that these later Ministers need not prove their calling by
Miracles, I prove thus: 1. God never imposed such a task upon them, nor
commanded the people to require such a proof, and not to believe any but worker
of Miracles. 2. God gave not all the gift of Miracles, that were employed in
his work even in the Apostles days: Are all workers of Miracles? says Paul;
some had by the Spirit, the word of wisdom, and of knowledge, and others
Tongues, and others Interpretation, and others Miracles, 1 Cor. 12 29, 7, 8, 9,
10. 3. They that have the Holy Ghost are owned by Christ; and so have many
without working Miracles. See Romans 8. 9. 1 Cor. 12. 3. Gal. 5. 18, 22, 23, 24.
1 Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians. 3. 16. and 5. 9, 18. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 22. Romans 15. 13, 16. Tit.
3. 5. 4. The Law of Moses was kept and taught by Priests and Levites that
wrought not Miracles. 5. If the Laws of all Nations may be kept without
Miracles, so may the Laws of Christ. 6. If humane writings are kept without
Miracles, (as Homer, Virgil, Ovid, Cicero, Livy, etc.) so may the Laws of God
much more, as being the daily subject of the belief, meditation, conference,
preaching, controversies, devotions of Christians through the world, and
translated into so many Tongues. 7. There is nothing in the Nature of the thing
that requires ordinary Miracles. Cannot men sufficiently prove without
Miracles, that there have been such men as Caesar, Pompey, Aristotle, or which
be Calvin's or Bellarmines writings, etc. Much more evidently may they prove
what doctrine is essential to Christianity, and the Scripture that contains the
whole. 8. Else Parents could not teach their children, nor bring them up in the
Nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. Nor teach them with Timothy,
from a child to know the Scriptures, which are able to make men wise to
salvation through faith in Christ, 2. Tim. 3. 15. Must no Parents teach their
Children to know Christ, but such as can work Miracles? 9. The Doctrine which
we preach is fully confirmed by Miracles already, by Christ and his Apostles:
There needs no greater then Christ's own Resurrection, nor more then were done;
which Universal unquestionable History and Tradition has brought down to our
hands. 10. It is a ridiculous expectation, that every person should see the
Miracles before they do believe. Then if Christ had done Miracles before all
Jerusalem, save one man, that one man should not be bound to believe: Or if I
could do miracles in this Town or Country, none must believe me ever the more
but those that see it. And so you may as well say, I should not believe that
there is any Sea or Land, City or Kingdom, France, Spain, Rome, etc. but what I
see. Are these men worthy to be talked with? that believe no body, and confess
themselves such Liars that they would have no body believe them. It was not all
that saw Christ's Miracles or Resurrection, or the Apostles miracles! It seems
the rest were not bound to be Christians? Even as Clem: Writer told me, that no
man is bound to believe that Christ did Rise again, or the rest of
Christianity, that sees not Miracles himself to prove it: adding withal, that
indeed Antichrist may do Miracles; and so it seems for all the talk, miracles
themselves would not serve if they saw them. 11. Is it not to put a scorn on
God Almighty, to lay that the Glory of all his most miraculous works should be
buried to all that saw them not; and that Parents should not tell them to their
Children, or Children should not believe them if they do? 12. Its injurious to
Posterity, that the knowledge of the most wonderful works of God shall be only
for the good of them that see them, and that all ages after shall be never the
better. 13. It tends to make men mad and as Idiots, that must know and believe
no more then they see: what kind of folks must these be, that know not that
there is either Prince or Parliament, City or Country, or any folks in the
world but those they have seen? This will stand with trading, converse,
Subjection, Societies; and its doubtful whether such are capable of managing
estates; or should not be put under others as Idiots? 14. Children cannot learn
to read nor speak without some kind of belief of them that teach them: nor can
they obey their parents nor learn any trade, nor obey Physicians: so that this
conceit of incredulity is against the Nature, livelihood, and life of man. 15.
And they would tie God to be at the beck of every unreasonable Infidel; that
shall say, [Though all the Town have seen thy Miracles, yet I will see my self,
or else I will not believe.] 16. They expect that God should overturn the
course of Nature: for if Miracles be as ordinary as the operations of Nature,
they are confounded. 17. And by this they would cross themselves, and make
Miracles uneffectual: For if they were ordinary; few would be moved by them as
any proof of a Divine Testimony: were it as ordinary for the Sun to go backward
as forward, who would take it for a Miracle? To this Clem: Writer answers me,
that [Miracles were convincing in the first Age when they were common] Answ.
How common? Not as natural operations: Nor so as for all Countries or persons
to see them; 500 saw Christ at once after his Resurrection: 5000. were once
miraculously fed: but as this was not every days work, so what was this to
others? And in that it was but for an age, and rarely in after ages, shows that
they were not for every man's eyes. 18. What need we more proof then actual
experience, that God does not often now work miracles! And he that says the
Gospel, and Christian faith, and Church, and Ministry are therefore ceased, its
like will not take it ill to be taken himself for an Heathen or Infidel. 19.
And we have experience of millions that still do actually and steadfastly
believe in Christ without Miracles: and many have laid down their lives on that
belief: therefore without miracles men may believe. But to this Clem: Writer
says to me, [These believers of all sorts condemn each other as Heretics.]
Answ. But not as Infidels. None but the ignorant or passionate condemn all
other sorts as Heretics. The sober do not. And it is not enough to prove you a
bastard, if an angry Brother call you so. 20. Because this sheet allows me
not room, I entreat the Reader to peruse these Texts, which tell him aloud that
the word and works of God must be believed by Tradition, though without
Miracles, Exodus 10. 1, 2. and 12. 14, 17, 26, 27, 42. Deuteronomy. 11. 2. to the 22.
and 29. 22. to 28. Josh. 4. 6, 7. and 22. 24. to 32. Psalm. 48. 13. and 78. 1.
to 9. and 102. 18. and 145. 4. and 89. 1. Joel. 1. 2, 3, 4. Acts 1. 8. and 2.
32. and 5. 30, 31, 32. and 10. 38. to 42. and 13. 30, 31. and 1. 22. and 4. 33.
and 22. 15. and 26. 16. and 23. 11. 2 Timothy 2. 2. John 20. 29. and 19. 35. and
15. 27. and 12. 17. and 5. 33. and 1. 15, 32, 34 Luke 4. 22. 1 Pet. 5. 1. And
that you would read my Determination of this very Question in my Book against
Infidelity: I proceed to the next.

Proposition 3. This ordinary Ministry for teaching, ruling, and public
worship, was ordained by Christ to continue till his coming, and does yet
continue, and did not cease when the extraordinary Ministry ceased. I prove it,
Matthew. 16. 18. Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.] The Church never did nor can subsist without its
Officers, who are an Essential part of it, as it is a Political Body, and the
first and most eminent part, as it is a Community. And therefore if the
Ministry be extinct, the Gates of Hell have prevailed against the Church: And
then Christ is overcome, or has broke his promise; and then he were not
Christ: So that if Christ be Christ, the Church and Ministry continue. So Luke
1. 33. He shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom
there shall be no end, Isa. 9. 6, 7. Of the increase of his government and
peace there shall be no end, Psalm 145. 13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and thy Dominion endures throughout all Generations. Christ rules
by his Officers in his Church; if Church or Ministry had an end, his Kingdom
had an end, and he reigned not for ever, Matthew. 28 20. Lo, I am with you
always, even to the end of the world. To this express promise, Clem. Writer has
no wiser an answer, but that, [it is conditional. If they teach men to observe
all things that Christ has commanded, then he will be with them, else not.]
Repl. This is your forgery: here is no such words, but an absolute promise. His
being with them, is to support and help them in his work: And will you feign
Christ to promise them help on condition they do it without? The further Cavils
against this Text and others, the London Ministers in their Vindication have
answered at large, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. The Past^rs and Teachers are given to
the Church for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God to a perfect man, etc.] Extraordinary
and ordinary Officers are here conjoined, who between them are to perfect the
building, the first laying the foundation, and the others building thereon, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. I give thee charge in the sight of God -- that thou keep this
Commandment without spot, unrebukable, unto the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ] which must needs extend to his Successors. The faithful and wise
Stewards that give the children their meat in due season, will be found so
doing by the Lord at his coming, Luke 12. 42, 43. And it is not till the last
day that Christ will give up the Kingdom to the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 25. 2. The
Apostles actually settled an ordinary Ministry in their time, as is proved. 3.
There are Commands for settling Successors of these, as 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5.
as is proved. 4. These Ministers are described, and the way of their Ordination
settled by Canons, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 5. We had the several Angels of the
Churches in their places, Revel. 2. and 3. and promises to some of them for the
future, with a Command [Hold fast till I come, 2. 23.] and 3. 10. [ I will keep
thee from the hour of temptation which shall come on all the world: Behold, I
come quickly.] 6. Christ has commanded the Ministerial work to continue to the
end: As the Preaching of the Word must be to all Nations, and every Creature,
Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15. And these most cruel men would have all the
Preachers give over their work, and leave the world to perish in Infidelity. So
for the assembling of our selves together, and exhorting one another, we are
commanded not to forsake it, as is the manner of some; and so much the more, as
we see the day approaching, Heb. 10. 23, 24, 25. So that the nearer we are to
Christ's coming, the closer must we stick to Church Communion, and holy
Assemblies; considering, that its but a little while, and he that comes will
come, and shall not tarry, ver. 37. God does on purpose forbear his coming,
because he is long-suffering, and will continue the means to call men to
repentance, and then the day of the Lord will come suddenly, 2 Pet. 3. 9, 10.
[The Word of the Lord endures for ever: and this is the word which by the
Gospel is preached to you, 1 Pet. 1. 25. The Lords Supper is Instituted to be
used to show the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Church Government or
Discipline is a fixed Ordinance, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. And if the work continue,
the workmen must continue. 7. The mercy of God, and the Efficacy of Christ's
Blood, and the necessities of the Church continue: we still need a Teaching
Ministry, Heb. 5. 11. and for our need it is Instituted till the Church be
perfect, that we be not as children tossed up and down, Ephesians. 4. 13, 14. What
enemies to us, and to the love and mercy of God are they that would persuade
men, that he so quickly withdrew so great a mercy, when the gifts and calling
of God are without repentance? 8. The Law and its Priesthood was not removed
but by the glory of a better Law and Ministry: And Christ is the Mediator of a
better Covenant and Promises, Heb. 7. 22. and 8. 7, 8. Therefore he will not
deal so much worse. 9. Christ tells us that a wise man will consider whether
he can go through with it, before he build or make War: Therefore he would not
himself begin to build his Church, and enter himself the Captain of our
Salvation, and presently let his Enterprise fall. 10. If the Ministry continue
not, then the Church continues not; for as the Head, Liver, and Stomach, or
Lungs are to the Body, so is the Ministry to the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 13, 19, 20,
28, 29. They plant and water it, 1 Cor. 3. 6. and build it, ver. 10. For how
shall we believe on him of whom we have not heard? and how shall we hear
without a Preacher? and hew shall they preach unless they be sent? Romans 10. 14.
But the Church does continue: for first, else Christ were no longer the Head of
it, the King, Prophet, or Priest, and so not Christ: But he is a Priest for
ever, abiding continually: he continues ever, and has an unchangeable
Priesthood; he ever lives to make intercession for those that come to God by
him, Heb. 7. 3. 22, 24, 25. 2. Those that deny the Church, must needs deny
themselves Christians and Members of that Church. 3. There is no Salvation
promised but to the Church, Ephesians. 5. 23, 25, 26, 27. Mark 16. 16. 4. Blindness
is on the Jews but till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all
Israel shall be saved: Therefore it is most evident that the Gentile Church
shall not cease till the fullness have prepared for the re-ingraffing of the
Jews, Romans 11. 25, 26. 5. It is an everlasting Kingdom, which cannot be moved,
and the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, whereof even the Angels
and perfected Spirits of the Just are a part, to which we come by Faith:
therefore it cease not, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 28. 6. When that which is perfect is
come, then that which is in part shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. but not
before. 7. If nothing can separate us from the love of God, no not any distress
or tribulation, then are not all the Ministers and Church cut off, Romans 8. 34.
to 39. Yea, those that in all Ages suffer for his sake, are not cut off from
him; but so many faithful Ministers do. 8. But what should I say any more
against that Assertion which carries stark Heathenism or Infidelity in its
Forehead, reproaching Christ as no Christ, and teaching men that they are not
bound to be Christians, and believe the Gospel, and persuading the world to
despise Christ's Messengers and Ordinances; and Ministers to cast off their
Masters work; which in two words is, to turn Infidels, or Apostates. I must
refer you for my fuller answer to such men, to my Book against Infidelity.

Prop. 4. God has in his Law appointed a standing way for the calling of these
ordinary Teaching, Ruling, worshipping Ministers, in all Ages; and does himself
call them in this way. 1. He instituteth the Office. 2. He commands that fit
persons be ordained to this Office. 3. He describes them by their necessary
Qualifications. All this is at large, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. Act. 20. 1 Pet. 5. etc.
This is his work by his standing Law: By which also he commands the people to
choose, consent to, or accept the fit, and to hear and obey them, Act. 14. 23. 2
These. 5. 12. Act. 6. 3, 5. Heb. 13. 7, 17. And then by Providence, 1. He gives
them those gifts of the Spirit that may competently qualify them for their
Office. 2. He assisteth the Chusers and Ordainers to discern those
Qualifications, and do their duties. 3. He causes some special fitness of a
Minister to the special Province or Charge which he is to undertake, and
special inviting occasions and opportunities, and ofttimes causes Necessity to
make the choice. 4. He boweth the heart of the person called to consent, and
usually to desire the work (for the right ends.) 5. And if he be called to be
the Pastor of a particular Church, he moves the people to consent or accept
him. And thus God according to his appointed Order does call his Ministers:
Besides which, he afterward 1. Helps them in his work: 2. And procures them
liberty, and often furtherance from Christian Magistrates. 3. And gives them
success.

Proposition 5. The faithful Pastors of the Reformed Churches, are these
ordinary Ministers of Christ, approved by him, and given in great mercy to his
people, who are bound to know* honor, and obey them in the Lord.

I exclude not all others, but I now prove that these are true Ministers.
Argument 1. They that have all that is essential to true Ministers are true
Ministers: But such are these Pastors of the Reformed Churches; as I prove
thus: If the Office it self be of Gods Institution, and their Qualifications
competent, and their entrance right in every point of flat Necessity, then they
have all that is essential to true Ministers: But the former is true, as I
shall prove in the three several parts. 1. That the Office it self is of Gods
appointment, is proved fully before, and confessed by all Christians that ever
I knew, Acts 14. 23. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13.
7, 17, 24. Acts 20. 28. 2. For Qualifications, they have 1. competent
Knowledge, 2. and Utterance, 3. and Godliness: and these are the Qualifications
that God accepts. 1 Cor. 12. 8. 1 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Mark the Canons
of the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 2. 2. They must be 1. Faithful men, 2. Able to teach
others: But such are those in question, 1 Timothy 3. A Bishop must be blameless
(that is, not scandalous) the husband of one Wife, vigilant, sober, of good
behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to Wine, no striker,
not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a brawler, not covetous, one that
rules well his own house having his children in subjection, with all gravity.]
To which is added, Tit. 1. 8, 9. A lover of good men, sober, just, holy
temperate, holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught, that he may
be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers.] Let
all here note: 1. That here is not only the mention of the Virtues necessary to
the Being, but to the well-being also of a Minister: 2. And yet through the
great mercy of God, all these are the qualifications of multitudes of the
Pastors of the Reformed Churches, as malice it self must be forced to confess:
But if any deny it of any particular men, as that is nothing to the rest; so an
unproved accusation is not by honest men to be believed. The world knows that
the Act for rejecting scandalous, insufficient, negligent Ministers is very
strict, and Commissioners in each County forward to execute it, and Ministers
have enemies enough to search out their faults, and yet none are more forward
than Ministers themselves to have the Act put in execution; so that their
standing justifies them before the world: Or, if any will yet deny them the
necessary Qualifications, I here challenge and provoke them to accuse all that
are guilty, and cast them out; or else to confess themselves mere slanderers,
and back-biters, and learn more truth and modesty hereafter. 3. And for the
third point, their entrance into the Office: They have all that God has made
necessary to a just entrance, as I prove: They that have a true Ordination, and
the Peoples consent, and the Magistrates allowance, have all that God has made
necessary to a just entrance, and more than all: But the said Pastors of the
Reformed Churches have true Ordination, and the Peoples consent, and the
Magistrates allowance: That they have true Ordination, I shall show anon in
answering all that can be said against it. The Peoples consent, by Electing, or
Accepting, is known by the fact; and so is the Magistrates by Law and fact: I
put in all this, though more than necessary, that all Objections may be
satisfied at once: So that the Enumerations being unquestionable, the
Conclusion is so to. In short; All those are true Ministers, that are in an
Office of Gods own Institution, and are competently fitted for that Office by
Knowledge, Godliness, and Utterance, and have all, and more than all that God
has made necessary to a right entrance or admission, even true Ordination,
consent of the Flock, and the Magistrates allowance. But such are the said
Pastors of the Reformed Churches, therefore they are true Ministers of Christ.

Argument 2. Those that have not only the Essentials, but excel all other
Ministers on Earth (that are known to the world) are certainly the true
Ministers of Christ. But such are the Ministers beforementioned of the
Reformed Churches; Ergo. This will be proved at once with the next, which is,

Argument 3. Either these Pastors of the Reformed Churches are the true
Ministers of Christ, or else there are none such visible in the world: But
there are such visibly and certainly in the world, as was proved; else there is
no Church, no Ordinances, no Christianity, no Christ: For he can be no King
without Subjects and Laws; no Master without a School and Scholars; no
Physician without Patients; no Husband without his Spouse; no Head without a
Body; no Intercessor without a Church to intercede for. And to believe the holy
Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints, is part of our Belief; and
therefore the Christian Faith is gone, if these be gone: And that either we, or
None are Christ's true Ministers, I prove thus: 1. We challenge the Adversary to
name us the true Church and Ministry; if these be none of them, where be they,
and who are they? speak out, or give up your wicked Cause. If you know not who
they be, or where, then how know you that there are any such? True Ministers
are like a light that shines to all the house, even the lights of the world,
and like a City on a Hill that cannot be hid, Mat. 5. 14, 15, 16. 2. But let us
try the particulars: 1. The Seekers have no Church or Ministry. 2. The Quakers
have no Ordination, that we know of, and are every way so unworthy, and had no
being in the world till a few years ago, that he is either no Christian, or of
a crazed brain, that thinks Christ has no Church or Ministry but them. 3. The
Anabaptists, Socinians, Swenlfeldians, Familists, Paracelsians, Weigelians, and
such like, have no more to show for their Ministry and Churches than we, but
their Errors; and are so few, and so lately sprung up, that of them also I may
say, that he that takes them for the only Church, or Ministers, is either out
of the Faith, or much out of his wits. 4. The Eastern and Southern Churches
have no more to show for their Ministry and Churches than we; but are
incomparably more ignorant, and erroneous: few of them doing more than read
their Liturgies and Homilies, and so administer the Sacraments. 5. All the
Controversy therefore lies between us and the Papists; either they are true
Ministers, and a Church, or not; if not, then its left to us: if they are, then
we are so much more; for we have much more unquestionable Evidence of our
Title. 1. The Office of a Teaching, Guiding, worshipping Presbyter which we are
in, is beyond all question, and yielded by themselves to be of Divine
Institution. But the office of a Mass-Priest, to make a God of a piece of
Bread, and turn Bread into Flesh, so that there shall be quantity, color,
taste, etc. without bread, or any subject; and a man's eyes, taste, or feeling,
shall not know that its bread or wine, when we see, taste, and feel it; as also
to celebrate public worship in an unknown tongue; this office is more
questionable than ours. 2. It remains a great doubt, whether the Pope be not
the Antichrist: but of our Ministry there is no such doubt. 3. For Knowledge,
Godliness and Utterance, and all true Ministerial abilities, as its well known
what an ignorant Rabble their common secular Mass Priests are; so those
Military Friars and Jesuits that are chosen of purpose to play their Game
among us, and credit their Cause, if they have any relics of truth or modesty,
will confess, that the generality of our Ministers are much beyond theirs for
Parts and Piety; or at least, that we cannot be denied to be true Ministers for
want of necessary abilities: We should rejoice if their Ministers, Priests or
Jesuits were near of such Piety as those of the Reformed Churches. Some of
their Jesuits and Friars are learned men; in which also we have those that
equal the best of them: but for the learning, ability, or Piety of the common
Ministers on both sides, there is no comparison to be made. 4. All the question
then is of the way of entrance: And there 1. The Papists seek not the Peoples
consent so much as we do. 2. They despise the Magistrates consent, in
comparison of us. 3. And for Ordination, which is it that all the stress must
be laid on, we have it, and nearer the Rule of God than they. Are they ordained
with Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands? so are we. Must it be by one of
a Superior Order? Who then shall Ordain or Consecrate the Pope? And yet a
multitude of our Ministers are ordained by Bishops, if that be necessary: But
the great Objection is, that we have not an uninterrupted succession from the
Apostles, and so those that ordained us had no power; and therefore could not
give it to us.

Proposition 6. The want of an uninterrupted succession; and so of Power in the
Ordainers, does not disable our Title to the Ministry, or set us in a worse
condition than the Papists. For if it be only the succession of possession of
the Office, there is no man of brains can deny, but we have an uninterrupted
succession down from the Apostles. But if it be a succession of Right
Ordination that is questioned, 1. The Papists have none such themselves. 2. We
have more of it than they. 3. It is not necessary that this be uninterrupted.
All these I prove: 1. The Popes themselves, from whom their power flows, have
been Heretics, denied the Immortality of the Soul, Whoremongers, Sodomites,
Simonists, Murderers; so that for many of them successively, the Papists
confess they were Apostatical, and not Apostolical. See in their own Writers
the Lives of Sylvest. 2. Alexand, 3. and 6. John 13. and 22. and 23. Greg. 7.
Urban 7. and abundance more, Ioh. 13. was proved in Council to have ravished
Maids and Wives at the Apostolic doors, murdered many, drunk to the Devil,
asked help at Dice of Jupiter and Venus, and was killed in the act of Adultery.
Read the proofs in my Book against Popery, page 269, 270, 255, 101. The Council
at Pisa deposed two Popes at once, called them Heretics departed from the
Faith. The Council at Constance deposed Ioh. 23. as holding that there was no
Eternal Life, Immortality of the Soul* or Resurrection: The Council at Basil
deposed Eugenius 4. as a Simonist and perjured wretch, a Schismatic, and
obstinate Heretic. Now these men are incapable of the Ministry, as an Infidel
is, for want of Essential Qualifications: As Copper is no current Coin, though
the stamp of the Prince against his will be put upon it: Undisposed matter
cannot receive the form: A fit man unordained is nearer the Ministry, than such
a man ordained: So that here was a Nullity. 2. And all the following Popes were
the Successors of Eugenius that was deposed, and thus judged by a General
Council; but by force brought them to submit, and held the place. 3. Either the
Election, Ordination, or both, is it that gives them the Essence of their
Papacy: If Election, then there has been a long interruption: for some-while
the People chose, and in other Ages the Emperors chose, and in these times the
Cardinals; and therefore some of them had no lawful choice: And for Ordination,
or Consecration; 1. There have been three or four Popes at once, and all were
Consecrated, that yet are now confessed to have been no true Popes. 2.
Inferiors only Consecrated. 3. And such as had no power themselves. Besides
that, the Sea has been very many years vacant, and some score years the Pope
has been at Avignion, and had but the name of P. of Rome. And when three or
four have been Pope at once, Bellarmine confesses, learned men knew not which
was the Right, yea, General Councils knew not. The Council at Basil thought
Faelix the fifth was the right Pope, but it proved otherwise; so that many
palpable Intercisions have been made at Rome.

2. Our Ordination has been less interrupted than theirs.

Object. But you are not ordained by Bishops. Answ. 1. Almost all in England
are till of late, if that will serve. 2. Presbyters may ordain in case of
necessity, as the generality of the Old Episcopal men grant, and their
Ordination is not null. 3. Presbyters have power to Ordain, and were restrained
only from the exercise by humane Laws, as many of the Schoolmen confess. 4.
Presbyters have still ordained with the Bishop; therefore they had Authority to
it, and the work is not Alien to their Function. 5. Our Parish Presbyters are
Bishops, having some of them Assistants, and Deacons under them; or as Grotius
notes, at least they are so, as being the chief Guides of that Church: Their
own Rule is, that every City should have a Bishop; and every Corporation is
truly a City, (...), and therefore must have a Bishop. 6. The Ius Divinum of
Prelacy is lis subjudice. 7. Bishop Usher maintaining to me the validity of the
Ordination of the Presbyters without a Bishop, told me how he answered King C.
who asked him for an instance in Church History, viz. That Hierom ad Evag. tells
us of more; that the Presbyters of Alexandria, till the days of Heroclas and
Dionysius, took one from among themselves, and made him Bishop; therefore they
may make a Presbyter, which is less. 8. Its at last confessed, that in
Scripture-times there were no Presbyters under Bishops, but the single Churches
had single Pastors. 9. No man can prove Ordination by fixed Bishops over many
Churches (now called Diocesan) in the first Age: The fixed Bishops had no more
at first but single Churches. Object. But you never received power from the
Bishop to ordain; and therefore cannot have that which was never given your
Answ. If they put men into that Office, to which God has affixed the power of
Ordination, then they do their part to convey the power. As if you marry a
couple, and express not the man's authority over the woman, yet he has it
nevertheless by being made her Husband. So he that is made a Pastor in City or
Country, may do the work of a Pastor, though each particular was not named.

Proposition 7. Ordination is ordinarily necessary as a means of our right
entrance, but not absolutely necessary to the Being of our Office or Power. For
1. God having already settled the Office, Duty, and Power, and what
Qualifications shall be necessary, and giving these Qualifications to men, he
has left nothing to man but mutual consent, and to judge of the person
qualified, and solemnly introduce him. 2. God has not tied himself or us
absolutely to the judgment of Ordainers. If a Bishop ordain a Heathen, or any
man void of Essential Qualifications, its null, as being against a flat Command
of God: And if Bishops refuse to ordain us Pastors, the people must take them
without; because the Command of Preaching, Hearing, Sacraments, etc. is greater
than that of Ordination, and before it. Positives yield to Natural Morals, and
matters of Order to the substance and end of the Duty ordered. See my Christian
Concord, page 82, 83, 84. 3. Ordination is no more necessary to the Ministry,
than Baptism to Christianity: As those that are first Princes by Title must be
Crowned, and those that are Soldiers by Contract, must be listed, and take
Colors, and those that are Husband and Wife by Contract, must be solemnly
Married, which are celebrating, perfecting actions; so they that are first
heart-Christians by believing, or by Parents dedicating them to God, must be
solemnly entered under the hand of the Minister: And those that are by
approbation and consent initially Ministers, must by solemnization have the
Office publicly delivered them by the Ministers of Christ. So that as a man is
a Christian indeed before Baptism initially, and is justified initially before,
and in case of necessity may be saved without it (the Papists confessing that
the Vow will serve) so is it in the case of Ordination to the Ministry.

Proposition 8. It is only Christ, and not the Ordainers, People or
Magistrates, that give us our Office and Power: Only the people and approvers
design the person which shall receive it from Christ; and our own consent, and
the peoples, is of necessity thereto (and our own as much as theirs) and the
Ordainers do instrumentally invest us in it; but the Power and Duty arise
directly from Gods Institution, when the person is designed. Now I proceed to
prove our Calling.

Argument 4. We have a far clearer Call than the Priests before Christ had to
the Priesthood: For they were not of the true Line; they bought the Priesthood;
they corrupted Doctrine and worship, and were of wicked lives. And yet Christ
commanded submission to their Ministry: Ergo.

Argument 5. If we have as clear a Call to our Office as any Magistrates on
Earth have to theirs, then we are true Ministers of Christ: For they are true
Magistrates; and God is the Fountain of their Power too; and its impossible
they should have any but from him: Or from him but by his means: Officers have
no power but from the Sovereign. The Prince was at first chosen by God
immediately, as well as the Apostles were by Christ, yet no Prince can plead an
uninterrupted succession thence; and if they may Reign without it, we may be
Pastors without it: and yet I cannot say that we are without it, though Princes
be. Kings were formerly anointed by inspired Prophets, and were Prophets
themselves: And as the continuance of this is not necessary to them, so neither
to us. The differences between their power and ours, makes nothing against this
Argument: If Conquest, or the peoples consent, or Birth, or directing
Providence can prove their Title, then Consent, Ordination, Providence, with
due Qualifications, will sure prove ours: were it not for fear, they should
soon hear the Arguments more set home against themselves, that are now bent
against the Ministers.

Argument 6. If besides all this God own us by such a blessing on our labors,
that he makes us the means of propagating and continuing his Gospel and
Church, and brings most of his chosen to Union with Christ, Reconciliation,
Holiness, and to Heaven by our Ministry, then certainly we are his true
Ministers: But experience assures us of the former: therefore -- so much for
Argument.

Proposition 9. If a Minister be in quiet possession of the place, and fit for
it, the people are bound to obey him as a Minister, without knowing that he was
justly ordained or called. Argum. 1. We must obey a Magistrate without
assurance of his Call and Title, Romans 13. therefore a Minister. 2. Christ
commanded hearing and obeying them that were not called as God appointed,
because they were Priests, or sat in Moses Chair, and taught the truth, Luke
16. 29. Matthew. 23. 2. Luke 5. 14. Matthew. 8. 4. Mark 1. 44. 3. Else the people
are put upon impossibilities: Can all the poor people tell before they submit
to a Minister, what is Essential to his Call, and whether he have all that is
so, and whether his Orders be true or forged, and whether they that ordained
him were truly ordained, or chosen themselves: Not one of twenty thousand knows
all this by their Pastors.

Proposition 10. The Ordinances are valid to the people when the Minister is
uncalled and unordained, if they know it not: He that has no just Call, shall
answer for what he does as an Intruder; but the people shall have for all that
the fruit of his Ministration; and Preaching, and Baptism, and other acts,
shall not be null to them. 1. The Papists themselves confess this. 2. Else
scarce a man could tell whether he be baptized, or may use any Ordinance,
because he cannot have an exact account of the Ministers Call, no nor know that
he is indeed a Christian. I knew diverse in the Bishops days that forged
themselves Orders, and acted long before it was discovered. 3. It is the Office
which is Gods Ordinance that is blessed, and valid to the people, and not his
Call only. 4. It is he that sins that must suffer, and not the Innocent;
therefore his sin depriveth them not of their due. 5. As an usurping Magistrate
owes us protection, though he shall answer for his Usurpation; so an usurping
Minister owes us his labor; so that the people are bound to hear and obey
men, when they are uncertain of their due Call, if they possess the place; and
shall have the blessing of such Administrations: For we are sure the Office and
work is of God.

Proposition 11. The truth of our Doctrine depends not on our Calling. Were we
no Ministers, we can prove the Gospel true which we deliver. And any man must
be believed, that brings a truth that concerns our peace. Therefore let
Quakers, and Seekers, and Papists first disprove our Doctrine if they can; and
not cheat the people, by persuading them, that our Calling must first be
proved; as a Prophets must be.

Object. But you have your learning only from Books, and Universities, and so
have not true Ministers. Answ. We have it from God in the use of his means,
even by prayer, reading, study and learning his works and word of our Teachers,
whether at Universities, or elsewhere. And we are commanded to study and
meditate on these things, and give our selves wholly to them, and to meditate
on Gods Law day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15. Christ's
Ministers must be Teachers or Tutors to others, and commit the things which
they have heard to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also, 2 Timothy
2. ^. Good Ministers of Christ are nourished up in the words of faith and good
Doctrine, and so attain to it, 1* Tim. 4. 6. All should learn according to
their time of teaching, Heb. 5. 11, 12, 14. We study nothing but the Word, and
works of God: And is not that a Wretch, and not a man, that will reproach us as
no Ministers, for doing that which we have our Reason for, and which must be
the work of our lives: Poor Christians, as you love God and your Souls, and
would not cast off Christ and Heaven, let not Deceivers draw you to cast off
the Ministry, Scripture, or the Ordinances of God.

FINIS.

