THE Catechizing OF FAMILIES: A TEACHER OF HOUSEHOLDERS HOW To Teach their
Households. Useful also to SCHOOLMASTERS and Tutors of Youth.

For those that are past the common small Chatechisms, and would grow to a more
rooted Faith, and to the fuller understanding of all that is commonly needful
to a safe, holy, comfortable and profitable Life.

Written by RICHARD BAXTER, in hope that Family and School-diligence, may do
much to keep up True Religion.

LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, and B. Simmons at the Three Golden Cocks
at the West end of St. Paul's, 1683.

The Reasons and Use of this BOOK.
MAN is born without Knowledge, but not without a Capacity and faculty of
Knowing, this is his Excellency and Essence: Nature, Experience, and Gods Word
tell us the great necessity of Knowledge. As the Souls essential form is the
virtue of vital Action, Understanding and Will conjunct, so Holiness is Holy
Life, Light and Love conjunct. The wisest men are the best, and the best the
wisest, but a Counterfeit of Knowledge is the great deceiver of the World.
Millions take the Knowledge of bare Words, with the Gramatical and Logical
sense, instead of the Knowledge of the things themselves which by these are
signified; as if the Glass would nourish without the Wine, or the Dish without
the Meat, or the Clothing or Skin were all the man; God and Holiness and
Heaven are better known by many serious unlearned Christians that cannot
accurately dispute about them, than by many Learned men, who can excellently
speak of that which their Souls are unacquainted with: The Hipocrites Religion
is but an Art, the true Christians is a Habit, which is a Divine Nature.

But yet the Words are signs, by which we are helped to know the things, and
must diligently be learned to that end; and though men cannot reach the Heart,
God has appointed Parents and Masters, and Teachers to Instruct their
Inferiors by words, and has written the Scripture to that use, that by them
his Spirit may teach or illuminate the Mind, and renew the Heart: God works
on man as man, and we must know by Signs, till we know by intuition.

It is a thing well known, that the Church abounds with Catechisms, and
Systemes of Divinity, and does there yet need more? their scope and Substance
is the same; they differ most, 1. In Choice of matter, that there be nothing
left out that is needful, nor needless uncertainties and disputes put in. 2.
That the Method or Order of them be True, agreeable to the matter and Sacred
Scripture. 3. And that they be not blotted with any drops of disgraceful
Error. These are the requisites to desirable Catechisms.

No doubt but they should be sorted into three degrees, suited to the
Childhood, Youth and maturer Age of Christians. I. The Essentials of
Christianity are all contained generally in Baptism; this must be understood,
and therefore expounded; the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Decalogue, the Summaries
of things to to be Believed, Desired, (in Hope) and Practiced, were from the
beginning taken for a good Exposition to those that were to be Baptized: These
three as Expounding Baptism, are themselves a good Catechism, the understanding
of the Lords Supper being added for Communicants. II. But here also Children
will be childish, and learn the words while they are mindless of the sense;
therefore an Explication of these in other words, has ever been thought a
great part of the work of a Teaching Ministry; whence the Ancients have left us
their Expositions of the Creed, etc.

But here the difficulty is made insuperable by the Learners indisposition; if
such a Catechism be short, and much put in few words, the vulgar cannot
understand it; if it be long and in many words, they cannot learn and remember
it. III. For Remedy of this, a Larger Catechism yet is needful; not to be
learnt without Book, but to be a full Exposition of the Shorter which they
learn; that they may have recourse to this for a more full and particular
understanding of a Shorter, whose general words they can remember.

Accordingly having in my Poor Man's Family Book, written two Catechisms of the
former rank, I here add the third, for those that have learned the two first:
Far am I from thinking that I have done any one of these to perfection; I never
yet saw a Catechism without some notable imperfection: And no doubt mine are
not free from such. But while I avoid what I see amiss in others, I hope God
will illuminate some to do yet beter, and to avoid what is amiss in mine. The
degree which yet pretends to greater accurateness in Method, I have given in
a Latin Methodus Theologiae.

The Uses for which I have written this, are these. I. For Masters of Families,
who should endeavor to raise their Children and Servants to a good degree of
Knowledge: I have divided it into short Chapters, that on the Lords days, or
at nights when they have leisure, the Master may read to them one Chapter at a
time, that is, the Exposition of one Article of the Creed, one Petition of the
Lords Prayer, and one Commandment Expounded.

II. For Schoolmasters to cause their riper rank of Scholars to learn: I am
past doubt that it is a heinous Crime in the Schoolmasters of England, that
they devote but one hour or two in a week to the learning of the Catechism,
while all the rest of the week is devoted to the learning of Lilly, Ovid,
Virgil, Horace, Cicero, Livy, Terence, and such like; besides the loss and
sinful omission, it seduceth Youth to think that common Knowledge (which is
only Subsidiary and Ornamental) is more excellent or necessary than to know
God, Christ, the Gospel, Duty, and Salvation; besides which, all Knowledge
(further than it helps or serves this) is but fooling and doting, and as
dangerous diversion and perversion of the mind, as grosser sensual delights. He
is not worthy the name of a Christian Schoolmaster, who makes it not his
chief work to teach his Scholars the Knowledge of Christ, and Life Everlasting.

III. But if they go from the Country Schools before they are capable of the
Larger Catechisms, (as to their great loss most make too much have away,) why
may not their next Tutors make it their chief work to train up their Pupils as
the Disciples of Jesus? (and yet not neglect either Aristotle, or any natural
light;) To our present Universities I am not so vain as to offer such
Instructions, (though to some small part of them I directed my Methodus
Theologiae;) I learnt not of them, and I presume not to make my self their
Teacher: Their late GUIDES, their WORLDLY-INTEREST, and their GENIUS, have made
my Writings odious to many, even that which they like they will not read. But I
have often with Lamentation wondered why Godly Ministers do no more of the work
now appropriated to Universities, for their own Sons? Those men whose Church
zeal would ruin Non-conformists if they Teach many, either Boys or Men, have
no Law against Parents teaching their own Children.

1. Are you fit for the Ministry your selves? If so, cannot you teach others
what you know? if you are defective in some useful Knowledge, let them
elsewhere learn that afterward.

2. Is there any so greatly obliged to take care of them as your selves? will
you be like those Parents who set Godfathers at the Font, to Vow and Promise
to do the Parents part? and how do such Undertakers use to perform it? Or will
you be like the Women of this unnatural Age, who get Children, and (not through
disability, but Wealth, Pride, and Coyness) disdain to Nurse them, but cast
that on hired Women, as obliged more by Money, than themselves by Nature, to
all that Care.

3. Cannot you do more at least to ground them well in Religion, before you
send them from you for other Learning? or are you of the mind, that to cant
over the Catechism is Divinity enough, before they have read Aristotle, or
Studied the Sciences? and that they must be Proficients in Logic and
Philosophy, before they make sure of their Salvation, and must read Smiglecius,
Ariago, Zaba^el, Suarez, or be fooled by Cartesians, Gassendus or Hobbs, before
they will Study the Gospel and Cross of Jesus Christ?

I am no undervaluer of any Academical advantages: when the Stream of Academies
runs pure and holy, they are blessed helps to men's Salvation; when their Stream
is SENSUAL, WORLDLY, CORRUPT and MALIGNANT, they are Seminaries for Hell, and
the Devils Schools to train up his most powerful Soldiers, to fight against
serious Godliness in Christ's own Livery and Name, and to send Youth thither, is
worse than to send them to a Brothel-House, or a Pesthouse.

4. Are there not fewer Temptations in your own Houses, than they are like to
find abroad in the World? you can keep them from the company of sensual
voluptuous Lads, and of Learned Reverend Enemies of serious Christianity, and
of worldly men whose Godliness is gain, and would draw them ambitiously to
Study Preferment, and espouse them to the World, which in Baptism they
renounced; if you cannot keep them from such Snares, how shall they be kept
where such abound?

5. And one of the greatest motives of all, for your keeping them long enough
at home, is, that you will thereby have time to judge whether they are like to
become fit for the Ministry or not: Oh, how many good men send Plagues into the
Church, by devoting unproved Lads to the Ministry, hoping that God will
hereafter give them Grace, and make them fit, who never promised it? When you
send them at fifteen or sixteen years of Age to the University, from under your
own eye, you are unlikely to know what they will prove, unless it be some few
that are very early sanctified by Grace; and when they have been a few years at
the University, be they never so unmeet, they will thrust themselves into the
Ministry, and (miserable men) for a Benefice take the charge of Souls; whereas
if you will keep them with you till twenty years of Age, you may see what they
are like to prove, and dispose of them accordingly.

If you say, They will lose the advantage of their Degrees, it is an Objection*
unfit for a Christians mouth; will you prefer Names, and aerie Titles before
Wisdom, Piety, and men's Salvation and the Churches good? must they go out of
their way for a Peacocks feather, when they are in a Race as for Life or Death?

If you say, They will lose their time at home, the shame then is yours, or
they are like to lose it more abroad; Teach them to read the Scriptures (at
least the Gospel) in the Original Tongues, and to understand and practice
things necessary to Salvation, which all Arts and Sciences must subserve, and
they do not lose their time; and at ripeness of Age they will get more other
Learning in a year, than before they will do in many; and what they learn will
be their own, when Boys learn words without the sense.

If you say, They will want the Advantage of Academical Disputes; I Answer, if
Reading fill them with matter, nature and common use will teach them how to
utter it: the World has too many Disputers; Books may soon teach them the true
order of Disputing, and a few days experience may show the rest.

If you say, You have not time to Teach them; I answer, you have no greater
work to do, and a little time will* serve with willing teachable Youth, and no
other are to be intended for the Ministry; what Boys get by hearing their
Tutors, they often bestow small labor to digest, but take up with bare words and
second notions: but when they are set to get it from their Books themselves,
harder Study better digesteth it; it is they that must bestow much time, the
Teacher need not bestow very much: Country Schools may teach them Latin,
Greek and Hebrew, let them stay there till they attain it; you may then teach
them the common rudiments of Logic, and see them well settled in Divinity and
serious Religion, and then if Academies prove safe and needful, they will go
out better fortified against all the Temptations which they must expect.

It is certain, that Inconveniences are not so bad as Mischiefs, and it is
certain that all our Natures as Corrupt, are Dark, Carnal and Malignant, and
need the sanctifying Grace of Christ: and its certain, that as Grace uses all
things to its increase, so this serpentine nature will turn Studyes, Learning
and all such things to serve it self; and that Carnal, Sensual, Malignant
Nature cultivated by humane Learning, is too usually ripened and sublimated
into Diabolism, and makes the most potent Servants of the Devil against
Christ: And if this be but gilded with sacred Ornaments and Titles, and
pretenses of the Churches Peace and Order, it is Garisoned and fortified, and a
stronger hold for sin and Satan than open Vice: And it is certain that as the
Rage of Drunkards is raised in their riotous Meetings, and as Conjunction,
Example and Noise put more Valor into Armies than separated Persons have, so
combined Societies of Learned Reverenced Malignity do Confirm the Individuals,
and raise them to the height of Wiekedness: So that Universities are either, if
holy, a Copy of Paradise, or if malignant, the chief Militia of the malicious
Enemy of man, except a malignant Hierarchy or Clergy, who are malignant
Academies grown up to maturity.

If any say, that there is no great and solid Learning to be got elsewhere, let
them think where great Augustine, and most of the great Lights of the Church
for four hundred years attained their Knowledge; and whether the Scaligers,
Salmasius, Grotius, Seldom, and such others, got not more by laborious secret
Reading, than by Academical Tutors and Disputes; and whether such famous men as
John Reignolds, Blondel, etc. even in the Universities, got not their great
Learning by searching the same Books which may be read in another place. If any
say, that I speak against that which I want my self, I only desire that it may
not be those who cast by my Catholic Theology, Methodus Theologiae, etc. with
no other Accusation, but because they are too Scholastical, Accurate and hard
for them.

I here bewail it as my great sin against God, that in the Youth of my
Ministry, Pride made me often blush with shame for want of Academical Degrees;
but usually God will not have us bring our own humane honor to his Service,
but setch honor from him, in faithful serving him: Fringes and Laces must be
last set on, when the Garment is made, and not be the ground or Stamen of it.
There have been men that have desired their Sons to learn all the Oriental
Tongues, and the rare Antiquities and critical applaud^d sort of Learning, not
for its own worth, but that they might Preach the Gospel with the advantage of
a greater name and honor: And this course has so taken up and formed such
Students into the quality of their Studies, when their Souls should have been
taken up with Faith and Love, and Heavenly Desires and Hopes, that it has
overthrown the end to which it was intended, and rendered such Students unfit
for the Sacred Ministry, and caused them to turn to other things: When others,
who (as Usher, Bochart, Blondel, etc.) have first taken in a digested Body of
saving Truth, have after added these Critical Studies at full maturity, have
become rare Blessings to the Church.

Let those that think all this digressive, or unmeet for the Preface to a
Catechism, Pardon that which the Worlds Miscarriages and Necessities bespeak.

If at least Masters of Families, by such helps diligently used, will keep up
Knowledge and Religion in their Houses, it is not public failings in
Ministers, nor the want of what is desirable in the Assemblies, that will root
out Religion from the Land: But if the faithful prove few, they must be content
with their Personal Comforts and Rewards; there is nothing amiss in the
heavenly Society, and the World which we are entering into: Come Lord Jesus,
Come quickly. Amen.

Land. October. 3. 1682.
The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. THE Introduction; About Catechizing and Learning, page 1 Chap. 2. How
to know our selves by Nature, p. 6 Chap. 3. Of the natural Knowledge of God and
Heaven, p. 9 Chap. 4. Of Gods Kingdom and Government of Man, and Providence, p.
13 Chap. 5. Of Gods Law of Nature, and Natural Officers. p. 19
Chap. 6. Of supernatural Revelation of Gods Will to Man, and of the Holy
Scriptures, p. 27 Chap. 7. Of the Christian Religion, what it is, and of the
Creed, p. 27 Chap. 8. Of Believing, what it signifies in the Creed, p. 70
Chap. 9. Of the first Article, I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of
Heaven and Earth, p. 82 Chap. 10. Of Gods Almightiness and Creation, p. 88
Chap. 11. Of the Person of Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, p. 92 Chap. 12.
How Christ was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary, 97
Chap. 13. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried, he
descended into Hell, p. 101 Chap. 14. The third day he rose again from the
Dead, p. 109 Chap. 15. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand
of God the Father, etc. p. 113 Chap. 16. From thence he shall come to Judge the
Quick and the Dead, p. 116 Chap. 17. I Believe in the Holy Ghost, p. 123 Chap.
18. The holy Catholic Church, p. 130 Chap. 19. The Communion of Saints, p. 136
Chap. 20. The Forgiveness of Sins, p. 144 Chap. 21. The Resurrection of the
Body, p. 154 Chap. 22. The Life everlasting. p. 165
Chap. 23. What is the true Use of the Lords Prayer, p. 173 Chap. 24. Our
Father which art in Heaven, Expounded. p. 177 Chap. 25. Hallowed be thy Name.
p. 182 Chap. 26. Thy Kingdom come, p. 198 Chap. 27. Thy Will be done on Earth
as it is in Heaven, p. 209 Chap. 28. Give us this day our daily Bread, p. 213
Chap. 29. Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive, etc. p. 219 Chap. 30. Lead
us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil. p. 224 Chap. 31. For thine is
the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever, Amen. p. 227
Chap. 32. Of the Ten Commmandments in general, p. 229 Chap. 33. Of the Preface
to the Decalogue, p. 233 Chap. 34. Of the first Commandment, p. 239 Chap. 35.
Of the second Commandment, p. 251 Chap. 36. Of the third Commandment, p. 262
Chap. 37. Of the fourth Commandment, p. 273 Chap. 38. Of the fifth
Commandment, p. 290 Chap. 39. Of the sixth Commandment, p. 314 Chap. 40. Of
the seventh Commandment, p. 324 Chap. 41. Of the eighth Commandment, p. 337
Chap. 42. Of the ninth Commandment, p. 353 Chap. 43. Of the tenth
Commandment, p. 365
Chap. 44. Of the Sacred Ministry, Church and Worship, p. 380 Chap. 45. Of
Baptism, p. 392 Chap. 46. Of the Sacrament of Christ's sacrificed Body and
Blood, p. 412 Chap. 47. How to prepare for a safe and Comfortable Death. p. 432
Amend these misprintings with your Pens.

PAge 31. line 21. for [ the] read [ that] p. 58. l. 24. r. [ maketh] p. 95. l.
21. for [ least] r. [ last] p. 99. l. 6. for [ light] r. [ sight] p. 166. l. 3.
blot out [ with Henoch] p. 200. l. 10. for [ were] r. [ where] p. 202. l. 8. r.
[ every] p. 208. l. 6. blot out [ for] p. 374. l. 31. for [ any] r. [ my.]

In some places the same things are repeated, the occasions being diverse, and
the Author having not strength and time to correct the Copy.

Books of Mr. Baxter's sold by T. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns at
the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel.
1. CHristian Directory, or Body of Practical Divinity. 2. Catholic Theology,
in three Parts: 1. Pacifying Principles: 2. Pacifying Practices: 3. Pacifying
Disputations. fol. 3. Life of Faith, in three parts: 1. Sermon on Heb. 11.
Preached before his Majesty, published by his Command. 2. Instructions for
Confirming Believers in the Christian Faith. 3. Directions to live by Faith.
Quarto. 4. Disputations of Original Sin. Octav. 5. An Apology for the
Nonconformists Ministry. Quarto. 6. Which is the True Church: A Defense of
Protestantism against Popery. 7. An Answer to Mr. Dodwell, confuting an
Universal Church-Supremacy; and defending Dr. Isaac Barrow against it. 8. True
History of Councels Enlarged and Defended, against a Pretended Vindicator of
the Primitive Church: To which is added, Diocesan Churches not yet Discovered
in the Primitive times, or, A Defense of the Answer to Dr. Stillingfleets
Allegations out of Antiquity for such Churches.
THE CATECHIZING OF FAMILIES: OR, A TEACHER of HOUSEHOLDERS How to Teach their
Households. Useful also to Schoolmasters and Tutors of Youth.
The Questions are the Learners and the Answers the Teachers.

CHAP. I. The Introduction.
Qu. 1. WHat is it which must be Taught and Learned?

Ans. All must be Taught and must Learn, 1. What to Know and Believe: 2* What
to Love and Choose and Hope for: 3. What they must Do or Practice: Psalm. 25. 4,
5. and 27. 11. and 119. 12, 33, 66.


Q. 2. What is it that we must Learn to know, and believe?

A. We must Learn to know our selves and our concerns. Job. 34. 32.


Q. 3. What must we know of our selves.

A. We must know what we are, and what Condition we are in. Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3.


Q. 4. What mean you by our concerns which we must know?

A. We must know, 1. Whence we are, or who made us: 2. And whither we are
going, or for what End he made us: 3. And which is the way, or what means must
be used to attain that end. Tit. 2. 3.


Q. 5. What must we Learn to Love, and Choose, and Hope for?

A. We must learn to Love best that which is Best in it self, and best to us
and others, and to choose the means by which it must be attained: which
implies Hating and Refusing the contraries. Psalm. 34. 11. and 32. 8.


Q. 6. What must we learn to practice?

A. We must Practice the means to obtain the End of our lives, and that is our
Obedience to Him that made us. 1 Kin. 8. 36. Mic. 4. 2.


Q. 7. Cannot we learn this of our selves without Teachers?

A. There is some part of this which Nature it self* will teach you as soon as
you come to the free use of Reason, and look about you in the World: And there
is some part of it that Nature alone will not teach you, without a higher
Teaching from above: And even that which Nature teaches you, you have also
need of a Teachers help ^o Learn it speedily and truly. For Nature does ^ot
Teach all things alike easily, speedily and sure^y: It quickly teaches a Child
to suck: It quick^y teaches us to eat and drink, and go and talk: and yet here
there is need of help: Children learn ^ot to speak without teaching. It
teaches men ^ow to do their worldly business: And yet they ^ave need of
Masters to teach it them, and will ^erve an Apprentiship to learn. Some things
Na^^re will teach to none but good wits, upon dili^ent search and study, and
honest willingness to ^now; which Dullards, and slothful, and Bad men ^each
not. Isa. 28. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 14. Job 12. 7, 8. Heb. 5. 12.


Q. 8. Who be they that must Teach? and who must ^earn?

A. None is able to Teach more than they Know ^^emselves; And all that are
Ignorant have need ^^ Learn. But Nature has put all Children un^er a necessity
of Learning; for though they are ^^rn with a Capacity to know, yet not with
actu^^ knowledge: And Nature has made it the duty ^^ Parents to be the
Teachers of their Children ^^st, and then to get the help of others. ( h)

Q. 9. May we give over Learning when we are ^^st Childhood? (i) ^ 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Job 32. 17. Tit. 2. 21. Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 8. and 11. 19, 20. Pro. 1. 5. and 9. 9. and
6. 21, 23.


A. No: We must go on to Learn as long as we live: For we know but in part, and
therefore still have need of more. But those that have neglected to Learn in
their Childhood, have most need of all; it being most sinful and unnatural to
be ignorant at full age; and signifies great neglect. Psalm. 119. 99. Hib. 5.
11, 12. Pro. 5. 13.


Q. 10. Who must teach us at Age?

A. Parents and Masters must teach their House*holds; and Public Teachers are
Officers to Teac^ all publicly; And all that have Wisdom, should take all fit
opportunities in Charity to teach an^ edify one another: Knowledge* and
Goodness* ha^^ a communicative nature. Gal. 6. D^^^. 6. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 7. 2 Timothy
1. 11. Ephesians. 4. 11. Tit. 2.


Q. 11. How must Parents teach their households?

A. Very familiarly and plainly, according ^^ their capacities, beginning with
the plain and n^*cessary things, and this is it which we call Cat^chizing:
which is nothing but the choosing out ^^ the few, plain, necessary matters from
all the res^ and in due method or order teaching them to t^^ ignorant. Hib. 3.
13. Ezr. 7. 25. Col. 3. 16. Heb. 5. 11, and 6. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 1. 13.


Q. 12. What need we Cat^chisms while we ha^^ the Bible?

A. Because the Bible contains all the who^^ body of Religious Truths; which
the ripest Chr^stians should know; but are not all of equal necessit^ to
Salvation, with the greatest points: And it ca^ not be expected that ignorant
persons can cull o^ these most necessary points from the rest, without help: A
man is not a man without a Head and Heart: But he may be a man if he lose a
finger or a hand, but not an entire man; Nor a comely man without Hair, Nails
and Natures Ornaments. So a man cannot be a Christian, or a good or happy man,
without the Great, most necessary points in the Bible, nor an entire Christian
without the rest. Life and Death lies not on all alike. And the skilful must
gather the most necessary for the ignorant; which is a Catechism. Mat. 11. 30,
31, 33. Mat. 19. 19. and 22. 37, 39. Romans 13. 9. Mat. 28. 19. Mat. 23. 23. Iam.
1. 27.


Q. 13. But is not Knowledge the gift of God?

A. Yes: but he gives it by means: Three things must concur: 1. A right
presenting to the Learner, which is the Teachers work: 2. A fitness in the
Learner, by capacity, willingness and diligence. 3. The blessing of God,
without which no man can be wise. Is. 30, 29. Mat. 28. 19, 20. 1 Timothy 1. 3. and
3. 2. and 6. 2, 3.


And therefore three sorts will be ignorant and Erroneous: 1. Those that have
not the happiness of true Teachers, nor Truth presented to them. 2. Those that
by sottishness, pride, sensuality, malignity or sloth, are incapable or
unwilling to learn. 3. Those that by wilful sinning against God are deprived of
the necessary blessing of his help and Illumination. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 24. Act. 20.
20. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Heb. 5. 12, 13. 1^ Io. 2. 27. 1 These. 4. 9.


CHAP. II. How to know our selves by Nature.
Qu. 1. WHat is the first thing that a man must know?

Ans. The first in Being and Excellency is GOD* But the first in Time known by
Man, or the lowest step where our Knowledge begins, are the sensible things
near us, (which we see, hear, feel, etc.) and especially our selves. 1 Io. 1.
1, 2, 3. Act. 1. 3. and 4. 20. and 26. 16.


Q. 2. What know we of the things which we se^ and feel, etc?

A. A Man of sound senses and understanding knows them to be such as Sense
apprehends, while they are rightly set before him; the Eye sees Ligh^ and
Colors, the Ear hears Sounds and words, and so of the rest; and the sound
Understanding judges them to be such as the sense perceives, unles^ distance
or false Mediums deceive us. Ioh. 20* 20, 25, 27.


Q. 3. But how know you that sense is not deceived? you say that is Bread and
Wine in the Sacrament, which the Papists say is not?

A. God has given us no other faculties bu^ Sense, by which to judge of
sensible things, as Ligh^ and Darkness, Heat and Cold, Sweet and Bitter, Soft
and Hard, etc. Therefore if we be here deceived, God is our Deceiver, and we
are remediless; even Faith and Reason suppose our Senses, and their true
Perception; and if that first Perception be false, Faith and Reason could be no
truer: God expects not that we should Judge by other Faculties than such as
he has given us for the Perception of those Objects.

Q. 4. What does a Man first perceive of himself?

A. We first feel that we are real Beings; and we perceive that we use and have
our Senses, that we See, Hear, Feel, Smell, Taste; and then we perceive that we
Understand and Think of the things so Seen, Felt, etc. And that we gather one
thing from another, and that we Love Good, and Hate Evil; and Choose, Refuse,
and Do accordingly.

Q. 5. What do you next know of your selves?

A. When we perceive that we See, Feel, etc. and Think, Love, Hate, etc. we
know that we have a Power of Soul to do all this, for no one does that which he
is not made able to do.

Q. 6. And what do you next know of your self?

A. When I know what I Do, and that I can do it, I know next that I am a
Substance endued with this Power; for nothing has no Power nor Act, it can do
nothing.

Q. 7. What know you next of your self?

A. I know that this Substance which Thinks, Understands and Wills, is an
unseen Substance, for neither I nor any mortal Man sees it, and that is it
which is called a Spirit.

Q. 8. What next perceive you of your self?

A. I Perceive that in this one Substance there is a Threefold Power,
marvellously but One, and yet Three as Named from the Objects and Effects, that
is, 1. A Power of mere Growing motion, common to Plants. 2. A Power of Sense
common to Beasts. 3. And a Power of Understanding and Reason about things above
Sense, proper to a Man; three Powers in one spiritual Substance.

Q. 9. What else do you find in your self?

A. I find that my spiritual Substance as Intellectual, has also a Threefold
Power in one, that is, 1. Intellectual Life, by which I move and act my
faculties, and execute my purposes. 2. Understanding. 3. And Will, and that
these are marvellously diverse, and yet one.

Q. 10. What else find you by your self?

A. I find that this unseen Spirit is here United to a humane Body, and is in
Love with it, and cares for it, and is much limited by it, in its Perceivings,
Willings and Workings; and so that a Man is an Incorporate Understanding
Spirit, or a humane Soul and Body.

Q. 11. What else perceive you by your self?

A. I perceive that my higher Powers are given me to rule the lower, my Reason
to rule my Senses and Appetite, my Soul to rule and use my Body, as Man is made
to rule the Beasts.

Q. 12. What know you of your self as related to others?

A. I see that I am a Member of the World of Mankind, and that others are
better than I, and multitudes better than one; and that the Welfare of Mankind
depends much on their Duty to one another; and therefore that I should Love all
according to their worth, and faithfully endeavor the good of all.

Q. 13. What else know you of your self?

A. I know that I made not my self, and maintain not my self in Life and
Safety, and therefore that another made me and maintains me; and I know that
I must Die by the Separation of my Soul and Body.

Q. 14. And can we tell what then becomes of the Soul?

A. I am now to tell you but how much of it our Nature tells us, the rest I
shall tell you afterward; we may know, 1. That the Soul being a Substance in
the Body, will be a Substance out of it, unless God should destroy it, which we
have no cause to think he will. 2. That Life, Understanding and Will being its
very Nature, it will be the same after Death, and not a thing of some other
kind. 3. That the Soul being naturally Active, and the World full of Objects,
it will not be a sleepy or unactive thing. 4. That its Nature here being to
mind its Interest in another Life, by Hopes or Fears of what will follow, God
made not its Nature such in vain, and therefore that Good or Evil in the Life
that is next will be the Lot of all.

CHAP. III. Of the Natural Knowledge of GOD and Heaven.
Qu. 1. YOu have told me how we know the things which we see and feel, without
us and within us: But how can we know any things which we neither see nor feel,
but are quite above us?

A. By certain Effects and Signs which notify them: How little else did man
differ from a Beast; if he knew no more than he sees and feels? Besides what
we know from others that have seen; you see not now that the Sun will rise to
morrow, or that Man must die: you see not Italy, Spain, France; You see no man's
Soul: And yet we certainly know that such things are and will be.

Q. 2. How know you that there is any thing above us, but what we see?

A. 1. We see such things done here on Earth, which nothing does or can do
which is seen. What thing that is seen can give all Men and Beasts their life
and sense and safety? and so marvellously form the bodies of all, and govern
all the matters of the World? 2. We see that the spaces above us, where Sun,
Moon and Stars are, are so vast, that all this Earth is not so much to them, as
one Inch is to all this Land: And we see that the Regions above us, excel in
the glory of purity and splendour: And when this dark spot of Earth has so many
millions of Men, can we doubt whether those vast and glorious parts are better
inhabited? 3. And we find that the grossest things are the basest, and the most
invisible the most Powerful and Noble; as our Souls are above our Bodies: And
therefore the most vast and Glorious Worlds above us, must have the most
invisible, powerful, noble inhabitants.

Q. 3. But how know you what those Spirits above us are?

A. 1. We partly know what they are, by what they do with us on Earth. 2. We
know much what they are, by the Knowledge of our selves. If our Souls are
Invisible Spirits, essentiated by the Power of Life, Understanding and Will,
the Spirits above us can be no less, but either such or more excellent. And he
that made us, must needs be more excellent than his work.

Q. 4. How know you who made us?

A. He that made all things, must needs be our Maker, that is, GOD; Romans 1. 19,
20, 21.


Q. 5. What mean you by God? And what is He?

A. I mean, The Eternal, Infinite, Glorious Spirit, and Life, most Perfect in
Active Power, Understanding and Will, Of whom, and by whom, and to whom are all
things; being the Creator, Governor and End of all. This is that God whom All
things do declare.

Q. 6. How know you that there is such a God?

A. By his works; (And I shall afterward tell it you more fully by his Word.)
Man did not make himself; Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Trees and Plants make not
themselves: The Earth, and Water, and Air made not themselves: And if the Souls
of men have a maker, the Spirits next above them must have a Maker: and so on,
till you come to a first Cause that was made by none. There must be a first
Cause, and there can be but one.

Q. 7. Why may there not be many Gods, or Spirits, that were made by none, but
are Eternally of themselves?

A. Because it is a Contradiction; The same would be both perfect and
imperfect: Perfect, because he is of himself Eternally, without a cause, and so
dependent upon none: And yet Imperfect, because he has but a Part of that
Being that is said to be perfect: For many are more than One, and all make up
the absolute, perfect being, and One of them is but a Part of all: And to be a
Part is to be Imperfect. However, many subordinate Created Spirits may unfitly
be called Gods, there can be but one uncreated God in the first and proper
sense.

Q. 8. How know you that God is Eternal, without Beginning?

A. Because else there was a time when there was Nothing; if there were a time
when there was no God. And then there never would have been any thing: For
nothing can make nothing.

Q. 9. But how can man conceive of an Eternal uncaused Being?

A. That such a GOD there is, is the most certain easy Truth, and that he has
all the Perfection before described: But neither Man nor Angel can know him
Comprehensively.

Q. 10. What mean you by his Infiniteness?

A. That his Being and Perfection have no limits or measure, but
incomprehensibly comprehend all Place and Beings.

Q. 11. What is this GOD to us?

A. He is our Maker; and therefore our absolute Owner, our Supreme Ruler, and
our Chief Benefactor and Ultimate End.

Q. 12. And how stand we related to him? what duty do we owe him? and what may
we expect from him?

A. We are his Creatures; and all that we are and have is of him; we are his
Subjects, made with Life, Reason and Free Will, to be ruled by him: He is the
Infinite Good, and Love it self. Therefore we owe him perfect Resignation,
perfect Obedience, and perfect Complacency and Love* All that we are, and all
that we have, and all that we can do, is due to him in the way of our
Obedience; to pay which, is our own Rectitude and Felicity as it is our Duty:
But all this you must much better learn from his Word, than Nature alone can
teach it you. Though Man's Nature and the frame of Nature about us, so fully
proves what I have said, as leaves all the Ungodly without excuse.

CHAP. IV. Of Gods Kingdom, and Government of Man, and Providence.
Q. 1. I Perceive that nothing more concerns us, than to know GOD and our
Relation and Duty to him, and what hope we have from him; Therefore I pray you
open it to me more fully: And first tell me Where God is?

A. GOD being Infinite is not confined in any Place, but all Place and things
are in GOD; and he is absent from none, but as near to every thing, as it is to
it self.

Q. 2. Why then do you say that he is in Heaven; if he be as much on Earth, and
every where?

A. GOD is not more or less in one place than another in his Being, but he is
apparent and known to us by his Working, and so we say He is in Heaven, as he
there Works and Shines forth to the most blessed Creatures in Heavenly
Glory. As we say the Sun is where it shines; Or, to use a more apt Comparison,
the Soul of Man is indivisibly in the whole Body, but it does not Work in all
parts alike; it understands not in the Foot, but in the Head; it Sees not,
Hears not, Tastes not, and smells not in the Fingers or lower parts, but
in the Eye, the Ear, and other Senses in the Head; and therefore when we talk
to a man, it is his Soul that we talk to, and not his Flesh, and yet we look
him in the Face; not as if the Soul were no where but in the Face or Head, but
because it only works and appears there by those Senses and that
Understanding which we Converse with: Even so we look up to Heaven when we
speak to God; not as if he were no where else, but because Heaven is the place
of his glorious Appearing and Operation, and as the Head and Face of the World
where all true Glory and Felicity is, and from whence it descends to this
Earth, as the Beams of the Sun do from its glorious Center.

Q. 3. You begin to make me think that GOD is the SOUL of the WORLD, and that
we must conceive of him in the World, as we do of the Soul of Man in his Body.

A. You cannot better Conceive of GOD, so you will but take in the points of
Difference, which are very great; for no Creature known to us, does resemble
God without vast Difference.

The Differences are such as these. First, The Soul is part of the Man, but God
is not a part of the World, or of Being: For to be a part, is to be less than
the whole, and so to be Imperfect. Secondly, We cannot say that the Soul is any
where out of the Body, but the World is Finite, and God is Infinite, and
therefore God is not Confined to the World. 3. The Soul rules not a Body that
has a distinct Understanding and Free Will of its own to receive its Laws, and
therefore rules it not by proper Law, but by despotical Motion: But God rules
men that have Understanding and Free Will of their own to know and receive his
Laws, and therefore he rules them partly by a Law. 4. The Soul does not use
another Soul under it to rule the Body, but GOD makes use of Superior Spirits
to move and rule things and Persons below them, so that there is great
difference between Gods ruling the World, and the Souls ruling the Body.

But yet there is great likeness also. 1. God is as near every part of the
World, as the Soul is near the Body. 2. God is as truly and fully the Cause of
all the Actions and Changes of the World, (except sin which Free Will left to
it self commits) as the Soul is the Cause of the Actions and Changes of the
Body. 3. The Body is no more lifeless without the Soul, than the World would be
without God. Yea, God gives all its Being to the World, and without him it
would be nothing, and in this he further differs from the Soul, which gives
not material being to the Body.

So that you may well conceive of GOD as the SOUL of the World, so you will but
put in that he is far more.

Q. 4. Is it not below God to concern himself with these lower things? Does he
not leave them to those that are under him?

A. It is below God to be unconcerned about any part, even the least of his own
works. Men are narrow Creatures, and can be but in one place at once, and
therefore must do that by others which they cannot do themselves, at least
without trouble: But God is infinite, and present with all Creatures; and as
nothing is in being without him, so nothing can move without him.

Q. 5. By this you make God to do all things Immediately, whereas we see he
works by means and second causes: He gives us light and heat by the Sun; he
upholdeth us by the Earth, etc.

A. The word Immediate sometime signifies, A cause that has no other cause
under it: So the Sun is the immediate cause of the emanation of its beams of
Light. And so God is not always an Immediate Cause; that is, He has other
causes under him: But sometime, Immediate signifies that which is next a
thing, having nothing between them. And so God does all things Immediately: For
he is, and he acts as near us as we to our selves, and nothing is between him
and us: He is as near the person and the Effect, when he uses Second Causes as
when he uses none.

Q. 6. But is it not a debasing GOD to make his Providence the cause of every
motion of a Worm, a Bird, a Fly, and to mind and move such contemptible things:
and so to mind the thoughts of man?

A. It is a debasing God to think that he is like a finite Creature, absent, or
insufficient for any of his Creatures. That there is not the least thing or
motion so small, as to be done without him, is most certain to him that will
consider, 1. That Gods very Essence is every where: And wherever he is, he is
himself, that is, most Powerful, Wise and Good: And if such a God be as near to
every Action as the most immediate Actor is, so that in him they all Live, and
Move, and Be, how can he be thought to have no hand in it, as to Providence or
causality?

2. And it is certain that God upholds continually the very Being of every thing
that moves, and all the Power by which they move: For that which had no Being
but from him, ^an have none continued but by him: That which could not make it
self, cannot continue it self: Should not God by his causality continue their
being, every Creature would turn to nothing. For there can be nothing without a
Cause, but the first Cause which is GOD.

3. And it is all one to Infiniteness to mind every Creature and motion in the
World, and to cause and rule the least, as it is to cause and rule but one. God
is as sufficient for all the World, even every Fly and Worm, as if he had but
One to mind. Seeing then that he is as present with every Creature as it is
with it self, and it has not the least power but what he continually gives
it, and cannot move at all but by him, and he is as sufficient for All as for
One, it is unreasonable to think that the least thing is done without him. Is it
a dishonor to the Sun that every Eye, even of Flies, and Ants, and Toads, and
Snakes, as well as Men, do see by the light of it? or that it shines at once
upon every p^le of Grass and Atome? This is but the certain Effect of Gods
Infinitene^s and Perfection.

Q. 7. How does God Govern all things?

A. He Governs several things according to their several Natures which he
has made: Lifeless things by their natural Inclinations, and by moving force;
Things that have sense by their sensitive Inclinations, and by their objects,
and by constraint; And Reasonable Creatures by their Principles, and by Laws
and Moral Rules: And all things by his Infinite Power, Wisdom and Will, as
being every one parts of one World, which is his Kingdom: Especially Man.

Q. 8. What is Gods Kingdom? and why do you call him our King?

A. I call him our King, because, 1. He only has absolute Right, Power and
Fitness to be our Supreme Ruler: 2. And he does actually Rule us as our
Sovereign. And in this KINGDOM, 1. GOD is the Only Supreme King and Head. 2.
Angels or Glorified Spirits and Men are the Subjects: 3. All the Bruits and
lifeless Creatures are the Furniture, and goods and utensils. 4. Devils and
Rebellious Wicked men, are the Enemies, to be opposed and overcome.

Q. 9. How does GOD govern Man on Earth?

A. 1. The Power of God, our Lord, Owner and Mover, moves us, and disposes of
us, as he does of all things, to the fullfilling of his Will. 2. The Wisdom of
God our King, does give us sound Doctrine, and holy and just Laws, with Reward^
and Penalties, and he will Judge men and execute accordingly. 3. And the Love
of our Heavenly Father does furnish us with all necessary blessings, help us,
accept us, and prepare us for the Heavenly Kingdom.

Q. 10. Why is man Ruled by Laws rather than Beasts and other things?

A. Because man has Reason, and Free Will, which makes them Subjects capable
of Laws, which Beasts are not.

Q. 11. What is that Free Will which fits us to be Subjects?

A. It is a Will made by God able to determine it self, by Gods necessary help,
to choose Good and refuse Evil, understood to be such, without any
necessitating Predetermination by any other.

CHAP. V. Of Gods Law of Nature, and Natural Officers.
Qu. 1. BY what Laws does God Govern the World?

Ans. How he Governs the Spirits above us, whether by any Law besides the
immediate Re^elation of his Will seen in the face of his Glory, or how else, is
not much known to us, because ^t does not concern us. But this lower World of
man he Governs by the Law of Nature, and by a Law of Supernatural Revelation,
given by his Spirit or by Messengers from Heaven.

Q. 2. What is it that you Call the Law of Nature?

A. In a large and improper sense some call the ^nclinations, and forcing or
naturally moving Causes of any Creatures, by the name of a Law: and so they say
that Beasts and Birds are moved by the Law of their Nature; and that Stones
sink downward, and the Fire goes upward by the Law of Nature. But this is no
Law in the Proper sense which we are speaking of, whatever you Call it.

Q. 3. What is it then that you Call A Law?

A. Any Signification of the Will of the Ruler purposely given to the Subject,
that thereby he may know and be bound to his Duty, and know his Reward or
Punishment due. Or any signification of the Rulers will for the Government of
Subjects, constituting what shall be Due from them, and to them. A Rule to live
by, and the Rule by which we must be judged.

Q. 4. What then is Gods Law of Nature, made for man?

A. It is the signification of Gods Governing Will, by the Nature of man
himself, and of all other Creatures known to man, in which God declares to man
his Duty and his reward or punishment.

Q. 5. How can a man know Gods Will and our duty by his Nature, and by all
other Works of God about us?

A. In some things as surely as by words or writings; but in other things more
darkly. I am sure that my Nature is made to Know and Love Truth and Goodness,
and to desire and seek my own Felicity: My Nature tells me that I was not made
by my self, and do not live by my Self, and therefore that I am not my own, but
his that made me: All things show me that there is a God who must needs be
Greater, Wiser and Better than all his Creatures, and therefore ought to be
most Honored, Feared, Loved and Obeyed: I see multitudes of persons of the
same Nature with me, and therefore obliged to the same duty to God; I see much
of Gods work in them which is Good, and therefore to be Loved: And I see that
we are all parts of one World, and made to be useful to one another: These and
many such things the Reason of man may discern in himself and other works of
God.

Q. 6. But I thought the Law of Nature had been every man's natural temper and
disposition, which inclines him to action: And you make it to be only a
notifying sign of duty.

A. Figuratively, some call every Inclination a Law, but it is no such thing
that we are speaking of: Only a man's natural Inclination among other signs may
notify his duty. But I hope you cannot think that a man's vicious Inclination
is Gods Law: Then you would make Original sin, and the work of the Devil to be
Gods Law. One man's sinful distemper of Soul, and another man's bodily distemper
(the fruit of sin) inclines him to wrath, to lust, to idleness, to sinful
sports, or drinking, or gluttony: And these are so far from being Gods Law of
Nature, that they are the contraries, and the Law of Satan in our members,
rebelling against the Law of God. And though the good Inclinations of our
common Nature (to Justice, Peace, Temperance) be by some called* The Law of
Nature, it is not as they are Inclinations, but as from them we may know our
duty.

Q. 7. Has God any Natural Officers under him in governing man? I pray you
tell me how far Man's Power is of God?

A. God has set up diverse sorts of humane Governing Powers under him in the
World, which all have their place and order assigned them; some by Nature, as
entire; some by the Law of Nature since the Fall, and some by supernatural
Revelation, (which is not to be here spoken to, but afterward.)

Q. 8. Because I have heard some say that God made no Government, but men do it
by consent for their necessity, I pray you show me what Government God made by
Nature, and in what order?

A. 1. Next to Gods own Governing Right which is the first, God has made every
man a Governor of himself. For God made him with some faculties which must be
ruled (as the Appetite, Senses, and Tongue, and other bodily members, yea and
Passions too,) and with some which must Rule the rest, (as the Understanding by
guidance, and the Will by command.) And this self-governing power, is so
necessary and Natural, that no man can take it from us, or forbid us the due
exercise of it, any more than they can bind us to sin or to self-destruction.

Q. 9. Which is the next humane Power in order?

A. 2. The Governing power of the Husband over the Wife; whose very nature as
well as Original shows that she was made to be Subject, though under the Law of
Love.

Q. 10. But is not this by consent rather than by nature?

A. It is by Consent that a woman is married: but when she has made her self a
Wife, Nature makes her a Subject; unless madness or disability make the man
unmeet for his place.

Q. 11. Which is the next sort of Natural Government?

A. 3. The Parents Government of their Children: Nature makes it the duty of
Parents to rule, and of Children to obey. And though some have been so
unnatural as to deny this, and say that Children owe nothing but reverence and
gratitude, yet there is no danger of the common prevalency of such a Heresy,
which the nature of all mankind confuteth, save that licentious Youth will take
advantage of it to disobey their Parents to please their lusts.

Q. 12. What is the humane Government which Gods Law of Nature has instituted
to man since his fall and corruption?

A. 4. That is to be afterward explained: But Magistracy, or Civil Government
is certainly of Natural Institution, though it is uncertain how God would have
governed Man in such Societies by man, if they had not sinned. The Law of
Nature teaches man the necessity of Civil Society, and of Government therein;
and therefore obliges man thereto.

Q. 13. This seems to be but the effect of men's own perceived necessity, and
so to be but their arbitrary choice.

A. Their Necessity is Natural, and the notice of it is Natural, and the desire
of Remedy is natural, and the fitness of Magistracy to its use is natural:
Therefore it is the Law of God in Nature that binds them to choose and use
it: And if any Country should choose to live without Magistracy, they would
sin against the Law of Nature, and their own good.

Q. 14. But I have heard that God has made no Law what Form of Civil
Government shall be used, but left it to every Countries choice.

A. God has by nature made it necessary that there be Magistracy; that is,
some men in power over Societies to enforce the obedience of Gods own common
Laws, and to make their subordinate Laws about undetermined mutable matters to
that end, for the honor of God and the Good of the Society.

But, 1. Whether this Government shall be exercised by one or many: 2. And who
shall be the Persons, Gods Law has left undetermined to humane Liberty: The
Form and the Persons are chosen, neither by the said persons, nor by the People
only, but by the mutual consent and contract of both: 3. And also by this
contract the Degree of power and order of the exercise may be Stated and
limited: But for all that, when humane consent has chosen the persons, the
essential Power of Governing in Subordination to Gods Laws, flows (not from
man, but) immediately from Gods Law of Nature.

Q. 15. But what if these sorts of Government prove cross to one another; and
Reason commands one thing, an Husband another, a Parent another, and the
Magistrate another; which must be obeyed?

A. Each have their proper Work and End, which none of the other can forbid.
Self-Government is the Reasonable management of our own Faculties and actions
in obedience to God, for our own Salvation. And no King or other can take this
from us: And if they forbid us any necessary duty to God, or necessary Means of
our Salvation, they do it without Authority, and are not to be therein obeyed.

A Husbands power to govern his Wife, is for the necessary Ends of their
Relation, which the King has no power to forbid. A Parents power to rule his
Children, is for the Necessary Education of them for the welfare of Soul and
Body; and the King has no power to forbid it. Should he forbid Parents to feed
their Children, or teach them Gods Laws, or to choose for them Orthodox fit
Tutors, Pastors, and Church Communion where God is lawfully worshipped; and
should he command the Children to use the contrary, it is all Null and
powerless.

But it belongs to the Magistrate only (though not to destroy any of the
three former Governments, which are all before his in Nature and Time, yet) to
Govern them all, by directing the exercise of them in lawful things to the
common good.

Q. 16. How far does the Law of Nature assure us of Gods rewards and
punishments?

A. As it assures us that perfect man owed God perfect Obedience, Trust and
Love, so it certifieth us, 1. That this performed must needs be acceptable to
God, and tend to the felicity of the Subject, seeing Gods Love is our Felicity.
2. And that sinning against Gods Law deserves Punishment. 3. And that
Governing Justice must make such a difference between the obedient and the
sinner, as the Ends of Government require. 4. And seeing that before man's
obedience or sin, God made man's Soul of a Nature not tending to its own
mortality, we have cause to expect that man's Rewards and Punishments should be
suitable to such immortal Souls. For though he can make Bruits immortal, and
can annihilate man's Soul or any Creature, yet we see that he keeps so close to
his Natural Establishments, that we have no reason to think that he will cross
them here, and annihilate Souls to shorten their Rewards or Punishments.

Q. 17. But does Nature tell us what kind of Rewards and Punishments men have?

A. The Faculties of the Soul being made in their Nature to know God in our
degree, to Love him, to please him, and to rest and rejoice herein, and this in
the society of wise and good and blessed joyful fellow Creatures, whom also our
Nature is made to Love; it follows that the Perfection of this Nature in
these Inclinations and Actions, is that which God did make our Natures for, to
be obtained by the obeying of his Laws.

And sin being the Injurious contempt and forsaking of God, and the most
hurtful malady of the Soul, and of Societies, and to others, it follows that
those that have finally forsaken God, be without the happiness of his Love, and
Glory, and under the sense of their sin and his displeasure; and that their own
sin will be their misery, as diseases are to the Body; and that the Societies
and Persons that by sin they injured or infected, will somewhat contribute to
their punishment. Happiness to the good, and Misery to the bad, the Light and
Law of Nature teaches man to expect: But all that I have taught you, is much
more surely and fully known by Supernatural Revelation.

CHAP. VI. Of Supernatural Revelation of Gods Will to Man, and of the Holy
Scriptures or Bible.
Q. 1. What do you call Supernatural Revelation?

A. All that Revelation of Gods mind to man which is made by him
extraordinarily, above what the common works of Nature do make known: Though
perhaps God may use in it some Natural second Causes in a way unknown to us.
Mat. 11. 27, 25. Luke 10. 22. Deu. 29. 29. Mat. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 10.


Q. 2. How many ways has God thus Revealed his will to man?

A. Many ways: 1. By some Voice and Signs of his presence, which we do not
well know what Creature he used to it, whether Angels, or only at present
caused that Voice and Glory. So he spoke to Adam and Eve, and the Serpent, and
to Moses in the Mount, and Tabernacle, and in the cleft of the Rock, Exodus 34.
And to Abraham, Jacob, etc. Ephesians. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 12. Dan. 2. 47, 22, 28, 29,
Am. 3. 7. Gal. 1. 12. and 2. 2.


2. By Angels certainly appearing as sent from God, and so he spoke to Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Lot, Moses, and to very many. Ephesians. 3. 3.


3. By Visions and Dreams in their Sleep, extraordinary. 1 Cor. 14. 6, 26. and


4. By the Vision of some Signs from Heaven in their waking: As Saul, Act. 9.
saw the Light that cast him down. 2 Cor. 12. 1, 7.


5. By Visions and Voices in an ecstasy: As Paul saw Paradise, and heard
unutterable things; whether in the Body or out of the Body he knew not. And its
like in such a rapture Daniel and John had their Revelations.

6. By Christ's own Voice, as he spoke to men on Earth and Paul from Heaven.

7. By the sight of Christ and Glory, as Stephen saw him.

8. By immediate Inspiration to the minds of Prophets.

9. By these Prophets sent as Messengers to others.

10. By certain uncontrolled Miracles.

11. By a convincing course of extraordinary works of Gods Providence: As when
an Angel killed the Armies of Enemies, or when they killed one another in one
night or day, etc.

12. By extraordinary works of God on the Souls of men: As when he suddenly
overcomes the strongest vicious habits and customs, and makes multitudes new
and holy persons by such improbable but assigned means, by which he promised to
do it.

Q. 3. These are all excellent things, if we were sure that they were not
deceived, nor did deceive: But how shall we be sure of that?

A. Its one thing to ask, How* they themselves were sure that they were not
deceived; and another thing to ask, How we are or others may be sure of it: As
to the first, they were sure as men are of other things which they see, hear,
feel, and think. I am sure by sense and intellectual Preception that I see the
light, that I hear, feel, think, etc. The Revelation comes to the person in
its own convincing Evidence, as Light does to the Eye. 1 I^. 1. 1, 2, 3.


Q. 4. They know what they see, hear, feel; but how were they sure that it was
of God, and not by some deceiving Cause?

A. 1. God himself gave them the Evidence of this also in the Revelation, that
it was from him and no deceit. But it is no more possible for any of us that
never had such a Revelation our selves, to know sensibly and formally what it
is, and how they knew it, than it is for a man born blind to know how other men
see, or what seeing is. 2. But moreover, they also were sure that it was of
God, by the proofs by which they make us sure of it: And this leads us up to
the other question. Heb. 2. 3, 4.


Q. 5. And a question of unspeakable moment it is, How we can be sure of such
prophetical Revelations delivered to us by others? viz, That they were not
deceived, nor deceive us?

A. It is of exceeding consequence indeed, and therefore deserves to be
understandingly considered and handled.

And here you must first consider the difference of Revelation. Some were but
made or sent by Prophets to some particular Persons about a personal particular
business, (as to Abraham that he should have a Son, that Sodom should be burnt;
to David, that his Son should be his punishment, his child die; to Hezekiah,
that he should recover, etc.) These none were bound to know and believe, but
the persons concerned to whom they were revealed and sent: (Till they were made
public afterward.) But some Revelations were made for whole Countries, and
some for all the World, and that as Gods Laws or Covenants, which Life and
Death depends on: And these must be accordingly made known to all.

Q. 6. I perceive then that before we further enquire of the Certainty, I
should first ask you of the Matter; what things they be that God has
supernaturally revealed to man, especially for us all?

A. The particular Revelations to and about particular men's matters, are many
of them recorded to us for our notice: But there may be thousands more in the
World, that we know not, nor are concerned to know: What Revelation God ever
made to any persons throughout the World (as what should befall them, when they
should die,) what Wars or Plagues or Famine should come, etc. little do we
know: But what is recorded by God we know.

2. But as for his Laws and Promises which we are all concerned to know, I
shall now but name and afterward open what God has Revealed.

I. He revealed to Adam besides the Law of Nature (which was perfecter and
clearer to him than it is now to us) a trying Prohibiton to eat of the Fruit of
the Tree of Knowledge, adding the Penalty of death to restrain him. Genesis 2. 16,
17. Genesis 3. 15.


II. He judged him after his Fall to some degree of Punishment, but declared
his pardoning Mercy, and promised Victory to and by the Woman's Seed in the War
which they now engaged in with Satan, the Serpent and his seed. And he
instituted Sacrificing to typifie the Means. Gen 4. 4. Genesis 9. 1, 2, to 8.


III. He renewed this Covenant with Noah after the Flood.

IV. He made a special Promise to Abraham, to be the God of his Seed, as a
Peculiar people chosen to him out of all the World; and that all Nations should
be blessed in his seed: And he instituted the Sacramant of Circumcision to be
the Seal and Symbol. Genesis 12. 2, 3. and 17. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.


V. When his Seed were multiplied in Egypt, he brought them out, and in
performance of this Promise made them a Holy Commonwealth as their Sovereign,
and gave them at large a Law and Sub-governours; which as Political was proper
to the people. Exodus 2. etc. 20. etc.


VI. In the fullness of time God sent his Son to reconcile man to God, to reveal
his Love and Will most fully, and to make and Seal the Covenant of Grace in its
last and best Edition, and as King to Rule and Judge the Redeemed, and
Sanctify, Justify and Glorify the Faithful. These are the public Laws and
Covenants Supernaturally revealed. Ioh. 1. and 3. 16. Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6. and 1.
4. Mat. 28. 19, 20.


Q. 7. Is it equally necessary to us to believe every word in the Bible? or is
every word equally certain to us?

A. All Truths are Truths, which is, to be equally True in themselves: And so
if by certainty you mean nothing but infallible Truth, every Truth is so
certain; and all Gods words are True: But if by [ certain] you mean that which
is so evident to us that we may our selves be fully certain of the Truth, so
the parts of Gods word have different degrees of Certainty. We suppose false
Translations and false Printings are none of Gods Word: Nor the Words of Satan
or fallible men recited in the Bible, save only the historical Assertion that
such words were spoken by them. But that which is Gods Word indeed, is none of
it so far void of proof, but that we may come to a certainty that it is true:
And if we had equal evidence that every word is Gods Word, we should have equal
Evidence that all is true. For that God cannot Lie, is the foundation Truth of
all our certainty. But God did not Reveal every Truth in the Bible with equal
evidencing attestation from Heaven. Some of them much more concern us than
others, and therefore were more fully sealed and attested. Heb. 7. 22. and 9.
15, 16, 17, 18. 9. 13. and 8. 10. and 10. 16. Matthew. 4.


Q. 8. How are we sure of the Law that was given to Adam, and that he sinned,
as is written, and had after a pardoning Law.

A. 1. The Law of Nature given him is yet Gods common Law to the World, saving
the strictness of it as a Condition of Life. 2. The fall of Man has too full
proof in all the pravity of Mankind from the Birth. 3. The Pardoning Act is
evident in the Execution, God gives all Men Mercy contrary to their deserts,
and uses none in the utmost rigor. 4. The notorious Enmity between Christ and
Satan, and their Seeds, through all Ages and Places of the World does prove the
Sentence, and the Law of Grace. 5. The universal Curse or Punishment on
Mankind, shows somewhat of the Cause. 6. The Tradition of Sacrificing was so
universally received over all the World, as confirms to us, that God
delivered it to Adam, as a Symbol and a Type of the Grace then promised. 7. But
our fullest proof of all that History, is that which after proved the Word that
revealed it to us. Psalm. 14. Romans 3. Psalm. 145.9. Act. 14. 17. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Romans
3.21, 23. Romans 4. 12.15, 16, 17. 2 Kings 10. 19. Acts 14. 13. 18. 1 Cor. 10. 20.


Q. 9. How are we certain that the Law of Moses was God's Law?

A. 1. By a Course of wonderful Miracles wrought to prepare them to receive it,
and to attest it. The Ten mavelous Plagues of Egypt; the Passage through the
Red Sea, the opening of the Rock to give them Water; feeding them with Manna,
raining twice Quails upon them, the sight of the flaming Mount, with the
terrible concomitants: The sight of the Pillar of Fire by Night, and Cloud by
Day, which conducted them: The sight of the Cloud and Symbol of God's presence
at the Door of the Tabernacle; the miraculous Destruction of the Rebellious,
even by the opening of the Earth, and the performance of God's Promises to
them. All these were full proofs that it was of God. 2. But we have yet fuller
proof in Christ's latter Testimony, which confirms all this to us.

Q. 10. These were full Proofs to those that saw them. But are we certain that
the Records of them in the Scripture are true?

A. 1. Consider that they were written by Moses to that very People who are
said to see them. Deuteronomy. 1. 31. and 3. 21, 22. and 4. 3. 9. and 5. 24. and 10.
21. and 11. 7. and 29. 3. Ios. 24. 7.
And if one should now write to us Englishmen, that God brought us out of
another Land by Ten such public Miracles, as the Frogs, the Flies, the Lice,
the Darkness, the Waters turned Blood, the Death of their Cattle, and of all
their first Born, that he opened the Sea and brought us through it on Foot,
that he opened Rocks, fed us with Manna, rained Quails for a Months food, spoke
from a flaming Mount, and opened the Earth to swallow up Rebels, etc. when we
know all this to be false, would not all Men deride and abhor the Reporter?
Would any of us receive a Law, and that of such operous, numerous, costly
Services, by the Motive of such a report as this?

2. Consider, that this Law so delivered was on this ground entertained, and
unchangeably kept by them from Generation to Generation, it being taken for an
heinous Crime to alter it in one word Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
.

3. Consider, that Practiced Sacramental Symbols from the first Day were so
uninterruptedly kept, as was a fuller proof of the Fact than the bare Writings.
1. All their Males from the Promise to Abraham, were constantly Circumcised
(save in the Wilderness Travels) and are to this Day. 2. From the very Night
that the Firstborn were killed in Egypt, and they driven hastily out; they
yearly continued the Eating of the Passover with unleavened Bread, as in a
hasting posture. 3. Since the Law given in the Wilderness, they constantly used
the Sacrifices, the Oblations, the Tabernacle, the Priesthood and Ceremonies as
that Law prescribed them. And the National constant use of these was an
ascertaining Tradition of the matters of Fact which were their cause. 4. Yea,
so tenacious were they of this Law, that (as they taught the very Syllables of
it to their Children, and kept in the Ark the very Tables of Stone that had the
Ten Commandments, so) they were Enemies to Christianity because the Christians
were against the Gentiles Observation of their Law, and for its abrogation.

4. Consider again, that the Matter of Fact, and the Divine Institution is
since made certain to us by Christ's Testimony.

Q. 11. But seeing this Law does not bind us now, nor the particular Messages
of the Prophets were sent to us, is it any of our Concern now to know or
believe them? It belonged to those that they were made for, and sent to; But
what are they to us?

A. There is not the same necessity to know them, and so to be such that they
were all of God, as there is to know and believe the Gospel: But it is greatly
our Duty and Concern to believe them; 1. Because they were preparatory to the
Gospel, and bore an antecedent Testimony to it. 2. Because the Gospel it self
bears witness of their Truth* which therefore if we believe it, we must
believe. 3. Because by the Holy Ghost's direction all now make up our Books of
Sacred Records, which is the certain Word of God, though not all of the same
Necessity and Evidence.

And here I must tell you a great and needful Truth, which ignorant Christians
fearing to confess, by overdoing tempt Men to Infidelity. The Scripture is like
a Man's Body, where some parts are but for the preservation of the rest, and may
be maimed without death: The Sense is the Soul of the Scripture, and the
Letters but the Body, or Vehicle. The Doctrine of the Creed, Lords Prayer, and
Decalogue, and Baptism, and Lords Supper, is the Vital part, and Christianity
it self. The Old Testament Letter (written as we have it about Ezras's time) is
that Vehicle which is as imperfect as the Revelation of those times was: But as
after Christ's Incarnation and Ascension, the Spirit was more abundantly given,
and the Revelation more perfect and Sealed, so the Doctrine is more full, and
the Vehicle or Body, that is, the Words are less imperfect, and more sure to
us; so that he that doubts of the Truth of some Words in the Old Testament,
or of some small Circumstantials in the New, has no reason therefore to doubt
of the Christian Religion, of which these Writings are but the Vehicle or Body,
sufficient to ascertain us of the Truth of the History and Doctrine. Be sure
first that Christ is the very Son of God, and it infers the certainty of all
his Words, and enforces our whole Religion.

Q. 12. I perceive then that our main Question is, both as to Necessity and
Evidence, How we are sure that the Gospel is true? and the Records of it the
very Word of God?

A. It is so: And as it is this that must Rule and Judge the Church, so we have
to us fuller proof of this than of the Old Testament: Because that the
narrowness of the Jews Country in comparison of the Christian World, and the
many Thousand Years distance, and a Language whose Phrase and Proverbial
speeches, and the very sense of the common words of it, must needs make it more
unknown to us than the Language that the Gospel is Recorded in. And it is not
the least proof of the Truth of the Old Testament, that it is attested and
confirmed by the New.

Q. 13. Will you first tell me, How the Apostles and that first Age were sure
that the Gospel of Christ was the very Word of God?

A. Here I must first tell you that the great Mystery of the Blessed Trinity,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, being One God, is made necessary to us to be
believed, not only as to the Eternal unsearchable Inexistence, but specially
for the Knowledge of Gods three great sorts of Works on Man: That is, As our
Creator, and the God of Nature; as our Redeemer, and the God of Governing and
and reconciling Grace; and as our Sanctifier, and the Applyer and Perfecter of
all to fit us for Glory. And so the Son as Redeemer, is the way to the Father,
(to know him and his Love, and be reconciled to him:) And the Holy Ghost is the
Witness of the Son. The proof therefore of the Gospel of Christ in one word is
the Holy Ghost; that is, the certain Testimony of God's Spirit. And this
Testimony consists of these several parts: I. The foregoing Testimony of the
Spirit by all the Prophesies of the Old Testament, and the Typical
Prefigurations; which became a fuller proof than before, when they were seen
all to be fulfilled in Christ: Yet many were fulfilled before. When Abraham had
no Child, he was promised the Multiplication of his Seed, and that all Nations
should be blessed therein, Genesis 12. 2. and 13. 16. and 15. 5. and 17. 2. and
18. 11, 12. The 400 Years of their abode in Egypt and Canaan before were
foretold and punctually fulfilled, Genesis 15. 13, 14. Ex. 12. 31, 32. So was
Jacob's Prophecy of Judah's Scepter, Genesis 42. 8, 9, 10. And Ioseph's dreams:
And verily Balaams last Prophecy was mavelous; who when he had blessed
Israel and foretold their Victories, foretold also the Scepter of David and
Christ, and the success of the Assyrians, and after that of Chittim against the
Hebrews themselves, Numb. 24. And who sees not the fulfilling of the terrible
Prophecy of Moses against the Jews, Deuteronomy. 31? Josiah by Name, and his Deeds
were foretold 300 Years before he was Born, 1 Kings 13. 2. 2 Kings. 23. 15. Often
was the Captivity of the Jews foretold; and the destruction of Babylon, and the
Jews return by Cyrus named long before he was Born, and the very time foretold*
From the beginning Christ was promised, and the circumstances of his coming
foretold, Genesis 3. 15. and 26. 4. and 49. 10. Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Psalm. 2. and 27. and
89. and 110. Isa. 53. and 11. 1. Ier. 33. 15. Mic. 5. 2. That he should be Born
of a Virgin, Isa. 7. 14. in Bethlem, Mic. 5. 2. and then the Infants killed,
Ier. 31. 15* that he should come into the Temple as the Angel of the Covenant
whom they desired, but they should not endure therein when he came, because he
came as a Refiner, Mal. 3. 1. 3. That he should go into Egypt, and return
thence, Isa. 19. 1. Hos. 11. 1. That One should go before him to prepare the
way, Mal. 3. 1. That he should do wonders for the People, Isa. 35. 5. That a
familiar should betray him, and that for Thirty pieces of Silver, Psalm. 41. 9.
and 55. 13, 14. Zech. 11, 12, 13, and a Potters Field be bought with them; all
his Persecution, and abuse, and Sufferings are foretold, Isa. 50. 6. and 53.
Psa. 69. 21. and 22. 18. and 118. 22. Isa. 6. 9. even ^o the Circumstances of
giving him Vinegar, casting Lots for his Garments, suffering as a Malefactor:
Yea the very time is foretold, Dan. 9. 25, 26. And that then the second Temple
should be destroyed.

II. The second part of the Spirits Testimony, or the certain proof of
Christian Truth is, The Inherent constitutive Proof or Testimony in the
unimitable Excellency of the Person and Gospel of Christ; which is the Image
and superscription of God. The Person of Christ was of such excellency of
Wisdom, Goodness and power, apparent in his Doctrine, Works and Patience, all
sinless, and full of Holy Love to God and Man, as is not consistent with being
the Deceiver of the World. His Gospel in the very Constitution of it, has the
impress of God. He that has the Spirit of God, will find that in the Gospel
which is so suitable to the Divine Nature, as will make it the easier to him to
believe it. Angels preached the Sum of it, Luke 2. 14. It is all but the
fore-promised and prefigured Redemption of Man Historically delivered, and the
Doctrine, Col. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Prove. 30. 5. Heb. 4. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 23. 1
Ioh. 2. 14. Ioh. 8. 48. and 12. 48. and 14. 25. and 15. 3. Act. 14. 3. and 20.
32. Romans 10. 8. Ephesians. 5. 26. Phil. 2. 16. 1 These. 1. 5. James 1. 2. Matt. 12.
26. Mar. 4. 15. Luke 10. 18. Act. 26. 18. Romans 16. 20. Rev. 20. 2, 3.
Laws and Promises of saving Grace most fully promulgated: It is the wonderful
Revelation of the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, the Truth* Justice, and Holiness
of God, especially his Love to Man; and of his mavelous design for the
recovery, Sanctifying and saving of Sinners, and removing all the impediments
of their Repentance and Salvation: It is so wholly fitted to the Glorifying of
God, and the reparation of depraved Nature, and the purifying and perfecting of
Man's Soul, to the guidance of Men's Lives in the ways of true Wisdom,
Godliness, Righteousness, Soberness, Mutual Love and Peace, that Men may live
profitably to others, and live and die in the Sense of God's Love, and in a
safe and comfortable State; that we may be sure so good a thing had a good
Cause. For had it been the device of Men, they must have been very bad Men that
would put Gods Name to it, and tell so many Lies from Generation to Genration,
to deceive the World: And it is not to be imagined, that from Moses time to the
writing of John's Revelations, there should arise a Succession of Men of such a
strange, self-contradicting Constitution as should be so good as to devise the
the most Holy, and Righteous, and Self-denying Doctrines, for the great good of
Mankind, and yet all of them so odiously wicked as to belie God, and deceive
Men, and do all this good in so bad a manner, with so bad a Heart.

And if any Blasphemer would Father it upon evil Spirits, what a Contradiction
would he speak. As if Satan would promote the greatest good, for the Honor of
God and Benefit of Man, while he is the greatest Hater of God and Man. And as
if he would devise a Doctrine to reproach himself, and destroy his own Kingdom,
and bless Mankind; and so were at once the best and the worst.

Indeed the Holy Scriptures do bear the very Image and Superscription of God in
their Ends, Matter and Manner, and prove themselves to be his Word: For God
has not given us external proofs that such a Book or Doctrine is his, which is
it self no better than humane Works, and has no intrinsic proof of its Divine
Original: 2 Pet. 1. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Matt. 5. 16. 44, 45.
But the intrinsic and extrinsick Evidences concur. What Book like the
Sacred Scriptures has taught the World the Knowledge of God, the Creation of
the World, the End and Hope and Felicity of Man? What the heavenly Glory is,
and how procured, and how to be obtained, and by whom? How man became sinful
and miserable? And how he is recovered? And what wonders of Love God has shown
to Sinners, to win their Hearts in Love to him? What Book has so taught Men to
live by Faith and the hopes of Glory, above all the Lusts of Sense and Flesh,
and to referr all things in this World to Spiritual, Holy and Heavenly Ends;
to Love others as our selves, and to do good to all, even to our Enemies; to
live in such Union and Communion and Peace, as is caused by this Vital Grace of
Love, and not like a Heap of Sand that every spurn or blast of cross Interest
will separate? What Book so teaches Man to Love God above all, and to pray to
him, praise him, and absolutely obey him with constant pleasure, and to trust
him absolutely with Soul, Body and Estate; and cast all our care upon him; and
in a word, to converse in Heaven while we are on Earth; and to live as Saints,
that we may live as Angels? Ioh. 3. 3. 5. Tit. 2. 14 1 Pet. 2. 9. Romans 8. 9.
Matt. 5. 20. Heb. 12. 14. Matt. 18. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Romans 8. 14.


Q. 14. But how few be there that do all this?

A. 1. I shall further answer that anon: None do it in Perfection, but all
found Christians do it in Sincerity. 2. But at present, it is the perfection of
the Doctrine of Christ, and of the Sacred Scriptures that I am proving: And it
is not Men's breaking the Law, that will prove that God made it not.

Q. 15. You have told me of the foregoing Testimony of the Spirit to Christ and
the Gospel, and of the Inherent Constitutive Testimony or Proof: Is there any
other?

A. Yes, III. There is the Concomitant Testimony, by the Works of Christ:
Nicodemus could say, We know that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no Man
can do the Works that thou do, except God were with him, Joh. 3. 2. He
cleansed the Lepers with his word, he cast out Devils, he healed the Lame, the
Deaf, the Blind, yea that were born Blind; he healed Palsies, Fevers, and all
manner of sicknesses with a touch, or a word* he turned Water into Wine, he fed
twice many Thousands by Miracle, he walked on the Sea, and made Peter do the
same, the Winds and Sea obeyed his Command; he raised the Dead: This course of
Miracles were the most evident Testimony of God.

And he was brought into the World by Miracle: Born of a Virgin: Foretold and
Named Jesus by an Angel: Preached to Shepherds by Angels from Heaven; a Star
conducting the Eastern Wisemen to the place; John his foregoer named by an
Angel, and Zacharias struck dumb for not believing it: Prophesied of by Anna
and Simeon; owned at his Baptism by the visible descent of the Spirit in the
shape of a Dove, and by a Voice of God from Heaven, and the like again at his
Transfiguration, when Moses and Elias appeared with him, and he did shine in
Glory: And at his Death the Earth trembled, the Sun was obscured, and the Air
darkened, and the Vail of the Temple rent: But the fullest Evidence was Christ's
own Resurrection from the Dead, his often appearing to his Disciples after, and
conversing with them at times for Forty Days, and giving them their
Commission, and promising them the Spirit, and ascending into Heaven in their
sight. And all this was the fuller Testimony, in that he had often over and over
foretold them of it, that he must be put to death and rise again the Third day,
before he entered into his Glory: and the Jews knew it, and were not able to
prevent it, Angels terrifying the Soldiers on the Watch.: Yea the Disciples
understood it not, and therefore believed it not, and Peter dissuaded him from
such talk of his Sufferings, till Christ called him Satan (doing like Satan
that had tempted him, when he faste^ Forty days:) to show that the Disciples
were no contrivers of a deceit herein.

Q. 16. Is there yet any further witness of the Holy Ghost?

A. Yes, IV. There was the Consequent Testimony of the Spirit by the Apostles,
and other first publishers of the Gospel: Christ bid them wait at Jerusalem for
this Gift, and promised them that when he was ascended, he would send that
Paraclete, Advocate or Comforter, that should be better than his visible
presence, and should lead them into all Truth, and bring all things to their
remembrance, and teach them what to say; that is, to Enable them to perform the
work to which he had Commissioned them, which was to go into all the World, and
preach the Gospel, and Disciple the Nations, Baptizing them, and teaching them
to observe all things that he had commanded them; which they performed partly
by word, and partly by writing, and partly by practice, Baptizing, gathering
Churches, establishing Offices and Officers: And he promised to be with them to
the end of the World; that is, with their Persons for their time, and with
their Doctrine, ordinary Successors, and the whole Church ever after. ( r)

On the Day of Pentecost, even the Lords Day, when they were assembled, this
Promise was so far performed to them, that the Holy Ghost suddenly (q) Ioh. 16.
Act. 2. Matt. 28. 20. The whole Book of the Acts of the Apostles is the History
of these Miracles. Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Ioh. 7. 3. 9. Romans 1. 4. 1 Cor. 12. 4,
7, 8, 9, 11, 13.
fell on all the Assembly, in the likeness of fiery cloven Tongues, after the
noise as of a rushing Wind, and they were filled with the Spirit, and spoke in
the Tongues of all the Countries near them, the Praises and wondrous works of
God. After which they were endued with the various miraculous Gifts of the
Spirit; that is, the use of the Tongues which they had never learnt; the
Interpretation of them, Prophesying, Miracles, healing all Diseases, insomuch
that those that came but under the shadow of Peter, and those that had but
Clothes from the Body of Paul, were all healed; the Lame and Blind cured,
Devils cast out, the dead raised, some Enemies struck blind, some sinners
struck dead; and which was yet greater, by their Preaching, or Praying, or
laying on of Hands, God gave the same miraculous gift of the Spirit to others;
and that not to a few, but ordinarily to the faithful, some having one such
Gift, and some another.

And as Christ had promised that when he was lifted up, he would draw all Men
to him, so he blessed the labors of the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists
accordingly; many Thousands being converted at a Sermon, and multitudes still
added to the Church. And when the Preachers were forbidden and imprisoned,
Christ strengthened them, and Angels miraculously delivered them. When Peter
was in Prison designed for Death, the Angel of God loosed his Bolts, and opened
the Doors, and led him forth. When Paul and Silas had been Scourged and were in
the Stocks in the Prison, an Earth quake sets them free, and prepares for the
Conversion of the Jailer and his House. And Christ himself had before appeared
to Paul in glory when he was going on in Persecution, and struck him down in
blindness, and preached to him with a Voice from Heaven, and converted him, and
sent him as his Apostle into the World. By these Miracles was the World
Converted.

And as Christ had promised them that they should Greater Works than those
which he himself did, so indeed their Miracles did more to Convert the World
than the Works of Christ in Person had done. For, 1. Those which were wrought
by One Man would leave suspicious Men more doubtful of the Truth, than that
which is done by many, at a distance from each other, and in several places. 2.
And that which was done but in one small Country would be more doubted of,
than that which is done in much of the World. Sometimes indeed Thousands, but
usually Twelve Men were the Witnesses of what Christ said and did: But what
these Witnesses said and did to prove their Testimony, Thousands in many Lands
did see and hear.

Q. 17. But why was it that Christ forbad some to declare that he was the
Christ?

A. Because the time was not come, till the Evidences were given by which it
must be proved: It was not a matter to be rashly believed, and taken upon the
bare word of himself or any other: That a Man living in a mean Condition was
the Son of God, and Savior, and Lord and Teacher of the World, and the Judge
of all Men, was not to be believed without good proof: And the Chief proof was
to be from all Christ's own Miracles, and his Resurrection, and Ascension, and
the great gift of the Holy Ghost, and Tongues and Miracles of the Apostles and
other Disciples: And these were not all done or given then: Yet because the
Jews received Moses and the Prophets, he sometimes showed how they Prophesied
of him: Yea, his very Doctrine, whose frame had a self-evidencing Light, was
not fully revealed till it was done by the Spirit in the Apostles. Luke 4. 22.
and 24. 27. 32. 45. Ioh. 5. 39. Act. 17. 2. 11. and 18. 28. Romans 1. 2. and 16.
26. 1 Cor. 15. 3. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. Heb. 2. 3, 4. Romans 3. 4. Ioh. 3. 2. 1
Ioh. 5. 10. Tit. 2. 2.


Q. 18. But though all these Miracles were wrought, how could it be certain
that they were the attestation of God, when it is said that Magicians, false
Prophets and Antichrist may do such things?

A. 1. I shall first mind you, that though we were never so uncertain of the
Nature of a Miracle, whether it be wrought by any Created Cause, yet we are
agreed that by Miracles, we mean such works which are wrought quite out of and
against the common Course of Second Causes, called Nature: And we are sure that
as no work can be done without Gods premotion or permission at least, so
specially the Course of Nature cannot be altered and overruled but by Gods
Knowledge, Consent and Execution; what ever Second Cause unknown to us may be
in it, certainly God is the first Cause.

2. And it is most certain that the Most perfect Governor of the World, is not
the great Deceiver of the World, and is not so wanting in Power, Wisdom and
Goodness as to Rule them by a Lie; yea, and an unresistible and remediless
deceit: This is rather the description of Satan.

3. And Man must know the will of God by some signs or other, or else he cannot
do it: And what signs can the Wit of Man devise, by which they that would fain
know the will of God, may come to be certain of it, if such a Course of
Miracles may deceive us? Would you believe if some came from the dead as
Witnesses? Or if an Angel or many Angels came from Heaven? All these could give
you no more certainty than such Miracles may do. 2 Cor. 11. 4. Mark 16. 17.
Exodus 4. 5. 8. and 19. 9.


4. And you must note, that the proof of Miracles lies not on this, that
Angels, or other Spirits, or Second Causes can do no such things, but that they
cannot do it without God, and that God will not do it to confirm a Lie, or any
thing which he would not have Man believe: For then either Man must believe
nothing sent from God, though it were by an Host of Angels, or else he must
say, I am unavoidably deceived by God himself; for I have no possible means
left to know the Fallacy.

5. Therefore you must note, that whenever God permits a Magician or false
Prophet to do any wonder or unusual thing, he never leaves Man without a
remedy against the Deceit, but does control^ and confute the Words of the
Deceiver: And usually he does it but first to try the Faith and steadfastness
of Men, and then to bring Truth into the clearer light. And he controlleth
false Miracles these ways.

1. He seals up the Truth which the Deceiver denies, with a stream of most
unquestionable Miracles; and so shows us that it cannot be a Truth and of God
which is said against such Sealed Verity, while all his Miracles confute
theirs. 2. Or if it be a Truth known to Man by the Common Light of Nature, that
Light confuteth the Pretenders Miracle. 3. If he do it to confirm a false
Prediction, it is confuted by the thing not coming to pass. 4. In the case of
Egyptian Act. 8. Simon Magus's Case.
Magicians wonders, God permitted them that his power might triumph over them,
and confute them; As he may permit a Sophister to talk against the Truth, that
he may be silenced and shamed. In none of all this does God become the Worlds
deceiver. But the Miracles of Christ, and his Apo^^les and Disciples, were
never controlled by the Light of Nature, by more prevalent Miracles, or any
such means; but were the fullest Signification of Gods attestation that Man can
have to save him from Deceit.

Q. 19. I confess if I had seen all these things my self, I should have made no
doubt, but God and Reason bound me to believe: But how can we at this distance
be sure that all these words of Christ were spoken, and these works done?

A. Let us first consider how they were sure of it that lived in that Age with
the Apostles, and then how we may be also sure. And ^. That Age, 1. Had the
common Evidences of the best credibility of Men. 2. They had most infa^lible
perception of it by their Senses; and 3. They had an immediate Testimony from
God themselves. Of these let us consider in order.

Q. 20. 1. What credible humane Testimony do you mean they had?

A. It is supposed that some Persons are to be believed much above others; Io.
19. 35. and 20. 31. 1 Io. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 6.
else all humane trust and conversation would cease. He that will believe no
Body, cannot expect to be himself believed.

And, 1. The Witnesses of Christ's words and works were not strangers to him,
that took it by report, but those that had accompanied him, and heard and seen
them.

2. They spoke to Men of the same Generation, Time and Country, and mentioned
things done before Multitudes of Spectators; so that had it been a false
report, it had been most easy to confute it, and turn it all as a Lie unto
their scorn.

3. They sharply reproved the Rulers and Teachers for rejecting Christ, and
provoked all their rage against them: So that no doubt they would do their best
to have searched out all deceit in the Reprovers.

4. They were Men of no Carnal Interest, to tempt them into a deceiving Plot;
but were foretold that they must be hated, persecuted and killed for their
Testimony.

5. They were purposely Chosen from among the meaner Unlearned sort, that there
might be no Suspicion that it was a Work of carnal Craf^ or Power.

6. Though they heard and saw, so far were they from plotting it, that they
understood it not themselves, nor believed that Christ must Die for Sin, Rise
the Third Day, and Ascend into Heaven, and gather a Catholic Church, and Reign
Spiritually; till the time that Christ was Risen, and the Holy Ghost came down
upon them. And yet Christ over and over foretold it them.

They taught not one another, nor came to it by Study and Degrees; but (in the
main) by su^dain common inspiration, and such as Christ had before promised
them. Gal. 1. and 2.


8. Paul was called by a Glory and a Voice of Christ from Heaven, in the sight
of other persecuting company.

9. Their Testimony all agreed, and they all spoke the same Truth.

10. Their Enemies never wrote a Confutation of them, nor decryed most of the
matters of Fact, but imputed it to Beelz^bub.

11. None of them ever repented of his Testimony: Whereas, had they
confederated to deceive the World, some ones Conscience living or dying would
sure have forced him to confess it.

12. Yea they sealed it with their great Labor, Sufferings, and Blood.

13. When false Teachers turned some of their Followers to Heresies, and to
forsake them, they still appealed for the matters of Fact, even to those
Dissenters or opposers. Gal. 3. 3. 5.


14. Their Doctrine by its fore-described Light and Goodness testified of it
self that it was of God: And that those Men that at so dear a rate divulged it,
in design to Sanctify and Save Mankind, were no such wicked Knaves as to Plot
the Worlds Delusion. These were evidences of more than humane credibility.

II. And the Disciples in Judea heard and saw Christ and his Miracles, and so
had as much certainty of the matter of Fact, as sense could give them.

III. And they had Gods Immediate Testimony in themselves; even his Spirits
internal Revelation, Illumination and Sanctifying Work: And the wonderful Gifts
of Healing, Tongues, Miracles, by which they convinced others.

Q. 21. Proceed to show me how their Followers were certain?

A. 1. They were Persons present, and therefore their Senses assured them, what
was said and done: They were the Men that heard the use of Languages given by
Inspiration; that heard the Triumphant Praises of God; that saw them that were
miraculously healed, and some raised from the Dead; could those doubt of the
Miracles, that saw the Lame Man that begged at the Temple cured by Peter and
John; and that saw Multitudes Cured by the very Shadow and Clothes of the
Apostles; when they that saw the Lame Man healed, Act. 14. would have
Sacrificed to Paul and Barnabas as gods? Act. 2. and 3. and 4.


2. They kept constant Church-meetings; and the use of Languages and other
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit were the ordinary Exercises of those
Assemblies; so that they could not be unknown. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor. 12. Rev. 1. 9,
10.


3. It was not a few Apostles only that had this extraordinary Spirit, but in
one sort or other the generality of the Persons converted by them: Sometime as
the Apostles were Preaching, the Spirit came upon the Hearers, as it did on
Cornelius and his Assembly, Act. 10. Usually by the laying on of the Apostles
Hands the Holy Ghost was given: And this not only to the sincere Christians,
but to some unsound Ones that sell away: All that did Miracles in Christ's
Name, were not saved.

4. Yea those that accused Christ as casting out Devils by Devils, might have
seen their own Children cast them out, Matt. 12. And those that were seduced,
and quarrelled with the Apostles, could not deny but they themselves had
received the Spirit by their Preaching: Paul appealeth to themselves when the
Galatians were perverted, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. O foolish* Galatians! who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth, before whose Eyes Jesus
Christ has been evidently set forth Crucified among you? This only would I
learn of you; Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing
of Faith? Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the Flesh? He that ministers to you the Spirit, and works
Miracles among you, does he it by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith?

If these Galatians had not the Spirit, and such as work't Miracles among them,
would not this Argument have turned to Paul's reproach, rather than to their
Conviction? Even Simon Magus was so convinced by the Spirit falling on the
Samaritans, that he was Baptized, and would have bought the Power of giving the
Holy Ghost with Money, Act. 8. Their Sense convinced them: And they that had
the Spirit themselves, must needs be sure of it*

Q. 22. Now tell me how We may be certain that all this History is true, and
that these things are not misreported by the Scripture?

A. I will speak first of the Gospel as such, and then of the Book.

I. You must first know that the Gospel in the strict ^e^ce, is the History and
Doctrine of Christ, necessary to be believed to our Salvation; which is
summarily contained in the Baptismal Covenant; For men were Christians when
they were Baptized; and they were not adult Christians till they believed the
Gospel.

2. You must know, that this Gospel was long preached and believed before it
was written: St. Matthew began and wrote eight years after Christ's
Resurrection, and the Revelation of St. John was written about ninety four
years after Christ's Birth: Luke's Gospel about fifty, and Marks about fifty
nine, and St. John's about Ninety nine from the Birth of Christ. Mar. 16. 20.
Act. 6. 8. and 8. 6. 13. and 15. 12. and 19. 11. and 4. 16. 22.


3. You must know, that all the foresaid Miracles were wrought to confirm this
Gospel preached before it was written.

4. And that while the Apostles lived their Preaching had as much Authority as
their Writing: But they being to die, were moved by the Spirit to write that
they had preached, that it might be certainly without Change delivered to
Posterity to the end of the World; For had it been left only to the Memory of
man, it would soon have been variously reported and corrupted.

5. And you must know, that this Scripture is so far from being insufficient as
to the Matter of our Faith, as that it contains not only the Essentials, but
the Integrals and useful Accidents of the Gospel; as a complete Body has every
part, and the very Ornament of Hair and Color. So that a man may be a
Christian that knows not many hundred words in the Scripture, but not unless
he know and believe the Essentials of the Gospel.

6. And you must note therefore, that the foresaid Miracles were wrought
primarily to confirm the Gospel, and that they do confirm all the Accidental
passages in the Bible but by Consequence, because the same Persons by the same
Spirit wrote them.

Q. 23. Proceed now to show me the Proof which you promised.

A. 1. That there have been from that time Christians in the World, is past all
doubt, acknowledged by the History of their Enemies that persecu^ed them. And
all these Christians were Baptized; for Baptism was their solemn Christening.
And every one that was Baptized (at age) did openly profess to receive this
same Gospel; even to Believe in God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost,
renouncing the Devil, the Lusts of the Flesh, and the Vanities of the World.
The Acts of the Historical Tradition of the G^^^el.


2. Yea all that were Baptized were before taught this Gospel, by Teachers or
Catechizers, who had all but one Gospel, one Faith and Baptism.

3. And they were all tried how they understood the foresaid General words; and
therefore they were opened in more words, which we call the CREED; which in
Substance and Sense was still the ^ame, though two or three words be added
since the first forming of it. So that every Christian being instructed by the
Gospel, and professing the Essence of it in the Creed and Baptism, we have as
many Witnesses that this Gospel was then delivered, as there have been
Christians.

4. And no man doubts but there have been Ministers as long: And what was a
Minister but a Preacher, of this same Gospel, and a Baptizer and Guide of them
that Believe it?

5. And none can doubt but there have been Christian Ass^mblies from that time:
And what were those Assemblies, but for the preaching, professing and
practicing this Gospel?

6. And none doubts but they celebrated the Lords Supper in those Assemblies:
And the Celebration of that Sacrament contains practically the profession of
all the Gospel of Christ.

7. And none can doubt but that the Lords day has ever since been constantly
kept by Christians in commemoration of Christ's Resurrection, and in the
performance of the foresaid Exercises: And therefore the very use of that day
assures us that the Gospel has been certainly delivered us.

8. And all grant that these Churches had still the use of Discipline, which
was the censuring of such as corrupted this Sacred Doctrine by Heresy, or
sinned against it by wicked Lives. And this could not have been, if the Gospel
had not been then received by them.

9. Yea the Numbers and Opinions of Heretics then, are left on Record: And
they tell us what the Gospel then was, by telling us wherein they departed from
it.

10. Yea the History of the Persecutors and Enemies, tell us that this Gospel
was then extant which they persecuted.

11. The Old Testament was long before in the common possess on and use of the
Jews: They read it every Sabbath day: And in that we see Christ foretold, and
abundance of Prophecies which in him are since fulfilled.

12. Lastly, the Sacred Scriptures, which contain all that God thought needful
to be transmitted to Posterity for History and Doctrine, have been most
certainly kept and delivered to us; so sure and full is our Tradition.

Q. 24. That Christianity has been propagated none can doubt: But how are we
sure that those Christians of the first age did indeed see, or believe that
they saw and heard those Miracles?

A. 1. To be a Christian was to be one that believed them. It was half their
belief in Christ, and in the Holy Ghost, and so the very Essence of
Christianity to believe that Christ wrought his Miracles and rose again, and
that the Apostles by the Holy Spirit did work theirs, and that Believers
received the Spirit by their Ministry.

2. They had not been made Christians but by these Miracles: They all professed
that it was the Gifts of the Spirit that Convinced and Converted them.

3. All the forementioned Professions of their Christianity contained a
Profession that they believed these Miracles. As the use of the Lords day,
Baptism, the Eucharist, showed their Belief of Christ's Life, Death and
Resurrection.

4. They suffered Persecution and Martyrdom in the Profession of that Belief.

5. They pleaded these Miracles in all their Defenses against their Adversaries.

6. The Writings of their Adversaries commonly acknowledge this Plea, yea and
deny not the most of the Miracles themselves.

7. But most fully their receiving the Sacred Scriptures as the Word of God, as
indicted by the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, shows that they believed the
Miracles recorded in that Book.

Q. 25. You are come up to the last part of the Doubt in the History, How are
we sure that these Christians then commonly believed the Book as now we have
it, and that it is the very same?

A. We have for this, full, infallible, historical Proof (premising that some
parcels of the Book (the Revelations, the Epistle of Jude, the Second of Peter,
the Epistle to the Hebrews, and that of James) were longer unknown to some
particular Churches than the rest.)

1. The constancy of Christian Assemblies and public Worship is a full proof,
seeing that the Reading, Expounding and applying of these Books, was a great
part of their public work, as all History of Friends and Enemies agree.

2. The very Office of the Ministry is full proof, which lay most in reading,
expounding and applying these same Books. And therefore they were as much by
Office concerned to keep them, as Judges and Lawyers are to keep the
Statute-book.

3. These Ministers and Churches which so used this Book, were dispersed over a
great part of the World: If therefore they had changed it by adding or
diminishing, they must have done it by Confederacy, or by single men's error or
abuse. It was impossible that all Countries should agree in such a Confederacy,
but the meeting, motives and treaties would have been known: But no History of
Friend or Foe has any such thing, but the clean contrary: And that it should
be done by all single Persons in the Christian World, agreeing by chance in the
same Changes, is a m^d supposition.

4. And it is the belief of all Christians, that it ^s a damnable Sin to add or
alter in this Book: And the Book it self so concludes: Therefore if ^ome had
agreed so to do, the rest would have detected and decryed it. 5. They took this
Book ^o be the Charter for their Salvation. And therefore would never agree to
alter it; when Men keep the Deeds, Evidences, Leases and Charters of their
Estates, and Worldly Privileges unaltered.

6. When a few Heretics rose up that forged some new Books, as Apostolical,
and rejected some that were such indeed; the Christian Churches condemned and
rejected them, and appealed to the Churches that had received the Apostles own
Epistles and kept them.

7. The many Heresies that rose up did so divide Men, and set them in cross
Interests and Jealousies against each other, that it was impossible for any one
Sect to have altered the Scripture, but the rest would have fallen upon them
with the loudest Accusations. But all sorts of Adversaries are agreed that
these are the same Books.

And though the weakness and negligence of Scribes have made many little Words
uncertain, (for God promised not infallibility to every Scribe or Printer) yet
these are not such as alter any Article of Faith or Practice, but show that no
Corruption has been designedly made, but that the Book is the same.

For instance, Let it be questioned* Whether our Statute-Book contained really
the same Statutes that are there pretended? And you will see that the
Historical certainty amounts even to a natural certainty, the contrary being
a mere impossibility: For, 1. They are the Kings Laws, and the King would not
bear a fraudulent alteration. 2. Parliaments would not bear it. 3. Judges that
successively judge by these Laws would soon discover it. 4. So would all
Justices and Magistrates. 5. Men's Lives and Estates are held by them, and
therefore Multitudes would decry the Fraud. 6. Enemies have daily Suits which
are tried by these Laws, and each Party pleads them for himself, and their
Advocates and Lawyers plead them against each other, and would soon detect the
Forgery. So that to suppose such a Change, is, 1. To suppose an Effect that
has no Cause in Nature. 2. And that is against a stream of Causes Moral and
Natural, and so impossible.

And to ^eign such forgeries in the Book that all Christians have taken for
Gods Laws, is just such another Case, and somewhat beyond it. That is but Moral
Evidence which depends only on Men's Honesty, or any free unnecessary acts of
Man's will. But Man's will has also of Natural Necessity, such as the Love of
our selves, and our felicity, etc. And it is a Natural Impossibility that all
Men or many should agree in a Lie, which is against these Acts of Natural
necessity. But so they must do, if all Men of cross Interests, Principles and
Dispositions should knowingly agree; c. g. That all our Statutes are
counterseit, that there is no such place as Rome, Paris, or other such l^^s.
And so the Gospel History has such Testimony of necessary Truth.

Q. 26. You have made the Case plainer to me than I thought it had been: But
you yet seem to intimate that some Words, yea, some Books of Scripture have not
the same Evidence a^ the rest: can a man be saved that Believes not all the
Scripture?

A. All Truth is equally True; and so is all Gods Word: But all is not equally
Evident: He that takes any Word to be Gods Word, and yet to be false,
believes nothing as Gods Word: For he has not the ^ormal essentiating Act and
Object of Faith. If God could lie, we had no certainty of Faith: But he that
erroneously thinks that this or that word, yea, Epistle, or Text, or Book in
the Bible is not Gods, but came in by mistake, may be saved, if he believe that
which contains the Essentials of Christianity: A lame Faith may be a saving
Faith. And he may see how Miracles sealed the Gospel, that cannot see how they
sealed every Book, Text or Word in the Bible. Romans 14. and 15.


Q. 27. Though we have been long on this, it is of so great importance to us
living or dying, to be sure of the Foundations of our Faith, that I will yet
ask you, Have you any more Proof?

A. I have told you of four Proofs already: I. The Antecedent Testimony of the
Spirit in the Old Testament. II. The Inherent Constitutive Testimony in Christ
and the Gospel. III. The concomitant Testimony of Miracles. IV. The consequent
Testimony of the Spirit to and by the Apostles Miracles and Gifts. But there is
yet that behind which to us is of the greatest moment; and that is,

V. The Sanctifying Testimony of the Holy Spirit in all true Christians, in all
Ages and Places o^ the Earth. Romans 3. 10, 11, 12.


Here you must remember, 1. That the common experience of the World assures
us, that Man's Nature is greatly vitiated, inclined to known evi^ for some
inferior good, and averse to the greatest good by the prevalency of the
lesser; hardly brought to necessary knowledge, and more hardly to the Love,
Delight and Practice of that which is certainly the best. And that hence the
World is kept in confusion and misery by Sin. Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Io. 12.
39, 40. Act. 28. 26, 27.


2. Experience assures us that there is no hope of any great Cure of this, by
the common helps of Nature and humane Reason: For it is that Reason that is
diseased, and blinded, and therefore unapt to cure it self, as an In^ant or
Fool is to teach himself. And as Philosophers are a small part of the World
(for few will be at the cost of getting such knowledge) so they are woefully
Dark themselves in the greatest things, and of a Multitude of Sects,
contradicting one another, and few of them have Hearts and Lives that are
answerable to that which they teach others; and the wisest confess that they
must expect few Approvers, much less Followers* And every Man's own experience
tells him, how hard it is to Inform the Judgment about Holy things, and to
conform the Will to them, and to Reform the life to a Holy and Heavenly State.
Luke 18. 34. 1 Cor. 13. 11. Isa. 17. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Ier. 13. 23.


3. The Multitude of Temptations makes this the more difficult, and so does the
nature of a vicious habit, and the privation of a good one; the self-defending
and propagating Nature of Sin, and the experience of the World, tells us how
wicked the World is, and how little the Labors of the wisest Philosophers,
Divines or Princes do to reform it, and to make Man better: And especially, how
hard it is to get a Heavenly mind, and joy and conversation: And all this being
sure, it is as sure that the Renovation of Souls is a great work, well
beseeming God. 4. And it must be added, that this is the most necessary work
for us, and the most excellent: Paul tells us but what Reason tells us in that,
1 Cor. 13. how much Holy Love (which is the Divine Nature and real Sanctity)
excels all Knowledge, Gifts and Miracles: This is the Souls health and
well-being: No man can be miserable so far as he is Good and Holy: And no Man
can choose but be miserable that is not so: Many shall lie in Hell that cast
out Devils, and wrought Miracles in Christ's Name; but none that love God, and
are Holy. Christ wrought Miracles, but in order to work Holiness; (as St. Paul,
1 Cor. 1. 14. tells them, that strange Languages are below Edifying plainness:)
His work as a Savior is to destroy the works of the Devil. Holiness is
incomparably better than the Gift of working Miracles. 1 Io. 3. 24. and 4. 12.
15, 16. Matt. 7. 21, 22. 25, 26. Heb. 12. 14.


This being considered, further think, 1. That All true Christians are Saints:
Hypocrites have but the Name and Image: No one soundly and practically
believes in Christ, and consents to his Covenant, but he is renewed by the
Holy Ghost.

2. Consider how great and excellent a Work this is; to set a Man's Hope and
Heart on Heaven; to live by Faith on an unseen World; to place our chiefest
Love and Pleasure on God, Holiness and Heaven; to mortify fleshly Lusts, and
be above the power of the Love of the World, and Natural Life; to love others
as our selves in the measure that God appears in them; to love our Enemies,
and to make it the work of our Lives to do the most good we can in the World;
to bring every true Believe^ to this in all Ages and Countries, which neither
Princes nor Perswafion alone can do, this is above all Miracles. And this is a
standing Witness which every true Christian has in himself. Ezekiel. 36. 26. 1
Io. 5. 10. 2 Timothy 1. 7. Romans 8. 3, 4. 13. 15. 26. 33. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. and
6. 10. 11. 17. and 12. 11. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 3. 17. Gal. 4. 6. and 5. 5. 16, 17,
18. 25. Ephesians. 2. 18. 22. and 4. 3, 4. 23. and 5. 9. 2 These. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2,
3. 1 Io. 3. 24. and 4. 13.


3. And note al^o, that it is by the foresaid Gospel or sealed Word of Christ,
that all this is wrough^ on all true Christians. And the Divine effect proves
a Divine Cause. God would never bless a Lie, to be the greatest means of the
Holiness, Reformation and Happiness of the World. And were not the Cause fitted
to it, it would never produce such Effects.

Q. 28. Is this it that is called, The witness of the Spirit in us?

A. Besides all the foresaid Witnessings of the Spirit without us, the Spirit
within us, 1. Causes us to understand and believe the Scripture. 2. Makes it
powerful to Sanctify us. 3. And therein gives us a connaturality and special
Love to it, and sense of its inherent Divine Excellency; which is writing it in
our Hearts. 4. And causes us to live by it. 5. And confuteth the Objections
made against it. 6. And causes us to fetch our comfort from it; in a Word,
Imprinteth the Image of it on us: and this is the inward Witness.

Q. 29. But when we see so much Ignorance, Wickedness, Confusion and Cruelty,
Pride, Lust and Worldliness among Christians, and how they live in malicious
tearing one another, how can we know that their Goodness is any proof of the
truth of Christianity?

A. I told you, Hypocrites have but the Name and Picture and Art of
Christianity. If Custom, Prosperity, Laws or Carnal Interest bring the World
into the visible Church, and make Men say, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2. Act. 20. 32. and 26.
18.
They believe, when they do not, is Christianity to be judged of by Dissemblers
and Enemies? Mark any that are serious Believers, and you will find them all
seriously Sober, Just and Godly: And though weak Believers have but weak Grace,
and many Failings, they are sincerely, though imperfectly such as I have
described. And though the Blind malignant Enemies can see no Excellency in a
Saint, he that has either known Faith and Holiness in himself, or has but
impartially observed Mankind, will see that Christians indeed are quite another
sort of Men, than the Unbelievers, and that Christ makes Men such as he
teaches them to be, and the Sanctifying Spirit is the sure Witness of Christ,
dwelling in all true Christians, ( Romans 8. 9.) as Christ's Agent and Advocate,
witnessing that he is True, and that we are his; Interceding from Christ to us
by communicating his Grace, and in us toward Christ, by Holy Love and Desires:
And is God's Name and Mark on us, and our Pledge, Earnest, and First Fruits of
Life eternal: and though we were in doubt of old Historical Proofs: Yet I. The
Old Testament fulfilled in the New. II. The Divine Impress discernible on the
Gospel. III. And the most excellent Effect of Sanctification on all true
Believers, are Evidences of the truth of Christianity and the Scriptures, which
all true Christians have still at hand. Ioh. 17. 17. 19. Ephesians. 5. 26. 1 These. 5.
23. Heb. 2. 11. and 10. 10. 14.


Q. 30. But there are things in the Scripture of exceeding difficulty to
believe: Especially that God should become Man?

A. 1. It is folly to be stalled at the Believing of any thing, which we once
are sure that God reveals, considering how unmeet our shallow Wit is to judge
of the things of infinite Wisdom, to us unseen. Prove. 8. 9. and 14. 6*


2. To Holy illuminated prepared Souls, Belief is not so hard: It Is Blindness
and Vice that make it difficult.

3. God did not become Man, by any Change of his Godhead; nor by confining his
Essence to the Manhood of Christ: But, 1. By taking the humane Nature into a
special Aptitude for hi^ Operations. 2. And so Relating it nearly to himself.
3. And Operating peculiarly in and on it, as he does not on any other Creature.
And when all are agreed that God is essentially every where, and is as near us
as we are our selves, and more the Cause of all good which we do than we our
selves are; it will be harder to show that he is not Hypostatically united to
every Man, than that he is so to Christ, (Though the foresaid Aptitude of
Christ's humane Nature, and the Relation and Operation of the Divine, indeed
make that vast difference.) If God can so peculiarly Operate in and by our
humane Nature, where lies the Incredibility?

Q. 31. But it is so transcendently above all the Works of Nature, that such
condescension of God is hard to be believed?

A. Great Works best beseem the Infinite God: Is not the make of the whole
World as wonderful, and yet certain? Gods Love and Goodness must have wonderful
products as well as his Power.

But is it not very congruous to Nature and Reason, that God should have Mercy
on lapsed man? And that he should restore depraved humane Nature? And that he
should do this great work like his Greatness and Goodness, and above Man's
shallow reach? And that Polluted Souls should not have immediate access to the
most Holy, but by a Holy Mediator? And that Mankind should have one Universal
Head and Monarch in our own Nature? And that when even Heathens are conscious
of the great need of some Divine revelations, besides the light of Nature, and
therefore consult their Oracles and Augurs, that God should give us a certain
Menssenger from Heaven to teach us necessary Truth? Many such Congruities I
have opened in the Reasons of the Christian Religion, Part 2. Chapter 5.

The Sum of all that is said, is This: I. If any History in the world be sure,
the History of the Gospel is sure. II. And if the History be sure, the Doctrine
must needs be sure. III. The continued Evidences: 1. In the Holiness of the
Doctrine: And 2. In the Holiness of all true serious Believers, are a standing
proof of both, as the Miracles were to all the beholders, who did not Blaspheme
the Holy Ghost.

Q. 32. But how comes it to be so hard then to the most to become serious
Believers and Godly, when the Evidence is so clear?

A. A Blind, Dead, Worldly, Fleshly Heart does undispose them, and they will
not Consider such things, nor use the means.

Yea, they so wilfully sin against Knowledge and Conscience, and will not obey
that which they know, that they forfeit further Grace. I will name you briefly
many things which every Man's Natural Reason might know, and ask you whether you
ever knew any Unbeliever that was not false to this Light of Nature.

1. Does not Sense and Reason tell men, how vile a thing that Flesh is which
they prefer before their Souls? 2. Does it not certify them that they must
die, and so that Fleshly Pleasure is short? 3. Does it not tell them of the
Vanity and Vexation of this World? 4. And that greatest Prosperity is usually
parted with, with greatest sorrow? 5. Does it not tell them, that Man's Nature
can hardly choose but fear what will follow after Death? 6. Does it not tell
them that there is a God that made them, and Rules all? 7. And that he is
infinitely Great, and Wise, and Good, and therefore should be Obeyed, Loved,
and Trusted above all? 8. And that their Lives and Souls, and all are his, and
at his will? 9. And that Man has Faculties which can mind a God and a Life to
come, which Bruits have not; and that God does not make such Natures in vain.
10. Does not experience tell them that humane Nature sees a vast difference
between Moral Good and Evil, and that all Government, Laws, and Converse show
it; And no Man would be counted false and bad? 11. And that Good Men are the
Blessing of the World, and Bad Men the Plagues? 12. And that there is a
Conscience in Man, that condemns Sin, and approves Goodness? 13. And that
most Men when they dye, cry out against that which Worldly, Fleshly Men
prefer; and wish that they had lived the Life of Saints, and might die their
death? Are not these easily knowable to all? And yet all the ungodly live as if
they believed none of this: And can you wonder if all such Men understand not,
or believe not the Heavenly things, have no experience of the Io. 3. 7, 8. Rom
1. 19, 20. Act. 14. 17.
Sanctifying Work and Witness of the Holy Spirit, and have no delight in God
and Goodness, no strength against Sin and Temptations, no Trust in God in their
necessity, no suitableness to the Gospel, nor the heavenly Glory: But as they
lived in sin, do die in a stupid or despairing state of Soul?

CHAP. VII. Of the Christian Religion, what it is, and of the Creed.
Q. 1. NOw you have laid so good a Foundation, by showing me the certain Truth
of the Gospel, I would better know what Christianity is? and what it is to be a
true Christian?

A. First, I must tell you what Religion is i^ general, and then what the
Christian Religion is* Religion is a Word that signifies either that which is
without us, the Rule of our Religion, or tha^ which is within us, our
conformity to that Rule The Doctrinal Regulating Religion, is the Signification
of Gods will, concerning Man's Duty to God, and his Hopes from God. The inward
Religion of our Souls, is our Conformity to this revealed regulating Will of
God, even our absolute resignation to God as being his own, our absolute
subjection to him a^ our absolute Sovereign Ruler, and our prevailin^ chief
Love to him as our chief Benefactor, and a^ Love and Goodness it self. Thus
Religion is ou^ Duty to God, and Hope from God.

Q. 2. Now what is the Christian Religion?

A. The Christian Religion as Doctrinal, is, The Revelation of Gods will
concerning his Kingdom as our Redeemer;] or the Redeeming and savin^ sinful
miserable Man by Jesus Christ.

And the Christian Religion as it is in us, is [Th^ true Conformity of our
Understanding, Will, an^ Practice to this Doctrine] or [The true Belief o^ the
Mind, the Thankful Love and Consent of the Will, and the sincere Obedience of
our Lives, to God as our Reconciled Father in Christ, and to Jesus Christ as
our Savior, and to the Holy Ghost as our Sanctifier, to deliver us from the
guilt and power of Sin, from the Flesh, the World and the Devil, from the
revenging Justice of God, and from everlasting Damnation; giving us here a
Union with Christ, the Pardon of our Sins, and Sanctifying Grace, and hereafter
everlasting heavenly Glory. Io. 1. 11, 12. and 3. 16. 21. Act. 26. 18. Mat. 28.
19, 20. Io. 14. 5. and 15. 10. 1 Ioh. 2. 3. and 5. 2, 3. Rev. 14. 12.


Q. 3. Is there any other Religion besides the Christian Religion?

A. There be many errors of Men, which they call their Religion.

Q. 4. Is there any True Religion, besides Christianity?

A. There be diverse that have some part of the Truth, mixed with Error. 1. The
Heathens acknowledge God and most of his Attributes and Perfections as we do:
But, they have no knowledge of his Will, but what mere Nature teaches them;
and they worship many Idols, if not Devils, as an under sort of Gods.

2. The Jews own only the Law of Nature and the Old Testament, but believe not
in Jesus Christ our Redeemer.

3. The Sadduces and all Bruitists worship God as the Governor of Man in this
World, but they believe not a Life to come for Man.

4. The Pythagorean Heathens look for no Reward or Punishment after Death, but
by the passing of the Soul into some other Body on Earth, in which i^ shall be
Rewarded or Punished.

5. The Mahometans acknowledge One God as we do, but they believe not in Jesus
Christ as Man's Redeemer, but only take him for an excellent Holy Prophet, and
they Believe in Mahomet a Deceiver as a Prophet greater than he.

6. The mere D^ists, believe in God, but not in Jesus Christ, and have only the
Natural Knowledge of his Will, as other Heathens, but worship not Idols as they
do.

Q. 5. Is there but One Christian Religion?

A. No: True Christianity is one certain thing.

Q. 6. How then are Christians said to be of diverse Religions?

A. Sound Christians hold to Christian Religion alone, as Christ did institute
it: But many others corrupt it, some by denying some parts of it, while they
own the rest; and some by adding many corrupting Inventions of Man, and making
those a part of their Religion; as the Papists do.

Q. 7. Where is the true Christian Religion Doctrinal, to be found, that we may
certainly know which is it indeed?

A. The Christian Religion contains, I. The Light and Law of Nature, and that
is common to them with others, and is to be found in the Nature of all things
as the Significations of Gods* Will* II. Supernatural Revelation, clearing the
Law of Nature, and giving us the Knowledge of the Redeemer and his Grace. Mat.
5. 17. and 23. 23. Romans 2. 14. Romans 8. 4. 7. and 13. 8. 10.


And this is contained, I. Most fully in the Holy Bible: II. Briefly and
summarily in the Creed, Lords Prayer and Commandments. III. Most briefly of all
in the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and the Covenant made and
sealed by them.

Q. 8. But are not the Articles of our Church, and the Confessions of Churches,
their Religion?

A. Only Gods Word is ou^ Religion as the Divine Rule: But our Confessions, and
Books, and Words, and Lives, show how we understand it.

Q. 9. What is the Protestant Religion?

A. The Religion of Protestants is mere Christianity: They are called
Protestants but accidentally, because they Protest for mere Scripture
Christianity, against the Corruptions of Popery.

Q. 10. What sorts of false Religion are there among Christians.

A. There are more Corruptions of Religion than can easily be named: The chief
of them are of these following sorts.

I. Some of them deny some Essential Article of Faith or Practice: As the
Immortality of the Soul, the Godhead, or Manhood, or Offices of Christ; or the
Holy Ghost, or the Scripture, etc.

II. Some of them pretend new Revelations falsely, and set their pretenses of
the Spirits Inspirations, against the sealed Word of God.

III. Some of them set up an Usurped Power of their own, against the Office,
Authority or sufficiency of the said Sealed Scriptures: Pretending that they
are Successors to the Apostles, in the Power and Office of making Laws for the
Universal Church, and being the Judges of the sense of Scripture, yea and what
is to be taken for Gods Word, and what not, and Judges of all Controversies
about it: Of these, the Papists preten^ that the Pope and a General Council,
are Suprea^ visible Governors under Christ of all the Christian World; and
that none may appeal from them ^ God, to Christ, to the Scripture, or to the
Day o^ Judgment: Others pretend to such a Power i^ every Patriarchal, National
or Provincial Church* And all of them, instead of a humble, helping, guiding
Ministry, set up a Church Leviathan, a silencing Abaddon and Appollyon; a
destroying Office: Setting up their Usurped power above ^^ equal in Effect with
Gods Word.

Q. 11. How come the Scriptures to be Gods Wor^ when the Bishops Cannons are
not? And to be ^^ far above their Laws?

A. You must know, that God has two differen^ sort of Works to do for the
Government of hi^ Church: The first is Legislation, or giving Ne^ Doctrines and
Laws: The other is the teachin^ and guiding the Church by the Explication an^
Application of these same Laws: God is not sti^ making New Laws for Man, but he
is still Teaching and Ruling them by his Laws. Isa. 8. 20. Isa. 33. 22. Iam. 4.
12. Mal. 2. ^, 8. Mat. 28. 20.


Accordingly God has had two sort of Ministers: One sort for Legislation, to
Reveal ne^ Doctrines and Laws: And such was Moses under the Old Administration,
and Christ and his Commissioned Apostles under the New: These were Eminent
Prophets inspired by God infallibly ^^ record his Laws, and God attested their
Offic^ and Work, by Multitudes of Evident uncontrolled Miracles. But the Laws
being Sealed, the Second sort of Ministers are only to Teach and Apply these
same Laws and Doctrines, and not to reveal New ones: And such were the Priests
and Levites under Moses, and all the succeeding Ministers and Bishops of the
Churches under Christ and the Apostles, who are the Foundation on which the
Church is built. And though all Church Guides may determine of the undetermined
Circumstances of Holy things, by the General Laws which God has given therein:
Yet to arrogate a power of making a new Word of God, or a Law that shall
suspend our Obedience to his Laws, or any Law for the Universal Church, whether
it be by Pope or Council, is treasonable Usurpation of a Government which none
but Christ is capable of: And as if one King or Council should claim the Civil
Sovereignty of all the Earth (which is most unknown to them.)

Q. 12. But I pray you tell me how the CREED comes to be of so great Authority,
seeing I find it not in the Bible?

A. It is the very Sum and Kernel of the Doctrine of the New Testament, and
there you may find it all, with much more: But it is Older than the writting of
the New Testament, save that two or three words were added since.

I told you before, 1. That Christ himself did make the Nature and Terms of
Christianity, Commissioning his Apostles, to make all Nations his Disciples,
baptizing them into the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: This
is the Sum of the Creed first made by Christ himself.

2. The Apostles were Inspired and Commissioned to teach men all that Christ
commanded, Mat. 28. 19, 20.

3. To say these three Words [ I believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,]
without understanding them, was easy, but would make no true Christians:
Therefore if we had never read more of the Apostles Practice, we might justly
conclude that those inspired Teachers, before they Baptized Men at Age, taught
them the meaning of those three Articles, and brought them accordingly to
Confess their Faith: And this is the Creed. And though a Man might speak his
Profession in more or various Words, the Matter was still the same; and the
words made necessary, must not be too many, nor left too much at men's liberty
to alter, lest corruption should Creep into the Common Faith. For the Baptismal
Confession was the very Symbol, Badge or Test, by which all Christians were
visibly to pass for Christians: And as Christianity must be a known certain
thing, so must its Symbol be.

4. And infallible historical Tradition assures us, that accordingly ever
since the Apostles days, before any adult were Baptized, they were Catechized,
and brought to understand and profess these same Articles of the Faith. And if
the Greeks and the Latins used not the same Words, they used Words of the same
Signification (two or three words being added since.)

Q. 13. Do you not by this set the Creed above the Bible?

A. No otherwise than I set the Head, Heart, Liver and Stomach of a Man above
the whole Body, which contains them and all the rest: Or than I set the Ten
Commandments above the whole Law of Moses, which includes them: Or than Christ
did set, Loving God above all, and our Neighbor as our selves, above all that
Law of which they were the Sum: We must not take those for no Christians, nor
deny them Baptism, who understand and believe not particularly every word in
the Bible; as we must those that understand not and believe not the CREED.

CHAP. VIII. Of BELIEVING, what it signifies in the Creed.
Qu. 1. I Understand by what you have said, that as Man's Soul has three
Powers, the Understanding, the Will, and the Executive: So Religion being but
the true qualifying and guidance of these three Powers, must needs consist of
three parts. I. Things to be known and believed. II. Things to be Willed,
Loved, and Chosen: And III. Things to be Done in the Practice of our Lives: And
that the Creed is the Symbol or Sum of so much as is necessary to our
Christianity, of the first sort; and the Lords Prayer the Rule and Summary of
the second; and the Ten Commandments of the Third. Heb. 11. 6.
I entreat you therefore first to expound the Cree^ to me, and first the first
word of it [I Believe] ^ it belongs to all that follows.

A. You must first know what the word signifies in Common use: To Believe
another, Signifies [ T^ trust him as True or Trusty, and to Believe a thing,
signifies to Believe that it is True, because a Trusty Person speaks it.]
The Things that you must Believe to be True, are called, The Matter, or Materi^
Object of your Faith: The Persons Trustiness tha^ you believe or trust to, is
called, The formal Object of your Faith, for which you Trust the Person* and
believe the thing. The Matter is as the Body of Faith, and the Form as its
Soul. The Matter which the Church has believed, has by Go^ had alterations:
And to this Day more is reveale^ to some than to others. But the formal Reason
^ your Faith is still and in all the same, even Gods Fidelity, who because of
his Perfection cannot Li^ Tit. 1. 2. Romans 3. 4. Number. 23. 29.


Q. 2. How may I be sure that God cannot Li^ who is under no Law?

A. His Perfection is more than a Law. 1. W^ see that God who made Man in his
own Image and renews them to it, making Lying a hate^ Vice to humane Nature
and Conversation: N^ Man would be counted a Liar: And the bette^ any Man is,
the more he hates it. Prove. 12. 22. Prove. 6. 17. Prove. 19. 5. 9. and 13. 5*
Io. 8. 44. 55. 1 Io. 5. 10. Rev. 21. 8. Prove. 14* 5. Col. 3. 9. Heb. 6. 18.


2. No man Lies, but either for want of Wi^dom to know the Truth, or for want
of perfec^ Goodness, or for want of Power to attain his Ends by better means.
But the Infinite most Perfect God has none of these defects.

Q. 3. But God speaks to the World by Angels and Men; and who knows but they
may be permitted to Lie?

A. When they speak to Man as sent by God, and God attesteth their credibility
by uncontrolled Miracles or other Evidence; if then they should Lie, it would
be imputable to God that attesteth their word: Of which I said enough to you
before.

Q. 4. Proceed to open the formal Act of Faith, which you call Trust?

A. As you have noted, that Man's Soul has three Powers, Understanding, Will,
and Executive; so our Assiance or Trust in God, extends to them all: And so
it is in One, an Assenting Trust, a Consenting Trust, and a Practical Trust. By
the first, we Believe the Word to be True, because we trust the Fidelity of
God. By the second, we consent to Gods Covenant and accept his Gifts, by
Trusting to the Truth and Goodness of the Promiser: By the Third, we Trustingly
venture on the costlyest Duty. Psalm. 112. 7. Matt. 27. 43. Heb. 11. Ephesians. 1. 12,
13. 2 Timothy 1. 12. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Tit. 3. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 21. Heb. 11. 39. Act. 27.
25.


Q. 5. I pray you open it to me by some familiar similitude?

A. Suppose you are a poor Man, in danger of a Prison; and a King from India,
sends his Son hither, Proclaiming to all the Poor in England; that if they will
come over with his Son, he will make them all Princes; some say, He is a
Deceiver and not to be believed: Others say, A little in hand with our Old
acquaintance, is better than uncertainty in an unknown Land: Another says, I
know not but a Leaky Vessel, Storms or Pirates may prevent my hopes. Here are
now three Questions: 1. Do you believe that he says True? 2. Do you so far
Trust him as to Consent to go with him? 3. When it comes to it, do you so far
Trust him as to venture on all the difficulties, and go?

Again, suppose you have a deadly sickness: There are many unable and deceitful
Physicians in the World: There is one only that can Cure you, and offers to
do it for nothing; but with a Medicine made of his own Blood. Many tell you, he
is a Deceiver: Some say, others can do it as well: And some say the Medicine is
intolerable or improbable. Here are three Questions, 1. Do you Trust his word
by Believing him? 2. Do you Trust him so as to Consent and Take him for your
Physician? 3. Do you Trust him so as to come to him and take his Medicine,
forsaking all others? I need not apply it: You can easily do it.

Trust then, or Assiance is the vital or formal act of Faith: And Assenting,
Consenting and Practice, are the inseparable effects, in which as it is a
saving Grace it is always found.

Q. 6. But is all this meant in the Creed?

A. Yes: 1. The Creed contains the necessary Matter revealed by God, which we
must believe. 2. And it mentions Him to whom we must Trust, in our Assent,
Consent and Practice, even God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Q. 7. But is this the Faith by which we are justified? Are we justified by
believing in God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, and the rest of the Articles?
Some say, It is only by believing in Christ's Righteousness as imputed to us.

A. Justification is to be spoken of hereafter: But this one entire Christian
Faith, is it which God has made the necessary qualification, or Condition of
such as he will justify by and for the Merits of Christ's Righteousness.

Q. 8. Does not [I believe] signify that I believe that this God is my God, my
Savior, and my Sanctifier in particular.

A. It is an applying Faith: It signifies, 1. That you Believe his Right to be
your God. 2. And his offer to be your God. 3. And that you consent to this
Right and Offer, that he may be special Relation be yours. 4. But it does not
signify, that every Believer is sure of the sincerity of his own Act of
believing, and so of his special Interest in God; though this is very desirable
and attainable.

CHAP. IX. Of the first Article, [I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker
of Heaven and Earth.]
Qu. 1. SEeing you before proved that there i^ a God, from the Light of Nature,
a^^ Heathens know it, why is it made an Article ^^ Faith?

A. The understanding of Man is so darkened and corrupted now by sin, that it
does but gro^^ after God, and knows him not as reveale^ in his Works alone,
so clearly and surely as ^^ needful to bring home the Soul to God, in Hol^
Love, Obedience and Delight: But he is more fully revealed to us in the Sacred
Scripture b^ Christ and his Spirit, which therefore must b^ herein believed.
Ioh. 17. 3.


Q. 2. What of God does the Scripture make kno^^ better than Nature?

A. That there is a God, and what God is and what are his Relations to us, and
what a^^ his works, and what are our Duty to him, an^ our Hopes from him. Heb.
11. 6. 1 Ti^* 2. 5.


Q. 3. That there is a God, none but a mad M^sure can doubt: But what of God is
so clearly r^vealed in Scripture?

A. 1. His essential Attributes, and, 2. The Tr^nity in one Essence.

Q. 4. Which call you his Essential A^tributes?

A. God is essentially LIFE, UNDERSTANDING and WILL, or VITAL-POWER, WISDOM and
GOODNESS or LOVE, in one substance; and this in absolute Perfection. Ioh. 14.
24. Psalm. 90. 2.


Q. 5. But are not all the rest of his Attributes Essential?

A. Yes; But they are but these same Named variously, from their various
respects to the Creatures: such are his Truth, his Justice, and his Mercy, as
he is our Governor: His Bounty, as our Benefactor; and his Self-sufficiency,
Eternity, Immensity, or Infiniteness, his Immutability, Immortality,
Invisibility, and very many such respective Names, are comprehended in his
PERFECTION. Mal. 3. 6. Psalm. 86. 5. and 145. 17. Prove. 15. 3. Psalm. 139. 23. 4,
5. 12. Ier. 23. 24. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.


Q. 6. I have often heard of Three Persons, and One God, and I could never
understand what it meant: How Three can be but One.

A. It Is like, that is because you take the word [PERSON] amiss, as if it
signified a distinct Substance, as it does of Men.

Q. 7. If it do not so, does it not tend to deceive us, that never heard of any
other kind of Person?

A. The Scripture tells us that there are Three, and yet but Matthew. ^8. 19. 1
Ioh. 5. 7.
One God, but it gives us not a Name which may notify clearly so great a
Mystery, for it is unsearchable and incomprehensible: We are to be Baptized
into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28. 29. And there are
three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit,
and these three are one, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. But the custom of the Church having used
the word [PERSON] having none that clearly expresses the Mystery, it is our
part rather to labor to understand it, how a Divine Person differ^ from a
Humane, than to quarrel with an imprope^ word: GOD is ONE Infinite undivided
Spirit^ and yet that he is FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, must be believed.

And God has made so mavelous an impression on all the Natures of Active
Beings, of THREE in ONE, as to me does make this Mystery of o^^ Religion the
more easy to be believed, so far i^ it from seeming a contradiction.

Q. 8. I pray show me some such Instances?

A. I. The Sun and all true Fire is One Substanc^^ having Three Essential
Powers, the Moving Power* the Enlightening Power, and the Heating Power Motion
is not Light, Light is not Heat, and He^^ is not Motion or Light: Yet all are
One Substanc^^ and radically one Virtue or Power, and yet Three as Operative.

II. Every Plant has One Vegetative principl^^ which has Essentially a Power
Discretive, (a^ discerning its own Nutriment) Appetitive, de^ring or drawing it
in; and Motive, and so digestiv^ and assimilative.

III. Every Bruit has One Sensitive Soul, which Essentially has a Power of
Vital-sensitive Motio^^ Perception and Appetite.

IV. Every Man has One Soul in Substance, which has the Powers of Vegetation,
Sense and Intellection ^^ Reasoning.

V. The Soul of Man as Intellective, has Essentially a Threefold Power or
Virtue, Mental Life, (for motion and execution) Understanding and Will. All
Active Beings are Three Virtues in one substance.

Q. 9. But these do none of them make Three Persons?

A. 1. But if all these be undeniable in Nature, and prove in GOD, ACTIVE LIFE,
UNDERSTANDING and WILL, it shows you that Three Essentials in One substantial
Essence is no contradiction: And why may not the same be as true of the Divine
Persons.

2. And in God who is an Infinite undivided Spirit, little can we conceive what
Personality Signifies; and how far those Schoolmen are right or wrong who say,
That Gods Essential SELF-LIVING, SELF-KNOWING and SELF-LOING, are the Trinity
of the Persons as in Eternal Existence; and that the Operations and Appearances
in POWER, WISDOM and LOVE in CREATION, INCARNATION for REDEMPTION, and
Renovation in NATURE, GRACE and Initial GLORY or Communion, are the Three
Persons in the Second Notion as outwardly Operative. And how much more than
this soever there is, it is no wonder that we comprehend it not: Yea, I believe
there is yet more in the Mystery of the Trinity, because this much is so
intelligible.

Q. 10. But is it not strange that God will lay our Salvation on the belief of
that which we cannot understand? Yea, is it not on the bare saying of a Word,
whose meaning none can know?

A. The Doctrine of the Trinity in Unity is the very Sum of all the Christian
Religion, as the Baptismal Covenant assures us: And can we think that
Christianity saves Men as a Charm, by words not understood? No, the belief of
the Trinity is a Practical Belief: far be it from us to think that every plain
Christian shall be damned, who knows not what a PERSON in the Trinity, is as
Eternally inexistent, when all the Divines and School Wits as good as confess,
after tedious disputes with unintelligible words, that they know not: It is the
Trinity as related to us, and Operative, and therein Notified, that We must
necessarily understand and believe, even as Our Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, that the Love of God the Father, and the Grace of the Son, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, may be believed, received, and enjoyed: As there
are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit, and differences of
Administrations, but the same Lord, and diversities of Operations, but the same
God which works all in all, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 13. 14. Even as it is
not our understanding the Essence of the Sun, but our Reception of it is
communicated Motion, Light and Heat, that our Nature lives by. Psalm. 16. 8.
and 125. 2. Mat. 28. 19. 1 Io. 5. 7. 10. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 13. 14. The
Doctrine of the Trinity is ever proposed relatively, and practically to our
Faith.


Q. 11. But how can any Man love him above all, of whom we can have no true
Conception? I cannot Conceive what GOD is?

A. It may be you think that you know nothing but what you see or feel by
Sense: For so Men's long use of Bodies and Sense is apt to abuse them: Or you
think you know nothing, which you know not fully, and so no Angel knows God
by an adequate comprehensive Knowledge. How far are we from knowing fully what
Sun and Moon and Stars are, and what is in them, and how they are ordered and
move? And yet nothing is more easily and surely known than that there is a Sun
and Stars, and that they are substances that have the power of Motion, Light,
and Heat. Yea Philosophers cannot yet agree what Light and Heat are: And yet we
know enough of them for our necessary use. And can it be expected then, that
Man give a proper Definition of the Infinite God? And yet nothing is more
certain than that there is a God, and that he is such as I have before
described: And we may know as much of him as our Duty and Happinss requires.
Io. 17. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 12. 1 Io. 4. 6, 7. Io. 8. 19. and 14. 7. 9. and 10. 14. 1
Cor. 8. 3. Gal. 4. 9. 1 Io. 2. 13, 14.


Q. 12. But what is the best Conception I can have of God?

A. I partly told you in the Third Chapter, and the Second. I now tell you
further, that we see God here but as in a Glass: His Image on Man's Soul is the
nearest Glass: How do you conceive of your own Soul? You cannot doubt but you
have a Soul, while you perceive its constant acts: Yet, you see it not: You
find clearly that [ It is a Spiritual substance, that has essentially the
power of Vital-Activity, Understanding and Will.] By this you perceive what a
Spirit is: And by this you have some perception what GOD is. All the World is
far less to God than a Body to its Soul. And GOD is Infinitely more than a Soul
to all the World: But by the Similitude of a Soul you may most easily conceive
of him.

CHAP. X. Of God's Almightiness, and Creation.
Qu. 1. WHy is God here called [The FATHER] in whom we believe?

A. 1. As he is the first Person in the Eternal Trinity, and so called, The
Father of the Eternal Word or Wisdom, as his Son.

2. As he is the Father of Jesus Christ, as Incarnate. 2 Cor. 1. 3. and 11. 31.
1 Cor. 8. 6. and 15. 24. Gal. 1. 1. 3, 4. Ephesians. 1. 3. 17. and 4. 6. and 6. 23.
Ph. 2. 11. Col. 2. 2. and 3. 17. 2 Timothy 1. 2. Iam. 3. 9.


3. As he is the Maker of the whole Creation, and as a Common Father gives
Being to all that is.

4. As he is our Reconciled Father by Christ; and has adopted us as his Sons,
and bound us to Love, and Trust, and Obey him as our Father. But the two first
are the chief Sense.

Q. 2. What is God's [ALMIGHTINESS?]

A. His Infinite Power by which he can do all things which are works of Power:
He cannot Lie, nor Die, nor be the Cause of sin, for these are no Effects of
Power, but of Impotencie.

Q. 3. Why is his Almightiness to be believed by us?

A. We do not else believe him to be GOD: And we cannot else Reverence, Admire,
Trust him and Obey him as we ought. Genesis 17. 1. Rev. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 6. 18. Psalm.
91. 1, 2. Mat. 8. 2.


Q. 4. Why is his Almightiness only named, and no other properties?

A. All the rest are supposed when we call him GOD. But this is named, because
he is first to be Believed in as the Creator; and his Creation does eminently
manifest his Power. And though the Son and the Holy Ghost are Almighty, the
Scripture eminently attributes POWER to the FATHER, WISDOM to the SON, and
LOVE and Perfective Operations to the Holy Ghost.

Q. 5. Is the Creation named to notify to us God's Almightiness?

A. Yes, and it is a great part of our Duty when we look up to the Heavens, and
daily see so far as our short sight can reach, of this wondeful World, to think
with most reverend admiration; O what a GOD have we to serve and trust! Genesis
17. 31. Rev. 4. 11. and 10. 6. Isa. 40. 28. and 42. 5. and 45. 12. 18. Psalm. 8.
1. 3. and 19. 1. and 89. 5. 11. and 104. 1, 2. and 115. 16.


Q. 6. HOw did God make all things?

A. He gave them all their Being, Order and well-being by the Power of his Will
and Word. Genesis 1. 2, 3.


Q. 7. When did he make all things?

A. It is not yet Six thousand Years since he made this World, even as much as
belongs to us to know.

Q. 8. How long was God making this World?

A. It pleased him to make it the work of Six days: and he consecrated the
seventh day a Sabbath for the Commemoration of it, and for the solemn
Worshipping Him as our Creator.

Q. 9. For whom, and for what use did God make the World?

A. God made all things for himself; not as having need of them, but to please
his own will, which is the Beginning and the End of all his Works; and to shine
in the Glory of the Greatness, Order and Goodness of the World, as in a glass
to understanding Creatures, and to communicate Goodness variously to his Works.
Prove. 16. 4. Rev. 4. 11.


Q. 10. What did God with the World when he had made it?

A. By the same Power, Wisdom and Will he still continues it; or else it would
presently return into nothing. Heb. 1. 3. Ezekiel. 18. 4. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Psalm. 10.
16.


Q. 11. What further must we learn from God^ CREATING us?

A. We certainly learn that he is our OWNER, our RULER, and our BENEFACTOR or
FATHER, and that we are his OWN, and His SUBJECTS, and his BENEFITED Children.

Q. 12. What mean you by the First, that he is our OWNER?

A. He that makes us of nothing, must needs be our absolute Lord or Owner: And
therefore may do with all things what he Will, and cannot possibly do any
wrong, however he uses us. And we must needs be wholly his Own, and therefore
should wholly resign our selves to his disposing Will. Psalm. 119. 94. Act. 27.
23. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Ioh. 17. 6. 9, 10. Isa. 63. 19. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11.


Q. 13. What mean you by the Second, that God is our Ruler?

A. He that by Creation is our absolute Owner, and has made us Reasonable, and
with Free Will, must needs have the only right and fitness to be our Ruler by
his Laws and Doctrine: And we are bound as his Subjects to Obey him absolutely
in all things Psalm. 59. 13. and 66. 7. and 103. 19. Dan. 4. 17. 25. 32. 1 Timothy
6. 15. and 1. 17. Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 6.
.

Q. 14. How gather you that he is our Father or Benefactor?

A. If we have our very Being from him, and all the Good that the whole
Creation enjoys be his free Gift, then as he is LOVE it self, so he is the
Great Benefactor of the World, but specially to his chosen faithful People: And
no Man or Angel has any thing that is good by way of merited exchange from
God, but all is of free Gift: And we owe him our superlative Love, and and
Thanks, and Praise.

Q. 15. Why are Heaven and Earth named as the parts of his Creation?

A. They are all that we are concerned to know: We partly see the difference
between them, and Gods Word tells us of more than we see: Earth is the place of
our present abode in our Life of Trials in Corruptible Flesh: Heaven is the
place where God does manifest his Glory, and from whence he sends down those
Influences which maintai^ Nature, and which communicate his Grace, and prepare
us for the Glory which we shall enjoy in Heaven. By Heaven and Earth is meant
all Creatures, both Spirits and Corporeal. Genesis 1. 1.


Q. 16. Were there no more Worlds made and dissolved before this: It seems
unlikely that God from all Eternity should make nothing till less than Six
Thousand Years ago; when he is a communicative Good, and delights to do good
in his Works?

A. It is dangerous presumption so much as to put such a Question with our
Thought or Tongue* and to pry into Gods Secrets, of which we are utterly
incapable, (unless it be to shame it or suppress it.) God has by Christ and
the Holy Ghost in Scripture set up a Ladder, by which you may ascend to the
Heaven that you are made for: But if you will climb above the top of the
Ladder, you may fall down to Hell. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.


CHAP. XI. Of the Person of Jesus Christ, the only Son of God.
Qu. 1. Who is Jesus Christ?

A. He is God and Man, and the Mediator between GOD and Man. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb.
12. 24. and 8. 6. and 9. 15.


Q. 2. When did he begin to be God?

A. He is the Eternal God that had no Tempoporal beginning?

Q. 3. When did he begin to be a Man?

A. About One thousand six hundred eighty one Years ago. Io. 1. 1, 2, 3, etc. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Romans 9. 5. Ti^. 2. 13.


Q. 4. If he be GOD, why is he called the Son of God? Are there more Gods than
One? And how does God beget a Son?

A. There is but One God: I before opened to you the Mystery of the Trinity in
Unity, to which you must look back. Begetting is a word that we must not take
carnally; and a Son in the Deity signifies not another substance. If the Sun
be said to Beget its own Light, that makes it not another Substance.

But Christ is also as Man begotten of God in a Virgins Womb. Ph. 2. 7, 8, 9,
10.


Q. 5. Was Christ GOD in his low condition on Earth?

A. Yes, but the GODHEAD appeared not as in heavenly Glory.

Q. 6. Is Christ a Man now he is in Heaven?

A. Yes, He is still God and Man: But his Glorified Manhood is not like our
corruptible Flesh, and narrow Souls. Act. 3. 21. Io. 2. 17. and 6. 62. Ephesians. 4.
8, 9, 10.


Q. 7. Has Christ a Soul besides his Godhead?

A. Yes, for he is a perfect Man, which he could not be without a Soul.

Q. 8. Then Christ has two Parts: One part i^ God, and the other Man?

A. The name of PART or WHOLE is not f^ for God: God is no PART of any thing,
no no^ of the Universe of Being: For to be a PART i^ to be less than the whole,
and so to be imperfect* And every WHOLE consists of PARTS; but so does not
God. Gal 3. 20. 1 Io. 5. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Ephesians. 4. 5, 6. Romans 5. 17, 18.


Q. 9. Is Jesus Christ one Person or two, viz. A Divine and Humane?

A. It Is dangerous laying too great a stress on words* that are either not in
Scripture, or are applied to God as borrowed from similitude in Man: As the
word PERSON signifies the Eternal Word, the Second in the Trinity, Christ is
but One Person: And though his humane Soul and Body assumed be Substances, they
are not another Person, but another Nature united to his Eternal Person, yet
no^ as a Part of it, but by a Union which we have no proper Words to express.
Christ has two Natures, and but one Person. But if you take the word PERSON
only for a Relation (as of a King, a Judge, etc.) so Christ as MEDIATOR is a
PERSON distinct from the same Christ as the Eternal Second Person in the
Trinity. Gal 3. 20. 1 Io. 5. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Ephesians. 4. 5, 6. Romans 5. 17, 18.


Q. 10. It seems then Christ had three Natures, a Divine, a Soul, and a Body?

A. This is a Question about mere Names, He has only the Nature of GOD and of
Man. But if you go to anatomize Man, you may find in him on* Earth, perhaps
more Natures than two, Spirit, Fire, Air, Water and Earth: But this is a
frivolous dispute.

Q. 11. In what Nature did Christ appear of Old before his Incarnation?

A. If it were not by an Angel as his Agent, it must be by some Body, Light or
Voice made or assumed for that present time.

Q. 12. I hear some say, That Christ is not One God with the Father, but a kind
of under-God, his first Creature, above Angels.

A. The Scriptures fully prove Christ to be God, and one God with the Father:
The form of Baptism proves it. There be some Learned Men that to reconcile
this Controversy, say, That Christ has Three Natures, 1. The Divine: 2. A
Super-angelical: 3. A Humane. And that God the Eternal Word, did first of all
produce the most perfect of all his Creatures, above Angels, like an Universal
Soul, and the Godhead uniting it self to this, did by this produce all other
Creatures; and at least did in and by this Unite it self hypostatically to the
humane Nature of Christ. They think diverse Texts do favor this threefold
Nature; and that the Arrians erred only by noting the Superangelical Nature,
and not noting the Divine united to it. But I dare not own so great a point,
which I find not that the Universal Church ever owned; nor do I see any cogent
Proof of it in the Scripture. Io. 1. 1, 2. Mat. 28. 19. Col. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Heb. 1. 2, 3, 4. Rev. 1. 5. 8.


Q. 13. But God does all his Works in Order: And he made Angels far Nobler than
Man: And is it like then that he sets a Man so far abo^^ all Angels, as
Personal Union does import?

A. It is not like, if we might judge by the co^jectures of our Reason: But
Gods lower Works a^^ none of them perfectly known here to us: Mu^^ less the
most Mysterious, even the Glorious Person of the Son of God. If God will thus
glorify h^^ Mercy to Man, by setting him above all the A^gels, who shall say
to him, What do thou? A^ if there be in Jesus Christ, a first created Super
angelical Nature; besides the Divine and Human^ we shall know it when we see as
Face to Face. ^^ the mean time he will save those that truly believ^ in him as
GOD and Man. Heb. 1. and 2.


Q. 14. Why is Christ called Our Lord?

A. Because he is God; and also as Mediator, A^^ Power in Heaven and Earth is
given him, and ^^ is made Head over all things to his Church, M^^ 28. 28. Ephesians.
1. 22, 23.

Q. 15. What do his Names [Jesus Christ] si^nifie?

A. Jesus signifies a Savior, and Christ, t^^ Anointed of God. He being
Anointed by God ^^ the Office of a Mediator, as the Great Prophet Priest and
King of the Church.

CHAP. XII. How Christ was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin
Mary.
Qu. 1. Does it not seem Impossible that Christ should be begotten on a Virgin
without a Man?

A. There is no Contradiction in it: And what is impossible to him that made
all the World of nothing? Mat. 8. 20. Luke 1. 35.


Q. 2. But it seems incredible that God should be made Man?

A. God was not at all changed by Christ's Incarnation. The Godhead was not
turned into Flesh or Soul: but united it self thereto. Romans 1. 3. Io. 1. 14. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Gal. 4. 4.


Q. 3. But it seems an incredible Cond^scension in God to unite the Nature of
Man to himself, in Personal Union.

A. When you understand what it is, it will not seem incredible to you, though
wonderful. Consider, 1. That it does not turn the humane Nature into Divine. 2.
Nor does it give it any of that part or work which was proper to the Divine
Nature, and Second Person in the Trinity from Eternity. 3. The Divine Nature is
united to the Humane, only to advance this to the excellent Office of
Mediation, and that Christ in it may be Head over all things to the Church. 4.
And it will abate your wonder if you consider, that God is as near to every
Creature as the Soul is to the Body: In Him we live, move and have our being.
And he is more to us, than our Souls are to our Bodies.

Q. 4. You now make me think that God is one with every Man and Creature, as
well as with Christ. I pray you wherein is the difference?

A. Gods Essence is every where alike: but he does not appear or work every
where alike: As he is more in Heaven than on Earth, because he there operateth
and appears in Glory, and as he is more in Saints than in the Ungodly,
because in them he Operateth his Grace; so he is in Jesus Christ, otherwise
than he is in any other Creature: 1. In that he by the Divine Power qualified
him as he never did any other Creature. 2. And designeth him to that work which
he never did any other Creature. 3. And fixeeth him in the honorable Relation
to that work. 4. And communicates to him by an uniting act, the Glory which he
does not to any other Creature: And though it is like there is yet more unknown
and incomprehensible to us, yet these singular Operations express a singular
Operative Union. The Sun by shining on a Wall, becomes not one with it: But by
its influence on Plants, it becomes one with them, and is their Generical Life.

Q. 5. But how is the Second Person in the Trinity more United to the humane
Nature, than the Father and the Holy Ghost? are they divided?

A. You may as well ask, Why God is said to make Io. 1. 3. 10.
the World by his WORD, and by his SON: Tho the Persons are undivided in their
works on the Creature, yet Creation is eminently ascribed to the Father,
Incarnation and Redemption to the Son, and Sanctification to the Holy Ghost.
The Suns power of Motion, Light and Heat are inseparable: And yet it is the
Light as such that with our Eye does cause the same act of sight, as united to
it. But the perfect Answer to this doubt is reserved for Heaven?

Q. 6. But how was he conceived by the Holy Ghost, the Second Person by the
third, when it is only the Second that was incarnate?

A. The Holy Ghost is not said to operate on the Second Person in the Trinity,
or the Godhead, for Christ's Conception; but on the Virgins Body, and by
miraculous causing a humane Soul and Body, and their union with the Eternal
Word. Gods perfecting Operations are usually ascribed to the Holy Ghost: But
the Father and Son, are still supposed Operating by the Holy Spirit.

Q. 7. Was Christ's Flesh made of the substance of his Mother?

A. Yes: Else how had he been the Son of Man? Gal. 4. 4.


Q. 8. Was Christ's Soul begotten by his Mother?

A. It is certain that Man begets Man: But how Souls are generated is not
fully known by Man: Some say, They are not Generated, but Created: Some say,
That they are not Created, but Generated: And I think that there is such a
concurrence of God's act and Man's, as may be called a Conjunction of Creation
and Generation; that is, that as the Sunbeams by a Burning-Glass may light a
Candle, and that Candle light another, and another; yet so that the Light and
Heat that does it, is only from the Suns continual communication: But will not
Light another but as contracted and made forcible by the Burning-glass, or the
Candle: So all the Substance of new Souls is from the Divine Efflux, or
communication of it, which yet will not ordinarily beget a Soul, but as it is
first received in the Generative natural faculty, and so operateth by it, as
its appointed Natural means. Thus it seems all humane Souls are caused (Pardon
the defects of the Similitude.) But the Soul of Christ miraculously, not
without all Operation of the Mothers (for then he had not been the Son of Man)
but without a humane Father; the Holy Ghost more than supplying that defect.

Q. 9. If Christ was Mary's Son, how escaped he Original guilt?

A. By being conceived by the Holy Ghost, and so in his humane Nature made the
Son of God, and not generated as other Men are.

Q. 10. Had Mary any Children after Jesus Christ?

A. It goes for a Tradition with most, that she had none: But it is uncertain,
and concerns not our Faith or Salvation. Heb. 7. 26. Mat. 12. 46. Mar. 3. 31.
Io. 2. 12. and 7. 3. 5. 10. Gal. 1. 19.


Q. 11. Why was Christ Born of a Jew?

A. God had made a special Promise to Abraham first, that Genesis 22. 18. and 26.
4. Psalm. 89. 29. 36. Romans 1. 3. and 4. 16. 2 Timothy 2. 8.
Christ should be his Seed, in whom all Nations should be blessed: and to David
after, that he should be his Offspring, an everlasting King.

Q. 12. Why was not Christ Born till about Four thousand Years after the Fall?

A. It Is dangerous asking Reasons of God's Councils which he has not revealed.
But this much we may know, that Christ was Man's Redeemer by undertaking what he
after did, before his Incarnation. And that he revealed the Grace of Redemption
by Promises, Types and Prophesies, and so saved the Faithful: And that Gods
works are usually progressive to Perfection, and ripe^t at last: And therefore
when he had first sent his Prophets, he lastly sent his Son, to perform his
undertaking and bring Life and Immortality more fully to light, and bring in a
better Covenant, and gather a more excellent Universal Church.

Q. 13. Were any sav^d by Christ before he was made Man?

A. Yes: They had the Love of the Father, the Grace of Christ, and the
necessary communion of the Holy Ghost, and the Promise: And in every Age and
Nation, he that feared God and work't Righteousness was accepted of him. See
Heb. 11.


CHAP. XIII. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried; he
descended into Hell.
Qu. 1. WHy is there nothing said in the Creed, 1. Of Christ's overcoming the
Temptations of the Devil and the World? Matt. 4.
2. Or of his fulfilling the Law, his perfect Holiness, Obedience and
Righteousness? 3. Nor of his Miracles?

A. 1. You must know that the Creed at first when Christ made it the Symbol of
Christianity, had but the three Baptismal Articles; Mat. 28. 19.
to be Baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 2. And that
the rest were added, for the Exposition of these three. 3. And that the Errors
that rose up occasioned the additions: Some denied Christ's real Humanity, and
some his Death, and said that it was another in his Shape that dyed: and this
occasioned these Expository Articles. 4. But the Apostles and other Preachers
expounded more to those whom they Ca^echized, than is put into the Creed; and
more is employed in that which is expressed: And had any Heretics then denied
Christ's perfect Righteousness, and Victory in Temptation, it is like it would
have occasioned an Article for these. 5. But Christ would not have his Apostles
put more into the Creed, than was needful to be a part of the Test of
Christianity: And he that understandingly, consentingly and practically,
believes in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, shall be saved. 6. And as to
Christ's Miracles; yea, and his Holiness, they are contained in the true
meaning of Believing in the Holy Ghost, as I shall after show.

Q. 2. But why is none of Christ's Sufferings mentioned, before that of his
being Crucified?

A. This which is the consummation, implies the humilation of all his Life:
his mean Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9. Heb. 12. 2, ^, 4.
Birth, and Education, his mean estate in the World, his Temptations,
Accusations, Reproaches, Buffeting, Scourging, his Agony, his Betraying, his
Condemnation as a Malefactor, by false Witness, and the Peoples Clamor, and
the Rulers Malice and Injustice: his whole Life was a state of humiliation,
^inished in his Crucifixion, Death and Burial.

Q. 3. What made the Jews so to hate and Crucify him? Ioh. 11. 48. 50.


A. Partly a base fear of Caesar, lest he should destroy them in jealousy of
Jesus as a King: And having long revolted from sincerity in Religion, and
become Ceremonious Hypocrites, God left them to the blindness and hardness of
their Hearts, resolving to use them for the Sacrificing of Christ, the
Redemption of the World, and the great enlargement of his Church.

Q. 4. Why is Pontius Pilate named in the Creed?

A. Historically to keep the remembrance of the time when Christ suffered: and
to leave a just shame on the Name of an unjust Judge. 1 Timothy 6. 13. Col. 1. 20.
and 2. 14. Ephesians. 2. 16. Gal. 3. 13.


Q. 5. Why was Crucifying the manner of Christ's death?

A. 1. It was the Romans manner of putting vile Malefactors to death. 2. And it
was a death especially cursed by God; and Christ foretold it of himself.

Q. 6. Was it only Christ's Body that suffered, or also his Soul and Godhead?

A. The Godhead could not suffer; but he that was God suffered, in Body and in
Soul. Matt. 26. 38. Ioh. 12. 27.


Q. 7. What did Christ's Soul suffer?

A. It suffered not by any sinful Passion, but by Natural, Lawful fear of what
he was to undergo, and feeling of pain, and specially of God's just displeasure
with Man's sin, for which he suffered; which God did express by such
with-holdings of Joy and by such inward deep sense of his punishing Justice, as
belonged to one that consented to stand in the place of so many sinners, and to
suffer so much in their stead. Luke 22. 44.


Q. 8. Did Christ suffer the pains of Hell, which the Damned suffer?

A. The pains of Hell are Gods just punishment of Man for sin; and so were
Christ's sufferings, upon his consent. But, 1. The Damned in Hell are hated of
God, and so was not Christ. 2. They are forsaken of Gods holy Spirit, and
Grace, and so was not Christ. 3. They are under the Power of Sin, and so was
not Christ. 4. They hate God and Holiness; and so did not Christ. 5. They are
tormented by the Conscience of their Personal guilt, and so was not Christ:
Christ's Sufferings and the Damned's vastly differ.

Q. 9. Why must Christ suffer what he did?

A. 1. To be an Explatory Sacrifice for sin: God thought it not meet as he was
the just and holy Ruler of the World, to forgive sin without such a
Demonstration of his Holiness and Justice, as might serve as well to the Ends
of his Government, as if the Sinners had suffered themselves. 2. And he
suffered to teach Man, what sin deserves, and what a God we serve, and that we
owe him the most costly obedience, even to the death; and that this Body, Life,
and World are to be denied, contemned and forsaken, for the sake of Souls, and
of Life Everlasting, and of God, when he requires it. The Cross of Christ is
much of the Christians Book. Heb. 9. 26. and 10. 12. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Luke 14. 33.
1 Cor. 2. 2. Gal. 2. 2. and 3. 1. and 5. 24. and 6. 14. Ph. 2. 8. and 3. 7, 8,
9.


Q. 10. What sorts of Sin did Christ die for?

A. For all sorts, except Men's not performing those Conditions which he
requires of all that he will pardon and save.

Q. 11. For whose sins did Christ Suffer?

A. All Men's sins were instead of a meritorious cause of Christ's Sufferings;
he suffered for Mankind as the Savior of the World: And as to the Effect, his
Suffering purchased a conditional Gift of free pardon and life to all that will
believingly accept it, according to the nature of the things given: But it was
the will of the Father, and the Son, not to leave his death to uncertain
success, but infallibly to cause the Elect to believe and be saved. Romans 5. 6.
8. and 14. 9. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 6. 1 Ioh. 2. 2. Ioh.
1. 29. and 3. 16. 18, 19. and 4. 42. and 6. 51.


Q. 12. Was it just with God to punish the Innocent?

A. Yes, when it was Christ's own undertaking by consent, to stand as a Sufferer
in the room of the guilty.

Q. 13. How far were our sins imputed to Christ?

A. So far as that his consent made it just that he suffered for them. He is
said to be made sin for us, who knew no sin, which is, to be made a Curse or
Sacrifice for our sin. But God never took him to be really or in his esteem a
sinner: He took not our fault to become his fault, but only the punishment for
our faults to be due to him. Else sin it self had been made his own, and he had
been relatively and properly a Sinner, and God must have hated him as such, and
he must have dyed for his own Sin when ours was made his own: But none of this
is to be imagined. 1 Pet. 2. 22.


Q. 14. How far are Christ's Sufferings imputed t^ us?

A. So far as that we are reputed to be justy forgiven and saved by his Grace,
because he made an expiation by his Sacrifice for our Sins: But not so as i^
God mistook us to have suffered in Christ, or tha^ he or his Law did judge that
we our selves have made satisfaction or expiation by Christ. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Act.
26. 18.


Q. 15. Was not that penal Law, [In the day tha^ thou eatest thereof thou shall
die] and [The Soul that sins shall die] fulfilled by execution for us all in
Christ, and now justifies us as so fulfilled?

A. No: That Law condemned none but the Sinner himself, and is not fulfilled
unless the Person suffer that sinned. That Law never said [ Either the Sinner
or another for him shall die.] Christ was given us by God as above his Law, and
that he might justly and mercifully forgive sin, though he executed not that
Law: That Law did but make punishment our Due, and not Christ's, but not bind
God to inflict it on us, when his Wisdom knew a better way. It is not that Law
as fulfilled that justifies us, but another, even the Law of Grace:
Satisfaction is not the fulfilling of the penal Law. Romans 3. 19, 20, 21. 28.
and 4. 13. 15. and 10. 4. Gal. 2. 16. 21. and 3. 11. 13. 18, 19. 24.


Q. 16. Did not Christ fulfill the Commands of the Law for us by his Holiness
and perfect Rrighteousness? What need was there that he suffer for us?

A. The Law or Covenant laid on him by his Father was, that he should do both;
and therefore both ^s the performance of that Condition on which God gave us to
him to be pardoned and saved by him. If he had fulfilled the Commands of the
Law by perfect Holiness and Righteousness, in our Legal Persons, so ^s that God
and his Law would have reputed us to have done it by him, then indeed being
reputed perfect Obeyers, we could not have been reputed Sinners that needed
suffering or pardon. But Christ's habitual, active and passive Righteousness,
were (all the parts of his One Condition) performed by him, to be the
meritorious Cause of our Justification. Mat. 3. 15. and 5. 17. Isa. 53. 11. 1
Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21.


Q. 17. Why is Christ's Death and Burial named besides his Crucifixion?

A. Those words have been since added to obviate their Error who thought Christ
dyed not on the Cross.

Q. 18. What is meant by his descending into Hell?

A. Those words were not of some Hundred Years in the Creed: And since they
were put in, have been diversely understood: There is no more certain nor
necessary to be believed, but that, 1. Christ's Soul was, and so ours are,
immortal, and remained when separated from the Body. 2. And that as death being
the separation of Soul and Body was threatened by God as a punishment to both,
so the Soul of Christ submitted to this penal separation, and went to the place
of separated Souls, as his Body did to the Grave. 1 Cor. 15. 4, 5. Psa. 16. 9,
10. 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21.


Q. 19. Of what use is this Article to us?

A. Of great and unspeakable use: 1. We lea^ hence what Sin deserves: shall we
play with tha^ which must have such a Sacrifice? Heb. 9. 21. Col. 1. 20. Ephesians.
1. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 19. Romans 3. 25. Heb. 2. 14. 1 Io. 2. 1, 2, 3* and 4. 10.
Heb. 9. 14. Ephesians. 2. 13. Rev. 1. 5. and 5* 9. and 7. 14. and 14. 20.


2. We learn hence that a sufficient expiatory Sacrifice is made for sin: and
therefore that God is reconciled, and we need not despair, nor are put to mak^
expiation our selves, or by any other.

3. We learn that Death, and the Grave, and the state of Separate Souls, are
Sanctified; and Satan conquered as he had the power of Death, as Gods
Executioner: And therefore that we may boldly die i^ Faith, and commit Soul and
Body into the hand ^ him that died for them.

Q. 20. But did not Christ's go to Paradise? and c^^ that be penal?

A. Yes: And so do faithful Souls. But the So^^ and Body are a perfect Man; and
Nature is against Separation; And as the Union of Christ's Soul a^^ glorified
Body now in Heaven is a more perfect sta^^ than that was of his separated Soul,
so the deprivation of that Union and Perfection was a degree ^^ penalty: And
therefore it was the extraordinary privilege of Enoch and Elias not to die.

CHAP. XIV. The Third Day he rose again from the Dead.
Q. 1. HOw was Christ said to be three days in the Grave?

A. He was there part of the Sixth day, all the Seventh, and part of the First.
Mat. 12. 39, 40. and 16. 4. Ioh. 20. Mat. 28.


Q. 2. Is it certain that Christ rose from the Dead, the third day?

A. As certain as any Article of our Faith, Angels witnessed it: Mary first saw
him and spoke with him: Two Disciples going to Emmaus, saw him, to whom he
opened the Scriptures concerning him: Peter and others Fishing, saw him, and
spoke and eat with him: The Eleven assembled, saw him: Thomas that would not
else believe, was called to see the print of the Nails, and put his Finger into
his pierced side. He was seen of above Five hundred Brethren at once: He gave
the Apostles their Commission and Instructions, and his Blessing, and ascended
Bodily to Heaven in their sight: And afterward appeared in Glory to Stephen and
Paul: But I have before given you the proof of the Gospel, and must not repeat
it. 1 Cor. 15. 5, 6.


Q. 3. Was it foreknown that Christ would rise?

A. Yes: It was foretold by the Prophets, and expressly and often by himself to
his Apostles and the Jews, and therefore they set a Sealed Stone with a Guard
^^ Soldiers on the Sepulcher to watchit. Act. 26. 23. Mat. 20. 19. Mark 8. 31.
and 9. 31. and 10. 34. Luke 24. 7. 46. Ioh. 20. 9. Romans 14. 9. 1 These. 4. 14.


Q. 4. It is a wonder that the Jews th^n believed no^ in him?

A. The Rulers were now more afraid than before that Christ would by the People
be Proclaimed their King, and then the Romans destroy their City and Nation;
for they feared Men more than God: And withal they had put him to death on that
account, a^ if his making himself a King had been Rebellion against Caesar, and
[ King of the Iews] was written as his Crime by Pilate on his Cross: and so
they were engaged against him as a Rebel, though he told them hi^ Kingdom was
not a Worldly one: And they seemed to believe that he did all his Miracles by
the Devil a^ a Conjurer, and therefore that he was raised by tha^ Devil: Matthew.
12.
which was the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: And as for the Common People,
they deceived them by hiring the Soldiers to say, Tha^ his Disciples stole his
Body while they slept. Matthew. 28. 3.


Q. But why would Christ appear to none but his Disciples?

A. We are not fit to give God a Law: His works are done in infinite Wisdom.
But we may see, 1. That they who had hardened their Hearts against all his
Doctrine, and the Miracles of his Life, and maliciously put him to Death as a
Blasphemer, a Conjurer, and a Traitor to Caesar, were unworthy and unmeet to be
the Witnesses of his Resurection: And its like it would but have excited their
rage to have tried a new Persecution. His Resurrection being the first act of
his triumphant Exaltation, none were so fit to see him as those that had
followed him in his Sufferings: Even as wicked Men are not meet (as Paul was)
to be ^rapt up into Paradise and the Third Heavens, and hear the unutterable
things. Act. 10. 41. and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 22. and 4. 2. 33. and 17, 18. Heb. 6. 2.


2. The Witnesses whom he chose were enough and fit Persons for that Office,
being to be sent abroad to Proclaim it to the World.

And God confirmed their Testimony by such abundant Miracles, of which you
heard before. 1 Cor. 15. 4. 6. Heb. 2. 3, 4, 5.


3. And yet he left not the Infidels without convincing means: As he before
told them, that he would raise in three Days the Temple of his Body, when they
destroyed it; so they saw the Earthquake, the Sun darkened, the Vail of the
Temple rent at his Death; and their Soldiers saw the Angels that terrified
them, and told the Rulers what they saw: And after all, it was to Paul a
Persecutor (and partly to his company) that Christ appeared. Mat. 26. and 27.
Luke 23. Act. 9.


Q. 6. Why must Christ rise from the Dead?

A. You may as well ask, Why he must be our Savior?

1. If he had not risen, Death had conquered him, and how could he have saved
us that was overcome and lost himself. 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14. 20.


2. He could not have received his own promised Reward; even his Kingdom and
Glory: It was for the Joy that was set before him, that he enendured the Cross
and despised the shame: Therefore God gave him a Name above every Name, to
which every created Knee must bow. Heb. 12. 3, 4. Phil. 2. 7, 8.


3. His Resurrection was to be the chief of all those Miracles by which God
witnessed that he was his So^* and the chief Evidence by which the World was to
be convinced of his Truth, Romans 1. 4* 1. Pet 1. 3, 4. and 3. 2^. Ioh. 11. 24.
25.
and so was used in their Preaching by the Apostles. That Christ rose from the
Dead, is the chief Argument that makes us Christians.

4. The great executive parts of Christ's saving Office were to be performed in
Heaven, which a dead Man could not do. How else should he have Inceded for us
as our heavenly High Priest? How should he have sent down the Holy Ghost to
renew us? How should he as King have governed and protected his Church on Earth
unto the End? How should he have come again in Glory to Judge the World? and
how should we have seen his Glory (as the Mediator o^ Fruition) in the Heavenly
Kingdom. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. and 3. 21. Phil. 3. 10, 11. 19, 20, 21. Romans 6* 5.
Heb. 4. 14, 15. and 6. 20. and 7. 16, 17, 18. and 8* 1, 2, 3. and 10. 21, 22.


Q. 7. I perceive then that Christ's Resurrection is t^ us an Article of the
greatest use? What use must ^^ make of it?

A. You may gather it by what is said, 1. By this you may be sure that he is
the Son of God and his Gospel True. Romans 8. 34. Col. 2. 12, 15. Col. 3. 1. 4, 5.
2. By this you may be sure that his Sacrifice on the Cross was accepted as
sufficient. 3. By this you may be sure that Death is Conquered, and we may
boldly trust our Savior, who tasted and overcame Death, with our departing
Souls. 4. By this you may be sure that we have a powerful High Priest and
Intercessour in Heaven, by whom we may come with reverend boldness unto God. 5.
By this we may know that we have a powerful King, both to obey and to trust
with the Churches Interest and our own. 6. By this we may know that we have a
Head still living, who will send down his Spirit to gather his Chosen, to help
his Ministers, to Sanctify and Comfort his People, and prepare them for Glory.
7. By this we are assured of our own Resurrection, and taught to hope for our
final Justification and Glory. 8. And by this we are taught that we must Rise
to Holiness of Life. Romans 8. 34. Col. 2. 12, 15. Col. 3. 1. 4, 5.


CHAP. XV. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right Hand of God the
Father Almighty.
Qu. 1. HOw long was it between Christ's Resurrection and his Ascension?

A. Forty days: He rose on the day which we call Easter Day, and he ascended
on that which we call Ascension day, or Holy Thursday. Act. 1. 3, 4. Mat. 28.


Q. 2. Did Christ stay all that while among his Disciples visibly?

A. No: but appeared to them at such seasons as he saw meet. Io. 20. and 21.


Q. 3. Where was he all the rest of the Forty Days?

A. God has not told us, and therefore it concerns us not to know.

Q. 4. He showed them that he had Flesh and Blood; ho^ ^^en was he to them
invisible, the most part of the Forty days?

A. The Divine power that raised Christ, could make those alterations on his
Body, which we are unacquainted with.

Q. 5. How was Christ taken up to Heaven?

A. While he was speaking to his Apostles of the things concerning the Kingdom
of God, and answering them that hoped it would presently be, and had given
their Commission, and the Promise of the Holy Ghost, and commanded them to wait
for it at Jerusalem; he was taken up as they gazed after him, till a Cloud took
him out of their sight: And two Angels like two Men in white, stood by them and
asked them why they stood gazing up to Heaven, telling them that Jesus who was
taken up should so come again. Act. 1. 4, 5.


Q. 6. Had it not been better for us that he had staid on Earth?

A. No: He is many ways more useful to us in Heaven. Act. 1. 10, 11. Io. 16,
17. and 15. 26. and 14. 16, 26. Gal. 4. 4, 6.
1. He is now no more confined in presence to that small Country of Judea,
above the rest of the World, as a Candle to one room, but as the Sun in his
Glory, shines to all his Church on Earth. 2. He is possessed of his full Power
and Glory (by which he is fit to protect and Glorify us.) 3. He intercedeth
for us where our highest Concerns and Interest are.

4. He sends his Spirit on Earth to do his work on all believers Souls.

Q. 7. What is meant by his sitting on the right Hand of God?

A. Not that God has Hands or is confined to a place as Man is. But it
signifies that the Glorified Man Jesus is next to God in Dignity, Power and
Glory; and as the Lieutenant under a King, is now the Universal Administrator
or Governor of all the World under God the Father Almighty. Mat. 26. 64. Act.
7. 55, 56. Romans 8. 34. Ephesians. 1. 20. 21, 22, 23. Col. 3. 1. Heb. 1. 3, 13. and 8.
1. and. 10. 12.. Ephesians. 1. 23. Mat. 28. 18.


Q. 8. I Thought he had been only the Lord of his Church?

A. He is Head over all things to his Church. All Power and things in Heaven
and Earth are given him: Even the frame of Nature depends on him: He is Lord
of all: But it is his Church that he Sanctifies by his Spirit and will
Glorify.

Q. 9. If Christ have all power, why does he let Satan and Sin still reign over
the far greatest part of the Earth?

A. 1. Satan reigns but over Volunteers that wilfully and obstinately choose
that Condition: And he reigns but as the Jailor in the Prison, as Gods
Executioner on the wilful refusers of his Grace. Rev. 12. 9. and 13. 14.
And his reign is far from absolute; he crosses none of the Decrees of God,
nor overcomes his power, but does what God sees meet to permit him to do. He
shall destroy none of Gods Elect, nor any that are truly willing of Saving
Grace. And as for the fewness of the Elect I shall speak of it after, about the
Catholic Church.

Q. 10. But is not Christ's Body present on Earth, and in the Sacrament?

A. We are sure he is in Heaven, and we are sure that their Doctrine is a
fiction contrary to Sense, Reason and Scripture, that say the Consecrated Bread
and Wine are substantially turned into the very Body and Blood of Christ, and
are no longer Bread and Wine. Bu^ how far the presence of Christ's Soul and Body
extends, is a question unfit for Man's determination, unle^ we better knew
what Glorified Souls and Bodies are ^ We see that the Sun is eminently in the
Heaven: An^ yet whether its lucid Beams be a real part of its substance which
are here on Earth, or how far they extend, we know not: nor know we how the Sun
differs in Greatness or Glory from the Soul and Bod^ of Christ: nor know when
an Angel is in the roo^ with us, and when not: These things are unfit for o^
enquiry and decision. Act. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45.


CHAP. XVI. From thence he shall come again to judge the Quick and ^ Dead.
Qu. 1. WHat is meant by the Quick and ^ Dead?

A. Those that are found alive at Christ's coming and those that were dead
before. 1 These. 15, 16, 17.


Q. 2. Are not the Souls of Men judged when Men die?

A. In part they are: But as it is Soul and Body that make a Man, so it is the
Judgment upon Soul and Body which is the full judgment on the Man: God's
Execution is the principal part of his Judgment: And as Souls have not the
fullness of Glory or Misery till the Resurrection, so they are not fully Judged
till then: And Societies must be then judged, and Persons in their Sociable
relations together. Mat. 25. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. 10, 11. Ioh. 5. 22. 25.


Q. 3. Whither is it that Christ will come, and where will he judge the World?

A. Not in Heaven, for the wicked shall not come thither: But Paul tells us, 1
These. 4. 16. [ That the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven, with a shout,
with the Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the Dead in
Christ shall rise first, and then they that are alive and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and so
shall we ever be with the Lord.] By which it appears that the place of
Judgment will be in the Air, between Heaven and Earth.

Q. 4. In what manner will Christ come to Judgment?

A. Christ tells us, Matthew. 25. 31. That the Son of Man (that is, Christ as
Man,) shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him, and shall sit
on the Throne of his Glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations, and
he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from
the Goats.] And St. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. The Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power, when he shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe.

Q. 5. Where are the Souls of the Dead before the Day of Judgment?

A. The Souls of the Faithful are with Christ in Heaven, and the Souls of the
Wicked are with Devils in misery.

Q. 6. Where is it that the Devils and Wicked are in misery?

A. They are shut out from the Glory of God, and where ever it be that they
are, it is as Gods Prison, till the Judgment of the Great Day. But the
Scripture calls the Devil, [ the Prince of the Power of the Air] Ephesians. 2. 2.
Yet is he on Earth, for he works in the Children of disobedience, and is
ready with his Temptations with all Men: And he is said to go to and fro in the
Earth, Job 1. 7. and 2. 2. And he is said to walk in dry places, seeking rest,
and dwelling in the wicked, Mat. 12. 43, 44.

Q. 7. But are the Souls of the Wicked in no other Hell than the Devils are?

A. The Scripture tells us of no other: But it tells us not of their tempting
and possessing Men as Devils do, but of their suffering.

Q. 8. Are Devils and Wicked Souls in the same Hell that they shall be in after
the Day of Judgment, and have they the same punishment?

A. Whether there shall be any change of the Place, it is not needful for us to
know: But the punishment is of the same kind: But it will be greater after
Judgment* were it but because the Body joined to the Soul, and the multitude of
the damned joined in the Suffering, will make every one more receptive of it.

Q. 9. Is there no middle place between Heaven and Hell? or a middle state of
Souls that are in hope of deliverance from their pain?

A. Hell it self is not all one Place, Luke 16. 22, 9.
seeing Devils are both in the Air and in the Earth, and where else we know
not: And in Job 1. 11, 12. Satan was among the Sons of God. But as for any hope
of deliverance to them that die unpardoned, the Scripture tells us of none,
buth says that [ the Night comes when none can work] and that This is the
accepted time: this is the Day of Salvation: And that [ every Man shall be
judged according to what he had done in the Body, whether it be good or evil.]
It is therefore mad presumption for any one to neglect this Day of Salvation
upon a hope of his own making, that they that die the Slaves of the Devil may
repent and be delivered in their Airy Life, and be made the Children of God; or
that any Purgatory fire shall refine them, or any Prayers of the Saints in
Heaven or Earth deliver them. Mat. 5. 25, 26. Mark 9. 43, 44, 45, 46.


Q. 10. But it seems by their pleading described by Christ, Mat. 25. that they
will not be past hope till the Sentence be passed on them.

A. But the same Text, tells you what Sentence certainly shall pass; and
therefore that if they keep any hope it is not of Gods making, but their own,
and will be all in vain: But indeed those words seem rather to express their
fervent desire to escape Damnation, than their hope. The wicked may cry for
Mercy when it is too late, but shall not obtain it: Dives Luke 16. may beg for
a drop of Water, but not get it.

Q. 11. But will it not be a long work to judge all that ever lived from the
beginning of the World unto the End?

A. Gods Judgment is not like Man's, by long talk and wordy Trial, though Christ
open the Reasons of it after the manner of Men; Gods Judgment consists of
full Conviction and Execution: And he can convince all Men in a moment by his
Light, shining at once into every ones Conscience: As the Sun can enlighten at
once the Millions of Eyes all over the Earth. And Gods execution (casting all
the wicked into utter darkness and misery) needs no long time, though it is
continuance will be for ever. 2 Timothy 4. 1.


Q. 12. May we know in this life, what Judgment Christ will then pass on us?

A. All Men, or most Men do not know it: Nor will it be known by a slight and
sudden Thought; nor by blinded or self-flattering Sinners; nor by the worser
sort of true Believers, that sin as much as will stand with sincerity; nor yet
by such ignorant Christians who understand not well the terms of the Covenant
of Grace, or have true Grace, and know it not to be true: nor yet by such
timorous Christians, whose fear does hinder Faith and Reason. But there is no
doubt but we may know, and ought to use all diligence to know what Sentence
Christ will pass upon us. Io. 12. 47, 48. Romans 2. 12, 13. Act. 17. 31. Mark 16.
16.


For, 1. The difference between Heaven and Hell is so great, that there must
needs be a great difference between them that shall go to each: And therefore
it may be known: Christ's Spirit is not an undiscernable Mark and Pledge to
them that have it. 2. And we are commanded to search and try our selves; and
many Marks of difference are told us, and the Persons plainly described that
shall be Justified and Condemned: And they are already here Justified and
Condemned by that Law by which they shall be judged. 3. And what comfort could
we have in all the Redemption and Grace of Christ, and all the Promises of
Salvation, if we could not come to know our Title by them. Mal. 3. 17. 18. Mat.
25. Mat. 13. Romans 8. 30. Io. 17. 2, 3. Heb. 9. 27. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 6. 2.


Q. 13. Who be they that Christ will then justify, or condemn?

A. I must not here answer that Question, because its proper place is
afterward, under some of the following Articles.

Q. 14. But I find some Scriptures, saying, That we are not justified by works,
but by Faith in Christ; and yet in Mat. 25. Christ passes the Sentence upon
Men's Works as the Cause; and it is said, We shall be judged according to our
works.

A. By works, Paul means Act. 24. 25. Iam. 2. 13. Acts 17. 31. Romans 3. 27.
Gal. 2. 16, 17. and 3. 2. 5. 10. Ephesians. 2. 7. Tit. 3. 5, 6. Romans 4. 4. and 2. 2,
3, 5. Eccl. 12. 24.
All works that are conceived to make the reward to be not of Grace, but of
Debt: All works which are set in competition or opposition to Justification by
Faith in Christ: The Question between him and the Jews was, Whether the Divine
excellency of Moses's Law was such, as that it was given to justify the doers
of it as such? Or whether it was but an Index to point them to Christ the end
of the Law, by whom they must be justified? But it is not Believing in Christ,
nor begging his Grace, nor thankfully accepting it, that Paul means by Works
in his exclusion: It is this that he sets against these works. And as we are
here made Justified Persons by mere Grace, giving us Repentance and Faith in
Christ (that is, making us Christians:) so this obliges us to live and die as
Christians, if we will be saved. And therefore the final justifying Sentence at
Judgment does pass on us according to such works only as are the performance of
our Covenant with Christ, without which we shall not be saved, and therefore
not then justified; our Justification then being the justifying of our Title to
Salvation, and therefore has the same conditions.

Q. 15. What may we further learn by this Article of Christ's coming.

A. 1. We must learn to Fear, and Obey him that must judge us: And to live as
we would then hear of it, and to make it all the work of Our lives to prepare
for that day and final doom. And diligently to try our Hearts and Lives, that
we may be sure to be then justified.

2. We must not be discouraged that we see not Christ, but remember that we
shall shortly see him in his Glory: In the Sacrament and all his worship, let
us do it, as expectants of his coming. (i) Romans 14. 10. Rev. 20. 12, 13. and
22. 14. Iam. 2. 14, etc. Mat. 12. 36, 37. 2. Pet. 3. 11, 12.


3. We have no cause to be dismayed at the Prosperity of the Wicked, nor at our
Prosecutions or any sufferings, while we foresee by Faith that glorious Day.

4. We should live in the joyful Hopes of that Day, when he that died for us,
and Sanctified us, shall be our Judge, and justify us, and finally judge us to
endless Life: And we must love, and long, and pray for this Glorious coming of
Christ. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

CHAP. XVII. III. I Believe in the Holy Ghost.
Qu. 1. WHat is meant by believing in the Holy Ghost?

A. It means our Believing what he is, and what he Does: and our Trusting to
Himself, and to his Works.

Q. 2. What must we believe of Himself?

A. That he is God, the Third Person in the Trinity, One in Essence with the
Father and the Son.

Q. 3. What must we believe of his Works?

A. We must believe, 1. That the Holy Ghost is the great Agent and Advocate of
Jesus Christ on Earth, by his works to be his Witness, and to plead his Cause
and communicate his Grace.

2. That the Holy Ghost was the Author of those many uncontrolled Miracles by
which the Gospel of Christ was Sealed to the World: And therefore that (a) Mat.
28. 19. 1 Io. 5. 7. Acts 5. 3. Mat. 12. 31, 32.
those Miracles were the certain attestation of God: Ioh. 14. 15, 16, 17. 26.
and 15. 26. and 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15. Mark 1. 8. Act. 1. 5. 8. and
2. 4, 33. 38. and 4. 31. and 6. 3. 5. and 8. 17. and 10. 44, 45. and 11. 15,
16. and 19. 2, 6. Romans 15. 13, 16. 1 Cor. 12. and 6. 11, 19. 2 Cor. 13. 14.
Tit. 3. 5, 6. Heb. 2. 3, 4. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Romans 8. 9, 15, 16. Iud. 20. Luke 11.
13. Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30. 1 These. 4. 8.


3. That the Holy Ghost was given by Christ to his Apostles, and Evangelists,
to enable them to perform the extraordinary Office to which they were
Commissioned, to teach the Nations to observe all things that Christ had
commanded, and to lead them into all Truth, and bring all things to their
remembrance.

4. That therefore the Doctrine of the said Apostles and Evangelists, first
preached by them, and after Recorded in the Sacred Scriptures for the use of
the Church to the end of the World, as the full Doctrine and Law of Christ, is
to be received as the Word of God, indicted by the Spirit.

5. That it is the work of the Holy Ghost to Sanctify all Gods Elect; that is,
to illuminate their understandings, to convert their Wills to God, and to
strengthen and quicken them to do their duty, and conquer Sin, and save them
from the Devil, the World and the Flesh: And to be in them a Spirit of Power
and Love, and a sound mind: And so that the Holy Ghost is an Intercessor within
us to communicate LIFE, LIGHT and LOVE, from the Father, and the Son, and
excite in us those Holy Desires, Thanks and Praise, which are meet for Gods
acceptance. All this is contained in our Believing in the Holy Ghost.

Q. 4. If all this be in it, it seems a most necessary part of Faith.

A. The Perfective works of God are used to be ascribed to the Holy Ghost: This
is so weighty and necessary a part of Faith, that all the rest are insufficient
without it: Millions perish that God created, and that Christ in a general sort
(as aforesaid) dyed for; but those that are Sanctified by the Holy Ghost are
saved. It is the work of the Holy Ghost to Communicate to us the Grace of
Christ, that the work of Creation and Redemption may attain their Ends.

Q. 5. How is it proved that the Holy Ghost is God?

A. In that we are Baptized into the Belief of him as of the Father and the
Son: And in that he does the works proper to God, and has the Attributes of
God in Scripture: Which also expressly says [ There are Three which bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these three are One,
1 John 5. 7.

Q. 6. I have often marvelled that the Creed left out, 1. The Authority of the
Apostles: 2. And their Miracles, and Christ's. 3. And the Authority of the
Scriptures; and now I perceive that all these are contained in our believing in
the Holy Ghost.

A. No doubt, but it is a Practical Article of Faith, Ioh. 16. 13.
in which we profess to believe in the Holy Ghost* in his Relation and Works on
Man; and therefore ^^ Christ's Agent in gathering his Church, by the
Apostolical Power, Preaching, Writings and Miracles; and in the Sanctifying,
and helping all true Believers.

Q. 7. By this it seems there are many ways of denying the Holy Ghost?

A. Yes: 1. They deny him, who deny his Godhead, as the Third Person in the
Blessed Trinity.

2. They deny him who deny that the Miracles o^ Christ and his Apostles were
God's Testimony to Christ, (being convinced of the Truth of the Facts.)

3. They deny him who deny the extraordinary qualifications of the Apostles,
and suppose them to have had but the prudence of ordinary honest Men.

4. They deny the Holy Ghost, who deny the sacred Scriptures to be indicted by
him, and to be true.

5. They deny him, who deny him to be the Sanctifier of God's Elect, and feign
Holiness to be b^^ conceit, deceit or common Virtue.

Q. 8. But are all these the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost?

A. The unpardonable sin is called [ The Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, Mat.
12. Matthew. 12.
And it is when Men are convinced that those Miracles were done, and those
gifts given, which are God's attestation to Christ and his Gospel, but they
fixedly believe and say, That they were all done by the power of the Devil, by
Conjuration, and not by God, and therefore notwithstanding them, Christ was but
a Deceiver. And this sin is unpardonable, because it rejects the only remedy,
The Spirits witness to the truth of Christ: He that will not believe this
Witness, shall have no other.

Q. 9. But how may we know that we are Sanctified by the Spirit?

A. By that Holiness which he causes: 1. When our Understandings so know and
believe the Truth and Goodness of the Gospel and its Grace, as that we
Practically esteem and prefer the Love of the Father, the Grace of the Son, and
the Communion of the Holy Ghost, and the heavenly Glory, before all the
Pleasures, Profits and Honors of this World, that stand against them, and
before Life it self.

2. When Our Wills do with habitual Inclination and Resolution, Love and Choose
the same, before all the said things that stand in competition.

3. When in the course of our Lives we seek them first, and hold them fastest
in a time of Trial, forsaking the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, so far as
they are against them, and living in sincere (though not perfect) Obedience to
God. Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 1. 18. Col. 1 9, 10. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Mat. 18. 3. Ioh. 3.
3, 5, 6. Heb. 12. 14. Mat. 6. 33. 2 These. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 2 These. 2. 2. 1
Io. 4. 1, 2, 3.


Q. 10. Is the Spirit or the Scripture higher, and the Rule of Faith and Life?

A. The Spirit as the Author of the Scripture is greater than the Scripture;
and the Scripture as the Word of the Spirit is the Rule of our Faith and Lives;
and greater than our Spiritual gifts: The Spirit in the Apostles, was given
them, to write (when they had preached) that Doctrine which is our Rule: But
the Spirit is not given to us to make a new Law or Rule, but to believe, Love
and Obey that already made. As under the Law of Moses, God that made the Law,
was greate^ than the Law: But when God had made that Law their Rule, he did not
after that teach good Men to make another Law, but to understand and obey that.

Q. 11. There are many that boast of the Spirit and Revelations; how shall we
try such, whether their Spirits ^^ of God?

A. 1. If they pretend to do that which is fully done by the Spirit already,
that is, to preach or write another Gospel, or make a new Law for the Universal
Church, seeing this was the Prophetical extraordinary Office of Christ and the
Spirit in the Apostle^ such imply an accusation of insufficiency on Christ's a^^
the Spirits Law or Rule, and arrogate a power never given them; and so are
false Prophets.

2. If they contradict the written Word of God which is certainly Sealed by
God's Spirit already, ^^ must needs be by an evil Spirit: For God's Spirit does
not contradict it self. Gal. 2. 7, 8.


Q. 12. But had not the Priests under the Law, t^^ Spirit of God, as well as
Moses that gave them t^^ Law?

A. Moses only (and Aaron under him) had God Revelation to make the Law: And
the Priests only to keep it, teach it and rule by it. And so it is as t^ the
Apostles of Christ, and the succeeding Ministry.

Q. 13. But might not Kings then make Religion Laws?

A. Yes: to determine such circumstances as Go^ had only given them a General
Law for, and left to be determined by them; but not to make new Laws of the
same kind with Gods; nor to add to or alter them.

Q. 14. But were there not Prophets after Moses that had the Spirit?

A. Yes: But they were not Legislators, but sent with particular Mandates,
Reproofs, or Consolations; save only David and Solomon who had directions from
God himself (not to make a new Law of God, but) to order things about the
Temple and its Worship.

So if any Man now pretend to a Prophetical Revelation, it must not be
Legislative to the Catholic Church, nor against Scripture, but about
particular Persons, Acts and Events; and it must be proved by Miracle or by
Success before another is bound to believe him.

Q. 15. Must I take every motion in me, to be by the Holy Ghost which is
agreeable to the Word of God, or for doing what is there commanded?

A. Yes, if it be according to that Word, for the Matter, End, Manner, Time,
and other circumstances. But Satan can transform himself into an Angel of
Light, 2 Cor. 11. 14.
and mind us of some Text or Truth to misapply it, and put us on Meditation,
Prayer or other duty at an unseasonable Time, when it would do more hurt than
good; or in an ill manner, or to ill Ends: He can move Men to be fervent
Reprovers, or Preachers, or Rulers, that were never called to it, but are urged
by him, and the Passion and Pride of their own Hearts: And good Men in some
mistakes know not what manner of spirit they are of.

CHAP. XVIII. The Holy Catholic Church.
Qu. 1. HOw is this Article joined to the former?

A. This Article has not been always in the Creed, in the same order and
words as now. But the belief of [a Holy Church] was long before it was called [
Catholic.] And it is joined as part of our Belief of the Work of the Holy
Ghost, and the Redemption wrought by Christ: Christ by his death purchases,
and the Holy Ghost gathers the Holy Catholic Church: It were defective to
believe Christ's Purchase, and the Holy Ghost's Sanctification; and not know for
whom and on whom it is done. To Sanctify, is to Sanctify some Persons: and so
to make them the Holy Society, or Christian Church.

Q. 2. What is a Church?

A. The Name is applied to many sorts of Assemblies which we need not name to
you. But here it signifies, The Christian Society.

Q. 3. Why is it called Catholic?

A. Catholic is a Greek word and signifies Universal: It is called Catholic
because, 1. It is not as the Jews Church confined to one Nation, but
comprehends all true Christians in the World. And* 2. Because it consists
of Persons that have every where in the World, the same Essentiating
qualifications, summed up Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. One Body, one Spirit, one hope of
our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all,
though i^ various Measures of Grace. And so the Concordan^ Churches of Christ
through the World, were called The Catholic Church, as distinct from the Sects
and Heresies that broke from it.

Q. 4. How comes the Pope of Rome to call only his Subjects Catholics?

A. The greatest part of the Church on Earth by far, was long in the Roman
Empire, and when Emperors turned Christians they gave the Churches Power for
the Honor of Christianity, to form the Churches much like the Civil State: And
so a General Council of all the Churches in that Empire was their Supreme
Church Power. And three Patriarchs first, and five after were in their several
Provinces, over all the rest of the Archbishops and Bishops. And so the
Orthodox Party at First were called, The Catholics, because they were the
greater Concordant part: But quickly the Arrians became far greater, and
carried it in Councils, and then they called themselves, The Catholics: After
that the Orthodox under wiser Emperors got up again, and then they were the
greater part called Catholics: Then the Nostorians a little while, and the
Eutychians after, and the Monothelites after them, got the Major Vote in
Councils, and called themselves the Catholic Church: And so since then, they
that had the greatest countenance from Princes, and the greatest number of
Bishops in Councils, claimed the Name of the Catholic Church: And the Pope
that was the first Patriarch in the Empire first called himself the Head of the
Catholic Church in that Empire; and when the Empire was broke, extended his
claim to the whole Christian World, partly by the abuse of the word [ Catholic
Church] and partly by abuse of the Name [ General Councils;] falsely pretending
to Men that what was called [ Catholic and General] as to the Empire, had been
so called as to all the World: And thus His Church was called Catholic.

Q. 5. Why is the Catholic Church called Holy?

A. 1. To notify the work of our Savior, who came to save us from our sins,
and gather a peculiar People, a holy Society, who are separated from the
unbelieving, ungodly World.

2. To notify the Work of the Holy Ghost, who is given to make such an Holy
People.

3. Yea, to notify the Holiness of God the Father, who will be Sanctified in
all that draw near him, and hates the impure and unholy, and will have all his
Children Holy as he is Holy.

4. And to tell us the fitness of all Gods Children for his favor and
Salvation.

Q. 6. Wherein consists the Holiness of the Church?

A. 1. Christ their Head is perfectly Holy: 2. The Gospel and Law of Christ
which is our objective Faith and Rule are Holy. 3. The Founders of the Church
were eminently Holy. 4. All sincere Christians are truly Holy, and marked out
as such for Salvation. 5. The common Ministers have an Holy Office. 6. The
Church Worship as Gods Ordinances are Holy works. 7. All that are Baptized and
profess Christianity, are Holy as to Profession, and so far separated from the
Infidel World, though not sincerely to Salvation.

Q. 7. What is it now that you call, The Holy Catholic Church?

A. It is The Universality of Christians Headed by Jesus Christ.

Or, It is a Holy Kingdom consisting of Jesus Christ Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. and 5. 23,
24. Col. 1. 18, 19* 24* Mat. 16. 18. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29, 30. Act. 2. 47.
the Head, and all sincere Christians the sincere Members* and all professed
Christians the professing Members; first founded and gathered by the Holy Ghost
eminently working in the Apostles and Evangelists, Recording the Doctrine and
Laws of Christ for their Government to the End; and guided by his Ministers,
and Sanctifying Spirit according to those Laws and Doctrine, in various degrees
of Grace and Gifts.

Q. 8. What is it that makes all Churches to be One?

A. 1. Materially, their concord in the same qualifications: which is called,
Ephesians. 4. 3. The Unity of the Spirit: They are all, that are sincere, Sanctified
by the same Spirit, and have the same Essentials of Faith, Hope, Baptismal
Covenant, and Love: Io. 17. 21, 23. 1 Cor. 8. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 5, 27, 28, 29. Ephesians.
4. 5, 6, 7. Mat. 28. 19.
And the Hypocrites profess the same.

2. Formally their common Union with and Relation to God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, that is, to Jesus Christ their Head, bringing them home to God the
Father by the Spirit.

Q. 9. Is there no one Ministerial Head of all the Church on Earth?

A. No: neither One Man, nor one Council or Collection of Men: For, 1. None are
naturally capable of being One Supreme Pastor, Teacher, Priest and Ruler over
all the Nations of the Earth, nor can so much as know them, or have hum^ne
converse with them. And a Council gathered equally out of all the World as One
such Supreme, is a more gross Fiction of impossibles than that of a Pope.

2. And Christ that never so qualified any, never gave any such power. But all
Pastors are like the Judges, Justices and Mayors that rule subordinately under
one King, in their several Precincts; and not like an Universal Viceroy,
Lieutenant, or Aristocracy or Parliament.

Q. 10. But is not Monarchy the best Form of Government, and should not the
Church have the best?

A. 1. Yes: and therefore Christ is its Monarch, who is capable of it.

2. But a Humane Universal Monarchy of all the World is not best: nor was ever
an Alexander, a Caesar, or any Man so mad, as soberly to pretend to it, or
plead for it. Who is the Man that you would have to be King at the Antipodes,
and over all the Kings on Earth.

3. Yea, the case of the Church is liker that of Schools and Colleges, that
rule Volunteers in order to Teaching them. And did ever Papist think that all
the Schools on Earth of Grammarians, Philosophers, Physicians, etc. should have
one humane Supreme Schoolmaster, or a Council or College of such to Rule them?

Q. 11. But Christ is not a Visible Head; and the Church is Visible.

A. We deny not the Visibility of the Church, but we must not feign it to be
more visible than it is. 1 Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 2. 10, 18. and 2. 19.
Act. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. Ephesians. 2. 20. Act. 8. 36. Act. 9. and 22. 14. Rev. 1. 7.
Mat. 25. 40.
1. It consists of visible Subjects: 2. Their Profession is visible and their
Worship. 3. They have visible Pastors in all the particular Churches, as every
School has its Schoolmaster. 4. Christ was visible in the Flesh on Earth. 5.
He was after seen of Stephen and Paul. 6. He is now visible in Heaven, ^^ the
King is in his Court. 7. And he will come in glorious Visibility shortly to
judge the World. 8. And his Laws are visible by which he rules us and will
judge us: If all this Visibility will not satisfy Men, Christ will not approve
of Usurpation for more Visibility.

Q. 12. Of what use is this Article to us?

A. 1. To tell us that Christ dyed not in vain, but will certainly have a Holy
Church which he will save. Ephesians. 5. 27. Act. 2. 47. Act. 20. 28. 1 Cor. 10. 32.
Ephesians. 3. 10. Col. 1. 18, 24. Ephesians. 3. 21. Heb. 2. 12. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Ephesians. 4.
16. 1 Timothy 3. 15.


2. To show us in the blessed effect that the Sanctification of the Spirit is
not a Fancy; but a Holy Church is renewed and saved by it.

3. To tell us that God forsakes not the Earth, though he permit Ignorance,
Infidelity and Wickedness to abound, and Malice to persecute the Truth: still
God has a Holy Church which he will preserve and save. And though this or that
Church may apostatize and cease, there shall be still a Catholic Church on
Earth.

4. To mind us of the wonderful Providence of God, which so continues and
preserves a Holy People, hated by open Enemies and wicked Hypocrites, by Satan
and all his Instrments on Earth.

5. To teach us to love the Unity of Christians, and carefully maintain it, and
not to tear the Church by the Engines of proud Men's needless Snares, nor to be
rashly censorious of any, or excommunicate them unjustly, nor to separate from
any, further than they separte from Christ; but to rejoice in our common Union
in Christian Faith and Love, and not let wrongs, or infirmities of Christians
or Carnal Interests, or Pride or Passion, nor different Opinions about things
not necessary to our Unity, destroy our Love or Peace, or break this holy bond.

CHAP. XIX. The Communion of Saints.
Qu. 1. HOw is this Article joined to the former?

A. As it belongs to our Belief in the Holy Ghost, it tells us the effect of
his Sanctification.: And as it belongs to our belief of the holy catholic
Church, it tells us the end of Church Relation, that Saints may live in a holy
Communion.

Q. 2. What is it to be a Saint?

A. To be separated from a common and unclean Conversation unto God, and to be
absolutely devoted to him, to Love, serve and trust him, and hope for his
Salvation.

Q. 3. Are all Saints that are members of the catholic Church?

A. Yes, by Profession, if not in sincerity: All that are sincere and living
members of the Church are really devoted to God by Heart-consent: and the rest
are devoted by Baptism and outward Profession, and are Hypocrites, pretending
falsely to be real Saints. 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2. Romans 1. 7. and 12. 15. and 15. 25,
26, 31. 1 Cor. 14. 33. and 16. 1, 15.


Q. 4. Why then does the Church of Rome Canonize some few, and call them
Saints, if all Christians be Saints?

A. By [ Saints] they mean [ extraordinary Saints]: But their appropriating the
Name to such, much tends to delude the People, as if they might be saved
though they be not Saints 2 Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1. and 5. 3. and 6. 18. Phil. 1.
1. Col. 1. 2. Heb. 13. 24. Act. 4.
.

Q. 5. What is meant by the Communion of Saints?

A. Such a frame and practice of Heart and Life toward one another as
supposes Union, such as is between the Members of the Body.

Q. 6. Wherein does this Communion consist?

A. 1. In their common Love to God, Faith in Christ and Sanctification by the
Spirit. 2. In their Love to one another as themselves. Col. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 22.
3. In their care for one another welfare, and endeavor to promote it, as
their own: Heb. 13. 2, 3. 1 Timothy 6 18.
and when Love makes all their goods so far common to all Christians within
their converse, as that they do to their power supply their wants in the order
and measure that Gods Providence and their Relations and Acquaintance direct
them; preferring the relief of others necessities, before their own superfluity
or fullness. 4. In their joining as with one Mind and Soul and Mouth in Gods
public Worship, and that in the holy Order under their respective Pastors,
which Christ by his Spirit in the Apostles has instituted 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2
Cor. 6. 14. Heb. 10. 22, 24. Ioh. 13. 34, 35. 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
.

Q. 7. Why is our joining in the Lords Supper called our Communion?

A. Because it is a special Symbol, Badge and Expression of it instituted by
Christ, to signify our Communion with him and one another.

Q. 8. Is that to be only a Communion of Saints?

A. Yes, that in a special manner is appropriated to Saints: Other parts of
Communion (as eating together, relieving each other, duties of Relation, etc.)
are so far to be used toward Unbelievers, that they are not so meet to be the
distinguishing Symbols of Christians: But the two Sacraments, Baptism for
Entrance, and the Lords Supper for continuance of Communion, Christ has
purposely appointed for such Badges or Signs of his People as separate from the
World. Mat. 26. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 21, 22, 24, etc. Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 10. 16. Act.
2. 42, 46.


Q. 9. By what Order are others to be kept from Church Communion?

A. Christ has instituted the Office of the Sacred Ministry for this end, that
when they have made Disciples to him, they may be entrusted with the Keys of
his Church, that is, especially the Administration of these Sacraments, first
judging who is fit to be entered by Baptism, and then who is fit for continued
Communion. Mat. 16. 19. and 24. 45, 46. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Act. 20. 20, 28. 1
These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24.


Q. 10. May not the Pastors by this means become Church-Tyrants?

A. We must not put down all Government for fear of Tyranny; else Kingdoms,
Armies, Colleges, Schools, must be all dissolved as well as Churches: some
body must be trusted with this Power; and who is fitter than they who are
called to it as their Office, and therefore supposed best qualified for it.

Q. 11. What if none were trusted with it, and Sacraments left free to all?

A. Then Sacraments would be no Sacraments, and the Church would be no Church:
If any man or woman that would, might baptize whom and when they would, they
might baptize Turks and Heathens, and that over and over, who come in Scorn;
and they might baptize without a Profession of true Faith; or upon a false
Profession. And if every man might give the Lords Supper to another, it might
be brought into Alehouses and Taverns in merrymerit, or as a Charm, or every
Infidel or Enemy might in scorn profane it: Do you think that if Baptism and
the Lords Supper were thus administered, that they would be any Symbols or
Badges of Christianity, or of a Church, or any means of men's Salvation? No
Christians ever dreamt of such Profanation.

Q. 12. But why may not the Pastors themselves give them to all that will?

A. Either you would have them 1 Cor. 5. 2 These. 3. Tit. 3. 10. 2* Cor. 6. 16,
17. 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2. and 2 Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1, 2.
forced to do so, or to do it freely. If forced, they are no Judges who is fit;
And who then shall be Judge? If the Magistrate, you make him a Pastor; and
oblige him to teach, examine, hear and try all the Peoples Knowledge, Faith and
Lives, which will find them work enough: And this is not to depose the
Ministers power, but to put it on another that has more already than he can
do: And a Pastor then that delivers the Sacrament to every one that the
Magistrate bids him, shall be a Slave and not a free performer of the acts of
his own Office, unless that Magistrate try and judge, and the Minister be but a
Deacon that must give account for no more, than the bare delivering it. But if
it be the Receivers of Baptism, or the Lords Supper, that shall be Judges, and
may force the Pastor to give it them, I have showed you already the profanation
will make it no Sacrament, nor Church.

And if Pastors that are Judges shall freely give them to all, they will be the
Profaners, and such Ministration will confound the Church and the World.

Q. 13. I do not mean that they should give them to Heathens, but to all that
profess the Christian Faith.

A. Therefore they: must judge whether they profess the Christian Faith or not:
And whether they speak as Parrots, or understand what they say And withal,
Christian Love, and a Christian Life must be professed as well as Christian
Faith.

Q. 14. What are the Terms on which they must receive Men to Communion?

A. They must Baptize them and their Infants, who with competent understanding,
and seeming seriousness, profess a Practical belief in God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and consent to that Covenant, as expounded in the Creed, Lords
Prayer, and Ten Commandments. And they must admit all to Communion in the Lords
Supper, who continue in that Profession, and nullify it not by proved
Apostasy or inconsistent Profession or Practice. Mat. 28. 19. Rev. 22. 17*


Q. 15. May not Hypocrites make such Professions, that are no Saints?

A. Yes: and God only is the Judge of Hearts, not detected by proved contrary
Words or Deeds: And these are Saints by Profession.

Q. 16. But it is on pretense of being the Judge of Church Communion, that the
Pope has got his Power over the Christian World.

A. And if Tyrants by false pretenses claim the Dominions of other Princes, or
of Men's Families, we must not therefore Depose our King, or ^athers.

Q. 17. But how shall we know what Pastors they be that have this Power of the
Keys, and judging of men's fitness for Communion?

A. All Pastors as such have Power, as all Physicians have in judging of their
Patients, and all Schoolmasters of their Scholars. But great difference there
is, Who shall Correct Men's injurious Administrations: Whether the Magistrace do
it himself; or whether a Bishop over many Pastors do it; or many Pastors in a
Synod do it, is no such great matter as will warrant the sad Contentions that
have been about it, so it be done: Or if none of these do it, a People
intollerably injured may right themselves by deserting such an injurious
Pastor. But the Pastors must not be disabled, and the work undone, on pretense
of restraining them from misdoing it. Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18.


Q. 18. What is the need and benefit of this Pastoral Discipline?

A. 1. The Honor of Christ, who by so wonderful an Incarnation, etc. came to
save his People from their Sins, must be preserved; which is profaned i^ his
Church be not a Communion of Saints. Tit. 2. 14. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. and 5. 25, 26,
27, 28, 29. Col. 1. 18, 24. Ephesians. 4. 14, 16.


2. The difference between Heaven and Hell is so great, that God will have a
visible difference between the Way to each, and between the probable Heirs of
each. The Church is the Nursery for Heaven, and the Womb of Eternal happiness.
And Dogs and Swine are no Heirs for Heaven.

3. It Is necessary to the comfort of Believers.

4. And for the conviction and humbling of the Unbelievers and Ungodly.

Q. 19. What further Use should we make of this Article*

A. 1. All Christians must carefully see that they be not Hypocrites, but
Saints indeed, that they be mee^ for the Communion of Saints.

2. All that administer Holy things, and Gove^^ Churches, should carefully see
that they be a Communion of Saints, and not a Swine-stye: Not as the common
World, but as the Garden of Christ: That they promote and encourage Holiness,
and take heed ^^ Cherishing Impiety.

3. We must all be much against both that Usurp^tion, and that neglect of
necessary Discipline, and differencing Saints from wicked Men, which has
corrupted most of the Churches in the World. Mat. 22. 21, 22. and 13, 39, 41.
and 7. 21, 22. Luke 13. 27.


Q. 20. But when experience assures us, that f^^ Christians can bear Church
Discipline, should it be us^^ when it will do hurt?

A. It is so tender and yet so necessary a Discipline which Christ has
appointed, that he is unfit for the Communion of Saints, who will not endure
it. It is not to touch his Purse or Body: It is not to cast any Man out of the
Church for small Infirmities: No, nor for gross sin, that repents of it and
forsakes it: It is not to call him Magisterially, to submit to the Pastors
unproved accusation or assertions: But it is with the Spirit of Meekness and
Fatherly Love to convince a Sinner, and draw him to Repentance, proving from
God's Word, Mat. 18. 21, 22. Luke 17. 3. 2 Cor. 2. 7, 10. 7. 8. Ioh. 20. 23.
that the thing is a Sin, and proving him guilty of it, and telling him the
evil and danger of it, and the necessity of Repentance and Confession and
amendment. And if he be stubborn, not making unnecessary have, but praying for
his Repentance, and waiting a competent Time, and joyfully absolving him upon
his Repentance: and if he continue impenitent, only declaring him unfit for
Church Communion, and requiring the Church accordingly to avoid him, and
binding him to answer it at the Bar of God; if he repent not. Mark 3. 6. Luke
13. 3, 5. and 17. 3. Act. 2. 37, 38. and 3. 19. Luke 24. 47. Iam. 5. 16. 1 Ioh.
1. 9. Prove. 28. 13. Act. 19.


Q. 21. But Men will not submit to public Confession: may not Auricular
private Confession to the Priest serve turn?

A. In case the Sin be private, a private Confession may serve: But when it is
known, the Repentance must be known, or else it attaineth not the Ends of it is
appointment: And the Papists Auricular Confession in such Cases, is but a trick
to delude the Church, and to keep up a Party in it of wicked Men, that will not
submit to the Discipline of Christ: It pretends strictness, but it is to
avoid the displeasure of those that are too proud to stoop to open Confession.
Le^ such be never so many, they are not to be kept in the Church on such Terms:
He that has openly sinned against Christ and scandalized the Church, and
dishonored his Profession, and will by no conviction and entreaty be brought
to open Confession (in an evide^ case) does cast himself out of the Communion
of Saints, and must be declared such by the Pastors.

CHAP. XX. The Forgiveness of Sins.
Qu. 1. What is the dependence of this Articl^ on the former?

A. It is part of the description of the Effects of Christ's Redemption, and the
Holy Ghost's application of it: His Regeneration makes us Members o^ the Holy
Catholic Church, where we must live in the Communion of Saints, and therewith
we receive the Forgiveness of sins: The same Sacrament of Baptis^ signifying
and exhibiting both, as washing us from the Filth or Power of sin, and from the
guilt of punishment. 1 Ioh. 1. 9.


Q. 2. What is the Forgiveness of Sin?

A. It is God's acquitting us from the deserved punishment. Mat. 9. 2, 5, 6, 7.
Mar^ 2. 7, 10.


Q. 3. How does God do this?

A. By three several Acts which are three Degrees of Pardon: The first is, by
his Covenant-gift, Promise, or Law of Grace, by which as his Instrument or Act
of Oblivion, he dissolveth the Obligation to punishment which we were under,
and gives us Lawful-Right to Impu^ity, so that neither punishment by Sense or
by Loss shall be our Due. Psalm. 32. 1, 2. and 85. 2. Luke 5. 20. and 7. 48, 50.
Iam. 5. 15. Ephesians. 4. 32. Heb. 1. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. Psalm. 130. 4.


The second Act is by his Sentence as a Judge pronouncing us forgiven, and
Justifying this our Right against all that is or can be said against it.

The third Act is by his Execution, actually delivering us from deserved
punishment of loss and sense. Act. 5. 31. and 13. 38. and 26. 18.


Q. 4. Does not God forgive us the Guilt of the fault as well as the Dueness of
Punishment?

A. Yes: for th^se are all one in several Words: To forgive the sin, and to
acquit from Dueness of punishment for that sin, are the same thing. God does
not Repute or Judge us to be such as never sinned; for that were to judge
fasly: Nor does he judge that our sin is not related to us as the Actors, for
that is impossible: Nor does he judge that our sin did not deserve punishment:
But only that the deserved punishment is forgiven for the Merits of Christ's
Righteousness and Sacrifice.

Q. 5. Is not Justification and Forgiveness of Sin all One?

A. To be Justified: 1. Sometimes signifies to be Made Just and Justifiable in
Judgment: And then it sometimes includes both the Gift of Saving Faith and
Repentance, and the Gift of Pardon, and of Right to Life Everlasting: And
sometime it presupposes Faith and Repentance given, and signifies the annexed
Gift of Pardon and Life.

2. Sometime it signifies Gods Justifying us by his Sentence in Judgment which
contains both the justifying of our Right to Impunity and Salvation, and the
Justifying our Faith and Holiness as sincere, which are the Conditions of our
Right. Isa. 53. 11. and 45. 25. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 5, 7. Rev. 22. 12. Romans
4. 2, 5. and 2. 13. and 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16, 17. Romans 8. 33. Iam. 2. 21, 24.


3. And sometimes to Justify us, is to use us as just Men. And as long as we
understand the Matter thus signified by Pardoning and Justifying, we must not
strive about words so variously used. Isa. 50. 8. 1 King. 8. 32. Deuteronomy. 25. 1.
Isa. 5. 2. 3.


Q. 6. But if Christ's perfect Righteousness Habitual and Actual, be Our own
Righteousness by God's Imputation, how can we need a Pardon of Sin, when we
were perfectly obedient in Christ?

A. We could not possibly be pardoned as Sinners, if God reputed us to have
fulfilled all Righteousness in Christ, and so to be no Sinners: Therefore it is
no such Imputation that must be affirmed. But God justly reputeth Christ's
Holiness, and Righteousness, active and passive, dignified by his Divinity to
be fully Meritorious of our Pardon, Justification and Salvation. And so it is
Ours and Imputed as the true Meritorious Cause of our Righteousness, which
consists in our Right to Pardon and Salvation. Romans 3. 22, 25, 26. Gal. 3. 6.
Romans 4. 5, 9, 22. and 5. 17, 18, 19. and 6. 13, 16, 18. and 8. 4, 10.


Q. 7. Is Pardon perfect in this Life, and all punishment remitted at Once?

A. No: 1. The punishment denounced in God's Sentence of Eve and Adam is not
wholly forgiven: The Curse on the Ground, the Woman's Sorrows, the pain and
stroke of Death. 2. Temporal correcting punishments are not all forgiven. 3.
Some measure of Sin is penally permitted in us. 4. The want of more Holiness
and help of Gods Spirit and Communion with God, is to all of us a fore
punishment. 5. The Permission of many Temptations from Devils and Men, are
punishments, specially when they prevail to heinous sinning. 6. To be so long
kept out of Heaven, and to lie after in the Grave, are punishments. Sure few
Men believe that Pardon is here perfect, that feel any of these. 7. And it is
not perfect till we are Justified before the World, and put in possession of
Salvation: That Is the perfect Pardon. I think no Man that felt what I feel at
the writing of this in my Flesh, and for my Friends, can possibly think that
Pardon is perfect in this Life. Iam. 5. 15. Luke 6. 37. Mat. 12. 31. Ios. 24.
19. Mat. 6. 12, 14. ^ King. 23. 26, 27. Mat. 18. 32.


Q. 8. But some say that Chastisements are no punishments?

A. They are not Damning destructive punishments: but they are Chastising
punishments: For they are evil to Nature inflicted by Fatherly Correcting
Justice for Sin.

Q. 9. Is that an Evil which always brings greater Good?

A. It is no such Evil as Sinners should repine at. But ask any of that
Opinion, under the Stone, o^ other tormenting Disease, or if he must die as a
Malefactor, whether it be not a Natural evil? If there be no Evil in it, why
does he groan under it? Why does he pray against it? Or use Physic or other
remedies? Why is he offended at those that hurt him? Had he not rather have his
Holiness and Salvation without torment, Prisons, etc. than with them.

2. But it is not true, that all the punishments of such as are saved make them
better: some are permitted to fall into heinous Sin, and to decline in their
Faith, Love and Obedience, and to die worse than once they were; and so to have
a less Degree of Glory, when they have been hurtful Scandals in the World. And
is there no harm in all this? Nothing is perfect i^ this imperfect World. 2 Samuel 7. 14. Psalm. 73. 14. and 1^8. 18. 1 Cor. 11. 32. Ier. 31. 18. Heb. 12. 8,
9, 10. 2 Cor. 2^ 6. Lam. 3. 39. Job* 31. 11. Am. 3. 2. Man 16. 23.


Q. 10. But how is Christ's Merits and Satisfaction perfect then?

A. That Is perfect which is perfectly fitted to it is use: It was not a use that
Christ ever intended to Pardon all temporal Correcting punishment, no^ to make
each Believer perfect the first hour. The our greatest Sins should go
unpunished is again Christ's will and Kingly Government, and the Nature of his
Salvation: And his Righteousness and Satisfaction are not intended against
himself. Phil. 3. 12, 13. 1 Pet. 5. 10. 1 Cor. 13. 10. 2 Cor. 7. ^. Prove. 8.
36. 1 Ioh. 1. 8. and 5. 17.


Q. 11. What sins are pardoned? Is it all, or but some?

A. All sin is pardoned (though the Pardon be not perfect at first) to all true
penitent Believers. But final Impenitence, unbelief and unholiness never had a
Pardon purchased or offered: But that which is not final is forgiven: Yea, no
sin is actually forgiven as to the everlasting punishment to final Impenitents
and Unbelievers. Mat. 12. 32. Ex. 34. 6, 7. Luke 13. 3, 5. Ioh. ^. 16. Mark 16.
16.


Q. 12. Are sins pardoned before they are committed?

A. If you call the mere purpose or purchase a Pardon unfitly, or if you speak
but of the General Act of Oblivion, which pardons all Men on Condition that
they penitently and believingly accept it, so sins to come are pardoned: But
(not to strive about words) no one has any actual proper Pardon for any sin
before it is committed: for it is no sin, and so no pardoned sin. Mat. 18. 32. 2
Cor. 5. ^9. Mat. 6. 12.


Q. 13. When is it that sin is pardoned?

A. God's purpose is Eternal: The conditional Pardon was made when the Covenant
of Grace was made: Some Degrees of punishment God remitteth by common and
preparatory Grace. But saving Pardon none receive (at Age) till they Believe,
nor are they Justified. Heb. 1. 3. Ioh. 3. 16, 18, 25. Romans 4. 2. and 5. 1.


Q. 14. Why do we pray for Pardon daily, when sin is already pardoned?

A. 1. I told you sin is not pardoned when it is no sin; we sin daily and
therefore must have daily pardon: And this also proves that Pardon and
Justification are not perfect before Death, because there are more sins still
to be pardoned. 2. And we pray for the Continuance of the Pardon we have, and
for removal of punishments.

Q. 15. Is this the meaning of this Article, that [I believe that my own sins
are actually forgiven] as a Divine Revealation?

A. The meaning is, 1. That by Christ a certain Degree of punishment is taken
off from all Mankind, and they are not dealt with according to the rigor of the
Law of Innocent Nature. 2. And that a conditional Pardon is given to all in the
new Covenant so far as it is revealed. 3. And that this Pardon becomes actual
to every one when he penitently and believingly consents to the (Baptismal)
Covenant with Christ. 2 Samuel 12. 12, 13. Psalm. 50. and 32.
4. And that this Pardon is offered to me as well as others, and shall be mine
if I be a sincere Believer; This is all that the Article contains* 5. But
while I profess to Believe, it is supposed that I hope I do it sincerely, and
therefore have some hope that I am pardoned. 6. But because a Man may sincerely
believe, and yet doubt of the sincerity, and God has no where said in
Scripture that I or you are Sincere Believers, or are pardoned; therefore to
believe this is no Divine Faith save by participation, nor is it professed by all
that profess the Creed. But it is an Effect of two Acts, 1. Of our Faith, 2.
And of the Conscience of our sincerity in Believing: It is a Conclusion that
all should labor to make sure, though it be not the proper sense of the
Article.

Q. 16. Seeing all true Believers are at first justified and pardoned as to the
Everlasting punishment, does it not follow that all God's Children have
afterward none but temporal chastisement to be forgiven?

A. 1. I told you that sin is not forgiven even to stated Believers, before it
is committed; and when it is committed the qualifying Condition must be found
in us: And though our first true Faith and Repentance qualify us for the
Pardon of all Sin past, yet when more is committed more is required in us to
our Pardon, that is, that we renew Repentance and Faith as far as Sin is known,
and that we beg Pardon and forgive others. 2. Yet the future punishment is not
so much unforgiven to the Faithful as to others, before renewed Repentance: For
they have the main qualification, and want but an act for which they are
habituated, and have God's Spirit to assist them. 3. And though Sins unknown
which are ordinary infirmities, are forgiven without express particular
Repentance, yet in order of nature, the Desert of punishment goes before the
forgiveness: The very Law of Nature makes durable punishment due to durable
Souls, till the dueness be remitted by forgiveness. Psalm. 32. and 25. and 51.
Mat. 18. 32. Mat. 6. 14, 15. 1 Ioh. 1. 9. Act. 8. 22.


Q. 17. Is my sin forgiven, as long as I believe it not forgiven?

A. If you believe not that God is a merciful pardoning God, and Christ a
pardoning Savior, whose Sacrifice and Merits are sufficient, and God's Promise
of Pardon to the Penitent Believer is true, and to be trusted, you are not
pardoned: But if you believe this, and consent to Christ's pardoning Covenant,
you are pardoned, though you doubt of your own forgiveness.

Q. 18. How may I be sure that I am forgiven?

A. The everlasting punishment is forgiven, when you are one that God by his
Covenant pardons, and that is, when by true Faith and Repentance you Consent
to the Covenant Terms, and give up your self to God, as your God and Savior,
and Sanctifier. And when temporal punishments are remitted in Soul or Body,
experience of their removal may tell you. Ioh. 3. 16. Romans 10. 14.


Q. 19. What keeps up doubts of forgiveness of Sin?

A. 1. Ignorance of the Terms of the pardoning Covenant. 2. And ignorance of
our Selves, and our own Sincerity. 3. Especially renewing our guilt by Sin, and
being so defective in our Repentance and other Grace, as that we cannot be sure
of our Sincerity: Above all when frequent sinning after Promises make us not
credible to our selves.

Q. 20. But is not the Cure of a doubting Soul, to Believe, though he find no
Evidence in himself, and that because he is commanded to believe, and so
believing will be his Evidence?

A. Believing is a word that signifies diverse Acts: As I told you, It is every
Man's duty to believe Gods Mercy, and Christ's Redemption and Sufficiency, and
the truth of the conditional Promise, Mar. 3. 28. Act. 5. 31.
and to Accept Pardon as Offered on the Terms of that Promise; and then not to
cherish doubts of his Sincerity: But it is not every Man's duty to Believe that
he is sincere, or that his Sin is pardoned: Else most should be bound to
believe an Untruth that it may after become true. Presumption destroys far
more than Despair. For an ungodly impenitent Person to believe that he is
godly, and justified by Christ, is to believe himself who is a Liar, and not to
believe Christ; yea it is to believe himself against Christ, who says the
contrary.

Q. 21. What is the use of this Article of the Forgiveness of Sin?

A. The Use is exceeding great: not to embolden us in sin because it is
pardonable; nor to delay Repentance and forsaking sin; For that were to cast
away Pardon by Contempt: But, 1. to show us what a merciful God we serve. 2.
And what a Mercy it is to have a Redeemer, Ier. 31. 34. and 36. 3. Luke 7. 12,
13. Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14.
and a Pardoning Savior. 3. And what a Comfort to be under a Pardoning
Covenant of Grace. 4. And it tells us that the review of the sins of our
unregenerate State, though they must keep us humble, should yet be still used
to raise our Hearts to joyful thankfulness to God, for the Grace of a Redeemer.
5. And it should keep us from despair and discouragment in all our weaknesses,
while we have the Evidence of daily Pardon. 6. Yea it should make us hate Sin
the more, which is against so good a God. 7. We may come with reveren^ boldness
to God, in Meditation, Prayer and Sacraments, when we know that Sin is
pardoned. 8. And we may taste the Sweetness of all our Mercies, when the doubt
of our forgiveness does not embitter them* 9. And we may much the easilier bear
all Afflictions, when the everlasting punishment is forgiven. 10. An^ we may
die when God calls us without horror, when we believe that we are pardoned
through Christ: nothing but Sin can hurt or endanger us, at Christ's Tribunal:
when that is forgiven, and there is no Condemnation to us being in Christ, how
joyfully may we think of his appearing! 11. What Peace of Conscience may we
have continually, while we can say that ^^ our Sins are forgiven us: For as
Psalm. 32. 1. An^ blessed are they whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is
covered, to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is
no guile.

CHAP. XXI. The Resurrection of the Body.
Qu. 1. I Have often wondered why there is nothing i^ the Creed of the
Immortality of the Soul, and its state before the Resurrection.

A. 1. The Article of Christ's Descent, tells us that his Soul was among the
separated Souls, while his Body was in the Grave: as he told the Thief, that he
should be that day with him in Paradise.

2. The Resurrection of the Body is a thing not known at all by Nature, but
only by supernatural Revelation, and therefore is an Article of mere belief:
But the Immortality or future Life of Souls, is a point which the Light of
Nature reveals, and therefore was taken both by Jews and sober Heathens as a
Truth of common Notice: Even as the Love of our selves is not expressed in the
Ten Commandments, but only the Love of God and others, because it was a thing
presupposed.

3. The Immortality of the Soul is included in the Article of the Resurrection
of the Body: For if the Soul continue not, the next at the Resurrection would
be another Soul, and a new created one, and not the same: And then the Body
would not be the same Souls Body, nor the Man the same Man, but another. Who
was ever so unwise to think that God had so much more Care of the Body than of
the Soul, as that he would let the Soul perish, and raise the Body from the
dust alone, and join it with another Soul.

4. Very Learned and wise Expositors think that the Greek word ( Anastasis)
used for Resurrection, indeed signifies the whole Life after this, both of
Soul first, and Body also after, often in the New Testament: It is a Living
again, or after this Life, called, A standing up again: And there is great
probability of of it in Christ's Argument with the Sadduces, and some passages
of Paul's, 1 Cor. 15.

Q. 2. What Texts of Scripture do fully prove that the Soul lives when it is
separated from the Body?

A. Very many: 1. God breathing into Man the breath of Life, and making him a
living Soul, is said thereby to make him in the Image of God, who is the Living
God: And so the Soul is essentially Life.

2. God's calling himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is by Christ
Expounded, as proving that he is the God of Living Abraham.

3. None ever dreamt that Henoch and Elias had no company of humane Souls in
Heaven: For Mat. 17. Moses also appeared with them on the Mount, and showed
that his Soul did live.

4. When Saul himself would have Samuel raised to speak with him, it plainly
implies that it was then the common belief of the Jews that separated Souls
survive.

5. When, 1 King. 17. 22. Elias raised the dead Child of the Widow of Sarepta,
and 2 King. 4. Elisha raised the Shunamites Child, and 2 King. 13. 21. ^ dead
Man was raised; all these proved that the So^^ was the same that came again:
Else the Persons had not been the same.

6. When Christ raised Lazarus, and Iairus Daughter, Mar. 5. 41. 42. Luke 8.
55. and another, Luke 7. 12, 14, 15. The same Souls came into them.

7. Many of the Dead rose and appeared at Christ's Death: And Peter raised one
from Death: which was by a reunion of the same living Soul to the same Body.

8. Christ tells us, Luke 12. 4. that Men cannot kill the Soul.

9. He tells us, Luke 16. 9. that as the wise Steward when he was put out, was
received by the Persons whom he had Obliged, so if we make us Friends of the
Mammon of Unrighteousness, when these things fail us (which is at Death) we
shall be received into the Everlasting Habitations.

10. The Parable of the sensual Rich Man, and Lazarus, one going presently to
Hell, and the other to the Bosom of Abraham in Paradise, fully prove that
Christ would have this believed, and would have all Men warned accordingly to
prepare; and that Moses and the Prophets were so sufficient for such notice, as
that one from the Dead would have been less credible herein: Though it be a
Parable, it is an instructing and not a deceiving Parable, and very plain in
this particular. The Name of Abraham's Bosom was according to the Common sense
of the Jews who so called that State of the blessed, not doubting but that
Abraham was then in Happiness, and the blessed with him.

11. Herod's thought that John had been risen from the Dead, and the Jews
conceit that Christ had been one of the Old Prophets risen, and the Pharisees
approbation of Christ's argument with the Sadduces, do put it past doubt that
it was then taken for certain Truth, that the Souls of the Faithful do survive,
by all except such as the Heretical Sadduces.

12. Christ says, Ioh. 17. 3. This is Life Eternal to know Thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. How is it Eternal if it have as long
an interruption as from Death till the Day of Judgment.

13. It is the Sum of God's Gospel that whosoever believes in Christ, shall
not perish, but have Everlasting Life, Joh. 3. 16. Therefore they perish not
till the day of Judgment.

14. Christ has promised that whoever drinks of the Water which he will give
him (the Spirit) it shall be in him a Well of Water springing up to Everlasting
Life, Ioh. 4. 14. But if the Soul perish, that Water perishes to that Soul.

15. To be born again of the Spirit, fitteth a man to enter into the Kingdom of
God: But if the Soul perish, all that New Birth is lost to that Soul, and
profits the Dust only.

16. Joh. 3. 36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life. Joh. 5.
24. He is passed from death to life. Ioh. 6. 27. He gives meat which endures
to everlasting life. V. 35. He shall never hunger or thirst (that is, be empty)
that comes to Christ V. 39. Of all that comes to him he will lose nothing:
Therefore will not lose all their Souls. V. 40, 47. They have everlasting life.
54, 56. He dweleth in Christ, and Christ in him, and therefore is not extinct,
58. Ioh. 8. 51. Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my sayings, he
shall never see death. Joh. 10. 28. I give unto them eternal Life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.

17. Joh. 11. 26. Whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die.

18. Joh. 14. 16. The Comforter shall abide with you for ever. V. 17. For he
dwells with you, and shall be in you.

19. Joh. 17. 24. I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory: If the Soul perish it is not they that shall
be with him, but others.

20. Luke 23. 43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

21. Luke 23. 46. Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

22. Joh. 12. 26. Where I am there shall my Servant be. But Christ is not
perished.

23. Act. 7. 59. Stephen called on God, saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit:
Therefore it perished not.

24. Romans 8. 17. If children then heirs. V. 23. We groan, waiting for the
Adoption. V. 30. Whom he ^ustified, them he glorified. In short, All the whole
Gospel that promises Life to the Sanctified, does prove the Immortality of the
Soul: For if the Soul perish, no man that lived on Earth is saved: For if ^he
Soul be not the Man, it is most certainly the prime essential part of the man.
The dust of the Carcass is not the Man: And if another Soul and not the same
come into it, it will be another man: and so all the Promises fail.

25. So all the Texts that speak of Resurrection, ^udgment, that we shall all
be judged according to our Works, and what we did in the body. If it be another
Soul that must be judged, which never was ^n that body before, nor ever did any
thing in that body, how shall it be judged for that which it never ^id. All the
Texts that threaten Hell or future Punishment, and promise Heaven, prove it.
Matthew. 25. ^ was hungry and ye fed me, naked and ye clothed ^ne, etc. Ye did
it or did it not to me: Might they not say, We never did it, nor ever lived
till now? Math. 13. The Angels shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them that work iniquity, and cast them into the lake of fire. 2
These. ^. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and 2. 12. and all the Scripture which threatens
Damnation to them that obey not the Truth, and promises Salvation to the
faithful: which is never performed if all be done on another ^oul.

26. And all the Texts that speak of Gods Justice and Mercy hereafter. Is it
Justice to damn a newmade Soul that never sinned?

27. Paul knew not whether he were in or out of the Body when he was in
Paradise, 2 Cor. 12. 2* 3, 4. The separated Soul then may be in Paradise.

28. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. How can the hope ^ unseen things make Affliction and
Death easy ^ that Soul that shall never be saved? And how ^ we be comforted or
saved by such hope?

29. 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a buildin^ of God. V. 2. For in this we groan earnestly,
desirin^ to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven. V. 5. He that
has wrought us for the se^^ same thing, is God, who also has given us the
earne^^ of the Spirit. V. 6. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that
whilst we are at home in the bod^ we are absent from the Lord; we are
confident ^ willing rather to be absent from the Body and pres^^ with the Lord.
Wherefore we labor, that whether pr^sent or absent we way be accepted of him:
For ^ must all appear before the Iudgment-seat of Christ that every one may
receive the things done in his body whether it be good or bad.

30. Phil. 1. 21, 22, 23. To me to live is Christ and to die is gain: What I
shall choose, I know not* For I am in a strait between two, having a desire ^^
depart and be with Christ, which is far better.

31. Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that ^ in the Lord, etc.

32. Heb. 12. 22, 23. We are come to mount Zio^ the City of the living God,
etc. the spirits of the ju^^ made perfect.

Abundance more might be added: And I have been so large on this, because it is
of most unspeakable importance, as that which all our comfo^^ and our Religion
lies on; and though the Light of Nature have taught it Philosophers, and
almost all the World in all Ages, yet the Devil is most busy to make Men doubt
of it, or deny it.

Religion lies on three grand Articles: 1. To believe in God: ^ and this is so
evident in the whole frame of Nature, that there is a God, that he is worse
than mad that will deny it. 2. To believe the Immortality of the Soul, and the
Life hereafter. And, 3. To believe in Christ: And though it be this third that
is known only by supernatural Revelation, yet to him that believes* the
Immortality of the Soul, and the Life hereafter, Christianity will appear so
exceeding Congruous, that it will much the more easily be believed. And
experience tells us that the Devils main Game, for the Debauching and Damning
of fleshly, worldly, ungodly Men, and for troubling and discomforting
Believers, lies in raising Doubts of the Souls Immortality, and the future
Life of Reward and Punishment.

Q. 3. But what good will a Resurrection of the Body do us, if the Soul be in
happiness before?

A. 1. It will be for Gods Glory to make and bless a perfect Man: 2. It will be
our Perfection: A whole Man is more Perfect than a Soul alone. 3. It will be
the Souls delight: Rev. 21. and 22.
As God that is perfectly blessed in himself, yet made and maintains a World,
of which he is more than the Soul, because he is a Communicative good and
pregnant, and delights to do good; so the Soul is made like God in his Image,
and is communicative and would have a Body to act on. As the Sun, if there were
nothing in the World but it self, would be the same that it now is, but nothing
would receive its Motion, Light or Heat, or be the better for it: And if you
did imagine it to have understanding, you must think that it would be much more
pleased to enlighten and enliven so many Millions of Creatures, and cause the
flourishing of all the Earth, than to shine to nothing. So may you think of the
Soul of Man: It is by God inclined to actuate a Body.

Q. 4. If that be so, it is till then imperfect, and deprived of its desire,
and so in pain and punishment?

A. It is not in its full Perfection; and it is a Degree of punishment to be in
a state of Separation: But you cannot call it a pain as to sense, because it
has an unspeakable Glory, though not the most perfect. Nor has the will of
the Blessed any trouble and striving against the will of God, but takes that
for best which God wills: And so the separated state is best while God
wills it, though the united State will be best (as more perfect) in its time.

Q. 5. But the dust in a Grave is so vile a thing that one would think the
raising it should not be very desirable to the Soul?

A. It shall not be raised in the shape of ugly Dust, or filth, nor of
corruptible Flesh and Blood: But a Glorious and Spiritual Body; and a meet
Companion for a Glorified Soul. And even now as vile as the Body is, you feel
that the Soul is loath to part with it. 1 Cor. 15.


Q. 6. But there are so many difficulties and improbabilities about the
Resurrection, as make the Belief of it very hard?

A. What is hard to God that made Heaven and Earth of nothing, and maintains
all things in their state and course? What was that Body a while ago? Was it
not as unlikely as dust to be what it now is?

It Is folly to Object difficulties to Omnipotency.

Q. 7. But the Body is in continual Flux or Change: we have not the same Flesh
this Year, that we had the last: And a Man in a Consumption loses before Death
the Mass of Flesh in which he did good or evil: shall all that rise again,
which every day vanishes? And shall the new Flesh be punished for that which
it never did?

A. It Is a foolish thing, from our Ignorance and uncertainties, to dispute
against God and certain Truth: Will you know nothing, unless you know all
things? Will you doubt of the plain Matter, because in your darkness you
understand not the manner or circumstances of it? The Soul has a Body
consisting of various parts: The fiery part in the Spirits is it is most
immediate Vehicle or Body: The ^eminal tenacious Humor and Air, is the
immediate Vehicle of the fiery part: Whether these Spirits do any of them
depart as it is Vehicle or Body with the Soul; or if not, whether they be the
identifying part that the Soul shall be reunited to first; or what or how much
of the rest even the aqueous and Earthy matter which we had from our Birth
shall be reassumed, are things past our understanding: You know not how you
were generated in the Womb, and yet you know that you were there made: And must
God teach you how you shall be raised before you will believe it? Must he
answer all your doubts of the Flesh that is vanished, or the Bodies eaten by
other Bodies, and teach you all his unsearchable skill, before you will take
his Word for true?

He that makes the rising Sun to end the darkness of the Night, and the
flourishing Spring to renew the Face of Millions of Plants, which seemed in the
Winter to be dead, and the buried little seed to spring up to a beautiful Plant
and Flower, or a strong and goodly Tree, has power and skill enough to raise
our Bodies, by ways unknown to foolish Man.

Q. 8. What should a Man do that he may live in a comfortable hope of the
Resurrection, and the Souls Immortality, and the Life to come?

A. We have three great things to do for this end: 1. To get as full a
certainty as is possible that there is such a Life to come. And this is done by
strengthening a sound belief. 2. To get a suitableness of Soul to that blessed
Life; and this is by the increase of Love and Holiness; and by a Spiritual
heavenly conversation. And, 3. To get and exercise a joyful Hope and Assurance
that it shall be ours: And this is done by a Life of careful Obedience to God,
and the Conscious notice of our sincerity and title, and by the increase and
exercise of the foresaid Faith and Love: Daily dwelling on the Thoughts of
God's infinite Goodness and Fatherly love, of Christ's Office and Grace, and
the Seals of the Spirit, and the blessed state of Triumphant Souls, in the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and living as in familiarity with them.

Q. 9. But when doubting Thoughts return, would it not be a great help to
Faith, if you could prove the Souls Immortality by reason?

A. I have done that largely in other Books: I will now say but this: If there
be no life of retribution after this, it would follow that not only Scripture,
but Religion, Piety, and Conscience were all the most odious abuses of Mankind:
To set Man's Heart and Care upon seeking all his days a Life which he can never
obtain, and to live honestly and avoid sin, for fear of an impossible
punishment, and to deny Fleshly pleasure, and lust, upon mere deceit, what an
injury would Religion, Conscience and honesty be? Men that are not restrained
by any Fear or Hopes of another Life, from Tyranny, Treason, Murder, Perjury,
Lying, Deceit or any wickedness, but only by present Interest, would be the
wisest Men. When yet God has taught Nature to abhor these Evils, and bound Man
to be Religious and Conscionable by common Reason, were it but for the
probability of another Life. And can you believe that Wickedness is Wisdom, and
all Conscionable Goodness is Folly and De ceit?

CHAP. XXII. Of the Life Everlasting.
Qu. 1. WHere is it that we shall live when we go hence?

A. With Christ in Heaven, called Paradise, and the Jerusalem above.

Q. 2. How is it then that the Souls of Men are said sometimes to appear on
Earth? Is it such Souls, or is it Devils?

A. Either is possible: For Souls are in no other Hell than Devils are, who are
said to be in the Air, and to go to and fro, and tempt Men, and afflict them
here on Earth: But when it is a Soul that appears, and when a Devil, we have
not acquaintance enough to know: But though God can for just Causes let a
blessed Soul appear, as Moses with Henoch and Elias did on the Mount, and
perhaps Samuel to Saul, yet we have reason to suspect that it is the miserable
Souls of the Wicked that oftenest appear.

Q. 3. But how come Devils or Souls to be visible being Spirits?

A. Spirits are powerful, and dwell in Airy and other Elementary matter, in
which they can appear to us, as easily as we can put on our Clothes. Fire is
invisible in its simple uncloathed substance; and yet when it has kindled the
Air it is visible Light.

Q. 4. Why then do they appear so seldom?

A. God restrains evil Spirits, and keeps them within their bounds that
they may not either deceive or trouble Mankind: And the Spirits of the just are
more inclined to their higher Nobler Region and Work: and God will have us here
live by Faith, and not by seeing either the heavenly Glory or its Inhabitants.

Q. 5. But it seems that we shall live again on Earth, for it is said, that the
new Jerusalem comes down from above, and we look for a new Heaven, and a new
Earth wherein dwells Righteousness?

A. It greatly concerns us to difference certainties from uncertainties. It
is certain that the Faithful have a promise of a great reward in Heaven, and of
being with Christ, and being conveyed into Paradise by Angels, and are
commanded to lay up a Treasure in Heaven, and there to set their Hearts and
Affections, and to seek the things that are above where Christ is at Gods right
Hand; and they desire to depart and be with Christ as far better than to be
here, and to be absent from the Body, and be present with the Lord: so that the
Inheritance of the Saints in heavenly Light and Glory, is certain. But as to
the rest, whether the New Earth shall be for new Inhabitants, or for us; and
whether the descending Jerusalem shall be only for a Thousand Years before the
final Judgment, or after for perpetuity, or whether it shall come no lower than
the Air, where it is said, That we shall be taken up to meet the Lord, and so
shall ever be with him, or whether Earth shall be made as Glorious to us as
Heaven, and Heaven and Earth be laid together in Common, when separating sin is
gone; These matters being to us less certain, must not be set against that
which is certain. And the new Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, does imply
that it was first in Heaven, and it is said, that it is now above, and we are
come to it in relation and foretast, where are the perfected Spirits of the
Just, as it is described, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.

Q. 6. But some think that Souls sleep till the resurrection, or are in an
unactive potentiality for want of Bodies.

A. Reason and Scripture confute this Dream. The Soul is Essential Life,
naturally inclined to Action, Intellection and Love or Volition, and it will be
in the midst of Objects enough on which to operate: And is it not absurd to think
that God will continue so noble a Nature in a state of idleness, and continue
all its essential Faculties in vain, and never to be exercised? As if he would
continue the Sun without Light, Heat, or Motion. What then is it a Sun for? And
why is it not annihilated? The Soul cannot lose its Faculties of Vitality,
Intellection and Volition, without losing its Essence, and being turned into
some other thing. And why it cannot act out of a Body, what Reason can be
given? If it could not, yet that it takes not hence with it a Body of those
corporeal Spirits which it acted in, or that it cannot as well have a Body of
Light for its own Action, as it can take a Body (as Moses on the Mount) to
appear to Man, is that which we have no reason to suspect.

2. But Scripture puts all out of doubt, by telling us, that To die is gain,
and that it is better to be with Christ, and that Lazarus was comforted in
Abraham's Bosom, and the converted Thief was with Christ in Paradise, and that
the Souls under the Altar and in Heaven pray and praise God, and that the
Spirits of the Just are there made perfect: And this is not a state of sleep.
It is a World of Life, and Light, and Love, that we are going to, more active
than this Earthy, heavy World, than Fire is more active than a Clod. And shall
we suspect any sleepy unactivity there? This is the dead and sleepy World: And
Heaven is the place of Life it self.

Q. 7. What is the Nature of that heavenly Everlasting Life?

A It is the perfect activity and perfect fruition of Divine communicated
Glory, by perfected Spirits and Spiritual Men, in a perfect Glorious Society,
in a perfect Place or Region, and this Everlasting.

Q. 8. Here are many things set together, I pray you tell them me distinctly.

A. 1. Heaven is a perfect Glorious Place, and Earth to it is a Dungeon. The
Sun which we see is a Glorious place in comparison of this.

2. The whole Society of Angels and Saints will be Perfect and Glorious. And
our Joy and Glory will be as much in participation by Union and Communion with
theirs, as the Life and Health of the Eye, or Hand is in and by union and
communion with the Body: we must not dream of any Glory to our selves but in a
state of that union and communion with the Glorious Body of Christ. And Christ
himself the Glorified Head is the chief part of this Society whose Glory we
shall behold.

3. Angels and Men are themselves there Perfect. If our Being and Nature were
not Perfect, our Action and Fruition could not be Perfect.

4. The Objects of all our Action are most Perfect: It is the Blessed God, and
a Glorious Savior and Society, that we shall see and love and praise.

5. All our Action will be pefect: Our Sight and Knowledge, our Love, our Joy,
our Praise will be all perfect there.

6. Our reception and fruition will all be perfect. We shall be perfectly loved
by God, and one another, and perfectly pleasing to him, and each other; and he
will communicate to us and all the Society, as much Glorious Life, Light and
Joyful Love, as we are capable of receiving.

7. And all this will be perfect in duration, being Everlasting.

Q. 9. O what manner of Persons should we be if all this were well believed? Is
it possible that they should truly believe all this, who do not earnestly
desire and seek it, and live in joyful longing hope to be put into possession
of it?

A. Whoever truly believes it, will prefer it before all Earthly treasure and
pleasure, and make it the chief End and Motive and Comfort of his Soul and
Life, and forsake all that stands against it rather than forsake his hopes of
this. But while our Faith, Hope and Love are all imperfect, and we dwell in
Flesh where present and sensible things are still diverting and affecting us,
and we are so used to Sight and Sense, that we look strangely toward that
which is above them, and out of their reach: it is no wonder if we have
imperfect desires and joy, abated by diversions, and by griefs and fears, and
if in this darkness unseen things seem strange to us; and if a Soul united to a
Body be loath to leave it, and be uncloathed, and have somewhat dark Thoughts of
that state without it, which it never tried.

Q. 10. But when we cannot conceive how Souls act out of the Body, how can the
Thought of it be pleasant and satisfying to us?

A. 1. We that can conceive what it is to Live and Understand, and Will, to
Love and Rejoice in the Body, may understand what these acts are in themselves,
whether out of a Body or in a more glorious Body: And we can know that nothing
does nothing; and therefore that the Soul that does these acts is a Noble
substance, and we find that it is invisible. But of this I spoke in the
beginning.

2. When we know in general all before mentioned, that we shall be in that
described Blessedness with Christ and the Heavenly Society, we must implicitly
trust Christ with all the rest, who knows for us what we know not: and stay
till possession give us that clear distinct conception of the manner, and all
the circumstances, which they that possess it not, can no more have, than we
can conceive of the sweetness of a Meat or Drink which we never tasted of: And
we should long the more for that Possession which will give us that sweet
Experience.

Q. 11. Is not God the only Glory and Joy of the Blessed? Why then do you tell
us so much of Angels and Saints, and the City of God?

A. God is all in all things; of him, and through him and to him are all
things, and the Glory of all is to him for ever. But God made not any single
Creature to be happy in him alone as separate from the rest; but an Universe
which has its Union and comunion. I told you as the Eye and Hand have no
separated Life or Pleasure, but only in Communion with the whole Body, so
neither shall we in Heaven. God is infinitely above us, and if you think of him
alone, without mediate Objects for the ascent and access of your Thoughts, you
may as well think to climb up without a Ladder: We are not the Noblest
Creatures next to God, nor yet the most Innocent: We have no access to him, but
by a Mediator: And that Mediator works and conveyeth his Grace to us by other
subordinate means: He is the Savior of his Body, which is the fullness of him
that fills all: If we think not of the Heavenly Jerusalem, the glorious City
of God; the Heavenly Society and Joyful Chore that praise Jehovah and the Lamb,
and live together in perfect Knowledge, Love and Concord, in whose Communion
only we have all our Joy; to whom in this Unity God commnicateth his Glory; and
if we think not of the Glorious Head of the Church, who will then be our
Mediator of Fruition, as he was of Acquisition: nay, if we think not of those
loving blessed Angels that rejoiced at our Conversion, and were here the
Servants, and will be for ever the Companions of our Joy: And if we think not
of all our old dear Friends and Companions in the Flesh, and of all the
Faithful, who since Adam's Days are gone before us, and if we think not of the
attractive Love, Union and Joy of that Society and State, we shall not have
sufficient Familiarity above, but make God as inaccessible to us: Delight and
desire suppose attractive suitableness: Inaccessible excellency draws not up
the Heart. I thank God for the Pleasure that I have in thinking of the Blessed
Society, which will shortly entertain me with joyful Love.

Q. 12. But may not [Everlasting] signify only a long time, as it often does in
Scripture, and so all may be in mutable Revolutions, as the Stoics and some
others thought?

A. 1. What reason have we to extort a forced sense against our own Interest
and Comfort, without any warrant from God? 2. The nature of the Soul being so
far Immortal as to have no Inclination to its own death, Why should we think it
strange that its felicity should be also everlasting. 3. It can hardly be
conceived how that Soul can possibly revolt from God and perish, who is once
confirmed with that sight of his Glory, and the full fruition of his Love.
Whether Nature be so bad as to allow such a revolt? If the Devils had bin as
near God, and as much confirmed in the Sight and Sense of his Love and Glory,
as ^^e Blessed shall be, I can hardly conceive how they could possibly have
fallen.

Q. 13. How may I be sure that I shall enjoy this Everlasting Life?

A. I told you before, 1. If you so far believe the Promise of it as made by
God, and purchased by Christ's Righteousness and Intercession, as to take this
Glory for your chief felicity and hope, and to prefer it before all Worldly
Vanity, Pleasure, Profit, Honor, or Life to the Flesh, and to make it your
chief care and business to seek it, and rather let go all than lose it, and
thus patiently wait and trust God's Grace in Christ and his Spirit, in the use
of his appointed means unto the end; it shall undoubtedly be yours for ever.

CHAP. XXIII. What is the true use of the Lord's Prayer.
Qu. 1. WHat is Prayer?

A. It is Holy Desires expressed or actuated to God, (with Heart alone, or also
with the Tongue) including our penitent Confession of sin, and its Deserts, and
our thankful acknowledgment of his Mercies, and our Praising God's works and
his Perfections.

Q. 2. What is the Use of Prayer? Seeing God cannot be changed and moved by us,
what good can it do us, and how can it attain our ends?

A. You may as wisely ask, what good any thing will do toward our Benefit or
Salvation which we can do, seeing nothing changes God. As God who is one,
makes Multitudes of Creatures; so God who is unchangeable makes changeable
Creatures; and the Effect is wrought by changing us, and not by changing God.
You must understand these great Philosophical Truths, that, 1. All things
effect according to the Capacity of the Receiver. 2. Therefore the various
effects in the World proceed from the great variety of Receptive Capacities.
The same Sunbeams do cause a Nettle, a Thorn, a Rose, a Cedar, according to
the seminal Capacity of the various Receivers. The same Sun enlightneth the
Eye, that does not so by the Hand or Foot, or by a Tree, or Stone: And it
shines into the House whose Windows are open, which does not so when the
Windows are shut; and this without any change in it self. The Boatman lays
hold on the Banck, and pulls as if he would draw it to the Boat, when he does
but draw the Boat to it. Two ways Prayer procures the Blessing without making
any Change in God. First by our performing the condition on which God promises
his Mercy. Secondly, By disposing our Souls to receive it. He that does not
penitently confess his sin, is unmeet for Pardon. And he that desires not
Christ and Mercy, is unmeet to be partaker of them. And he that is utterly
unthankful for what he has received, is unmeet for more.

Q. 3. Who made the Lords Prayer?

A. The Lord Jesus Christ himself, as he made the Gospel; some of the Matter
being necessary yet before his Incarnation.

Q. 4. To whom and on what occasion did he make it?

A. To his Disciples, (to whom also he first delivered his Commands) upon their
request that he would teach them to pray.

Q. 5. To what Use did Christ make it them?

A. First, To be a Directory for the Matter and Method of their Love, Desires,
Hope and Voluntary choice and endeavors; And, 2. To be used in the same Words
when their case required it.

As Man has three Essential Faculties, the Intellect, Will and Vital executive
Power; so Religion has three Essential parts, viz. To direct our
Understandings to believe, our Will to desire, and our Lives in practice.

Q. 6. What is the Matter of the Lord's Prayer in General?

A. It contains, First, What we must desire as our End: And Secondly, What we
must desire as the Means; premising the necessary Preface, and concluding with
a suitable Conclusion.

Q. 7. What is the Method of the Lord's Prayer?

A. I. The Preface speaks, 1. To God as God: 2. As our reconciled Father in
Christ, described in his Attributes, by the words [ which art in Heaven] which
signify the Perfection of his Power, Knowledge, and Goodness, and the Word
Father, signifies that he is Supreme Owner, Ruler and Benefactor.

2. The word [ Our] implies our Common Relation to him as his Creatures, his
Redeemed and Sanctified Ones, his Own, his Subjects and his Beneficiaries or
Children.

II. The Petitions are of two sorts (as the Commandments have two Tables:) The
first proceed according to the order of Intention, beginning at the highest
Notion of the ultimate End, and descending to the lowest. The Second part is
according to the Order of Execution and Assecution, beginning at the lowest
means, and ascending to the highest.

III. The Conclusion enumerateth the parts of the ultimate End by way of
Praise, beginning at the lowest and ascending to the highest. The Method
throughout is more perfect than any of the Philosophers Writings.

Q. 8. Why do we not read that the Apostles after used this Prayer?

A. It is enough to read that Christ prescribed it them, and that they were
Obedient to him. We read not of all that the Apostles did.

2. This is a Comprehensive Summary of all Prayer, and therefore must needs be
brief in the several parts: But the Apostles had occasion sometime for one
branch and sometime for another, on which they particularly enlarged, and
Seldom put up the whole matter of Prayer all at once.

3. They formed their Desires according to the Method of this Prayer, though
they expressed those deres as various occasions did require.

Q. 9. Is every Christian bound to say the Words of the Lords Prayer?

A. The same answer may serve as to the last. Every Christian is bound to make
it the Rule of his Desires, and Hopes, both for Matter and O^der: But not to
express them all in every Prayer. But the Words themselves are apt, and must
have their due reverence, and are very fit to sum up our scattered less
ordered Requests.

Q. 10. But few Persons can understand what such generals comprehend.

A. 1. Generals are useful to those that cannot distinctly comprehend all the
particulars in them. As the General knowledge that we shall be happy in Holy and
Heavenly Joy with Christ, may comfort them that know not all in Heaven that
makes up that happiness, so a General desire may be effectual to our receiving
many particulars. 2. And it is not so General as [ God be merciful to me a
Sinner,] an accepted Prayer of the Publican, by Christ's own Testimony. There
are six particular Heads there plainly expressed.

CHAP. XXIV. Our Father which art in Heaven,] Expounded.
Qu. 1. WHo is it that we pray to, whom we call Our Father?]

A. GOD himself.

Q. 2. May we not pray to Creatures?

A. Yes, for that which it belongs to those Creatures to give us upon our
request, supposing they hear us: But not for that which is Gods, and not their
own to give; nor yet in a manner unsuitable to the Creatures Capacity or Place.
A Child may Petition his Father, and a Subject his Prince, and all Men one
another.

Q. 3. May we not pray to the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as well as to the Father?

A. As the word Father signifies God a^ God, it comprehends the Son, and the
Holy Ghost: and as it signifies the first Person in the Trinity, it excludes
not but implies the second and the third.

Q. 4. What does the word [Father] signify?

A. That as a Father by Generation is the Owner, the Ruler and the Loving
Benefactor to his Child, so is God eminently and transcendently to us.

Q. 5. To whom is God a Father, and on what Fundamental account?

A. 1. He is a Father to all Men by Creation; to all lapsed Mandkind by the
Price of a sufficient Redemption: But only to the Regenerate by Regeneration
and Adoption, and that effective Redemption which actually delivers Men from
Guilt, Wrath, Sin and Hell, and Justifies and Sanctifies them, and make^ them
Heirs of Glory.

Q. 6. What is included then in our Child-like relation to this Father?

A. That we are his own to be absolutely at his dispose, his Subjects to be
absolutely Ruled by him, and his Beloved to depend on his Bounty, and to love
him, above all, and be happy in his Love.

Q. 7. What is meant by the words [which art i^ Heaven?]

A. They signify, I. God's real Substantiality: He is existent.

II. God's incomprehensible Perfection in Power, Knowledge, and Goodness, and
so his absolute sufficiency and fitness to hear and help us. 1. The vastness,
Sublimity and Glory of the Heavens, tell us that* He who Reigns there over
all the World, must needs be Omnipotent, and want no power to do his will, and
help us in our need.

2. The Glory and Sublimity, tell us that he that is there above the Sun which
shines upon all the Earth, does behold all Creatures, and see all the ways of
the Sons of Men, and therefore knows all our Sins, Wants and Dangers, and
hears all our Prayers.

3. Heaven is that most perfect Region, whence al^ good flows down to Earth:
Our Life is thence; our Light is thence; all our Good and foretast of Felicity
and Joy is thence: And therefore the Lord o^ Heaven must needs be the Best; the
Fountain of a^ Good, and the most amiable End of all just Desire and Love. Yet
Heaven is above our Sight and comprehension; and so much more is God.

III. And the word [ Art] signifies God's Etemity in that Heavenly Glory: It
is not [ who wast] or [ who wilt be.] Eternity is indivisible.

Q. 8. Is not God every where: Is he more in Heaven than any where else?

A. All Place and All things are in God: He is absent from none: Nor is his
Essence divisible or Commensurate by Place, or limited; or more here than
there: But to us God is known by his Works and Appearances; and therefore said
to be most where he works most: And so we say, that God dwells in him who
dwells in Love: That he walks in his Church; that we are his Habitation by
the Spirit; that Christ and the Holy Spirit dwell in Believers: Because they
operate extraordinarily in them: And so God is said to be in Heaven, because he
there manifests his Glory to the Felicity of all the Blessed, and has made
Heaven that Throne of his Majesty, from whence all Light, and Life, and
Goodness, all Mercy, and all Justice are communicated to and exercised on Men.
And so we that cannot see God himself, must ^ook up to the Throne of the
Heavenly Glory in our Prayers, Hopes and Joys. Even as a Man's Soul is
undivided in all his Body, and yet it works not alike ^^ all its parts, but
it is in the Head, that it uses Reason, Sight, etc. and does most notably
appear to others in the Face, and is almost visible in the Eye: and therefore
when you talk to a Man, you look him ^^ the Face; and as you talk not to his
Flesh* but to his ^ensitive and intellectual Soul, so you look to that art
where it most apparently shows its sense and ^^tellection.

Q. 9. Is there no other Reason for the naming of Heaven here?

A. Yes: It teaches us whither to direct our own desires; and whence to expect
all good, and where our own Hope and Felicity is. It is in Heaven that God is
to be seen and enjoyed in Glory, and in perfect Love and Joy: Though God be on
Earth, he will not be our Felicity here on Earth: every Prayer therefore should
be the Souls aspiring and ascending toward Heaven, and the believing exercise
of a heavenly Mind, and Desire: For a Man of true Prayer to be unwilling to
come to Heaven, and to love Earth better, is a contradiction.

Q. 10. But do we not pray that on Earth he may use us as a Father?

A. Yes: that he will give us all Mercies on Earth conducing to heavenly
Felicity.

Q. 11. What else is employed in the word, Our Father?

A. Our Redemption and Reconciliation by Christ, and to the Regenerate, our
Regeneration by the Holy Ghost, and so our Adoption; by all which, of Enemies
and the Heirs of Hell, we are made the Sons of God, and Heirs of Heaven. It is
by Christ and his Spirit that we are the Children of God.

Q. 12. Why say we Our Father, and not My Father?

A. 1. To signify that all Christians must pray as Members of One Body, and
look for all their good, comfort and blessedness in Union with the whole, and
not as in a separate State: Nor must we come to God with selfish narrow Minds,
as thinking only of our own case and good, nor put up any Prayer or Praise to
God, but as Members of the Universal Church, in one Chore, all seen and heard
at once by God, though they see not, and hear not one another: And therefore
that we must abhor the pregnant comprehensive Sin of selfishness; by which
wicked Men care only for themselves, and are affected with little but their
Personal concerns, as if they were all the World to themselves, insensible of
the Worlds or the Churches State, and how it goes with all others. 2. And
therefore that all Christians must love their Brethren and Neighbors as
themselves, and must abhor the Sin of Schism, much more of Malignant Enmity,
Envy, and Persecution, and must be so far from disowning the Prayers of other
Christians on pretense of their various Circumstances and Imperfections, and
from separating in Heart from them on any account for which God will not reject
them; as that they must never put up a Prayer or Praise, but as in concord with
all the Christians on Earth, desiring a part in the Prayers of all, and
offering up hearty Prayers for all: The imperfections of all Men's Prayers we
must disown, and most our own; but not for that disown their Prayers, nor our
own. They that hate, or persecute, or separate from Gods Children, for not
praying in their Mode, or by their Book, or in the Words that they write down
for them, or for not worshipping God with their Forms, Ceremonies or Rites, or
that silence Christ's Ministers, and scatter the Flocks, and confound Kingdoms,
that they may be Lords of Gods Heritage, and have all Men sing in their
Commandded Tune, or Worship God in their unnecessary Commanded Mode, do condemn
themselves, when they say Our Father: And to repeat the Lords Prayer many times
in their Liturgy, while they are tormenting his Children in their Prisons and
Inquisitions, is to worship God by repeating their own Condemnation.

Q. 13. It seems this Particle, Our and Us is of treat importance.

A. The Lord's Prayer is the Summary and Rule of Man's Love and just Desires: It
directs him what to Will, Ask and Seek. And therefore must needs contain that
duty of Love which is the Heart of the New Creature, and the fulfilling of the
Law: The Will is the Man: And Love is the Will. What a Man Wills and Loves,
that he is in God's account, or that he shall attain. And therefore the Love of
God as God, and of the Church as the Church, and of Saints as Saints, of
Friends as Friends, and of Neighbors as Neighbors, and of Men (though Enemies
and Sinners) as Men, must needs be the very Spring of acceptable Prayer, as
well as the Love of our selves as our selves. And to pray without this Love, is
to offer God a Carrion for Sacrifice, or a lifeless sort of Service. And Love
to all makes all Men's Mercies and Comforts to be ours, to our great Joy, and
that we may be thankful for all.

CHAP. XXV. Hallowed be thy Name.
Qu. 1. WHy is this made the first Petition in ou^ Prayers?

A. Because it contains the highest Notion of ou^ ultimate end: And so must
be the very top or chief o^ our desires.

Q. 2. What is meant by God's Name here?

A. The proper Notices or Appearances of God t^ Man; and God himself as so
notified and appearing t^ us. So that here we must see that we separate not any
o^ these three: 1. The Objective signs, whether words or works, by which God is
known to us. 2. The inward Conceptions of God received by these signs.

3. God himself so notified and conceived of.

Q. 3. And what is the Hallowing of Gods Name?

A. To use it Holily: That is, in that manner as is proper to God as he is God,
infinitely above all the Creatures: That is Sanctified, which is appropriated
to God by separation from all common use.

Q. 4. What does this Hallowing particularly include?

A. First that we know God, what he is: 2. That our Souls be accordingly
affected toward him. 3. That our lives and actions be accordingly managed. 4.
And that the signs which notify God to us be accordingly reverenced, and used
to these Holy Ends.

Q. 5. Tell us now particularly, What these Signs or Names of God are, and how
each of them is to be hallowed?

A. God's Name is either, 1. His sensible or intelligible works objectively
considered. 2. Or those words which signify God or any thing proper to God. 3.
And the inward light or conception, or notice of God in the mind. And all these
must be Sanctified.

Q. 6. What are God's works which must be so Sanctified, as notifying God?

A. All that are within the reach of our knowledge But especially those which
he has designed most notably for this use, and most legibly as it were written
his Name, or Perfections upon. Exodus 9. 16. Psalm. 8. 1.


Q. 7. Which are those?

A. First, The Glorious wondeful frame of Heaven and Earth.

2. The wonderful work of Man's Redemption by Jesus Christ.

3. The planting of his Nature, Image and Kingdom in Man by his Spirit.

4. The mavelous Providence exercised for the World, the Church, and each of
our selves, notifying the disposal and Government of God.

5. The Glory of the Heavenly Society, known by Faith, and hoped for.

Q. 8. How must the first, God's Creation, be Sanctified?

A. When we look on, or think of the incomprehensible Glory of the Sun, it is
wonderful Greatness, Motion, Light and quickening Heat; Psalm. 19. 1, etc. Romans
1. 19, 20.
of the multitude and magnitude of the glorious Stars, of the vast heavenly
Regions, the incomprehensible invisible Spirits or Powers that actuate and rule
them all; when we come downward and think of the Air and its Inhabitants, and
of this Earth, a vast Body to us, but as one Inch or Point in the whole
Creation; of the many Nations, Animals, Plants of wonderful Variety, the
terrible depths of the Ocean, and its numerous Inhabitants, etc. All these must
be to us but as the Glass which shows somewhat of the Face of God, or as the
Letters of this great Book, of which God is the Sense; or as the actions of a
living Body by which the invisible Soul is known. And as we study Arts for our
Corporal use, we must study the whole World, even the Works of God, to this
purposed use, that we may See, Love, Reverence, and admire God in all: And this
is the only true Philosophy, Astronomy, Cosmography, etc.

Q. 9. What is the Sin which is contrary to this?

A. Profaneness; that is, using God's Name as a common thing: Psalm. 14. 1, 2.
Psalm. 50 21. and ^8. 19. Tit. 1. 16.
And in this instance, to study Philosophy, Astronomy, or any Science, or any
Creature whatsoever, only to know the thing it self, to delight our mind with
the Creature-knowledge, and to be able to talk as knowing Men, or the better to
serve our Worldly Ends, and not to know and glorify God, is to profane the
works of God. And alas then how common is profaneness in the World!

Q. 10. What is it to Sanctify God's Name as in our Redemption?

A. Redemption is such a wonderful work of God, to make him known to sinners
for their Sanctification and Salvation, as no Tongue of Man can fully utter. To
think of God, the Eternal Word first undertaking Man's Redemption, and then
taking the Nature of Man, dwelling in so mean a Tabernacle, fulfilling all
Righteousness for us, Teaching Man the knowledge of God, and bringing Life and
Immortality to light, dying for us as a Malefactor to save us from the Curse,
Rising the third day, Commissioning his Apostles, undertaking to build his
Church on a Rock, which the Gates of Hell should not prevail against; ascending
up to Heaven, sending down the wonderful and sanctifying Spirit, Interceding
for us, and Reigning over all, who receives faithful Souls to himself, and
will raise our Bodies, and judge the World: Can all this be believed and
thought of, without admiring the manifold wisdom, the unconceivable Love and
Mercy, the Holiness and Justice of God! This must be the daily study of
Believers.

Qu. 11. How is this Name of God profaned?

A. When this wonderful work of Man's Redemption is not believed, but taken by
Infidels to be but a deceit: Or when it is heard but as a common History; and
affects not the Hearer with admiration, thankfulness, desire and submission
to Christ: when Men live as if they had no great Obligation to Christ, or no
great need of him.

Q. 12. How is Gods Name as our Sanctifier to be hallowed?

A. Therein he comes near us, even into us, with Illuminating, Quickening,
Comforting Grace, renewing us to his Nature, Will and Image: Marking us for his
own, and maintaining the cause of Christ against his Enemies. And therefore
must in this be specially notified, honored, obediently observed, and
thankfully and joyfully admired.

Q. 13. But how can they honor God's Spirit and Grace, who have it not: Or
they that have so little as not well to discern it?

A. The least prevailing sincere Holiness has a special excellency, turning
the Soul from the World to God, and may be perceived in Holy desires after him,
and sincere endeavors to obey him: And the beauty of Holiness in others may be
perceived by them that have little or none themselves, if they be not grown to
Malignant Enmity: You may see by the Common desire of Mankind to be esteemed
Wise and Good, and their Impatience of being thought and called Foolish,
Ungodly or Bad Men, that even corrupted Nature has a radicated Testimony in it
self for Goodness, and against Evil.

Q. 14. Who be they that profane this Name of God?

A. Those that see no great need of the Spirit of Holiness, or have no desire
after it; but think that Nature and Art may serve the turn without it: Those
that think that there is no great difference between Man and Man, but what
their Bodily temperature and their Education makes; and that it is but
Phanatick delulusion, or Hypocrisy to pretend to the Spirit: Those that hate
or deride the Name of Spirituality and Holiness; and those that resist the Holy
Ghost.

Q. 15. How is God known and honored in his Providence?

A. By his Providence he so Governs all the World, and particularly all the
Affairs of Men, as shows us his Omnipotence, his Omniscience, and his Goodness
and Love, ordering them all to his Holy End, even the pleasing of his good Will
in their Perfection. Mal. 2, 2.


Q. 16. How can we see this while the World lies in Madness, Unbelief and
Wickedness, and the worst are greatest, and Contention, Confusion, and Bloody
Wars do make the Earth a kind of Hell, and the Wise, Holy, and Just are
despised, hated and destroyed?

A. 1. Wisdom, and Holiness, and Justice are conspicuous and honorable by the
odiousness of their contraries; which though they fight against them, and seem
to prevail, do but exercise them to their increase and greater glory: And all
the Faithful are secured and purified, and prepared for Felicity, by the Love
and Providence of God.

2. And as the Heavens are not all Stars, but spangled with Stars, nor the
Stars all Suns, nor Beasts and Vermin Men, nor the Earth and Stones are Gold
and Diamonds, nor is the Darkness Light, the Winter Summer, or Sickness Health,
or Death Life: And yet the wonderful Variety and Vicissitude contributeth to
the Perfection of the Universe, as the Variety of parts to the Perfection of
the Body, so God makes use even of Men's Sin and Folly, and of all the mad
Confusions and Cruelties of the World, to that perfect Order and Harmony which
he that accomplisheth them does well know, though we perceive it not, because
we neither see the Whole, nor the End, but only the little Particles and the
Beginnings of God's unsearchable works.

3. And this dark and wicked World is but a little Spot of God's vast Creation;
and seems to be the lowest next to Hell, while the lucid Glorious heavenly
Regions are incomprehensibly great, and no doubt possessed by Inhabitants
suitable to so glorious a place: And as it is not either the Gallows or the
Prison that is a dishonor to the Kingly Government, so neither is Hell or the
Sins on Earth, a dishonor to the Government of God.

4. And as every Man is nearest to himself, it is the duty of us all carefully
to record all the Mercies and special Providence of God to our selves, that we
may know his Government and him, and use the remembrance of them to his Glory.

Q. 17. How is the heavenly Glory as a Name of God to us that see it not?

A. We see vast lucid Bodies and Regions above us: And by the help of things
seen we may conceive of things unseen; and by Divine Revelation we may
certainly know them: We have in the Gospel as it were a Map of Heaven, in its
description, and a title to it in the Promises, and a notifying earnest and
foretast in our Souls, so far as we are Sanctified Believers.

Q. 18. How must we hallow this Name of God?

A. 1. Firmly believing the heavenly Glory, not only as it shall be our own
Inheritance, but as it is now the most Glorious and Perfect part of Gods
Creation, where Myriads of Angels and Glorious Spirits in perfect Happiness,
Love and Joy, are Glorifying their most Glorious Creator; and as the Saints
with Christ their most Glorious Head, shall for ever make up that Glorious
Society, and the Universe it self be seen by us in that Glorious Perfection, in
which the Perfection of the Creator will appear.

2. And in the constant delightful Contemplation of this Supernal Glorious
World, by Heavenly Affections and Conversation, keeping our Minds above while
our Bodies are here below, and looking beyond this Prison of Flesh, with desire
and hope. As Heaven is the State and Place where God shines to the
understanding Creature in the greatest Glory, and where he is best known, so it
is this heavenly Glory seen to us by Faith, which is the most Glorious of all
the Names or Notices of God to be hallowed by us.

Q. 19. What is the profaning of this Name of God?

A. The minding only of Earthly and Fleshly things; and not believing,
considering or admiring the heavenly Glory: Not loving and praising God for it,
nor desiring and seeking to enjoy it.

Q. 20. So much of God's Works which make him known: Next tell us what you mean
by the Words which you call his Name?

A. 1. All the Sacred Scripture as it makes known God to us, by History,
Precepts, Promises or Penal Threats: With all God's Instituted means of
Worship. 2. More specially the Descriptions of God by his Attributes. 3. And
most specially his Proper Name, GOD, Jehovah, etc. Ex. 3. 15. and 6. 3. Psalm.
83. 18. Act. 9. 15.


Q. 21. I Will not ask you what his Attributes are, because you have told us that
before; But how is this Name of God to be hallowed?

A. When the Soul is affected with that Admiration, Reverence, Love, Trust and
Submission to God which the meaning of these Names bespaeks: And when the
manner of our using them, expresses such affections: Especially in public
Praises with the Churches. Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. and 33. 19. Act. 21. 13* 1 Timothy
6. 1. Tit. 2. 5. Romans 2. 24. Psalm. 22. 22. Heb. 2. 12. Neh. 9. 5. Psalm. 50. 23.
and 66. 2. Mic. 4. 5. Rev. 11. 15.


Q. 22. How is this Name of God profaned?

A. When it is used lightly, falsely, unreverently, without the aforesaid Holy
regard and affections.

Q. 23. III. What is that which you call God's Name imprinted on Man's Mind?

A. God made Man very good at first, and that was in his own Image: And so much
of this is either left by the interposition of Grace in lapsed Nature, or by
common Grace restored to it, as that all Men, till utterly debauched, would
fain be accounted Good, Pious, Virtuous, and Just, and hate the imputation of
Wickedness, dishonesty and Badness: And on the Regenerate the Divine Nature is
so renewed, as that their Inclination is toward God, and HOLINESS TO THE LORD
is written on all their Faculties: And the Spirit of God moves on the Soul, to
actuate all his Graces; and to plead for God and our Redeemer, and bring Him to
our Remembrance, to our Affections, and to subject us wholly to his Will and
Love. And thus as the Law was written in Stone as to the Letter, which is
written only on tender fleshy Hearts as to the Spirit and Holy effect and
disposition; so the Name of God which is in the Bible in the Letter, is by the
same Spirit imprinted on Believers Hearts, that is, They have the Knowledge,
Faith, Fear and Love of God. Psalm. 29. 2. and 48. 10.


Q. 24. How must we hallow this inward Name of God?

A. 1. By Reverencing and Loving God, that is, God's Image and Operations in
us: Not only God as glorified in Heaven, but God as dwelling by Grace in Holy
Souls, must be remembered, and reverenced by us. 2. By living as in habitual
Communion and Conversation with that God who dwells in us, and who has made
us his Habitation by the Spirit. 3. And by ready obeying the moving Operations
of the Spirit for God.

And to contemn or resist these inward Ideas, Inclinations and Motions, is to
profane the Name of God.

Q. 25. But what is all this to the Sanctfying of God himself?

A. The Signs are but for him that is signified: It is God himself that is to
be admired, Loved and Honored, as notified to us by these Signs or Name;
otherwise we make Idols of them. In a Word, God must be Esteemed, Reverenced,
Loved, Trusted and Delighted in Transcendently as God, with affections proper
to himself; and this is to Sanctify him, by advancing him in our Heart, in his
Prerogative above all Creatures: And all Creatures must be used respectively to
this Holy End: And specially those Ordinances and Names which are specially
Separated to this use: And nothing must be used as common and unclean,
especially in his Worship, and Religious Acts. Act. 1. 15. and 4. 12. Rev. 3.
4. and 11. 13. Joel 2. 23. Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Exodus 33. 19. and 34. 5, 6, 7. 1 Kin.
5. 3, 5. Lev. 10. 3. Number. 20. 12, 13.


CHAP. XXVI. Thy Kingdom come.
Qu. 1. WHy is this made the Second Petition?

A. To tell us, that it must be the Second thing in our Desires. We are to
begin at that which is highest, most excellent, and ultimate in our Intentions,
and that is, Gods Glory shining in all his Works, and seen, admired, honored
and praised by Man, which is the hallowing of his Name, and the Holy Exalting
him in our Thoughts, Affections, Words and Actions above all Creatures. And we
are next to desire that in which God's glory most eminently shines: And that
is his Kingdom of Grace and Glory.

Q. 2. What is here meant by the Kingdom of God?

A. It is not that Kingdom which he has over Angels, and the innumerable
glorious Spirits of the Heavenly Regions. For these are much unknown to us, and
we know not that there is any Rebellion among them which needs a Restoration.
But Man by Sin is fallen into Rebellion, and under the Condemnation due to
Rebels Col. 1. 13. Mat. 12. 28. and 21. 31, 43. Mark 1. 45. and 4. 26, 30. and
12. 34. and 10. 14, 15, 23. and 15. 43.
: And by Christ the reconciling Mediator, they are to be restored to their
subjection to God, and so to his Protection, Blessing and Reward: And because
they are Sinners, corrupt and guilty, they cannot be Subjects as under the
Primitive Law of Innocence: And therefore God has delivered them to the
Mediator, as his Vicegerent, to be governed under a Law of healing Grace, and
so brought on to Perfect Glory. So that the Kingdom of God now is his Reign
over fallen Man by Christ the Mediator, begun on Earth by Recovering Grace, and
perfected in heavenly Glory. Luke 7. 28. and 8. 1. 10. and 10. 9. and 11. 20.
and 13. 18, 20, 28, 29. and 16. 16. and 17. 21. and 18. 3, 17, 29.


Q. 3. But the Scriptures sometimes speaks of the Kingdom of God as come
already when Christ came, or when he rose and ascended to his Glory: and
sometime as if it were yet to come at the great Resurrection Day.

A. In the first case the meaning is, that the King of the Church is come, and
has established his Law of Grace, and Commissioned his Officers, and sent
forth his Spirit, and so the Kingdom of healing Grace is come; But in the
second case, the meaning is, that all that Glorious Perfection which this Grace
does tend to, which will be the Glory of the Church, the Glory of Christ
therein, and the Glorification of Gods Love, is yet to come.

Q. 4. What is it then which we here desire?

A. That God will enlarge and carry on the Kingdom of Grace in the World, and
bear down all that Rebels, and hinders it, and particularly in our selves:
And that he would hasten the Kingdom of Glory.

Q. 5. Who is it then that is the King of this Kingdom?

A. GOD as the absolute Supreme, and Jesus Christ the Son of God and Man, as
the Supreme Vicegerent and Administrator. Rev. 1. 9. Luke 9. 27. and 14, 15.
and 22. 16, 18. and 23. 51.


Q. 6. Who are the Subjects of this Kingdom?

A. There are three sorts of Subjects: 1. Subjects only as to Obligation: Act.
14. 22. Gal. 5. 21. Ephesians. 5. 5* 2 These. 5. Rev. 12. 10. Mat. 16. 28. 2 Timothy 4.
1* 1 These. 2. 12.
And so those without the Church are Rebellious obliged Subjects: 2. Subjects
by mere Profession: And so all Baptized professing Christians though
Hypocrites, are the Church-visible, and his professed Subjects. 3. Subjects by
sincere Heart-consent: And so all such are his Subjects as make up the
Church-mystical, and shall be saved. So that the Kingdom of God is a word which
is sometime of a larger signification than the Church: and sometime in a
narrower sense is the same. Ephesians. 1. 23. Christ is Head over all things to the
Church.

Q. 7. What are the Acts of Christ's Kingly Government?

A. Law-making, Judging according to that Law, and executing that Judgment.
Heb. 7. 12. Isa. 2. 3. and 8. 16, 20. and 42. ^. 21. and 51. 4. Mic. 4. 2. Romans
3. 27. and 8. 2. ^. Gal. 6. 2. Isa. 51. 7. Ier. 31. 33. Heb. 8. ^^, 16.


Q. 8. What Laws has Christ made, and what does ^e rule by?

A. First, He takes the Law of Nature now as his own, as far as it belongs
to sinful Mankind: And, 2. He expounds the darker passages of that Law: And,
3. He makes new Laws, proper to the Church ^ince his Incarnation.

Q. 9. Are there any new Laws of Nature since the Fall?

A. There are new Obligations and Duties arising from our changed State: It was
no duty to the Innocent to repent of Sin, and seek out for Recovery, and ^eg
Forgiveness: But Nature binds Sinners not yet under the final Sentence to all
this.

Q. 10. What new Laws has Christ made?

A. Some proper to Church Officers, and some ^ommon to all.

Q. 11. What are his Laws about Church Officers?

A. First, He chose himself the first chief Officers, and he gave them their
Commission, Mat. 28. 19. Ephesians. 4. 6, 7, 8, 9. 16. Act. 14. 23. ^ct. 15.
describing their Work and Office; and he Authorized them to gather and form
particular Churches, and their fixed Officers ^t Pastors, and necessary Orders,
and gave them the ^xtraordinary Conduct and Seal of his Spirit, that their
determinations might be the infallible significations of his Will, and his
recorded Law to his Universal Church to the end of the World: His Spirit being
the Perfecter of his Laws and Government.

Q. 12. How shall we be sure that his Apostles by the Spirit were Authorized to
give Laws to all future Generations?

A. Because he gave them such Commission, to teach Men all that he Commanded.
Act. 10. 42. and 13. 47. Mat. 28. 19, 2^ Ioh. 14. 16, 17, 26. and 15. 26, 27.
and 16. 7. 13, 14 15. Rev. 2. 7, 11, 16, 17, 29. and 3. 6, 13, 2^ 1 Pet. 1. 11.
2. And promised them his Spirit to lead them into all Truth, and bring all
things to their Remembrance, and to tell them what to say and do: And 3.
Because he performed this Promise, in sending them that extraordinary measure
of the Spirit: And 4. They spoke as from Christ, and in his Name, and as by his
Spirit: And, 5. They sealed all by the manifestation of that Spirit, in its
Holy and Miraculous manifold Operation. Act. 2. 4. Gal. 1. and 2. Mark 13. 1^
Luke 12. 12. Isa. 33. 22.


Q. 13. Have not Bishops and Councils the same Power now?

A. No: To be the Instruments of Divine Legislation, and make Laws which God
will call His Laws, is a special Prophetical Power and Office, such a^ Moses
had in making the Jewish Laws; which no^ had that came after him. But when
Prophetical Revelation has made the Law, the following Office^ have nothing to
do; But, 1. To preserve that Law 2. And to expound it and apply it, and guide
the People by it, and themselves obey it. 3. And to determine undetermined
mutable Circumstances. As the Jewish Priests and Levites were not to make
another Law, but to preserve, expound and Rule by Moses Law; so the ordinary
Ministers, Bishops or Councils are to do as to the Laws of God, sufficiently
made by Christ, and the Spirit in his Apostles. Iam. 4. 12. Act. 1. 5, 8, and
2. 4, 33. and 15. 28. 1 Cor. 2. 13. 2 Pet. 1. 21. 1 Cor. 7. 25. Act. 1. 2. 1
Cor. 14. 37. Col. 2. 22. Mat. ^5. 9.


Q. 14. What are the New Laws which he has made for all?

A. The Covenant of Grace in the last Edition is his Law, Ioh. 1. 9, 10, 11.
Ioh. 3. 16. Mat. 28. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4, 5. and 11, 28. Act. 13. 47. and
10. 42. Ioh. 14. 21.
by which he obliges Men to Repent and Believe in him as Incarnate, Crucified,
and Ascended, and Interceding and Reigning in Heaven, and as one that will
Judge the World at the Resurrection: As one that pardons Sin by his Sacrifice
and Merit, and Sanctifies Believers by his Spirit: And to believe in God as
thus reconciled by Him, and in the Holy Ghost as thus given by him: And he
promises Pardon, Grace and Glory to all true Believers, and threatens
Damnation to impenitent Unbelievers: And he commands all Believers to devote
themselves thus to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, by a solemn Vow
in Baptism, and live in the Communion of Saints, in his Church, and Holy
Worship, and the frequent Celebration of the Memorial of his Death in the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood, especially on the first Day of the Week which
he has separated to that Holy Comemoration and Communion by his Resurrection,
and the sending of his Spirit, and by his Apostles. And he has commanded all
his Disciples to live in Unity, Love and Beneficence, taking up the Cross, and
following him in Holiness and Patience, in hope of Everlasting Life. Ioh. 13.
34. Rev. 1. Mat. 28. 18. Ioh. 13. 2. ^* 17. 3. and 5. 22. Isa. 9. 6. Romans 14.
9. Col. 1. Heb. ^* and 7.


Q. 15. But some say that Christ was only a Teacher, and not a Lawgiver.

A. His Name is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and all Power in Heaven and
Earth is given him, and all things put into his Hands; the Government is laid
on his Shoulders, and the Father (without him) judges no Man, but has
committed all Judgment to the Son. For this end he died, rose and revived, that
he might be Lord of the Dead and of the Living; He is at God's right Hand above
a^^ Principalities and Powers, and every Name, being Head over all things to
the Church. Ephesians. 1. 23. Luke 17. 9, 10. and 19, 15, and ^ Rev. 22. 14. 1 Ioh.
2. 4. and 3. 24. and 5. 3.


Q. 16. May not this signify only his Kingdom as ^^ is God, or that which he
shall have hereafter only at the Resurrection?

A. 1. It expressly speaks of his Power as God and Man the Redeemer: 2. And he
made his Law i^ this Life, though the Chief and Glorious part of h^^ Judgment
and Execution, be hereafter. How els^ should Men here keep his Law, and
hereafter ^^ judged according to it?

He that denies Christ to be the Lawgiver, denied him to be King, and he that
denies him to be King denies him to be Christ, and is no Christian.

Q. 17. Has Christ any Vicegerent or Universal Governor under him on Earth?

A. No: It is his Prerogative to be the Universal Governor: for no mortal Man
is capable of it: As no one Monarch is capable of the Civil Government of all
the Earth, nor was ever so mad as to pretend to it; much less is any one
capable of being an Universal Church-Teacher, Priest, and Governor over all
the Earth; when he cannot so much as know it, or send to all, or have access
into the contending Kingdoms of the World: To pretend to this is mad
Usurpation. 1 Cor. 12. 5, 18. 20, 27, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 3. 4, 5, 6, 11, 21, 22,
23. Mat. 23. 7, 8, 10, 11. Ephesians. 4. 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and 5. 23,
24. Mat. 18. 1, 4. Mar. 9. 34. Luke 9. 46. and 22. 24, 25, 26. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3,
4.


Q. 18. But had not Peter the Monarchical Government of all the Church on Earth
in his Time?

A. No: He was Governor of none of the Eleven Apostles, nor of Paul; nor ever
exercised any such Government: no nor it seems, so much as presided at their
meeting, Act. 15.

Q. 19. But is not a General Council the Universal Governor?

A. No: 1. Else the Church would be no Church, when there is no General
Council, for want of its Unifying Government: And 2. There indeed never was a
general Council of all the Christian World: But they were called by the Roman
Emperors, and were called General as to that Empire (as the Subscriptions yet
show). 3. And there never can be an Universal Council: It were madness and
wickedness to attempt it: To send for the Aged Bishops from all Nations of the
Christian World, (when none is Empowered to determine Whither or When) even
from the Countries of Turks, and other Infidels, or Princes in War with one
another that will not permit them: And what room shall hold them, and what one
Language can they all speak? And how few will live to return home with the
Decrees? And will not the Country were they meet, by nearness, have more
Voices than all the rest? And what is all this to do? To condemn Christ as not
having made Laws sufficient for the Universal part of Government, but leave
such a burden on incapable Men: And to tell the Church that Christian Religion
is a mutable growing thing, and can never be known to attain its ripeness, but
by new Laws must be made still bigger, and another thing.

Q. 20. But the Bishops of the World may meet by their Delegates?

A. Those Delegates must come from the same Countries and distance: And how
shall the whole World know that they are truly chosen? And that all the
Choosers have trusted them with their Judgments, Consciences and Salvation, and
will stand to what they do?

Q. 21. But if the Universal Church be divided into Patriarchates, and chief
Seats, those can Govern the whole Church when there is no General Council; even
by their Communicatory Letters?

A. 1. And who shall divide the World into those chief Seats, and determine
which shall be chief in all the Kingdoms of Infidels, and Christian Kings in
the World? And which shall be Chief when they differ among themselves? How many
Patriarchs shall there be, and where? There were never Twelve Pretenders to
succeed the Twelve Apostles: The Roman Empire had three First, and Five after
within it self: But that was by Humane institution; and over one Empire; and
that is now down; and those Five Seats have many Hundred Years been separated,
and condemning one another; so far are they from being One Unifying Aristocracy
to Govern all the World: And if they were so, then Europe is Schismatical, that
now differs from the Major Vote of those Patriarchs.

Q. 22. But did not the Apostles as one College Govern the whole Church?

A. 1. I proved to you before, that the Holy Ghost was given the Apostles to
perfect Universal Ligislation, as Christ's Agent and Advocate, and that in this
they have no Successors. 2. And it was easy for them to exercise Acts of
Judicial Determination over such as were among them, and near them, when the
Church was small. 3. And yet we read not that ever they did this in a General
Council, or by the Authority of a Major Vote. For that meeting in Act. 15. was
no General Council, and the Elders and Brethren joined with them that belonged
to Jerusalem: and they were all by the same Spirit of the same mind, and none
Dissenters. Every single Apostle had the Spirit of Infallibility for his proper
work: And they had an Indefinite charge of the whole Church, and in their
several circuits exercised it: Paul could by the Spirit deliver a Law of Christ
to the World, without taking it from the other Apostles, Gal. 2. The Apostles
were foundation Stones, but Christ only was the Head Cornerstone. They never
set up a Judicial Government of all the Churches under themselves as a
constitutive Unifying Aristocracy, by whose major Vote all must be Governed:
When they had finished the work of Universal Legislation, and settled Doctrine
and Order, for which they stayed together at Jerusalem, they dispersed
themselves over the World, and we never find that they Judicially governed the
Churches either in Synods or by Letters, by a major Vote, but settled Guides in
ever Church as God by Moses did Priests and Levites, that had no Legislative
Power. Ephesians. 2. 20. 1 Cor. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. and 3. 21, 22. Gal. 2. 9. 2
Cor. 11. 5. and 12. 11.


Q. 23. But has not Christ his Subordinate Official Governors?

A. Yes: Magistrates by the Sword, and Pastors by the Word and Keys: These are
Rulers in their several Circuits, as all the Judges and Justices, and
Shoolmasters of England are under the King: But he that should say, that all
these Judges and Justices are one Sovereign Aristocracy, to make Laws and Judge
by them by Vote ( as one Person political, though many Natural) would give them
part of the Supreme power, and not only the Official: All the Pastors in the
World, Guide all the Churches in the World, by parts, and in their several
Provinces, and not as One Politic Person.

Q. 24. But how is the Universal Church visible, if it have no Visible Unifying
Head and Government under Christ?

A. It is Visible, 1. In that the Members and their Profession are visible. 2.
And Christ's Laws are visible, by which he rules them. 3. And their particular
Pastors are visible in their places. 4. And Christ was visible on Earth, and is
now visible in his Court in Heaven, and will visibly Judge the World e're long:
And God has made the Church no further Visible; nor can Man do it.

Q. 25. But should not the whole Church be One?

A. It is one: It is one Body of Christ, having one God, and one Head, or Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one Spirit, one Hope of Glory. Ephesians. 4. 1, 3, 6, 7, 14,
15, 16. 1 Cor. 12.


Q. 26. But should they not do all that they do in Unity and Concord?

A. Yes, as far as they are capable: Not by feigning a new Universal
Legislative Power in Man, or making an Universal Head under Christ, but by
agreeing all in the Faith and Laws that Christ has left us: And Synods may
well be used to maintain such Union as far as capacity reaches, and the case
requires: But an Universal Synod, and a partial or National, a Governing
Synod, and a Synod for Concord of Governors, differ as much as does a Monarch
or Governing Senate over all the World, and a Diet, or an Assembly of Christian
Princes met for mutual help and concord in the conjunction of their strength
and Councils.

Q. 27. What is the Pastoral Power of the Church Keys?

A. It is the Power of making Christians by the Mat. 28. 19, 20. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
12, 13. Heb. 13. 17, 24. Tit. 3. 10, 11, and 1. 13. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 3. 5. Isa. 22. 22. Luke 11. 52. Rev. 3. 7. and 1. 18. Mat. 16. 19.
Preaching of the Gospel, and Receiving them so made into Communion of Christ
and his Church by Baptism, and feeding and guiding them by the same Word, and
communicating the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood in his Name, declaring
Pardon and Life to the Penitent, and the contrary to the Impenitent, and
applying this to the particular Persons of their own charge on just occasion,
and so being the stated Judges who shall by them be received to Church
Communion, or be rejected, and this as a presage of Christ's future Judgment.

Q. 28. But have not Pastors or Bishops, a power of constraint by the Sword,
that is, by Corporal punishments or mulcts?

A. No: That is proper to Magistrates, Parents and Masters, in their several
places: Christ has forbidden it to Pastors, Luke 22. and appointed them
another kind of work. Luke 22. 24, 25, 26. 1 Pet. 5. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2. 24. Tit.
1. 7.


Q. 29. But if Bishops judge that Civil Magistrates are bound to destroy or
punish Heretics, Schismatics or Sinners, are not such Magistrates thereby
bound to do it?

A. They are bound to do their duty whoever is their Monitor: But if Prelates
bid them sin, they sin by obeying them: Nor may a Magistrate punish a Man
merely because Bishops judge him punishable, without trying the Cause
themselves.

Q. 30. But if it be not of Divine Institution that all the Church on Earth
should have one Governing Unifying Head (Monarchical or Aristocratical) is it
not meet as suited to humane Prudence?

A. Christ is the builder of his own Church or House, and has not left it to
the Wit or Will of Man, Heb. 3. 2, 5, 6.
to make him a Vicegerent, or an Unifying Head or Ruler of his whole Church,
that is, to set up an Usurper against him under his own Name, which is
Naturally incapable of the Office.

Q. 31. But sure Unity is so excellent that we may conceive God delights in
all that promoteth it?

A. Yes: And therefore he would not leave the Terms of Unity to the Device of
Men, in which they will never be of a mind, nor would he have Usurpers divide
his Church by imposing impossible Terms of Unity. Must God needs make one Civil
Monarch or Senate to be the Unifying Governor of all the Earth as one Kingdom,
because he is a lover of Unity? The World is politically Unified by one God and
Sovereign Redeemer, as this Kingdom is by one King, and not by one Civil humane
Supreme Ruler, Personal or Collective: Men so mad as to dream of one Unifying
Church Governing Monarch or Aristocracy, are the unfittest of all Men to
pretend to such Government. Ioh. 17. 22, 23, 24. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 16.


Q. 32. At least should we not extend this Unifying Government as far as we
can, even to Europe, if not to all the World?

A. Try first one Unifying Civil Government (Monarchical or Aristocracitical)
for Europe, and call Princes Schismatics (as these Men do us) for refusing to
obey it, and try the success. 2. And who shall make this European
Church-Soveraign? And by what Authority, and limit his Kingdom? 3. And what is
all this to do? To make better Laws than Christ's! When were any so mad as to
say that all Europe must have one Sovereign Person, or College of Physicians,
Schoolmasters, Philosophers or Lawyers, to avoid Schism among them. 4. Is not
Agreement by Voluntary consent a better way to keep Civil and Ecclesiastical
Unity in Europe, than to have one Ruling King, Senate, or Synod over all.
Councils are for voluntary concord, and not the Sovereign Rectors of their
Brethren.

Q. 33. But are not National Churches necessary?

A. No doubt but Christ would have Nations discipled, baptized and obey him:
And Kings to govern them as Christian Nations, and all men should endeavor
that whole Nations may be Christians, and the Kingdoms of the World be
voluntarily the Kingdoms of Christ. But no man can be a Christian against his
will: Nor has Christ ordained that each Kingdom shall have one Sacerdotal
Head, Monarchical or Aristocratical. But Princes, Pastors and People, must
promote Love, Unity and Concord in their several places.

Q. 34. So much for Gods public Kingdom on Earth: But is there not also a
Kingdom of God in every Christians Soul?

A. One man's Soul is not fitly called A Kingdom: But Christ as King does govern
every faithful Soul.

Q. 35. What is the Government of each Believer?

A. It is Christ's Ruling us by the Laws which he has made for all his Church,
proclaimed and explained and applied by his Ministers, and imprinted on the
Heart by his holy Spirit, and judging accordingly.

Q. 36. What is the Kingdom of Glory?

A. It has two degrees: The first is the Glorious reign of our Glorified
Redeemer over this World, and over the Heavenly City of God before its
Perfection; which began at the time of Christ's Ascension (his Resurrection
being the Proeme) and ends at the Resurrection. 2. The perfect Kingdom of
Glory, when all the Elect shall be perfected with Christ, and his work of
Redemption finished, which begins at the Resurrection and shall never end.

Q. 37. What will be the state of that Glorious Kingdom?

A. It contains the full Collection of all Gods Elect, who shall be perfected
in Soul and Body, and employed in the perfect Obedience, Love and Praise of
God, in perfect Love and Communion with each other, and all the blessed Angels
and their Glorified Redeemer, and this is in the sight of his Glory and the
Glory of God, and in the continual joyful sense of his Love, and essential
Infinite Perfection: All imperfection, sin, temptation and suffering being for
ever ceased.

Q. 38. But some think this Kingdom will be begun on Earth a Thousand Years
before the General Resurrection; and some think that after the Resurrection it
will be on Earth. Rev. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 12, 13.


A. This very Prayer puts us in hope that there are yet better things on Earth
to be expected than the Church has yet enjoyed. For when Christ bids us pray
that [ His Name may be hallowed, his Kingdom come, and his Will done on Earth
as it is done in Heaven,] we may well hope that some such thing will be
granted; for he has promised to give us whatever we ask according to his Will
in the Name of Christ: And he has not bid us pray in vain.

But whether there shall be a Resurrection of the Martyrs a thousand years
before the general Resurrection; or whether there shall be only a Reformation
by a holy Magistracy and Ministry; and how far Christ will manifest* himself on
Earth; ^ confess are Questions too hard for for me to determine: He that is
truly devoted to Christ, shall have his part in his Kingdom, though much be now
unknown to him, of the Time, Place and Manner. Mat. 6. 20, 21. Mat. 5. 12. Mat.
19. 21* Ephesians. 1. 3. 2 Timothy 4. 18. Heb. 11. 16. and 12. 2^* 23. 1 Cor. 15. 49.
Phil. 3. 20. Col. 1. 5. 1 P^* 1. 4. Heb. 10. 34.


And as to the Glory after the General Resurrection, certainly it will be
Heavenly, for we shall be with Christ, and like to the Angels. And the N^w
Jerusalem being the Universality of the Bless^ how with Christ, may well be
said to come do^ from Heaven, in that he will bring all the Bless^ with him,
and in the Air with them will judge t^ World: But whether only a New Generation
she inhabit the New Earth, and the Glorified rule the^ as Angels now do; or
whether Heaven and Eart^ shall be laid common together, or Earth made ^
Glorious as Heaven, I know not.

But the perfect knowledge of Gods Kingdom, ^ proper to them that enjoy it:
Therefore even w^ who know it but imperfectly, must daily pray tha^ it may
come, that we may perfectly know it when we are perfected therein.

CHAP. XXVII. Thy will be done on Earth* as it is in Heaven.
Qu. 1. Why is this made the Third Petition?

A. Because it must be the Third in our Desires: I told you this Prayer in
perfect Method begins at that which must be the first in our Intention; and
that is, God's Interest as above our own, which is consistent and expressed in
these three gradations: 1. The highest Notion of it is, The Hallowing and
Glorifying of his Name, and resplendent perfections. 2. The Second is that in
which this is chiefliest notified to Man, which is his Kingdom. 3. The Third is
the Effect of this Kingdom in the fulfilling of his will.

Q. 2. What will of God is it that is here meant?

A. His Governing and Beneficent will: expressed in his Laws and Promises,
concerning Man's Duty, and God's Rewards and Gifts. Ioh. 4. 34. and 6. 39, 40.


Q. 3. Is not the will of his Absolute Dominion expressed in the Course of
Natural Motion, here inclided?

A. It may be included as the supposed matter of our approbation and praise:
And as Gods will is taken for the Effects and Signs of his will, we may and
must desire that he will continue the Course of Nature, Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, Earth, Winds and Water, etc. till the time of their dissolution, and
Mankind on Earth: For these are supposed as the subject or accidents of
Government. But the thing specially meant is God's governing Will, that is,
that his Laws may be obeyed, and his Promises all performed. Act. 21. 14. Mat.
7. 21. and 12. 50. and 18* 14. and 21. 31.


Q. 4. But will not God's will be always done, whether we pray or not?

A. 1. All shall be done which God has undertaken or decreed to do himself,
and not laid the Event on the will of Man: His absolute will of Events, is
still fulfilled. But Man does not always do God's will; that is, he does not
keep God's Laws, or do the Duty which God commands him; and therefore does
not obtain the Rewards or Gifts which were but conditionally promised. 2. And
even some things decreed absolutely by God, must be prayed for by Man: For he
decrees the Means as well as the End; and Prayer is a means, which his
Commands and Promises oblige us to.

Q. 5. Why is it added [as it is done in Heaven?]

A. To mind us, 1. Of the perfect Holy Obedience of the Glorified. 2. And that
we must make that our Pattern, and the End of our Desires. 3. And to keep up
our Hopes and Desires of that Glorio^ Perfection: And strive to do God's will
understandingly, sincerely, fully, readily, delightfully, without
unwillingness, unweariedly, concordantly, without division, in perfect Love to
God, his work, an^ one another: For so his will is done in Heaven. An^ these
Holy heavenly Desires, are the Earnest of our Heavenly possession.

Q. 6. What is it that we pray against in this Petition?

A. Against all sin, as a Transgression of his Law, and against all distrust of
his Promises, and Discontentedness with his Disposals: and so against every
will, that is contrary to the will of God.

Q. 7. What Will is it that is contrary to the Will of God?

A. 1. The Will of Satan, who hates God and Holiness, and Man, and wills
Sin, Confusion and Calamity, and who is obeyed by all the ungodly World.

2. The Will of all blind Unbelieving wicked Men, especially Tyrants, who fill
the World with Sin, and Blood, and Misery, that they may have their wills
without control or bounds.

3. Especially our own sinful self-willedness, and rebellious and disobedient
dispositions. Io. 1. 13. Ioh. 5. 30. and 6. 38. Luke 22. 42. ^. 13. 22. Heb.
13. 21.


Q. 8. What mean you by our self-willedness?

A. Man was made by the Creating Will of God, to obey the Governing will of
God, and rest and rejoice in the disposing, rewarding and beneficent will of
God, and his Essential Love and Goodness: by sin he is fallen from God's will
to himself, and his own Will, and would fain have all Events in the power and
disposal of his own Will, and fain be Ruled by his own Will, and have no
restraints, and would rest in himself; and the fulfilling of his Will: Yea, he
would have all Persons and things in the World, to depend on his Will, fulfill
and please it, and ascribe unto it. And so would be the Idol of himself, and of
the World. And all the wickedness, and stir, and cruelty of the World, is but
that every selfish Man may have his will.

Q. 9. What then is the full meaning of this Petition?

A. That Earth which is grown so like to Hell by doing the will of Satan, of
Tyrants, and of self-willed fleshly wicked Men, may be made liker unto Heaven
by a full compliance of the will of Man with the will of God, depending
submissively on his disposing will, obeying his commanding will, fearing his
punishing will, trusting, rejoicing and resting in his rewarding and beneficent
will, and renouncing all that is against it. Luke 12. 47. Ioh. 7. 17. Act. 22.
14. Romans 2. 18. Col. 1. 9.


Q. 10. But if it be God's will to punish, pain and kill us, how can we Will
this when it is evil to us; and we cannot Will evil?

A. As God himself does Antecedently or Primarily will that which is good
without any evil to his Subjects, and but consequently will their punishment on
supposition of their wilful sin, and this but as the work of his Holiness and
Justice for good; so he would have us to will first and absolutely, next his
own Glory and Kingdom, our own Holiness and Happiness, and not our Misery; but
to submit to his just punishments with a will that Loves (not the hurt, but)
the final good Effect, and the Wisdom, Holiness and Justice of our Chastiser.
Which well consists with begging Mercy, Pardon, and Deliverance. Mat. 26. 42.


Q. 11. But is not Heaven too high a Pattern for our desires?

A. No: Though we have much duty on Earth which belongs not to them in Heaven;
and they have much which belongs not to us, yet we must desire to obey God
fully in our duty, as they do in theirs; and desiring and seeking heavenly
Perfection is our sincerity on Earth. Psalm. 4. 80.


Q. 12. What Sin does this Clause specially condemn?

A. 1. Unbelief of the Heavenly Perfection. 2. Fleshly Lusts and Wills, and a
Worldly mind. 3. The ungodliness of them that would not have God have all our
Heart, and Love, and Service, but think it is too much preciseness, or more ado
than needs, and give him but the leavings of the Flesh.

CHAP. XXVIII. Give us this Day, our daily Bread.
Qu. 1. WHY is this the Fourth Petition?

A. I told you that the Lords Prayer has two parts: The first is for our End
according to the Order of Intention, beginning at the top, and descending: The
Second part is about the Means, according to the Order of Execution, beginning
at the bottom, and ascending to the top. Now this is the first Petition of the
Second part, because Our Substance and Being is supposed to all accidents; and
if God continue not our humanity, we cannot be capable of his Blessings. Luke
12. 23.


Q. 2. What is meant by Bread?

A. All things necessary to sustain our Natures in a fitness for our duty and
our Comforts. Ier. 45. 5. 1 Timothy 4. 8. 2 Pet. 1. 3.


Q. 3. It seems then that we pray that we may not want, or be sick, or die,
when God has foretold us the contrary Events?

A. We justly show that our Nature is against Death, and sickness, and wants,
as being Natural evils: And God gives us a discerning Judgment to know natural
good from evil, and an Appetite to desire it accordingly: But because Natural
Good and Evil, are to be estimated as they tend to Spiritual and everlasting
Good or Evil, God gives us Reason and Faith to Order our desires accordingly:
And because our Knowledge of this is imperfect (when and how far Natural Good
or Evil, conduces to Spiritual and Eternal) it is still supposed that we make
not our selves but God the Judge; and so desire Life, Health and Food and
Natural Supplies, with submission to his Will, for time and measure, they being
but means to higher things.

Q. 4. Why ask we for no more than Bread?

A. To show that Corporal things are not our Treasure, nor to be desired for
any thing but their proper use; and to renounce all covetous desires of
Superfluity, or provision for our inordinate fleshly Lusts. 2 Cor. 9. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 8.


Q. 5. Some say that by Bread is meant Jesus Christ* because there is no
Petition that mentions him?

A. Every part of the Lord's Prayer includes Christ: It is by him that God is
our Father, by him that the Holy Name of God is hallowed: It is his Kingdom
that we pray may come; it is his Law or will which we pray may be done: It is
he that purchases our right to the Creature and redeemed Nature: It is by him
that we must have the forgiveness of Sin, and by his Grace that we are
delivered from temptations and all Evil, etc.

Q. 6. Why ask we Bread of God as the Giver?

A. To signify that we are and have nothing but by his gift, and must live in
continual dependence on his Will, and begging, receiving, and thanksgiving are
our work. Mat. 6. 25, 26, 27, etc. Psalm. 136. 25.


Q. 7. But do we not get it by our Labor, and the gift of Men?

A. Our Labors are vain without God's Blessing, and Men are but God's
Messengers to carry us his gifts. Psalm. 127. 1. Mat. 4. 3, 4.


Q. 8. What need we Labor, if God give us all?

A. God gives his Blessings to meet Receivers, and in the use of his appointed
Means: He that will not both beg and labor as God requires him, is unmeet to
receive his gifts. 2 Cor. 9, 10. Prove. 12. 11. and 28. 19. Psalm. 8. 13. Prove.
31. 27.


Q. 9. Why do we ask Bread from Day to Day?

A. To show that we are not the keepers of our selves, or our stock of
Provisions, but as Children live upon our Fathers daily allowance, and
continually look to him for all, and daily renew our thanks for all, and study
the daily improvement of his maintenance in our Duties. Mat. 6. 24, etc. Luke
12. 19, 20, 21.


Q. 10. But when a Man has Riches for many Years, what need he ask daily for
what he has?

A. He has no assurance of his Life or Wealth an Hour, nor of the Blessing of
it, but by God's gift. ( h)

Q. 11. Why say we [Give us] rather than [Give me]?

A. To exercise our common Love to one another, and renounce that narrow
selfishness, which consineth Men's regard and desires to themselves: And to show
that we come not to God merely in a single Capacity, but as Members of the
World, as Men, and Members of Christ's Body or Church, as Christians: And that
in the Communion Saints as we show our Charity to one another, so we have a
part in the Prayers of all.

Q. 12. May we then pray against Poverty and Sickness, and hurt?

A. Yes, as aforesaid, so far as they are hurtful to our Natures, and thereby
to our Souls and the ends of Life. Prove. 30. 8.


Q. 13. Does not naming Bread before Forgiveness and Grace, show that we must
first and most desire it.

A. We before expressed our highest desire of God's Glory, Kingdom and Will; and
as to our own Interest, all the three last Petitions go together, and are
inseparable; (i) 1 Cor. 12.
but the first is the lowest, though it be first in place. Nature sustained is
the first, but it will be but the subject of sin and misery without Pardon and
Holiness: I told you that the three last Petitions go according to the Order of
Execution, from the lowest to the highest step. God's Kingdom and Righteousness
must be first sought in order of Estimation and Intention, by all that will
attain them.

Q. 14. But if God give us more than Bread, even Plenty for our delight, as
well as necessaries, may we not use it accordingly?

A. Things are necessary to our well*being, that are not necessary to our
Being: We may ask and thankfully use all that by strengthening and comforting
Nature, tends to fit the Spirit for the joyful Service of God, and to be
helpful to others. But we must neither ask nor use any thing for the service of
our Lusts, or tempting unprofitable pleasure.

Q. 15. What if God deny us necessaries, and a Christian should be put to beg
or be famished, how then does God make good his Word, that he will give us
whatever we ask through Christ, and that other things shall be added if we seek
first his Kingdom and Righteousness, and that Godliness has the promise of
this Life and that to come?

A. Remember as aforesaid, 1. That the things of this Life are promised and
given, not as our happiness, but as Means to better. 2. And that we are
promised no more than we are fit to receive and use. 3. And that God is the
highest Judge, both how far outward things would help or hinder us; and how far
we are fit to receive them. Therefore if he deny them, he (l) Mat. 6. 33. Ioh.
5. 40. Mat. 6. 19, 20.
certainly knows that either we are unmeet for them, or they for us. 1 Samuel
2. 29, 30, 31. Iam. 4. 3. Phil. 4. 10, 11. Heb. 13. 5.


Q. 16. When should a Man say, He has enough?

A. When having God's Grace and favor, he has so much of Corporal things, as
will best further his Holiness and Salvation, and as it pleases the Will of
God that he should have.

Q. 17. May not a Man desire God to bless his labors, and to be rich?

A. A Man is bound to labor in a lawful Calling that is able, and to desire
and beg God's Blessing on it: But he must not desire Riches, or Plenty for it
self, or for fleshly Lusts; nor be over importunate with God to make him his
Steward for others. Prove. 10. 22. Psalm. 129. 8. Deuteronomy. 28. 8, 9, etc. and 33. 11.


Q. 18. What if God give us Riches, or more than we need our selves?

A. We must believe that he makes us his Stewards, to do all the good with it,
that we can to all, but specially to the Household of Faith: But to spend no
more in sinful Lust and Pleasure, than if we were Poor. 1 Pet. 4. 10. Luke 12.
21, 24.


Q. 19. What does daily Bread oblige us to?

A. Daily Service, and daily Love, and thankfulness to God, and to mind the end
for which it is given, to be always ready at the end of a Day, to give up our
account and end our journey.

Q. 20. What is the sin and danger of the love of Riches?

A. The Love of Money or Riches, is but the fruit of the Love of the Flesh,
whose Lust would never want Provision: But it is the Root of a Thousand farther
Evils. As it shows a wretched Soul, that does not truly believe and trust God
for this Life, much less for a better, but is Worldly and Sensual, and
Idolatrous; so it leads a Man from God, Holiness, Heaven, yea and from common
honesty, to all Iniquity: A Worldling, and lover of Riches, is false to his own
Soul, to God and Man, and never to be much trusted. Luke 18. 23, 24. Mark 10.
24. 1 Timothy 6. 10. 1 Ioh. 2. 15.


CHAP. XXIX. And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass
against us. ( Or, as we forgive our Debtors.)
Qu. 1. WHy is this made the fifth Petition, or the second of the second part?

A. Because it is for the second thing we Personally need. Our Lives and
Natural being supposed, we next need Deliverance from the Guilt and Punishment,
which we have contracted. Else to be Men, will be worse to us than to be Toads
or Serpents. Psalm. 32. 1, 2, 3.


Q. 2. What does this Petition imply?

A. 1. That we are all Sinners, and have deserved punishment, and are already
fallen under some degree of it. Romans 3, throughout.


2. That God has given us a Savior who died for our Sins, and is our Ransom
and Advocate with the Father:

And, 3. That God is a gracious pardoning God, and deals not with us on the
terms of rigorous Justice according to the Law of Innocence: But has brought
us under the Redeemers Covenant of Grace, which gives Pardon to all penitent
Believers: So that sin is both pardonable, and conditionally pardoned to us
all. 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. Ioh. 3. 16. Psalm. 130. 4. Act. 5. 31. and 13. 38. Act. 26.
18.


Q. 3. What then are the presupposed things which we pray not for?

A. 1. We pray not that God may be Good and Love it self, or a merciful God:
for this is presupposed. 2. We pray not that he would send a Savior into the
World, to fulfill all Righteousness, and die for Sin, and that his Merit and
Sacrifice may procure a Conditional Universal Pardon and Gift of Life, viz. to
all that will repent and believe. For all this is done already. Luke 23. 34,
Mat. 9. 6. Mat. 12. 31, 32.


Q. 4. Is it to the Father only, or also to the Son tha^ we pray for Pardon?

A. To the Father primarily; and to the Son as Glorified; for now the Father
without him judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, Ioh. 5.
22. But when Christ made this Prayer, he was not yet Glorified, nor in full
possession of his Power. ( e)

Q. 5. What Sin is it, whose forgiveness we pray for?

A. All sin, upon the Conditions of pardon made by Christ; that is, for the
pardon of all Sin to true penitent Believers. Therefore we pray not for any
pardon of the final nonperformance of the condition, that is, to finally
impenitent Unbelievers. Luke. 15. 3, 5.


Q. 6. Sin cannot hurt God: what need then is there of forgiveness?

A. It can wrong him by breaking his Laws, and rejecting his moral government,
though it hurt him not: And he will right himself.

Q. 6. What is forgiving Sin?

A. It is by tender Mercy, on the account of Christ's Merits, Satisfaction and
Intercession, to forgive the guilt of Sin as it makes us the due subjects of
punishment, and to forgive the punishment of sin, as due by that guilt and the
Law of God, so as not to inflict it on us. Col. 2. 13. Iam. 5. 15. Mat. 18. 27.
32. Luke 7. 42, 43. Romans 6. 21, 23. 1 Cor. 15. 22.


Q. 7. What punishment does God forgive?

A. Not all: For the first Sentence of Corporal punishment and death is
inflicted. But he forgiveth the Everlasting punishment to all true Believers,
and so much of the temporal, both Corporal and Spiritual, as his Grace does fit
us to receive the pardon of: and so he turns Temporal correcting punishments
to our good. Psalm. 103. 3. 1 Ioh. 1. 9.


Q. 8. Does he not pardon all Sin at once, at our Conversion?

A. Yes: All that is past: for no other is sin. But not by a perfect Pardon.

Q. 9. Why must we pray for Pardon then every day?

A. 1. Because the Pardon of old Sins is but begun, and not fully perfect, till
all the punishment be ceased: And that is not, till all sin, and unholiness,
and all the evil effects of sin be ceased. No nor till the Day of Resurrection*
and Judgment have overcome the last Enemy Death, and finally Justified us. 1
Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32. Mat. 18. 27. Psalm. 85. 2, 3, 4, etc. Luke 6. 37. Iam. 5.
15.


2. Because we daily renew our sins, by omission and commission, and though the
foundation of our Pardon be laid in our Regeneration, that it may be actual and
full for following sins, we must have renewed Repentance, Faith and Prayer.

Q. 10. God is not changeable, to forgive to day what he forgave not yester
day: What then is his forgiving Sin?

A. The unchangeable God changes the Case of Man: And, 1. By his Law of Grace,
forgiveth penitent Believers who were unpardoned in their impenitence and
unbelief: And, 2. By his Executive Providence he takes off and preventeth
punishments both of Sense and Loss, and so forgiveth.

Q. 11. How can we pray for pardon to others, when we know not whether they be
penitent Believers, capable of Pardon?

A. 1. We pray as Members of Christ's Body for our selves, and all that are his
Members, that is, penitent Believers.

2. For others we pray that God would give them Faith, Repentance and
Forgiveness: As Christ prayed, Father forgiv them, for they know not what they
do; that is, Qualify them for Pardon, and then pardon them: Or give them
Repentance and Forgiveness.

Q. 12. Why say we, [as we forgive them that trespass against us?

A. To signify that we have this necessary qualification for forgiveness; God
will not forgive us fully till we can forgive others: And to signify our
Obligation to forgive: And as an Argument to God to forgive us, when he has
given us Hearts to forgive others: But not as the Measure of God's forgiving
us: For he forgiveth us more freely and fully than we can forgive others. Mat.
6. 14, 15. and 18. 35. Mar. 11. 25, 26.


Q. 13. Are we bound absolutely to forgive all Men?

A. No: But as they are capable of it. 1 We have no power to forgive wrongs
against God. 2. Nor against our Superiors, or other Men, or the Commonwealth
or Church, further than God Authori^eth any Man by Office. 3. A Magistrate must
forgive sins as to Corporal punishment, no further than God allows him, and
as will stand with the true design of Government, and the common good. And a
Pastor no further than will stand with the good of the Church: And a Father no
further than will stand with the good of the Family: And so of others. 4. An
Enemy that remains such, and is wicked, must be forgiven by private Men, so
far as that we must desire and endeavor their good, and seek no revenge: But
not so far as to be trusted as a familiar or bosom Friend. 5. A Friend that
offended and returns to his Fidelity, must be forgiven and trusted as a
Friend, according to the Evidence of his Repentance and Sincerity, and no
further.

The rest about forgiveness is opened in the Exposition of that Article in the
Creed [ The forgiveness of ^^ns:] Still remembering that all forgiveness is by
God's Mercy, through Christ's Merits, Sacrifice and Intercession.

CHAP. XXX. And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil.
Qu. 1. WHy is this made the Sixth Petition?

A. Because it is the next in order to the attainment of our ultimate End; Our
Natures being maintained, and our sin and punishment forgiven, we next need
deliverance from all Evils that we are in danger of for the time to come; and
then we are saved.

Q. 2. What is meant by Temptation?

A. Any such Trial as may overcome us or hurt us, whether by Satan, or by the
strong allurements of the World and Flesh, or by Persecutions or other heavy
Sufferings, which may draw us to sin, or make us miserable. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Rev.
3. 10. Mat. 26. 41. Lu^ 8. 13.


Q. 3. Does God lead any into Temptation?

A. 1. God places us in this World in the mids^ of Trials, making it our duty
to resist and overcome. 2. God permits the Devil by his suggestions, and by
the World and Flesh to tempt us. 3. God tries us himself by manifold
afflictions, and by permitting the Temptations of Persecutors and Oppressors. 1
Pet. 1. 6. Mat. 4. Genesis 22. 1.


Q. 4. Why will God do and permit all this?

A. It is a Question unmeet for Man to put: It is bu^ to ask him, Why he would
make a rank of reasonabl^ Creatures below confirmed Angels? And why he would
make Man with free will? And why he will not give us the Prize without the
Race, and the Crown without the Warfare and Victory? And you may next ask, Why
he did not make every Star a Sun? and every Man an Angel? and every Beast and
Vermin a Man, and every Stone a Diamond. Iam. 1. 12. 2. 1 Cor. 10. 13.


Q. 5. Does God Tempt a Man to sin?

A. No: Sin is none of God's End or Desire: Satan tempts Men to Sin, and God
tempts Men to try them whether they will sin, or be faithful to him, to
exercise their Grace and Victory. Iam. 1. 13, 14, 15.


Q. 6. Is it all that we need, that God lead us not into Temptation?

A. The meaning is that God who over-ruleth all things, will neither himself
try us beyond the strength which he will give us, nor permit Satan, Men or
Flesh to over-tempt us unto sin.

Q. 7. But are we not sure that this Life will be a Life of Trial and
Temptation, and that we must pass through many Tribulations?

A. Yes: But we pray that they may not be too strong, and prevalent to overcome
us, when we should overcome. 1 Cor. 10. 13. Heb. 2. 18.


Q. 8. What be the Temptations of Satan which we pray against?

A. They are of so many sorts that I must not here be so large as to number
them. You may see a great number with the Remedies named in my Christian
Directory. But in general they are those by which he deceives the
Understanding, perverteth the Will, and corrupts our Practice: and this about
our state of Soul, or about our particular actions, to draw us to sins of
Commission, or of Omission, against God, our selves or others. The particulars
are innumerable. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. Ephesians. 6. 11.


Q. 9. What is the Evil that we pray to be delivered from?

A. The evil of sin and Misery; and from Satan, our selves and Men, and all
hurtful Creatures as the Causes.

Q. 10. What is the reason of of the Connection of the two parts of this
Petition, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil?

A. Temptation is the means of sin, and sin the cause of misery. And they that
would be delivered from sin, must pray and labor to be delivered from
Temptation: And they that would be delivered from misery, must be delivered
from sin. Pro. 4. 14* 15. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Prove. 7. 23. 2 Timothy 3. 7. and 6. 9. 1
Cor. 7. 35. Mat. 5. 29, 30, 31.


Q. 11. May not a tempted Man be delivered from Sin?

A. Yes, when the Temptation is not chosen by him, and cannot be avoided, and
when it is not too strong for him, grace assisting him.

Q. 12. What duty does this Petition oblige us to, and what sin does it
reprehend?

A. 1. It binds us to a continual humble sense of our own corrupt dispositions,
apt to yield to Temptations, and of our danger, and of the evil of Sin: And it
condemns the unhumbled that know not, or fear not their pravity or danger.

2. It binds us all to fly from Temptations as far as Lawfully we can; and
condemns them that rush fearlesly on them, yea, that tempt themselves and
others. The best Man is not safe that will not avoid such Temptations as are
suited to his corrupt Nature, when he may: While the bait is still near unto
his Senses, he is in continual danger. Mat. 18. 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 8. 9. Romans
14. 13. Mat. 16. 22, 23, 24. Rev. 2. 14.


3. It binds us to feel the need of Grace, and God's deliverance, and not to
trust our corrupted Nature, and insufficient strength.

Q. 13. How does God deliver us from Evil?

A. 1. By keeping us from over strong Temptation. 2. By his assisting Grace. 3.
By restraining Satan and wicked Men, and all things that would hurt us, and by
his merciful Providence, directing, preserving and delivering us from sin and
misery.

CHAP. XXXI. For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever, Amen.
Qu. 1. WHat is the meaning of this Conclusion, and it is Scope?

A. It is a form of Praise to God, and helps to our Belief of the hearing of
our Prayers.

Q. 2. Why is it put last?

A. Because the Praise of God is the highest step next Heaven. ( a) (i) Psalm.
119. 164. and 71. 6, 8. and 78, 13.


Q. 3. What is the meaning of Kingdom, Power and Glory here?

A. By Kingdom is meant, that it belongs only to God to Rule all the
Creatures, dispose of all things; and by Power is meant, that by his Infinite
Perfection and Sufficiency he can do it: And therefore can give us all that we
want, and deliver us from all that we fear. And by Glory is meant, that all
things shall be ordered so as the Glory of all his own Perfections, shall
finally and everlastingly shine forth in all: And his Glory be the End of all
for ever. Psalm. 103. 19. and 145. 12. Dan. 4. 34. 3. Mat. 16. 28. Psalm. 145.
11, 13. Heb. 1. 8. Luke 2. 14. Mat. 16. 27. and 24. 30. Act. 12. 23.


Q. 4. What is the reason of the Order of these three here?

A. I told you that the last part ascends from the lowest to the highest
Step: God's Actual Government, is the cause of our deliverances and welfare:
God's Power and Perfection is it that manageth that Government: God's Glory
shining in the perfected form of the Universe, and specially in Heaven, is the
ultimate End of all.

Q. 5. But it seems there is no Confession of Sin, or Thanksgiving in this Form
of Prayer?

A. It is the Symbol or Directory to the wills Desire: And when we know what we
should desire, it is employed that we know what we want, and what we shall
bewail, and what we should be thankful for: And Praise includes our
Thanksgiving. Psalm. 145. 4. 10. and 148. and 66. 2, 8. and 147. 1, 7. and 106.
2. 47. Phil. 4. 20. Iud. 25. Rev. 5. 13. and 7. 12. Romans 11. 36. and 16. 27.


Q. 6. Why say we, [for ever?]

A. For our Comfort and God's honor, expressing the Everlastingness of his
Kingdom, Power and Glory.

Q. 7. Why say we, Amen?

A. To express both our Desire, and our Faith and Hope, that God will hear the
Desires which his Spirit gives us through the Mediation of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Ten Commandments in General.
Qu. 1. ARE the Ten Commandments a Law to Christians? Or are they abrogated
with the rest of Moses Law?

A. The Ten Commandments are considerable in three States: 1. As part of the
Primitive Law of Nature. 2. As the Law given by Moses for the peculiar
Government of the Jews Commonwealth. 3. As the Law of Jesus Christ. Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5. Exodus 34. 28.


1. The Law of Nature is not abrogate, though the terms of Life and Death are
not the same as under the Law of Innocence. Luke ^. 6.


2. The Law of Moses to the Jews as such, never bound all other Nations, nor
now binds us, but is dead and done away, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 9, 10, 11. Romans 2. 12.
and 14, 15. and 3. 19. and 7. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 7. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 21. But seeing it
was God that was the Author of that Law, and by it expressly told the Jews what
the Law of Nature is, we are all bound still to take those two Tables to be
God's own Transcript of his Law of Nature, and so are by consequence bound by
them still. If God give a Law to some one Man, as that which belongs to the
Nature of all Men, though it bind us not as a Law to that Man, it binds as Gods
exposition of the Law of Nature when notified to us.

3. As the Law of Christ, it binds all Christians.

Q. 2. How are the Ten Commandments the Law of Christ?

A. 1. Nature it self, and lapsed Mankind is delivered up to Christ as
Redeemer, to be used in the Government of his Kingdom. And so the Law of Nature
is become his Law. Mat. 5. 18, 19. and 24. 40. Mark 10. 19. and 12. 29, 30.
Ioh. 14. 21. 1 Cor. 7. 19. and 14. 37. 1 Ioh. 2. 4. and 3. 24. and 5. 3. Ioh.
15. 12.


2. It was Christ as God-Redeemer that gave the Law to Moses, and as it is a
Transcript of the Common Law of Nature he does not revoke it, but suppose it.

3. Christ has repeated and owned the Matter of it in the Gospel, and made it
his Command to his Disciples.

Q. 3. Is there nothing in the Ten Commandments proper to the Israelites?

A. Yes: 1. The Preface: Hear O Israel: And [ that brought thee out of the Land
of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.] 2. The stating the Seventh Day for the
Sabath, and the strict Ceremonial Rest commanded as part of the Sanctifying of
it.

Q. 4. How does Christ and his Apostles contract all the Law into that of Love?

A. God who as Absolute Lord, Owneth, moves and disposes of all, Mar. 12. 30,
33. Romans 13. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 13. Tit. 3. 4. Romans 5. 5. and 8. 39. 1 Ioh. 4. 16.
Ioh. 14. 23.
does as Sovereign Ruler give us Laws and excute them, and as Love and
Benefactor gives us all, and is the most Amiable Object and End of all: So
that as to Love and Give is more than to Command, so to be Loved is more than
as a Commander to be Obeyed: But ever includes it, though it be eminently in
its Nature above it. So that, 1. Objectively, Love to God, our Selves and
Others in that measure that it is exercised Wisely, is Obedience Emenently and
somewhat higher. 2. And Love as the Principle in Man, is the most powerful
Cause of Obedience, supposing the Reverence of Authority and the fear of
punishment, but is somewhat more Excellent than they. A Parents Love to a Child
makes him more constant and full in all that he can do for him, 2 Timothy 1. 7. 1
Ioh. 4. 17, 18. Gal. 5. 14.
than the Commands of a King alone would do. In that measure that you Love God,
you will heartily and delightfully do all your duty to him; and so far as you
love Parents or Neighbors, you will gladly promote their Honor, Safety,
Chastity, Estates, Rights, and all that is theirs, and hate all that is against
their good. And as Parents will feed their Children, though no fear of
punishment should move them; so we shall be above the great necessity of the
fear of punishment, so far as God and Goodness is our delight. Psalm. 1. 2, 3.
and 119. --.


Q. 5. How should one know the meaning and extent of the Commandments?

A. The words do plainly signify the Sense: And according to the reasonable
use of Words, Gods Laws being perfect must be thus expounded. Mat. 7. 12. Phil.
2. 14. and 3. 8. 1 Cor. 14. 26.


1. The commanding of Duty includes the forbidding of the contrary. 2. Under
General Commands and Prohibitions, the kinds and particulars are included which
the General word extends to. 3. When one Particular sin is forbidden, or duty
Commanded, all the Branches of it, and all of the same kind and reason are
Forbidden or Commanded. 4. Where the End is commanded or forbidden, it is
employed that so are the true Means as such. 5. Every Commandment extends to
the whole Man, to our Bodies and all the Members, and to the Soul and all its
Faculties respectively. 6. Commands bind us not to be always doing the thing
Commanded. Duties be not at all times duty: But Prohibitions bind us at all
times from every sin, when it is indeed a sin. 7. Every Command implies some
reward or benefit to the Obedient, and every sin of Omission or Commission is
supposed to deserve punishment, though it be not named. Mal. 3. 14.
8. Every Command supposes the thing Commanded to be no Natural impossibility,
(as to see Spirits, or into the Heart of the Earth, to know that which is not
intelligible, etc.) But it does not suppose us to be Morally or Holily disposed
to keep it, or to be able to change our Corrupt Natures without God's Grace. 9.
So every Command supposes us to have that Natural freedom of Will which is a
self-determining Power, not necessitated or forced to sin by any: But not to
have a Will that is free from Vicious inclinations: Nor from under God's
disposing power. Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. Ier. 13. 23.
10. The breach of the same Laws may have several sorts of punishment: By
Parents, by Masters, by Magistrates, by the Church: On Body, on Name, on Soul,
in this Life by God, and finally heavier punishment in the Life to come. 11.
The sins here forbidden are not unpardonable, but by Christ's Merits, Sacrifice
and Intercession are forgiven to all true penitent converted Believers.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Preface to the Decalogue.
Qu. 1. What are the Parts of the Decalogue?

A. I. The Constitution of the Kingdom of God over Men described: And, II. The
Administration or Governing Laws of his Kingdom.

Q. 2. What words express the Constitution of God's Kingdom?

A. [I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of
the House of bondage.]

Q. 3. What is the Constitution here expressed?

A. 1. GOD the Sovereign: 2. Man the Subject. 3. The work of God, which was the
next Foundation or reason of the mutual Relation between God and Man, as here
intended. Mal. 2. 10. Mat. 19. 17. Mark 12. 32. Ier. 7. 23. Ioh. 20. 17.


Q. 4. What is included in the first part, of God's Sovereignty?

A. 1. That there is a God, and but One God (in this special Sense:) 2. That
the God of Israel is this One true God, who makes these Laws. 3. That we must
all obey him.

Q. 5. What is GOD, and what does that word here mean?

A. This was largely opened in the beginning. Briefly, to be GOD is to be a
Spirit, Infinite in Being, in Vital Power, Knowledge and Goodness, of whom as
the efficient Cause, and through whom as the Governor, and to whom as the End,
are all things else; related to us as our Creator, and as our Absolute Owner,
Our Supreme Ruler and our greatest Benefactor, Friend and Father.

Q. 6. What words mention [ Man as the Subject of the Kingdom?]

A. [ Hear O Israel] and [ Thy God that brought Thee, etc.

Q. 7. What Relations are here included?

A. That we being Gods Creatures and Redeemed Ones, are, 1. His Own: 2. His
Subjects, to be Ruled by him. 3. His poor Beneficiaries, that have all from
him, and owe him all our Love.

Q. 8. What do the words signify [that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt?]

A. That besides the Right of Creation, God has a Second Right to us as our
Redeemer: The deliverance from Egypt was that Typical one that founded the
Relation between him and the Commonwealth of Israel. But as the Decalogue is
the Law of Christ, the meaing is [ I am the Lord thy God who Redeemed thee from
sin and misery by Jesus Christ. Mat. 28. 19. Romans 14. 9. Ioh. 5. 22. Ioh. 17.
2, 3.
So that this signifies the nearest Right and Reason of this Relation between
God and Man. He gives us his Law now not only as our Creator, but as our
Redeemer: and as such we must be his willing Subjects and obey him.

Q. 9. Are all Men Subjects of God's Kingdom?

A. 1. All are Subjects as to Right and Obligation. 2. All that Profess
Subjection as professed Consenters. 3. And all true hearty Consenters are his
sincere Subjects that shall be Saved.

God the Creator and Redeemer has the Right of Sovereignty over all the World
whether they Consent or not. But they shall not have the Blessing of Faithful
Subjects without their own true Consent, nor of visible Church Members without
professed Consent. But antecedent Mercies he gives to all.

Q. 10. Why is this description of Gods Sovereignty, and Man's Subjection, and
the Ground of it, set before the Commandments?

A. Because, 1. Faith must go before Obedience. Ioh. 17. 3. and 14. 1, 2. Ioh.
3. 16. Ios. 24. 18. Ioh. 20, 28.
He that will come to God and obey him, must Believe that God is God, and that
he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. And he that
will obey him as our Redeemer, must believe that we are Redeemed by Jesus
Christ, and that he is our Lord and King. 2. And Relations go before the Duties
of Relation: And our Consent foundeth the mutual Relation. The nature and form
of Obedience is, To Obey another Commanding will because he is our Rightful
Governor. No Man can Obey him formally whom he takes not for his Ruler. And
Subjection or Consent to be Governed, is Virtually all Obedience.

Q. 11. But what if Men never hear of the Redeemer, may they not obey Gods Law
of Nature?

A. They may know that they are Sinners; and that the sin of an Immortal Soul
deserves endless punishment: And they may find by experience that God uses
them not as they deserve, but gives many mercies to those that deserve nothing
but misery; and that he obliges them to use some means in hope for their
recovery, and so that he Governs them by a Law (or on terms) of Mercy. And
being under the first Edition of the Law of Grace, though they know not the
second, they ought to keep that Law which they are under, and they shall be
judged by it.

Q. 12. How then does the Christian Church as Christ's Kingdom, differ from the
World without, if they be any of his Kingdom too?

A. As all the World was under that Common Law of Grace which was made for them
to Adam and Noe, and yet Abraham and his Seed only were chosen out of all the
World as a peculiar Holy Nation to God, and were under a Law and Covenant of
Peculiarity, which belonged only unto them; so though Christ has not revoked
those common Mercies given to all by the first Edition of the Law of Grace, nor
left the World ungoverned and lawless, yet he has given to Christians a more
excellent Covenant of Peculiarity than he gave the Natural Seed of Abraham, and
has elected them out of the World to himself, as a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priestood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People, to show forth the Praises of him
that has called them out of darkness into his mavelous Light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Q. 13. It seems then we must take great heed that we make not Christ's Kingdom
either less or Greater than it is?

A. To make it Greater than it is, by equalling those without with the Church,
or Church-hypocrites with the sincere, does dishonor Gods Holiness, and the
wonderful design of Christ in Man's Redemption, and the Grace of the Spirit, and
the Church of God, and obscureth the Doctrine of Election and God's peculiar
Love, and tends to the discomfort of the Faithful, and even to Infidelity.

And to make Christ's Kingdom less than it is, by de^ying the first Edition of
the Law of Grace made to ^ll, and the common Mercies given to all,
(antecedently ^o their rejection of them) does obscure and wrong ^he Glory of
Gods Love to Man, and deny his com^on Grace and Law, and feigneth the World
either ^o be under no Law of God, or else to be all bound to be perfectly
Innocent at the time when they are guilty, Psalm. 145. 9.
and either not bound at all to hope and seek for Salvation, or else to seek it
on the Condition of being Innocent when they know that it is impossible, they
being already guilty: And it makes the World like the Devils almost; shut up
in despair; and it leaves them as Guiltless of all sin against Grace and the
Law of Grace, as if they had none such: And it contradicts the judgment of
Abraham the Father of the Faithful, who saw Christ's day: For he thought that
even the wicked City Sodom had had Fifty Persons so Righteous as that God
should have spared the rest for their sakes: (to say nothing of Job, Nineve,
etc.)* In a word, the ungrounded extenuating the Grace o^ Christ, and the Love
of God, hardens Infidels, and tempts Christians to perplexing Thoughts of
the Gospel, and of the Infinite Goodness of God, and makes it more difficult
than indeed it is, to see hi^ Amiableness, and consequently to Glorify and
Lo^^ him, as the Essential Love, whose Goodness is equa^ to his Greatness. It
is Satan as an Angel of Light and Righteousness, who pretending the defense of
God's special Love to his Elect, denies his common Mercies to Mandkind, to
dishonor Gods's Love, and strengthen our own Temptations, against the Joyfu^
Love of God.

Q. 14. Is Government and Subjection all that ^^ here included?

A. No: God's Kingdom is a Paternal Kingdom, ^ling Children by Love, that he
may make them happy [ I am the Lord thy God] signifies [ I am thy great^^
Benefactor, thy Father, who gave thee all the Goo^ thou have, and will give to
my obedient Children, Grace and Glory, and all that they can reasonably desire,
and will protect them from all their Enemies, and supply their wants, and
deliver them from Evil, and will be for ever their Sun and Shield, their Reward
and Joy, and better to them than Man in Flesh can now conceive, even Love it
self. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. Ioh. 20. 28.


CHAP. XXXIV. Of the First Commandment.
Qu. 1. What are the words of the First Commandment?

A. Thou shall have no other Gods before me, Exodus 20. 3. Deuteronomy. 5. ^. and 10.
21.


Q. 2. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

A. It implies a Command that we do all that du^ God, which is due to him from
reasonable Crea^ures, made by him, and freely Redeemed by him from sin and
misery. And it forbids us to think that there is any other God, or to give
to any other that which properly belongs to him. Deuteronomy. 26. 27. Dan. 6. 16. Isa.
6. 19.


Q. 3. Does not the Scripture call Idols and Magi^^rates Gods?

A. Yes: but only in an Equivocal improper Sense: Idols are called Gods as so
reputed falsely by Idolaters; and Magistrates only as Men's Governors under God.
Gal. 4. 8. 1 Cor. 8. 5. Ioh. 10. 34, 35 Deuteronomy. 30. 16, 20. Ioh. 17. 3. and 14.
1, 2. Deuteronomy. 10 12. Mic. 6. 8.


Q. 4. What are the Duties which we owe to God alone?

A. I. That our Understandings know, believe and esteem him as God: II. That
our Wills love^ him and cleave to him as God: III. That we Practically obey and
serve him as God.

Q. 5. When does the Understanding know, believe and esteem him as God?

A. No Creature can know God with an adequate Comprehensive knowledge: But we
must in our measure know, believe and esteem him to be the only Infinite,
Eternal self-sufficient Spirit, Vital power, Undestanding and Will, or most
perfect Life, Light and Love; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of whom, and through
whom, and to whom are all things, Our absolute Owner, Ruler and Father,
reconciled by Christ; Our Maker, our Redeemer and Sanctifier.

Q. 6. When does Man's Will love and cleave to him as God?

A. When the Understanding believing him to be Best, even Infinitely Good in
himself, and Best to all the World, and Best to us, we Love him as such; though
not yet in due perfection, yet sincerely above all other things. Psalm. 73. 25.
Mat. 22. 37. Psalm 119. 68. and 145. 9.


Q. 7. How can we Love God above all, when we never saw him, and can have no
Idea or formal conception of him in our Minds?

A. Though he be invisible and we have no corporeal Idea of him, nor no
adequate or just formal Conception of him, yet he is the most Noble Object of
our Understanding and Love; as the Sun is of our sight, though we comprehend it
no^. We are not without such an Idea or conception of God, as is better than
all other knowledge, and is the beginning of Eternal Life, and is true in its
kind, though very imperfect. Mat. 19 17. Ioh. 17. 3.


Q. 8. How can you know him that is no Object of sense?

A. He is the Object of our Understanding: We know in our selves what it is to
Know and to Will, though these acts are not the objects of sense, (unless you
will call the very acts of knowing and willing, an eminent internal sensation
of themselves.) And by this we know what it is to have the Power of
Understanding and Willing: And so what it is to be an Invisible substance with
such Power. And as we have this true Idea or Conception of ^ Soul, so have we
more easily of him who is more than a Soul to the whole World. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
and 2. 8. 3. and 2. 3. 18. Ioh. 1. 18.


Q. 9. How does the true Love of God work ^^re in the Flesh?

A. As we here Know God, so we Love him: As we know him not in the manner as we
do things sensible, so we Love him not with that sort of sensible appetite, as
we do things sensible immediately. But as we know him as revealed in the glass
of his works, natural and gracious, and in his Word, so we Love him as known by
such Revelation. Ex. 20. 6. Pro. 8. 17, 21. Ioh. 14. 15 23.


Q. 10. Do not all men Love God who believe that there is a God, when Nature
teaches men to Love Goodness as such; and all that believe that there is a
God, believe that he is the Best of beings?

A. Wicked men know not truly the Goodness of God, and so what God is indeed:
To know this proposition [ God is most Good,] is but to know words and a
Logical general Notion. As if a man should know and say that Light is Good, who
never had sight, or Sweetness is good, who never tasted it: Every wicked man is
predominantly a Lover of fleshly pleasure, and therefore no Lover but a Hater
of all the parts and acts of Divine Government and Holiness which are contrary
to it, and would deprive him of it. So that there is somewhat of God that a
wicked man does love, that is, his Being, his Work of Creation, and bounty to
the World and to him in those natural good things which he can value; But he
Loves not, but Hates God as the Holy Governor of the World and him, and the
Enemy of his forbidden pleasure and desires. 1 Cor. 8. 3. Romans 8. 28. Iam. 1.
12. and 2. 5. 1 Ioh. 3. 16, 17. and 5. 3. Iud. 21. 1 Ioh 4. 20. Ioh. 14. 23.


Q. 11. What be the certain signs then of tru^ Love to God?

A. 1. A true Love to his Government, and Laws, and Holy Word; and that as it
is his, and holy: And this so effectual, as that we unfeignedly desire to obey
that word as the Rule of our Faith, and Life, and Hope: and desire to fulfill
his Commanding Will.

2. A true Love to the Actions which God commands, (though flesh will have
some degree of backwardness.)

3. A true Love to those that are likest God in Wisdom, Holiness and doing
good; And such a Love to them as is above the Love of Worldly Riches, Honor
and Pleasure, so that it will enable us to do them good, though by our
suffering or loss in a lower matter, when God calls as to it. For if we see our
Brother have need and shut up the bowels of Compassion, so that we cannot find
in our hearts to relieve his necessities by the loss of our unnecessary
superfluities, how dwells the Love of God in us?

4. True Love to God does Love it self. It is a great sign of it, when we so
much love to Love God, as that we are gladder when we feel it in us, than for
any worldly Vanity; and when we take the Mutual Love of God and the Soul to be
so good and joyful a State, as that we truly desire it as our Felicity and best
in Heaven, to be ^erfectly Loved of God, and perfectly to Love him, and
joyfully express it in his Everlasting prai^es. To long to Love God as the best
Condition for us, is a sign that we truly Love ^im. Luke 11. 42. Ioh. 5. 42. 1
Ioh. 2. 5. and 3. ^7. Ioh. 15. 10. 1 Ioh. 3. 17. Ps. 42. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.


Q. 12. But must not all the affections be set on God as well as Love?

A. All the rest are but several ways of Loving or Willing good, and of
Nilling or Hating and avoiding Evil.

1. It is Love that desires after God, and his Grace and Glory. 2. It is Love
that hops for him. 3. It is Love that rejoiceth in him, and is pleased when
we and others please him, and when his Love is poured out on the Sons of men,
and Truth, Peace and Holiness prosper in the World. 4. It is Love that makes
us sorrowful that we can please him no more, nor more enjoy him; and that
makes us grieved that we can no more know him, love him, and delight in him;
and that we have so much sin within us to displease him, and hinder our
communion of Love with him. 5. And Love will make us fearful of displeasing
him, and losing the said Communion of Love. 6. And it will make us most angry
with our selves when we have most by sin displeased God, and angry with others
that offend him. Deu. 5. 29. Mat. 6. 21. Deu. 11. 13. and 13 3. and 26. 16. and
30. 2, 6, 10. Ios. 22. 5. 1 Samuel 12. 14. Mat. 22. 37.


Q. 13. What is the Practical duty properly due from us to God?

A. To obey him in doing all that he commands us either in his holy Worship,
or for ourselves or for our Neighbor; And this by an absolute universal
Obedience, in sincere desire and endeavor, as to a Sovereign of greatest
Authority, and a Father of greatest Love, whose Laws and Works are all most
wise, and just, and good. Ioh. 14. 23, 15. 1 Ioh. 5. 3.


Q. 14. What if our Governors command or forbid us any thing, must we not take
our obeying them to be obeying God, seeing they are his Officers whom we see,
but see not him?

A. Yes, when they command us by the Authority given them of God: But Gods
universal Laws are before and above their Laws; and their Power is all limited
by God; They have no Authority but what he gives them; and he gives them none
against his Laws: And therefore if they command any thing which God forbids,
or forbid what God commands, you must obey God in not obeying them. But this
must never be made a pretense for disobedience to their true Authority. Romans
13. 2, 3. Act. 5. 29. 32. Dan. 3. and 6. Act. 4. 19. 24.


Q. 15. II. What is the thing forbidden in the first Commandment?

A. I. To think that to be God which is not God, as the Heathens do by the Sun.
II. To ascribe any part of that to Creatures which is essential and proper to
God; and so to make them half-gods.

Q. 16. How are men guilty of that?

A. I. When they think that any Creature has that Infiniteness, Eternity or
Self-sufficiency, that Power, Knowledge or Goodness which is proper to God
alone. Or that any Creature has that causality which is proper to God, in
making and maintaining, or Governing the World, or being the ultimate End. Or
that any Creature is to be more Honored, Loved or Obeyed than God, or with any
of that which is proper to God. Isa. 2. 22. Act. 12. 22, 23. ^sa. 42. 8. Mic.
2. 9.


II. When the Will does actually Love and Honor the Creature with any of that
Love and Honor which is due to God as God, and therefore to God alone.

III. When in their practice men labor to please, serve or obey any Creature
against God, before God, or equal with God, or with any Service proper to God
alone. All this is Idolatry Rev. 16. 9. 1 Chr. 16. 28, 29. 1 Cor. 10. 3^* Gal.
1. 10.


Q. 17. Which is the greatest and commonest Idol of the World?

A. Carnal-self: By sin man is fallen from God to his Carnal-self; to which he
gives that which is Gods proper due.

Q. 18. How does this Selfishness appear and work as Idolatry?

A. 1. In that such men love their Carnal-self and Pleasure and Prosperity, and
the Riches that are the provision for the Flesh, better than God: I mean not
only more sensibly, but with a preferring, choosing Love: And that which as
Best is most loved, i^ made a man's God. The Images of Heathens were not so much
their Idols as Themselves: For non^ of them loved their Images better than
themselves nor than a Worldling loves his Wealth, Power an^ Honor. Romans 12.
3. and 14. 7. Mat. 16. ^^* and 18. 4. and 23. 12. Mar. 12. 33. Phil. 2. 4. 21.


2. In that such are their own chief ultimate En^ and prefer the Prosperity of
carnal self before the Glorifying of God in perfect Love and Praise in the
heavenly Society for ever. And so did Idolaters b^ their Images or other Idols.

3. In that such had rather their own Will were done than God's; and had rather
God's will were brought to theirs, than theirs to God's. Their Wills are their
Rule and End; yea they would have God and Man, and all the World fulfill their
Wills; even when they are against the Will of God: SELF-WILL is the great Idol
of the World: All the stir and striving, and War and work of such, is but
to serve it. Tit. 1. 7. 2 Pet. 2. 10.


4. Selfish men do measure Good and Evil chiefly by carnal self Interest: They
take those for the best men that are most for them herein; and those for the
worst that are against their Interest in the World: And their Love and Hatred
is placed accordingly. Let a man be never so wise and good, they hate him if he
be against their Interest. 1 King. 22. 8. Chron. 18. 7.


5. And as holy men live to God in the care and endeavor of their Lives, so do
selfish men to their carnal selves: Their study, labor and time is thus
employed; even to ruin the best that are but against their carnal Interest:
And if they be Princes or Great men in the World, the Lives and Estates of
thousands of the Innocent, seem not to them too dear ^ Sacrifice by bloody
unlawful Wars or Persecutions, to offer to this grand Idol SELF.

6. And when it comes to a parting choice, as ^he Faithful will rather let go
Liberty, Honor, Estate and Life, than forsake God and the heavenly Glory; so
selfish men will let go their Innocence, their Savior, their God and all,
rather than part with the Interest of carnal Self. Luke 14. 26. 33.


7. And in point of Honor, they are more ambitious to be well thought and
spoken of, and praised themselves, both living and dead, than to have God and
Truth, and Goodness honou^ed. And they can more easily bear one that
dishonors God, and Truth and Holiness, yea and common Righteousness and
Honesty, than one that (though justly) dishonors them.

So that all the World may easily see that carnal SELF and specially SELF-WILL
is the greatest Idol in the World. 2. Tim. 3. 2, ^. Pro. 21.4. Ps. 10.2, 4.


Q. 19. But is not that a man's Idol which he Trusts most? and all men are so
Conscious of their own Insufficiency, that they cannot Trust themselves for
their own preservation?

A. I say not that any selfish man Mar. 10. 24. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Psalm. 20. 7. 118.
8. and Pro. 3. 5.
is a perfect Idolater, and gives all God's properties to himself. He must
kn^w whether he will or not, that he is not Infinite* Eternal, Almighty,
Omniscient, Selfsufficient; He knows he must suffer and die. But SELF has
more given it that is due only to God, than any other Idol has. And though
such men know their own insufficiency, yet they have so little Trust in God,
that they Trust their own Wits, and the Choice of their own Wills before the
Wisdom and Choice of God: and had far rather be at their own Wills and Choice
if they could: And indeed had rather that all things in the World were at their
Will and Choice, than at the Will and Choice of God. And therefore they like
not his Laws and Government, but make their Wit, Will and Lust the Governors
of themselves and as many others as they can.

Q. 20. Is there not much selfishness in all? By this you will make all men,
even the best, to be Idolaters. But a man cannot be saved that l^veth in
Idolatry.

A. It is not every subdued degree of any fault that denominateth the man, but
that which is predominant in him: every man has some Unbelief, some
backwardness to God and Goodness, some hypocrisy, pride, etc. and yet every
man is not to be called An Infidel, an enemy to God and Goodness, an hypocrite,
etc. So every man has some Idolatry and some Atheism remaining, and yet is not
an Idolater or Atheist: If a man could not be saved till he were perfectly
healed of every degree of these heinous sins, no man could be Saved. But Gods
Interest is predominant in holy Souls.

Q. 21. Does not Paul say, of all save Timothy, That All seek their own, and
not the things that are Jesus Christ's?

A. He means not that they predominantly do so, except those among them who
were hypocrites: But that all did Ier. 45. 4, 5. Mic. 6. 8.
too much seck their own, and too little the things that are Jesus Christ's,
and were ^ot so self-denying as Timothy, who as it were na^urally Cared for the
good of the Church: As De^as forsook Paul in his suffering, and went after ^is
own worldly business; but yet did not forsake Christ and prefer the world
before him (for ^^ght we find of him.)

Q. 22. You make this first Commandment to be the sum of all.

A. It is the Summary of all, and our Obedience to it is Virtually (but not
Actually) our obedience to all the rest. This is it which Christ calls the
first and greatest Command, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart
and Soul and might. This is the Foundation of all the rest of the
Commandments, and the Root of all: The rest are but branches from it. When we
are obliged to Love God and obey him, we have a General obligation to keep all
his Commandments. But as this General Command does not put the special
particular Commands in existence, so neither does it oblige us to obey them
till they exist: And then as the Genus and Species constitute every defined
being, so the General and Special obligation concur to make up every duty. He
that sincerely obeys this first command, is a true Subject of God and in a
state of Salvation, and will sincerely obey all particular Commands in the main
course of his life, when they are revealed to him. Hos. 9. 1, 2. and 4. 6. and
12. 2.


CHAP. XXXV. Of the Second Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the words of the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in
the Water under the Earth: Thou shall not bow down thy self to them nor serve
them. For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me, and she wing Mercy to thousands of them that Love me and keep my
Commandments.

Q. 2. How prove you against the Papists, that this is not part of the first
Commandment?

A. 1. By the matter which is different from it. 2. And by the Scripture which
says, There were Ten, and without this there is but Nine. 3. And by historical
Tradition; which we can prove that the Papists falsify.

Q. 3. What is the true Meaning of the Second Commandment? and wherein does it
differ from the ^^rst?

A. The first Commandment binds us to give God his own, or his due as God,
both in heart and life, and to give it to no other. The second commands men
to keep so wide a difference between God and Heathen Idols, as not to worship
him as the Heathens do their Idols, nor yet to seem by their bodily action to
worship an Idol, though they despise it in their Thoughts, and pretend to keep
their hearts to God. Corporal and outward and seeming Idolatry is here
forbidden. For though a man renounce in Heart all other Gods, yet if he be seen
to bow down before an Image, ^. He seems to the* beholder to mean as
Idolaters do, while he symbolizeth with them. And as Lying and Perjury with the
Tongue is sin, though a man's inward thoughts do own the truth, so bowing as
Worshippers do before an Image, is Bodily Idolatry, though the mind renounce
all Idols: And God is the God of the Body as well as of the Soul: And God would
not have others encouraged to Idolatry by so scandalous an Example. 2. And if
it be the true God that such profess to worship, it is interpretative
Blasphemy; As if they told men, that God is like to that Creature whose Image
they make. So that ^^andal and Bodily Idolatry and Blasphemy are the things
directly forbidden in this Commandment, as the real choosing and Worshipping a
false God is in the first. Deu. 4. 16, 17. Lev. 26. 1, 2. Deu. 16* 22. Dan. 3.
Deu. 7. 5. Isa 40. 18, 25. and^ 46. 5.


Q. 4. By this it seems that scandal is a hainou^ sin?

A. Scandal is enticing, tempting or encouraging others to sin, by doing or
saying that which is like to be abused by them to such an effect: or laying a
Stumbling Block in the way of blind or careless Souls. If they will make our
necessary duty the occasion of sin, we may not therefore omit our duty, if
indeed it be an in indispensable duty at that time: But if it be no duty, yea
or if it be only a duty in other Seasons and Circumstances, it is a heinous sin
to give such Scandal to another, much more to Multitudes or public Societies.

Q. 5. Wherein lies the evil of it?

A. 1. It is a countenancing and furthering sin. 2. It is uncharitableness and
cruelty to men's Souls. 3. And therefore it is the Devils work. Mat. 18. 6, 7.
8, 9, etc. and 13. 41. 1 Cor. ^. 13. Lev. 19. 14. Ezekiel. 14. 3, 4, 7. To. 14.
^3. Rev. 2. 14.


Q. 6. But if our Rulers command us to do a thing indifferent, which others
will turn to an occasion of sin and damnation, must we disobey our lawful
Governors to prevent men's sin and fall?

A. If the thing in its own nature tended to so great and necessary good as
would weigh down the contrary evil to the scandalized, we must do our duty and
labor to help them some other way. But supposing it either Indifferent or of
so small benefit as will not preponderate against the sin and ^anger of the
scandalized, we are Soul-murderers if we do not forbear it. For 1. God has
given no Rulers power to Destruction of Souls, but to Edi^^cation; no power to
command us that which is ^o contrary to the indispensible duty of Love or
Charity. If an Apothecary, or Physician, or King command his Servant to sell
Arsnick to all that will buy it without exception, the servant may not lawfully
sell it to such as he knows mean to Poison themselves or others by it. If the
Commander be a sober man, the servant ought to suppose that he intended such
exceptions though he expressed them not. But if he expressed the contrary, he
commanded contrary to Gods command, without authority, and is not to be obeyed.
2. God himself dispenses with his own Commands about Rituals or smaller
matters, when greater good or hurt stands on the other side. The Disciples did
justly pluck and rub the Ears of Corn, and the Priests in the Temple break the
rest of the Sabbath, and an Ox or Ass was to be watered o^ pulled out of a pit
on that day: If the King o^ Priest had made a Law to the contrary, it had been
null: If Gods Laws bind not in such cases, man^ cannot. God bids us preach and
pray, etc. and yet to quench a Fire, or save men's Lives, we may and must at
that time forbear Preaching, or Sacraments, or other public Worship. Romans 14.
15, 17, 20. 2 Cor. 10. 8. and 1^ 10.


Q. 7. But what if as many will be scandalized or tempted to sin on the other
side if I do it not?

A. No duty being a duty at all times, much less a thing indifferent though
commanded, ever^ Christian must prudently use the Scales, and by a^ the helps
of wise men that he can get, must discern which way is like to do most good or
hur^ considering the persons, for number, for quality and probability of the
effect. God binds us to Charity and Mercy, and no man can disoblige us from
that. And he that sincerely desires to do the greatest good, and avoid the
greatest hurt, and uses the best means he can to know it, shall be accepted of
God though men condemn him. 1 Cor. 10. 33. and 6. 12, 13. and 9. 22. and ^. 26.


Q. 8. But is nothing here forbidden but symbolizing with Idolaters, in seeming
to mean as they by doing as they?

A. That Is it that is directly forbidden. But by consequence it is employed,
that all Doctrines are forbidden that falsely represent God, and all Worship
^or acts pretended to be Religious, which are un^^itable to Gods holy Nature,
Attributes, Will or Word; as being profanation, and an offering to God that
which is unclean. Ps. 50. 21, 22, 23.


Q. 9. What is the Command which is here im^lyed?

A. That we keep our Souls chaste from all outward and seeming Idolatry; and
that we worship ^im who is the Infinite, Almighty, Holy Spirit, with Reverence,
Holiness, in Spirit and Truth; according to his Blessed perfect Nature, and his
holy Will and Word. 1 Ioh. 5. ^. 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Cor. 8. 10, 11. and 10. 19, ^,
27, 28. Rev. 2. 14, 20. Isa. 2. 18.


Q. 10. Has God given us a Law for all things ^ his Worship?

A. The Law of Nature is Gods Law, and ob^geth man to that devotion to God and
worship ^f him which is called Natural. And the sacred Scripture prescribes
both that and also all those positive means or Ordinances of Gods Worship which
are made necessary to the universal Church on Earth: And as for the mere
Accidents of worship (which are no proper parts) as Time, Place, Words,
Methods, Gesture, Vesture, etc. Gods Laws give us general Precepts, only
telling us how to order them, leaving it to humane Prudence and Church Guides
to order them according to those general Rules.

Q. 11. Is all use of Images unlawful?

A. God did so much hate Idolatry, and the Neighborhood of the Idolaters made
it so dangerous to the Israelites, that he did not only forbid the Worshipping
of Images, but all such making or using of them as might become a snar^ or
temptation to any. So that though it be lawful to make Images for Civil uses,
and when they are made, to fetch holy Thoughts or Meditation^ from them, as
from all other Creatures, or things in the World; yet in any case when they
becom^ a snare or danger (being not necessary things ^ they become a sin, to
those that so use them as snare to others or themselves. Ex. 34. 13, 14, 15.
Number. 33. 52. Deu. 7. 2 Kin. 11. 18. and 23. 14, 24.


Q. 12. Is it lawful to make any Picture of God?

A. No: for Pictures are the signs of Corporeal things, and it is Blasphemy to
think God lik^ a bodily Substance: But it is Lawful to make suc^ Pictures (as
of a Glorious Light) from which o^casion may be taken of good thoughts
concerni^ God. Ex. 25. 18, 1^ 20. 1 Samuel 4. 4. Ps. 18. 1. Ezekiel. 10. 2.


Q. 13. Is it lawful to make the Picture of Christ as Man, or as Crucified.

A. The doing it as such is not forbidden, nor the right use of it when done:
But the abuse, i. e. the worshipping of it or of Christ by it, is forbidden,
and the making or using such, when it tends to such abuse, and has more of
snare than profit.

Q. 14. Why is Gods Jealousy here mentioned?

A. To make us know that God does so strictly require the great duty of
worshipping him as the true God, and hate the sin of Idolatry or giving his
Glory to another, or blaspheming him as if he were like to painted things, that
he would have us accordingly affected.

Q. 15. Why does God threaten to visit the iniquities of the Fathers on the
Children in this Command rather than in the rest?

A. God has Blessings and Curses for Societies as well as for individual
persons; And societies are constituted and known by the Symbols of public
profession. And as Gods public Worship is the Symbol of his Church which he
will bless, so Idolatrous Worship is the Symbol of the societies which he will
Curse and Punish. And it was Specially needful that the Israelites should know
this, who could never else have been excused from the guilt of Murdering Man,
Woman and Child of all the Nations which they conquered, had not God taken it
on himself as judging them to death for their Idolatry and other Crimes, and
making the Israelites his Executioners. Ier. 10. 25. Deu. 2. 34. and 3. 6. and
4. 26. Number. 33. 50, 51, 52. Deu. 7. 2, 23, 24. and 12. 2, 3. ^ 20. 17, 20.


Q. 16. But does not God disclaim punishing the Children for the Fathers sins,
and say the Soul that sins shall die?

A. Yes; when the Children are either wholly innocent of that sin, or else are
pardoned through Christ upon their true repentance, and hating and renouncing
their Fathers sins. But not else.

Q. 17. Are any Children guilty of their Parents sins?

A. Yes, all Children are guilty of the sins which their Parents Committed
before their birth, while they were in their loins. Not with the same degree
and sort of Guilt as the Parents are; but yet with so much as exposes them to
just penalties.

Q. 18. How prove you that?

A. First by the Nature of the Case: For though we were not Personally existent
in them when they sinned, we were seminally existent in them, which is more
than Causally or Virtually: And it was tha^ semen which was guilty in them,
that was after made a person, and so that person must have the same guilt^ 2.
From the whole History of the Scripture, which tells us of the Children of
Cain, the old World, Sodo^ Cham, the Canaanites, Saul, David (as an Adulterer,)
Achan, Gehazi, and others punished for their Parents sins: And the Jews cast
off and Cursed o^ that account to this day. 3. And our common Original sin from
Adam proves it.

Q. 19. But our Original sin from Adam had an^ there cause; God decreeing that
Adam should stan^ or fall for all his posterity?

A. We must not add to Gods Word, much le^ blaspheme him, as if it were God
himself that b^ a Decree or Covenant made all the world sinne^ save Adam and
Eve. If Adam had not sinned, it would not have saved all or any of his
Posterity, unless they also had continued innocent themselves. Nor did God make
any promise to continue and keep innocent all Adams posterity, in case he
sinned not. We sinned in Adam because we were seminally in him; and so are our
Children in us: And who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, if it was
essentially in it?

Q. 20. If we are guilty of all nearer parents sin, will not our guilt increase
to the end of the World, and the last man have the greatest guilt? On this I
have written a peculiar Treatise of Original sin.


A. No: because all guilt from Adam, and from our nearer parents too, is
pardoned by Christ, when we are baptized as sincere Believers or their seed:
But it is true that we are so far more guilty as to have the more need of a
Saviors grace. 2. And Guilt is considerable either as more obligations to the
same punishment, or as obligation to more or greater punishment. It Is true,
that impenitent persons who are the seed of a line of wicked Ancestors, have
more obligations to the same punishment; but not obligation to greater
punishment: because as great as they were capable of was due before.

Q. 21. But many say that for nearer parents sins no punishments but temporal
are due?

A. 1. If any at all are due, it proves an answerable guilt: 2. To say that
Adams sin deserves our spiritual and eternal punishment, and all other Parents
sin only temporal, is to speak without and against Scripture and the Nature of
the Case? The Case of the seed of the old World, the Sodomites, the Canaanites
and the present Heathens, speaks much more. 3. It Is clear that nearer Parents
sin is a cause that many of their Posterity are more sinful (in Lust, Pride,
Fornication, Heresy, Ignorance) than others: And Sin (as well as Grace) has a
tendency to perpetuity, if not cured and remitted.

Q. 22. Why does God name only the third and fourth Generation?

A. To show us, that though he will punish the sins of his Enemies on their
Posterity who imitate their Parents, yet he sets such bounds to the Execution
of his Justice, as that sinners shall not want encouragement to repent and hope
for Mercy.

Q. 23. Who be they that be called here Haters of God?

A. All that have a predominant hatred to his Servants, his Service and his
holy Laws. But the Text specially means those Societies of Infidels,
Heathens, and Malignants, who are the professed enemies of his Church and
Worship. As I said before, The outward symbols of Idolatry were the Professing
signs by which his Churches Enemies were openly noted in the World; as Baptism
and the Lords Supper were the Badges of his Church and Servants. De^. 32. 41.
Psalm. 81. 15. Romans 1. 30. Luke 19. 27.


Q. 24. What is the meaning and extent of the promise of Mercy to thousands of
them that Love him and keep his Commandments?

A. 1. As to the Subject it must be noted, that such a Belief in God as causes
men to Love him and keep his Commandments, is the qualification of them that
have the promise of Gods saving Mercy: Faith working by Love and Obedience.

2. The words signify Gods wonderful Mercy and his delight to do good to those
that are qualified to receive it.

3. And they signify, that God will not only love and bless a Godly Offspring
for their own sake, but also for the sake of their godly Ancestors, and while
they succeed them in true Piety, God will increase his Blessings on them.

4. And though those forfeit all, that prove ungodly when they come to age, yet
the Insant-seed of the Faithful, while such, are in Covenant with God, on the
account of their relation to those godly Parents who dedicate themselves and
theirs to him.

Q. 25. How does God perform this Promise, when many godly Parents have wicked
and miserable Children?

A. This Promise does not say that God will keep all the Children of the
faithful from sinning against him, and casting away his Mercy and Salvation:
But if men be sincerely Godly, and dedicate themselves and their Children to
God, and enter them into his Covenant, and perform their own part promised by
them, God will accept them into his Family, and pardon their Original Sin, and
give them the necessary helps for their personal Faith and Obedience when they
come to the use of Reason: Prove. 20. 7. Psalm. 37. 28. 26. Mat. 19. ^3, 14. Act.
2. 39. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Isa. 45. 25. and ^5 23. Mal. 2. 15. To. 4. 16. and 9. 8.
And if the Children keep their Covenant according to their capacity, and do
not violate it and reject his Grace, God will accept and save them as actual
obedient Believers.

Q. 26. Will he not do so also by the Children of Unbelievers?

A. If such at age see their Parents sin and forsake it, and devote themselves
to God, he will accept them. But as Infidels and wicked Hypocrites have no
Promise of Gods acceptance of them and theirs, so such do not dedicate
themselves and their Children to God: He that will devote his Child to God,
must do it as it were a part of himself; and cannot do it sincerely if he first
devote not himself to God.

Q. 27. But may not others do it for his Children?

A. In Infancy they are considered in the Covenant of Grace, but as Infants,
that is, Appurtenances to another. As the Infidels Infants they have neither
Capacity nor Promise. But if any other adopt them and take them truly as their
own, I am in hope that God accepts such so devoted to him.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Third Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the words of the Third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain,; for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that taket^ his Name in vain.

Q. 2. What is it that is specially here forbidden?

A. Profaneness: that is, The unholy using of Gods holy Name, and holy things;
especially* by Perjury or any other entitling him to falsehood or to any of the
sins of men, as if he were the Author or approver of them.

Q. 3. What is meant by the Name of God?

A. Those words or other signs by which he is described, denominated, or
otherwise notified to man; which I opened so fully on the first Petition of the
Lords Prayer, that to avoid repetition I must refer you thereto.

Q. 4. What is meant by taking the Name of God in vain?

A. Using it Profanely, and specially falsely; it is contrary to the Hallowing
of Gods Name, which is mentioned in the Lords Prayer.

In the Scripture, 1. The Creature is called Vanity, as being but a Shadow and
untrusty thing, and to use Gods Name and Holy things in a common manner, as we
use the Creatures, is to Profane his Name, and take it vainly.

2. And Falsehood and Lies are usually called Vanity, for Vanity is that
Shadowyness which seems something and is nothing, and so deceives men: A Lie
is that which deceives him that trusts it; so Idols are called Vanity and
Lies, for their Falsehood and deceit; and all men are said to be Liars, that is,
Untrusty and deceitful.

Q. 5. What is an Oath?

A. I have said heretofore as others, that it is but an Appeal to God as the
Witness of the Truth, and the Avenger of a Lie; but on further Thoughts I find
that the common nature of an Oath is to [ Pawn some greater thing in attesting
of the truth of our words,] or [ to take some grievous thing on our selves as a
penalty if we Lie,] or [ to make some certain Truth a pledge of the truth of
what we say;] And to Swear by our Faith, or Truth, or Honesty, by the Temple,
the Altar, the Fire, the Sun, is as much as to say [If this be not true, then I
have no Faith, Truth, Honesty; there is no Temple, Altar, Fire, Sun] or [let me
be taken for one that denies that I have any Faith, that there is any Sun,
Fire, etc.] or [it is as true as that this is Fire, Sun, etc.] so to Swear by
God, is to say [It is as true as that there is a God, or as God lives, etc.]
or [If I Lie, take me for one that denies God to be God] (and consequently it
is an Appeal to him as the Avenger:) so [ By the Life of Pharaoh] was [ As true
as Pharaoh liveth] or [ else take me for one that denies the life of Pharaoh;]
So that there is somewhat of an Imprecation or Self-reproach as the penalty of
a Lie in every Oath, but more dreadfully of Divine Revenge when we Swear by
God, and of Idolatry when men Swear by an Idol as if it were a God.

Q. 6. Which be the chief ways of taking Gods Name in vain?

A. 1. Fathering on him false Doctrine, Revelations or Laws; saying as false
Prophets, God sent me, and Thus says the Lord, when it is false; saying, This
Doctrine or this Prophecy Gods Spirit revealed to me, when it is not so;
therefore all Christians must be very fearful of false Revelations and
Prophecies, and see that they believe not every Spirit, nor pretend to
Revelations; and to take heed of taking the Suggestions of Satan, or their
crazed melancholy Fancies, for the Revelations of God.

2. So also Gathering false Doctrines out of Scripture by false Expositions,
and fathering these on God. And therefore all men should in dark and doubtful
cases, rather suspend their judgments till they have overcome their doubts by
solid Evidence, than rashly to conclude, and confidently and fiercely dispute
for Error. It Is a great profanation to father Lies on God, who is the Hater
of them, when Lying is the Devils work and character.

3. The same I may say of a rash and false Interpretation of Gods Providence.

4. And also of fathering false Laws on God, and saying that he either
commands or forbids what he does not: To make Sins and Duties which God
never made, and say he made them, is to father falsehood on him, and corrupt his
Government.

5. Another way is by false Worship. 1. If men say that God commanded such
Worship which he commanded not, it is the sin last mentioned. 2. If they
worship him with their own Inventions without his Command (Particular or
General) they profane his Name, by offering him that which is unholy, common
and unclean.

6. Another way is by false pretending that God gave them that Authority which
he never gave them; Like counterfeiting a Commission from the King. ^f Princes
should pretend that God gave them Authority to oppose his Truth, to persecute
Godliness, ^njustly to silence faithful Ministers of Christ, to ^aise
unnecessary Wars, to oppress the Innocent; This were a heinous taking of
God's Name in vain. ^f Priests shall pretend that God gave them Authority to
make themselves Pastors of the Flocks that are unwilling of them, without a
just Call, or to make Laws for any that are not rightfully their Subjects, and
to impose their Dictates, Words and Forms, and unnecessary Inventions, as
Conditions of Ministration or Communion, without true right, and to make
themselves the Rule of other men's words and actions by usurpation; this is all
taking Gods Name in vain. And so it is, if they Preach false Doctrine in his
Name, and if they pronounce false Excommunications and Absolutions, and
justify the wicked, and condemn, reproach and slander the Just, and brand
unjustly the Servants of Christ as Hypocrites, Schismatics, or Heretics, and
this as by Ministerial Power from Christ: especially if they silence Christ's
Ministers, impose Wolves or incompetent men, scatter the Flocks, and suppress
serious Godliness, and all this in the Name of Christ. Much more if any
pretend, as the Pope or his pretended general Councils, to be Christ's Vicar
General, or Head, or Supreme unifying Governor over all the Church on Earth,
and to make Laws for the whole Church: Or if they corrupt Gods Worship with
imposed Superstitions, Falsehoods, or Prophanations, and say God has Authorized
them to do this; It is heinous Profaning God's Name by a Lie; such doing
brought up the Proverb, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum: When all their
Abuses began with [ In the Name of God, Amen.]

And they that make new Church-forms which God made not, either Papal,
Universal Aristocracy, Patriarchal, and such like, and either pretend that God
made them, or gave them, or such other power to make them, must prove what they
say, lest they profane Gods Name by falsehood.

But the highest Profanation is, when they pre^end that God has made them
Absolute Governors, and set them so far above his own Laws, and Judgment, and
himself, as that whatever they say, is the Word of God, or the Sense of the
Scripture, though never so falsely, must be taken for such by all: and whatever
they command or forbid, they must be obeyed, though Gods Word command or forbid
the contrary: And that God has given power (to Popes or Councils) to forbid
men the Worship which God commands; yea, to Interdict whole Kingdoms, and
excommunicate and depose Kings; and that from these as a Supreme Power no man
must appeal to the Scripture, or to God and his final Judgment. This is by
profane Lying to use God's Name, to the destroying of Souls, the Church, and
the Laws and Government of God himself. Ier. 14. 14. and 23. 32. and 37. 14.
Mar. 13. 22. 2 Cor. 11. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Ier. 27. 15. and ^9. 9, 10. 31. 1 Ioh.
4. 1, 2.


7. Another way of taking God's Name in vain, is by Heresies; that is,
embodying in separated Parties or Churches against the Church and Truth of God,
for the propagating of some dangerous false Doctrine which they father on God,
and so militate in his Name against his Church. If men, as aforesaid, do but
promote false Doctrine in the Church without Separation, it is bad; But to
gather an Army against the Truth and Church, and feign Christ to be the Leader
of it, is worse. Act. 20. 30. To. ^6. 16, 17. Ephesians. 4. 14.


8. Another way is by Perjury, appealing to God or abusing his name as the
Witness and owner of a Lie.

9. Another way is by false Vows made to God himself. When men either Vow to
God, to do that which he abhors or has forbidden: Or when they Vow that
which is good with a false deceitful Heart, and as Ananias and Sapphira with
false reserves; or when they Vow and pay not, but wilfully break the Vows which
they have made. The breach of Covenants between Princes, or between them and
Subjects, or between Husband and Wife confirmed by appeal to God, is a dreadful
sin; But the violation of the great Baptismal Vow in which we are all solemnly
devoted and obliged to God, is one of the hainousest sins in the World: When it
is not about a lesser duty, but even our Oath of Allegiance to God, by solemn
Vow taking him for our God, our Savior and Sanctifier, and giving up our
selves to him accordingly, renouncing the contrary, and laying on this Covenant
all our Hopes of Grace and Glory, Pardon and Salvation, what can be more
heinous than to be false to such a Vow and Covenant? Ier. 4. 2. and 5. 2. and
7. 9. Mal. 3. 5. Psalm. 15. 4. Zech. 5. 3, 4. Ier. 23. 10. Hos. 4. 2. and 10. 4.


10. And Hypocrisy it self is a heinous taking Gods name in Vain. When we
offer God the dead Carcass of Religious acts without the Life and Soul; and
present him with Ceremony, self-exalting Pomp, mere heartless words, an
artificial Image of Religion, that has not the Spiritual Nature, Life, or
serious desire of the Heart; This is seeking to mock God, or making him like an
Idol that sees not the Heart, and knows not what is offered him. Alas! how
much of the Preaching, Hearing, Praying and Sacraments of many is a taking
God's Name in vain, as if he did accept a Lie?

11. Another way of this Profanation is making Gods Name and acts of Religion
an engagement to wickedness: As when men bind themselves to Treason, Murder or
any sin, by taking the Sacrament. As many, Alas, (which I unwillingly Name)
have done ^n a blind zeal for the Roman Usurpation, being told that it pleases
God and Saint Peter, and meriteth ^alvation, to destroy the Enemies of the
Church, that ^s, of the Pope and his Clergy. And those that ^ound themselves
with an Oath to kill Paul, thought God accepted the Oath and deed. And the
General Council at Laterane under Innocent the 3. which bound Temporal Lords to
take an Oath to Exterminate such as they called Heretics, fathered the work on
God by that Oath. And the Pope (and Council of Trent) which has brought in on
all the Clergy a new Oath to many new and sinful things, by that Oath make God
the approver of all. And the Mahometans that give liberty of Religion, yet
think ^t pleases God and meriteth Heaven to kill the Enemies of Mahomet. And
Christ says, They that kill you shall think they do God good service. And is
^t not profaning the Name of God, to make him the Author of the murder of his
Servants?

12. Another way of taking Gods Name prophane^, and pleading it for Vanity and
Lies, is by making God the determining first Cause of all the acts of men in
the World, as ^pecified by their objects and circumstances; that is, of all the
Lies and all the other sins that are done in the World: As if Go^ had given no
such free will to men or Devils, b^ which they can Lie, Murder, hate God or
commit any sin, till God move their Wills, Tongue and Hands to do it, by an
unavoidable predetermining Efficiency. This is so much to profane a^ take in
vain Gods Name, as that it makes him ^ Chief cause of all the Devils Works.

13 Another way of vain abuse and prophanat^ of Gods Name, is by Blasphemy and
contempt a^ scorn of God; or of the Word or ways of Go^ And, Alas, who would
think that this should ^ so common among men, when even the Devils b^lieve and
tremble! I hope Posterity will account so odious as hardly to believe, that
ever there we^ m^n, and so many men, even in England, who ^ to deride the Name,
Word, Providence and Worsh^ of God, and make serious regard of God and Re^^gion
the common scorn; and familiarly to wish ^ way of Imprecation as a byword [
God damn me, and to swear by the Name, the Wounds, and Bloo^ of God.

14. Lastly, another way of taking Gods Name vain, is by an unholy, unreverent
tossing of it in common talk in jest, and on every Ludicrous occasion Plays
and Play-books use it: It Is made an ordina^ accident to all Common and Profane
discours^ Beggars profanely beg by it: Children cry by ^ [O God, and O Lord],
is become an Interjection.

Q. 7. Why do we take ordinary light Swearing, s^cially by God or by Sacred
things, to be a sure sign a wicked man?

A. Because it shows a predominant habit Profaneness; that the man lives
without the reverence of Gods Holiness, Majesty, Knowledge and Presence, and is
hardened into a senselesness or contempt of God and of his dreadful judgment,
as if he derided God or dared him; or as if he did believe that there is no God
that hears him. To ^ive in the fear of God, and Subjection to his Government,
is the property of every godly man.

Q. 8. What is meant by the words [The Lord will not hold him guiltless?]

A. God will not leave him unpunished, nor account this as a small offense: He
himself will be ^venged for this sin.

Q. 9. Why is this threatening annexed more to this Commandment than to others?

A. Because this sin is, 1. An immediate injury to God; while it expressly
fathereth Lies and other sin on him, it does as we may say, engage him to
vindicate himself. When Rulers or Usurpers pretend that God authorizeth them to
do mischief and fight against himself; when Persecutors and Corrupters of
Religion, pretend Gods Interest and Will for all; that it is for Order, Unity,
Government and Obedience for the Church, that they corrupt, destroy, silence
and tyrannize; they invite God to cast the Lie and Cruelty back on them, which
they would father upon him; and to turn their Canons, Prisons, and ^nquisitions
and other devilish plagues of the world, upon the Author, in disowning them
himself.

2. And they that by Perjury, Hypocrisy, false Doctrine and the rest of the
forementioned sins, do Appeal to God and make him openly the Author of ^ll, do
thereby as it were Summon God to revenge. ^s they said to Paul, Have thou
appealed to Caesar? To Caesar shall thou go: so it may be said to the Perjured,
the Hypocrite, the Usurper, the false Judge, etc. Have you appealed to God, and
do yo^ father on him your Lies, Cruelties, Tyrannies, and Usurpations, and
false Doctrines? To God shall yo^ go, who will undertake the Cause which you
ca^ upon him; and will judge the secrets of men's Hear^ as he did Ananias and
Saphira's: If men sin under the Laws of men, God requires Magistrates to judge
them: But if they appeal to God, or by falshoo^ escape the judgment of man,
they more immediately cast themselves on the Justice of God; And it ^ a fearful
thing to fall into his hands who is a cons^ming fire: God is the avenger
specially on such. Deu. 32. 43. 1 These. 4. 6. Romans 12. 19. H^^* 10. 30. Hab.
12. 29. Isa. 35. 4. and 47. 3. and 6^* 2. and 63. 4. and 1. 24. Luke 18. 7, 8.


Q. 10. Is it meant of Gods vengeance in this Lif^ or in the next?

A. In both: Usually Profanation of Gods Na^^ and Holy things, especially by
Perjury, and by ^^thering Cruelty and Wickedness on God, is mo^^ notably
punished by him in this life; Though suc^ may seem to prosper for a while, God
usually overt^keth them here, and their sins do find them out: But ^ they
escape such* Bodily punishment here, they are usually more dreadfully forsaken
of Grace than other me^ and heap up wrath against the day of wrath.

I will only add in the conclusion, that even tr^^ Christians should take
great care, lest their v^ Thoughts of God, and their Prayers and speaking ^
him, should be customary, and dead, and like the Thoughts and talk of Common
things, and in some degree, of Taking of Gods Name in vain.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Fourth Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the Words of the fourth Commandment?

A. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: six days shall thou Labor and
do all thy work: But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it
thou shall not do any work; thou nor thy Son, nor thy Daugh^er, thy
Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger that is
within thy Gates* For in six days the Lord made Heaven* and Earth, the Sea and
all that in them ^s, and rested the seventh day: Wherefore ^he Lord blessed the
Sabbath day and ^allowed it. Exo. 20. 10, 11. and 31. 17. Heb. 4. 4.


Q. 2. Why does Deuteronomy. 5. repeat it in so different Words?

A. Because the words are but for the sense, and ^hey being kept in the Ark as
written in Stone and safe from alteration, Moses in Deuteronomy. 5. gave them the
sense, and added some of his own explication: And nothing is altered to obscure
the sense. Genesis 2. 2, 3.


Q. 3. Which day is it which was called the Sabbath in this Commandment?

A. The seventh, commonly called from the Heathen Custom, Saturday.

Q. 4. Why was that day made the Sabbath?

A. God having made the world in six days space, seeing all Good and very
Good, rested in his own complacency; and appointed the seventh day every week
to be separated as Holy, to worship and praise him the Great Creator, as his
Glorious perfections shine forth in his works.

Q. 5. What is meant by Gods resting from his work?

A. Not that he had been at any labor or wea^iness therein; but 1. That he
finished the Creation; 2. That he was pleased in it as Good: 3. And that he
would have it be a day of holy pleasant Rest to man.

Q. 6. What is meant by keeping Holy the Sabbath day?

A. Separating it to the Holy Worship and praise of the Creator, and Resting to
that end from unnecessary bodily labor.

Q. 7. What does the word [Remember] signify?

A. First, it is an awakening Caveat to bid us take special care that we break
not this Commandment 2. And then that we must prepare before it comes to avoid
the things that would hinder us in the duty, and to be fit for it is performance.

Q. 8. Why is [Remember] put before this more than before the rest of the
Commandments?

A. Because, 1. Being but of Positive institution, and not naturally known to
man, as other duties are, they had need of a positive excitation and
Remembrance. And 2. It is of great importance to the constant and acceptable
worship, and the avoiding of impediments to keep close to the due Time which
God has appointed for it: And to violate it, tends to Atheistical
ungodliness.

Q. 9. Why is it called [The Sabbath of the Lord thy God?]

A. Because 1. God did institute and separate it: 2. And it is separated to the
honor and Worship of God.

Q. 10. When and how did God institute and separate it?

A. Fundamentally by his own Resting from the work of Creation: But immediately
by his declaring to Adam his Will for the sanctifying of that day, which is
expressed, Genesis 2. 3.

Q. 11. Some think that the Sabbath was not instituted till man had sinned and
Christ was promised, and so God Rested in Christ?

A. When the text adjoineth it close to the Creation, and gives that only as
the reason of it (that God ended his works which he had made, and rested from
them,) this is humane, corrupting presumption.

Q. 12. But some think the Sabbath was first instituted in the Wilderness, when
they were forbid to gather Manna?

A. It is not there mentioned as newly instituted, and it is mentioned, Genesis 2.
2, 3. and then instituted with the reason of it, [ And God blessed the seventh
day, and sanctified it, because in it he rested from all his works which God
created and made.] And the same reason is repeated in the Fourth Commandment.

Q. 13. Is this Commandment of the Law of Nature as are the rest?

A. It was more of the Law of Nature to Adam than to us; his nature knowing
otherwise than ours, both when God ended his works, and how beautiful they were
before the Curse. It is now of the Law of Nature (that is, known by Natural
light without other Revelation.) 1. That God should be worshipped: 2. That
Societies should assemble to do it together: 3. That some set Time should be
separated statedly to that use: 4. That it should be done with the whole heart,
without worldly diversions or distractions.

But I know nothing in Nature alone from whence a man can prove that 1. It must
be either just one day in seven, 2. Or just what day of the seven it must be:
3. Nor just what degree of Rest is necessary. Though reason may discern that
one day in seven is a very convenient proportion.

Q. 14. Are the words [ Six days shall thou labor, etc.] a Command, or only
a License?

A. They are not only a License but a Command to man, 1 These. 4. 11. 2 These. 3.
10, 11, 12. Pro. 18. 9. Mat. 25. 26. Romans 12. 11.
to live in an ordinary calling or Lawful course of Labor, according to each
ones ability and place, and diligently to exercise it, and not spend time in
Idleness: And the ordinary time is here assigned thereto.

Q. 15. Then how can it be lawful to spend any of the week-dayes in Religious
Exercises, any more than to spend any part of the Sabbath day in Labor?

A. All Labors are to be done as the Service of God, and as a means to holy
and Everlasting ends; and therefore it is employed still that God be sought and
remembered and honored in all; As our Eating and drinking is our duty, but to
be done to the Glory of God, and therefore with the seeking of his blessing and
returning him our thanks. Prove. 31. 27. Ezekiel. 16. 41. 1 Timothy 5. 13. Mat. 20. 6.


Q. 16. But is it lawful then to separate whole days either weekly, or
monthly, or yearly, to Religious Exercises, when God has commanded us to
labor on them?

A. As Gods command of Resting on the Sabbath is but the Stating of the
Ordinary Time; supposing an exception of extraordinary Cases; (as in time of
War, of Fire, of dispersing Plagues, of hot Persecution, etc. As Circumcision
was omitted in the Wilderness forty years;) so this Command to Labor six days
does state our ordinary time, but with supposed exception of extraordinary
occasions for days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving. And all Gods Commands
suppose that when two duties meet together and cannot both be then done, the
greater must ever be preferred: And therefore saving the Life of a Man, or a
Beast, yea feeding and watering beasts, laboring in Temple Service, etc. were
to be preferred before the Rest of the Sabbath: And so when our necessity or
profit make Religions exercises more to o^r good, and so a greater duty (as
Lectures, Fasts, etc.) we must prefer them to our ordinary Labor. For as the
Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath, so were the other days.
Esth. 9. 26, 28, 31.


Q. 17. May not Rich men that have no need, forbear the six days Labor?

A. No: if they are able: It is part of Gods Service, and Riches are his gift:
And to whom he gives much, from them he expects not less but more: Shall
servants work less because they have more wages? It is not only for their own
supplies that God commands men to Labor, but also for the public good, and
the benefit or relief of others: and the health of their Bodies, and the
suitable employment of their minds, and that none of their short precious time
be lost in sinful idleness. See Prove. 31. 27, etc.


Q. 18. But it will seem sordid for Lords, and Knights, and Ladies to labor?

A. It is swinish and sinful not to Labor: But they must do it in works that
are suitable to their places. As Physicians, Schoolmasters, and
Church-Ministers, labor not in the same kind of employment as Plow-men and
Tradesmen do; so Magistrates have their proper Labor in Government, and Rich
Persons have Families, Children and Servants to oversee, their poor Neighbors
and Tenants to visit, encourage and relieve, and their equals so to converse
with as tends to the greatest good: But none must live idly. Ezekiel. 16. 49.


Q. 19. Was Rest on the Sabbath absolutely commanded?

A. It was always a duty to break it, when a greater duty came in which
required it: As Christ has told the Pharisees, in the Case of feeding Man or
Beast, healing the sick, and doing such necessary good; For God prefers
Morals before Rituals; and his rule is, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice.
Mat. 12. 5. Mar. 2. 27, 28. Luke 13. 15.


Q. 20. Why then was bodily Rest* Commanded?

A. That body and mind might be free from diversion, weariness and distraction,
and fit with pleasure wholly to serve God, in the religious duties of his
Worship.

Q. 21. Why does God mention not only Servants but Beasts?

A. As he would not have Servants enslaved and abused by such Labor as should
unfit them for Sabbath-work and Comfort, so he would have man exercise the
clemency of his Nature even toward the Brutes: and Beasts cannot labor, but
man will be put to some Labor or diversion by it: And God would have the whole
place where we dwell, and all that we have to do with, to bear an open
signification of our obedience to his Command, and our reverence to his
sanctified Day and Worship.

Q. 22. Is this Commandment now in force to Christians?

A. So much of it materially is in force as is of the Law of Nature, or of
Christ by supernatural Revelation; and no more. Therefore the Seventh day
Sabbath of Corporal Rest, is changed by Christ into the Lords day, appointed
for Christian Worship.

Q. 23. Was not all that was written in stone of perpetual obligation?

A. No: Nor any as such: For as it was written on those stones it was the Law
of Moses for the Jews, and bound no other Nations, and is done away by the
dissolving of their Republic and by Christ.

Q 24. How prove you all this?

A. 1. As Moses was Ruler or Mediator to none but the Jews, and the words of
the Decalogue are appropriate to them as redeemed from Egyptian bondage, so the
Tables were delivered to no other: and a Law cannot bind any without
promulgation. All the world was not bound to send to the Jews for Revelation,
nor to be their Proselytes.

2. The Scripture expressly affirms the change, 2 Cor. 3. 3, 7, 11. If the
ministration of death written and engraven in stones was glorious, so that the
Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the Glory
of his Countenance, which was to be (or is) done away, etc. For if that which
is done away was Glorious (or, By Glory) much more that which remains is
Glorious (or In glory.) Here it is evident that it is the Law written on Stone
that is mentioned, and that it is not (as some say) the Glory only of Moses
Face or the flaming mount which is done away; (for that was done away in a few
days;) But it is the Law which is called Glorious that is said to be done
away. The words can bear no other sense. It Is too tedious to cite all: The
Texts following fully prove it; Heb. 7. 11, 12. 18. and 9. 18, 19. Ephesians. 2. 15.
Ioh. 1. 17. Luke 16. 16. Romans 2. 12, 14, 15, 16. and 3. 19, 20, 21, 27, 28, 31.
and 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. and 5. 13, 20. and 7. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16. and 9. 4, 31,
32. and 10. 5. Gal. 2. 15, 16, 19, 21. and 3. 2, 10, 11, 12, 13, 19, 21, 24.
and 4. 21. and 5. 3, 4, 14, 23. and 6. 13. Phil. 3. 6, 9. 1 Cor. 9. 21.

3. And the Sabbath it self is expressly said to be ^eased with the rest; [ Col.
2. 16. Let no man judge ^ou in meat or in drink, or in respect of an Holy day
(or Feast) or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things
to come; but the body is of Christ. It was the weekly Sabbath that was the
thief of Sabbaths, and therefore included in the plu^al name, there being no
exception of it.

4. And to put all out of doubt, Christ (who commands not two weekly
Sabbaths) has appointed and sanctified the First day of the week instead of
^he Seventh-day Sabbath; not calling it, The Sabbath, but the Lords day.

Q. 25. How prove you that?

A. If you will search the Scripture, you shall see ^^proved by these degrees.
I. Christ commissioned ^is Apostles to teach the Churches all his Doctrines,
Commands and Orders, and so to settle and guide them. Luke 6. 13. Mat. 28. 18,
19, 20. Ioh. 20. 21. Luke 10. 16. Mat. 10. 40. Act. 26. 17. 1 Cor. 15. ^. and
11. 23. and 4. 1, 2. Gal. 1. 11, 12. Ioh. 21. 5, 16, 17. Mat. 16. 19. Ioh. 17.
18. and 13. 16, ^0. Act. 1. 2, 24, 25. and 2. 42. and 10. 5. Gal. ^. 1. Ephesians. 4.
11, to 16. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. Ephesians. ^. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 2.

II. Christ promised his Spirit to them, to enable them to perform their
Commission, and lead them into all truth, and to bring all to their
remembrance, and to Guide them as his Churches Guides, and so as the
promulgators of his Commands. For this see Ier. 3. 15. Isa. 44. 3. Joel 2. 28,
29, etc. And Luke 24. 49. Ioh. 15. 26, 27. and 16. 7, 12, 13, 14, 15* and 17.
18. Mat. 28. 20. Act. 1. 4, 8.

III. Christ performed this promise, and gave them the infallible Spirit
accordingly to perform their Commissioned work. See Heb. 10. 23. Tit. 1. 2. 1
Ioh. 5. 10. Ioh. 20. 22. Act. 2. and 15. 28. Heb. 2. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 12. Romans 15.
19, 20, etc.

IV. Christ himself laid the Foundation by Rising that day (as God did of the
Sabbath by ceasing from his Work.) He appeared to his disciples Congregate on
that day; He sent down the Holy Ghos^ (his Agent and the perfecter of his work)
on that day: The Apostles settled that day as the stated time for constant
Church Assemblies and Communion And all the Churches in the World have
constantly called it The Lords day, and kept it as thus appointe^ and u^ed by
the Apostles, from their days till now with one consent. And because I must
not here writ^ a Volume on this point instead of a Catechisme^ he that doubts
may see all this fully proved in m^ book called The Divine appointment of the
Lord day, and in Dr. Youngs book, called The Lords d^^ (vindicated.)

Q. 26. Is Rest as necessary now as under Mos^^ Law?

A. It was then commanded both as a means t^^ ^he holy work of the day, and
also as a Ceremo^^ which was made a duty in it self, as a Shadow ^^ ^^^
Christian Rest. In the first respect we are as much ^^^ more) obliged to
forbear Labor, even so far ^^it hinders holy work, as they were then: But ^^
in the second respect. Exo. 31. 15. and 35. 3. Number. 15. 32. Neh. 13. 19. Ier.
17. 21, 22, 24, 27.


Q. 27. When does the Lords day begin and end?

A. It Is safest to judge of that according to the Com^ estimation of your
Country, of the measure of ^^ other days: remembering that it is not now as
^^^ Jewish Sabbath to be kept as a Ceremony, but as ^^^ season of Holy Works:
As therefore you allow ^^^ other days a stated proportion of twenty four ^^^rs
for Labor, and the rest for sleep or rest, do ^^ by the Lords day, and you
need not further be ^^pulous as to the time. But remember, 1. That you ^^id
scandal. ^. That even the Sabbath (and so ^^ Lords day) was made for man, and
Christ is the ^^d of it, who will have the greatest works pre^ed.

Q. 28. Does not Paul tell us that all days are alike, ^^ we must not judge
one another for days? Why then ^^d Christians make a difference, and not serve
God ^^lly every day?

A. Paul tells you, that Christ has taken away the ^^ish Ceremonial difference
of days; for neglect ^^ which none is to be judged: But it follows not ^^^
Christ has made no difference himself, and has ^^ stated a day for Christian
Work in Communion ^^ve the rest. One hour of the day does not in ^^lf now
differ from another. And yet every wise ^^ter of a Family will keep the Order
of stated ^^s, for Dinner and for Prayer. And so will a Congregation for
Lectures and other ordinary oc^^sions. I told you in the beginning that the
Light ^ Law of nature tells us, that Gods public Wors^^^ should have a stated
day; in which as free from versions and distractions, we should wholly ap^ our
selves thereto. And that all the Christians in ^ world assemble for the same
work on the same d^ has much of laudable concord, harmony and m^al help. And
therefore it concerned him who o^ is the King and Lawgiver to the universal
Chur^^ to make them a Law for the determination of ^^^ day, which he has done.

Q. 29. But is it not more spiritual to make e^ day a Sabbath?

A. It is most Christian-like to obey Christ ^ King. Thus the same men pretend
to make ev^ meal a Sacrament, that they may break the Law Christ who instituted
the Sacrament. Satan's way drawing men from Christ's Laws, is sometime by
^tending to do more and better. But to keep ev^^^ day a Sabbath, is to keep
none. It is not lawful cast off our outward labor all the six days: nor ^
mind or body bear it to do nothing but religious W^^s^ip. These men mean no
more but to follow the earthly business with a spiritual mind, and at so^
seasons of the day to worship God solemnly: And ^ is but what every good
Christian should do every ^ But who knows not that the mind may with more
advantage attend Gods instructions, and be ^ed to him in holy Worship, when all
worldly ^verting businesses are laid by, and the whole man ^^ployed toward God
alone.

If men will regard 1. The experience of their o^ Souls, 2. And of all others
in the World, they mi^ ^ be resolved how mischievous a thing the neg^ of the
Lords day is, and how necessary its holy ^rvation. 1. That man never knew what
it is ^ttend Gods worship seriously, and therein to re^e his special blessing,
who has not found the ^t advantage of our separation from all common ^ess to
attend holy work only on the Lords day. ^ that feels no miss or loss of it,
sure never knew ^t Communion with God is. 2. And Servants ^d be left remediless
under such Masters as would ^ oppress them with Labor and restrain them ^ Gods
service. It is therefore the great mercy the universal King, to secure the
Liberties of the ^vants, and to bind all men to the means of their ^ felicity.

3. And common reason will tell us, that a Law ob^ing all men to spend one day
of seven in Learn^ Gods Word, and offering him holy Worship, ^st needs tend
abundantly more to the increase of ^^owledge and Holiness, than if all men were
left their own or to their Rulers wills herein.

4. And common experience puts the matter of fact ^ of doubt, that where the
Lords day is most con^nably spent in holy exercises, there Knowledge, ^ty,
Charity and all Virtue, do most notably pros^: And where the sanctifying of the
Lords day ^eglected, Ignorance, Sensuality and Worldliness and. O how many
millions of Souls has Grace ^erted and comforted and edified on the Lords ^es!
When men are obliged to hear, read, pray, ^ praise God, and to Catechize their
Children and ^vants, as that which God requires, is it not liker ^e done, than
if they be left to their own errone^, backward, sluggish minds, or to the Will
of ^ers perhaps worse than they?

Q. 30. How is it that the Lords day must be s^ and Sanctified?

A. Not in diverting worldly thoughts, word^ ^ deeds: Much less in idleness, or
vain pastimes: ^ least of all in such sinful pleasures as corrupt ^ mind and
unfit a man for holy Work, such as g^tony, drunkenness, lasciviousness,
Stage Plays, ^mances, Gaming, etc. But the Lords day is ^cially separated to
Gods public Worship in Ch^ Communion; and the rest to private and secret ^
exercises. The primitive Christians spent mo^ the day together: And the public
Worship she not be only preferred, but also take up as much of day as we can
well spend therein. Isa. 58. 13, 14, 15. Luke 6. 1, 6. and 10. Act. 13. 42. and
16. 13. Luke 4. 16, 18. 13. 27, 44. and 15. 21. Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 14 16. 1.
Psalm. 100. 1, 2, 3, etc.


Q. 31. What are the parts of Church Service be used on the Lords day?

A. 1. The Reading of the Sacred Scriptures, the Teachers, and expounding them
to the Peo^ Their preaching the Doctrine of the Gospel, applying it to the case
and Consciences of the ^ers. Their guiding them in the solemn exercis^ Gods
Praise, special Worship, celebrating the S^ments, especially that of Communion
of the B^ and Blood of Christ, and that with such conjunc^ of Praises to God,
as that it may be fitly called Eucharist, speaking and singing joyfully of Gods
^fections, and his Mercyes to man; but special the wonderful Work of our
Redemption, and t^ in chiefly of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. ^^e day is
to be spent as a Day of Thanksgiving, in ^oyful and praising Commemoration of
Christ's Resur^ection.

Q. 32. On days of Thanksgiving men use to Feast: May we labor on the Lords
day in providing Feasts?

A. Needless cost and Labor and sensual excess ^ust be avoided, as unsuitable
to spiritual work and ^ejoicing. But such provision as is suitable to a
Festival ^or sober holy Persons, is no more to be scrupled, ^han the labor of
going to the Church, or the Mi^isters preaching. And it is a Laudable use for
men to ^ear their best Apparel on that day.

Q. 33. What are the private duties of the Lords ^ay?

A. Principally speaking and singing Gods Praises ^or our Redemption, in our
Families; and calling ^o mind what we were publicly taught; and Catechizing
Children and Servants, and praying to God, and meditating on Gods Word and
Works of Nature, Grace and Glory. Psalm. 92. and 95. and 96. and 118. 21, 22,
23, ^4. Col. 3. 16.


Q. 34. Seeing the Lords day is for the Commemoration of Christ's Resurrection,
must we cease the Commemoration of the Works of Creation for which the se^enth
day Sabbath was appointed?

A. No: The appointing of the Lords day is ac^umulative and not diminutive, as
to what we were ^^ do on the Sabbath. God did not cease to be our Creator and
the God of Nature, by becoming our Redeemer and the God of Grace; we owe more
^raise to our Creator and not less. The Greater and the subsequent and more
perfect work comprehends the Lesser, antecedent and imperfect* The Lords day
is to be spent in praising God both as our Creator and Redeemer: The Creation
it self being now delivered into the hands of Christ. Iam. 5. 14. Rev. 4. 11.
and 10. 6. Col. 1. 16.


Q. 35. But is it not then safest to keep two days; the seventh to honor the
Creator, and the first to commemorate our Redemption?

A. No: For when the world was made all very Good, God delighted in Man, and
Man in God a^ his only Rest. But upon the sin of Man, God is become a
condemning Judge, and displeased with Man and the Earth is Cursed; so that God
is so far from being now man's Rest, that he is his greatest Terror, till he be
reconciled by Christ: No man comes to the Father but by the Son: So that now
the work of Creation must be commemorated with the work of Redemption, which
restores it to i^ proper use. Col. 2. 16.


Q. 36. But what if a man cannot be satisfied that the seventh day is repealed,
is it not safest for him ^^ keep both?

A. God has laid no such task on Man, as to dedicate to Religious Duties two
days in Seven* And he that thinks otherwise, it is his culpable Error. But
if he do it conscionably, without contentious opposing the Truth, and dividing
the Church for it, good Christians will not despise him, but own him as a
Brother. Paul has decided that Case Romans 14. and 15.

Q. 37. Why is mention here made of all within ou^ gates?

A. To show that this Commandment is not only directed to private Persons, but
to Magistrates and Masters of Families as such, who though they cannot compel
men to believe, may restrain them from violating the Rest of the Sabbath, and
compel them to such external Worship of God as all men are immediately obliged
to: even all within the gates of their Cities or Houses.

Q. 38. What if one live where are no Church-meetings, or none that he can
lawfully join with?

A. He must take it as his great loss and suffering, and with the more
diligence improve his time in private. Rev. 1. 10.


Q. 39. What Preparation is necessary for the keeping holy that day?

A. I. The chief part of our Preparation is the habitual Holiness of the Soul,
a Love to God and his Word and Grace, and a sense of our Necessities, and Heart
full of thankfulness to Christ, which relisheth Sweetness in his Gospel, and in
Gods Praise and the Communion of Saints. II. And the other part is Our
endeavor to prevent all distracting hindrances, and to enjoy the greatest
helps that we can in the most suitable Means; and to meditate before of the
great mercy of our Redemption, of Christ's Resurrection, the giving of the Holy
Ghost, and the everlasting Heavenly Rest which this prepares for: And to pray
for Gods assistance and blessing.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the the Fifth Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the Words of the fifth Commandment?

A. Honor thy Father and thy Moeher, that thy days may be long on the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Q. 2. Does this Commandment belong to the first Table or the second?

A. No man knows which of the two Tables of Stone it was written in by God:
But if we may judge by the Subject, it seems to be the Hinge of both, or
belong partly to each: As Rulers are Gods Officers, and we obey God in them, it
belongs to our duty to God: But as they are Men, it belongs to the second. Pro.
1. 8. and 6. 20. and 23. 22, 25. Heb. 12. 9. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. Prove. 13. 1. and 15.
5. and 20. 20. and 30. 17. Mar. 7. 10, 11. Deu. 27. 16. Deu. 21. 18, 19. Lev.
19. 3. and 20. 9. Exodus 21. 15. 17. Genesis 9. 23. Col. 3. 20. 22. Ier. 35. 8. 10.


Q. 3. Why is Father and Mother named rather than Kings?

A. 1. Parents are our first Governors before Kings: 2. Their Government is
deeplyer founded, even in Nature, and not only in Contract. 3. Parents give us
our very being, and we are more obliged to them than to any. 4. They have a
natural Love to us and we to them: so that they are justly named first.

Q. 4. Is it only Parents that are here meant?

A. No: All true Governors are included: but so far as the Commandment is
part of the Law of Nature, it binds us but to natural Rulers antecedently to
humane Contract and consent, and to those that Rule us by Contract, but
consequently. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. Prove. 5. 13. Tit. 3. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13. and 5.
5. 1 Timothy 2. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 1. 5. Heb. 13. 7. 17. 1 Cor. 16. 16.


Q. 5. What is the Power of Parents and Rulers which we must obey?

A. They are of various ranks, and Offices; and every ones power in special, is
that which belongs to his own place and Office: But in general, they have
power first to command Inferiors to obey Gods Laws: And 2. To command them such
undetermined things in subordination to Gods Laws which God has left to their
Office to determine of: As Corporations make Bylaws by Virtue of the Kings Law.

Q. 6. What if Parents or Princes command what God forbids?

A. We must obey God rather than men. Act. 5. 29.


Q. 7. Are we not then guilty of disobedience?

A. No: for God never gave them power to contradict his Laws.

Q. 8. But who shall be Judge when men's Commands are contrary to Gods? Must
Subjects and Children judge?

A. While we are Infants naturally incapable of judging, we are ruled as Bruits
by our Parents. But when we grow up to the use of Reason, our Obligation to
Govern our selves is greater than to be governed by others. 1 Pet. 1. 14. 1
Ioh. 5. 21. Jude 20, 21. Mar. 13. 9. Prove. 25. 28. and 16. 37. and 9. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Timothy 3. 15. and 4. 7, 15, 16. and 5. 22. and 6. 5.
Gods Government is the first in order of Nature: Self-government is the next,
though we are not capable of it till we come to some ripeness: A man is nearer
to himself than his Parents are, and his happiness or misery depends more on
himself than on them: And indeed Childrens or men's obedience to others, is but
an act of self-government. It is a man's self-governing Reason and Will which
causes him to obey another: nor can a Child perform any act of proper
obedience differing from a Brutes, unless by a self-governing act. But Parents
Government is the next to Self-government, and the Government of Husbands,
Princes and Masters which are by Contract is next to that. Every Subject
therefore being first a Subject of God and next a self-governour, is to obey as
a reasonable Creature, and to understand what is his duty and what not; And
because all is our duty which God commands, but not all that man Commands,
Gods power being Absolute, and all men's limited, therefore we have nothing to
do with the Laws of God but to know them, and Love them, and obey them. But as
to man's Commands we must know also that they are not contrary to Gods Laws, and
that they belong to the Office of the Commander. Dan. 3. and 6.
If a Parent or Prince command you to blaspheme God, or Worship Idols, or deny
Christ, or renounce Heaven, or not to pray, etc. you must obey God by
disobeying him. And if a King Command you not to obey your Parents, or will
choose for you your Wife, your Diet, your Physic, the words you shall say to
God in your secret Prayers, etc. these are things which belong not to his
Office, no more than to a Captains to become Judge of the Common Pleas.
Subjects therefore must judge what they must or must not obey, as Rulers must
judge what they must or must not Command: or else they act not as men.

Q. 9. But what Confusion will this Cause, if every Subject and Child become
judge whether their Princes or Parents Commands be lawful? Will they not take
all for unlawful which their folly or Corrupt wills dislike, and so cast off
all obedience?

A. It is not finding inconveniences in the miserable state of lapsed Mankind
that will cure them. Were there any avoiding Error, Sin and Confusion by
Government, some would have found out the way before now. But while man is bad,
he will do accordingly. In avoiding these evils we must not run into far
greater. Are they not Greater, if men must not discern who is their lawful
Governor, but must fight for an Usurper in Power against his Prince or Parents
if Commanded by him? And if every Child and Subject must renounce God, Christ
and Heaven, that is Commanded; and men become Gods and Antigods? Isa. 9. 6, 7.
Job 34. 17. Neh. 5. 14. 18.


Q. 10. But is there no remedy against both these Confusions?

A. Yes: the remedies are these. 1. Rulers, that should have most reason, must
give us the first remedy, by knowing Gods Laws, and taking care that they
Command and forbid nothing contrary to them, and not put on Subjects a
necessity of disobeying them.

2. Children and Subjects must be instructed also to know the Laws of God, that
they may not take that for his Law which is not: It is not keeping them
ignorant of Gods Laws, lest they pretend them against the Laws of man, that is
the way; no more than keeping them ignorant that there is a God, lest they obey
him against man.

3. They must be taught betime the difference between the capacity of Children
and of men at age, and of young unfurnished wits, and those that Study and
Experience have ripened; and they must be taught the duty of self-suspicion,
humility and submission, and that as Learning is necessary to knowing, so
believing our Teachers (with a humane belief) is necessary to Learning of them.
Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3.
Who can learn that will believe nothing which his Teacher says? But this is
not taking him for Infallible, nor resolving only to be ruled still by his
knowledge, but in order to Learn the same Evidence of Truth which our Teachers
themselves discern it by. Ephesians. 5. 21. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Pet. 5. 5. 2 Pet. 2.
10.


4. They must be taught to know, that if they mistake Gods Laws, and
erroneously pretend them against their Rulers, their error and abuse of the
Name of God is their sin, and will not excuse their disobedience: And therefore
they must try well, before they disobey.

5. All the Churches near them should agree publicly of all the necessary
Articles of Divine Faith and Obedience, that the authority of their Concord may
be some awe to the minds both of Commanders and Obeyers.

6. Rulers are not to suspend the executive part of their Government upon every
Conscientious error of the Child or Subject: If they will pretend Gods Law for
intolerable sin or injury, they must nevertheless be restrained by punishment.

7. But lastly, the Conscience of Subjects duty to God must be tenderly used
and encouraged, and their mistakes through infirmity must be tolerated in all
tolerable cases: Some differences and disorders in judgment and practice must
be born with by them that would not bring in greater. Romans 14. 1, 2, etc.
Gentle reasoning and Loving usage, must cure as much of the rest as will be
cured: And our Concord must be placed in the few plain and necessary things:
The King has more wit and clemency than to hang all ignorant, erroneous,
faulty Subjects, or else he would have none left to Govern. And if Pastors have
not more wit and clemency than to excommunicate all such, they will be no
Pastors as having no flocks. But heinous is their sin that can tolerate
multitudes of the ignorant and ungodly in their Communion, who will but be for
their power and wealth, and can tolerate none of the Wise and Conscionable if
they do but differ from them in tolerable cases, or dislike them. Yet there
goes more to make a tolerable Christian and Churchmember, than a tolerable
Subject: And consent to the Relation is necessary to both.

Q. 11. What duty does the Word [Honour] contain and Command?

A. 1. The first and chief act of Honoring them, is to acknowledge their
Relation to God as his appointed Officers, and the Authority which God has
given them, that they may be obeyed reverently, and God in them.

2. The next is to take all their Laws and Commands which God has authorized
them to make, to be the Rule of our duty in subordination to Gods Laws, and so
far to obey them for Conscience sake, believing it a sin to resist or disobey
them.

3. Another is to maintain them honorably, so far as we are able and they
need: Though parents provide for Children in youth, Children must maintain
Parents if they need it, when they come to age; And so must People their
Princes and Pastors, and pay Tribute to whom it is due. Mal. 1. 6, 7. Mat. 15.
5, 6. and 21. 30, 31. Ephesians. 6. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Romans 13. 6, 7.
Ephesians. 5. 33. Heb. 12. 9, 2 Samuel 9. 6. 1 King. 1. 31.


4. Also they ought to speak reverently to them, and honorably of them, and
not use any unjust dishonouring Thoughts, Words or Deeds against them,
specially which would disable them for Government.

5. Lastly they ought to do their best to defend them against injuries.

Q. 12. But seeing Parents are named and not Princes, must we defend our
Parents against our King if he be their Enemy?

A. If their Cause be just, we must defend them by all lawful means; that is,
by Prayer to God, by Argument, by Petition to the King, and by helping their
Flight or hiding them: And if a King would ravish or murder your Mother or
Wife, you may hold his hands while they escape; as you may do if he would kill
himself in Drunkenness or Passion. But you may not on such private accounts
raise a War against him, because War is a public action, and under the
Judgment of the public Governor of the Commonwealth, and not under the
Judgment of your Parents or any private person. 1 Samuel 19. 11, 12, 13, 17. and
19. 1, 4, 7. and 20. 16, 30, 42. and 14. 44, 45.


Q. 13. But if the King Command me one thing and my Parents another, which of
them must I prefer in my obedience?

A. Each of them have their proper Office, in which they must be preferred and
obeyed: Your Mother must be obeyed before the King, in telling you when to Suck
or Eat. Your Parents must be obeyed before the King, in matters proper to
Family-Government; as what daily Food you shall eat, and what daily work for
them you shall do, and what Wife to choose, etc. But the King is to be obeyed
before your Parents in all matters belonging to National Government.

Q. 14. But what if it be about Religious acts, as what Pastor I shall choose;
What Church I shall join with; how I shall spend the Lords day, etc. Must I
prefer the King or my Parents in my Obedience?

A. While you are in your Minority and understand not the Kings Laws, you must
obey your Parents, and if they command you any thing contrary to the Kings
Commands, they must be answerable for it, as the Case shall prove: some
Commands about your Religion belong to your Parents, and some to the King, and
they are accordingly to be obeyed. It is not the Kings Office but your Parents
to Catechize you, to teach you to Read and Pray, to choose your Schoolmaster
or Tutor; In these therefore your Parents are first to be obeyed: And it is
your Parents office to choose where you shall dwell, and consequently to what
Pastor you shall commit the conduct of your Soul: And also how in the Family
and in Private you shall spend the Lords day. But the determination of all
those public Circumstances, which are needful to be imposed on all Christians
in the Land, belongs not to your Parents but to the Supreme Power. Deu. 6. 11.
and 11. 19.


Q. 15. But what if the King and the Bishops or Pastors differ about matters of
Religion, to be believed or done, which of them must I obey?

A. If it be in things belonging to the Kings determination, (as what
Translation shall be used in all the Churches, when Synods shall meet, who
shall have the Tithes, Glebe and Temples; what National Fasts or Thanksgivings
shall be kept, and such like) you must obey the King. But if it be in things
proper to the Pastoral Office, (as who shall be judged Capable of Raptisme, or
of the Lords Supper and Church Communion: Who shall be admonished,
^xcommunicated or absolved by the Pastors: what ^ext the Minister shall Preach
on, and on what ^ubject, in what Method and in what Words: what ^e shall say to
troubled Consciences or to the sick, ^r to others: what words he shall use in
Exhor^ation, Prayer or Thanksgiving: all these being part ^f the Pastors work,
you are to obey him in them all. ^ut neither Prince nor Pastor have power
against God. 2 Chronicles. 29. 27. See all the Examples of Da^^d, Solomon,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nehe^ah.


Q. 16. But what if the Bishops or Pastors be di^^ded; which of them must we
obey?

A. 1. Those that obey Gods Laws. 2. Those that impose the safest course where
the matter on ^ne side is no sin, when on the other we fear it is. ^. All other
things being equal, those that are most ^^animous and concordant with the
universality of Christians, and the Primitive Church: And our own Pastors
rather than others: And the Godly and ^minently wise, before the ignorant and
ungod^^. Romans 16. 16, 17. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. ^. 7, 17.


Q. 17. But what if the Bishop or Pastor who is ^^er us, differ from most in
the Nation? And if the National Bishops and Ministry differ from most other
^rreign Churches, (as England from France, Spain, ^^aly, Germany, Moscovy, the
Greeks, Armenians, ^^assines?)

A. The things in which the difference is supposed must not be thus confounded:
either they are necessary points of Faith or Practice to all Christians in
order to Salvation. 2. Or else they are controverted Opinions not so necessary.
3. Or else they are matters of local occasional mutable practice.

1. As to the first, All true Christians are agreed in all things necessary to
our Common Salvation: ^ any oppose these (and draw men from the Church on that
account) he is a Heretic. In this case God^ Law must be known to us all, to
which we must stick whoever gainsay it. Gal. 1. 8. and 2. See the Case of Paul
an^ Peter.


2. In the second case (of disputable less necessary Opinions,) we must suspend
our judgments ti^ evidence determine them: But judge them most probably to be
in the right who are in those matter discerned commonly to have greatest skill
and sincerity. But the Ignorant cannot subscribe to any o^ them in the dark.

3. In the third case, (as what Time and Plac^ we shall meet at, what Subject
we shall hear; wha^ Catechism-questions we shall answer, when we sha^
Communicate, and with what individual Persons, i^ what words the Assembly shall
pray and praise God^ etc.) we are to obey our own Pastors, and no^ Strangers:
As every Wife is to be governed by he^ own Husband, and every Child by his own
Parent^ and every Servant by his own Master: I scarce thin^ our Papists
(Monarchical or Aristocratical) would have an universal Husband, Parent or
Master, or ^ Council of Husbands, Parents or Masters of all the World, or all
the Kingdom, set up for such acts ^ these.

Q. 18. But is there no Command to Parents, Prin^, and Pastors for their duty,
as well as to Chil^n and Subjects for theirs?

A. The Commandments written on stone were ^cessarily brief, and the duty of
Rulers is here im^yed and included.

Q. 19. What is the duty of Parents for their ^ldren?

A. 1. To take due care of their Lives, Health and ^cessary Maintenance. Deu.
6. 11. and 11. 19. and 33. 46. Ios. 4. 6, 22. Ephesians. 6. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 3. 12. Prove.
22. 6. and 13. and 29. 15.
2. To teach them when ^ey are capable to know God and his Word (his Do^ine,
Laws, Promises and Penalties;) to know ^emselves, their Souls, their Relation
to God, their ^ty to him, their Original pravity, and guilt, and ^nger: To know
Jesus Christ, his Person, Life, ^octrine, Death, Resurrection, Ascension Glory,
^ngdom, Intercession, and Judgment: To know ^e Holy Ghost as sent by Christ, to
indite and ^l the Scripture, qualify the Apostles and Evan^lists to deliver
infallibly Christ's Commands, and lord them to all after Ages, and accordingly
set^ the Churches; to confirm their Ministry by Mi^les, and to sanctify all
true Christians to the end ^ the world: To know the use of the ordinary
^nistry, and of the Communion of Saints: To know ^ Covenant of Grace, and the
Grace of Pardon, ^option and Sanctification which we must here re^ve, and the
Glory which we shall receive hereafter at Death and at the General
Resurrection; A^ the great duties of Faith and Repentance, of Obdience and Love
to God and Man, and renounc^ the Lusts of the flesh, the world and the Devil,
wh^ must be done by all that will be Glorified by a^ with Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy
3. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4, 5, 6. Heb. 5. 12. and 6. 1, 2, 3.


This is the Catechism which Parents must te^ their Children.

Q. 20. Alas, it will be a hard and long work ^ teach Children all this; or
Servants either that ^ at age?

A. All this is but the plain meaning of the Cr^ and ten Commandments; which
the Church re^reth all to learn; And no more than in their B^tism the Parents
should, and the Godfathers do, ^lemnly Promise to see them taught. It is these
thi^ for which God has given them life, and time, and ^son; and on which their
present safety and comf^ and their Everlasting Life depends: And will y^ set
them seven years Apprentice to a Trade, ^ set them Seven and Seven to Schools
and Univ^sities, and Innes of Court, where study must be the daily business:
And will you think it too much teach them the sense of the Creeds, Lords Pr^er
and ten Commandments, needful to far gre^er and better ends? 2 Timothy 3. 15.


Q. 21. In what manner must Parents teach the Children?

A. 1. Very plainly, by familiar talk: 2. Ge^ly and Lovingly, to win them, and
not discour^ them: 3. Beginning with the History and the ^ctrine, which they
are most capable to receive. 4. Very frequently, that it be not neglected or
forgotten, Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. 5. Yet a little at a time, that they be not
overwhelmed. 6. Praising them when they do well. 7. Doing all with such holy
reverence, that they may perceive it is the Work of God, and not a Common
matter. 8. Teaching them by an answerable Life.

Q. 22. What else besides Teaching is the Parents duty?

A. 3. To use all just means to make Religion pleasant to them, and win their
Hearts to Love it: And therefore to tell them the Author, the Excel^ency, the
certainty and profit of it, here and here^fter. 4. To possess them with
necessary Fear of God, of Death, of Hell and of Sin. 5. To make ^ great
difference between the good and the bad; ^ewarding good Children, and
Correcting the bad, ^isobedient and stubborn. 6. To choose safe and ^odly
Schoolmasters for them, if they teach them ^ot all themselves. 7. To keep them
out of ill Com^ny, and from Temptations; especially to know their Vices, and
watch against all occasions of their ^: 8. To choose meet Trades or Callings
for them, ^d faithful Masters, ever preferring the welfare ^f their Souls
before their Bodies. 9. To choose ^eet Husbands or Wives for them, if they are
to ^e married. Deu. 6. 11. and 11. 19, 20. Ephesians. 6. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 15. 1 These. 2.
7.
10. To settle them under a faithful ^astor in the real Communion of Saints.
And all this with constant serious diligence, praying to God for his Grace and
Blessing.

O how happy were the Church and World, if Parents would faithfully do all this
needful certain Duty, and not perfidiously and cruelly break the Promise they
made in Baptism, and by negligence, worldliness and ungodliness betray the
Souls of their own Children to Sin and Satan. The happiness or misery of
Families, Churches, Cities, Kingdoms, and of the World, lies most eminently on
Parents hands.

Q. 23. What is the duty of Children to their Parents in special?

A. To Honor their Judgment and Authority; to be Thankful to them for their
Being, Love and Education: To Love them Dearly: To learn of them willingly and
diligently: To obey them faithfully: and to requite them as they are able: and
what is included in the General duty of Subjects opened before.

Q. 24. What if the Father be a Papist and the Mother a Protestant, and one
commands the Chil^ to read one book, and go to one Church, and the oth^^
another; which must be obeyed?

A. Either the Child is of age and understanding to try and Judge which of them
is contrary to God^ Law, or not: If he be, he must obey God first and therefore
not obey any thing that is contrary t^ his Law: But if not, then he is one that
will not pu^ such questions, nor do what he does out of Conscience to God, but
perform mere humane Obedienc^ to man: And if his Ignorance of Gods Law, b^
through his own negligence, it will not excuse h^ (u) Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. Col. 3. 20,
21.
Sin if he mistake. But if it be from natural incapacity, he is ruled like a
Bruit, and no doubt the Father is the Chief Governor of the house, ^^d will
and must be obeyed before the Mother, when obedience to God does not forbid it,
which this Child understands not.

Q. 25. What if Children be rebellious in wickedness, as Drunkenness, Stealing,
etc. must the Parents cause them to be put to death, as Moses Law Commanded? or
what must they do with them?

A. Moses Law had some special Severities, and was peculiar to that Nation, and
is abrogate: whether the Common good and safety require the death of such a Son
(or any,) the Supreme Power is judge, and not the Parents: Nor is it meet
(though some think otherwise) that Parents have the Power of putting to death
their Children: For the Commonwealth, which is better than the Family, is
concerned in all the Subjects lives: And experience proves it, that were this
granted, Whores, Beggars and raging passionate Persons would be Common
Murderers of their Children.

But if the Magistrate would appoint one house of Correction in every County
for Children that will not be ruled by Parents, where they may be kept ^n
labor till they are humbled and subdued, it would ^e an excellent work.

Q. 26. But what shall such sorrowful Parents ^o?

A. First use all means by Wisdom, Love and Pa^ience, while there is hope: And
next, if they are ^ast their Correction, send them to the House of ^orrection:
And lastly, disinherit them, or deny them ^l maintenance for their lust.

Q. 27. Is it a duty to disinherit an incorrigible wicked Son; or to deny such
filial maintenance and Portions?

A. Supposing it to be in the Fathers power, it is a duty to leave them no more
than will maintain their lives in temperance: For all men are Gods Stewards and
must be accountable for all that he does trust them with: And they ought not to
give it to be the fuel of Lust and Sin, when they have reason to believe that
it will be so used: That were to give Gods Mercies to the Devil, to be turned
against him. Nor are Parents bound to give those Children the necessary
maintenance for their lives and health, or any thing at all, who by obstinate
rebellion utterly forfeit it: Nature is not so strong a bond, but that some sin
may dissolve it, and forfeit Life it self, and therefore forfeit fatherly
maintenance. The rebellion and ingratitude of an incorrigible Child is far more
heinous than a Neighbors injuries. And though Moses Law and its rigors be
ceased, the reason of it still remains, as directive to us. When thousands of
good people want food, and we cannot give all, it is a sin to prefer an
incorrigible wicked Son before them. Luke 15. 16. Deu. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. and
17. 11, 12. 2 These. 3.


Q. 28. But God may change them when the Parents are dead?

A. It is supposed that the Parents have tried to the utmost of their Power:
And Parents cannot judge of what unlikelihoods God may bring to pass when they
are dead. If God change them, God will provide for them: If Parents have any
hope, they may leave somewhat in trusty hands to give them when they see them
Changed. If not, such may work for themselves.

Q. 29. But what if a Son be not deboist, but Civil; But be of a Corrupt
understanding, inclined to ill Opinions, and averse to serious Piety, and like
to use his Estate to the hurt of the Church or Commonwealth? What shall
Parents do by such?

A. The public Interest is to be preferred before a Sons: If Parents have good
hopes that such a Son may do more good than harm with his Estate, they must
trust him as far as Reason requires, rather than to trust a Stranger. But if
they have reason to believe that he will do more harm than good with it, they
should settle it in trust to do all that good which he should do, and not leave
it to do hurt, if it be in their Power; Allowing him necessary maintenance.

Q. 30. Should not Parents leave all their Estates to their Children? Or what
proporion must they give them?

A. Nature makes Children so near their Parents, that no doubt they must be
specially careful of their Corporal and Spiritual welfare above others: And the
Israelites being tied to keep their Possessions in their Families and Line,
were under an extraordinary obligation in this matter. But to all Christians
the Interest of God and the Common good is the Chief, and to be preferred: Act.
4. and 5. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 4. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 10. Psalm. 17. 14. Job 21. 11. Luke
19. 8.
They that all Sold their possessions, and laid down the Money at the Apostles
feer, did not scruple alienating them from their Heirs. In this case, Children
are to be considered, 1. As mere Receivers of their own due. 2. Or as their
Parents Trustees for doing good. If they be like to prove faithful, their
Parents should rather trust them than others with their Estates to do good when
they are gone. But if not, they should secure a due proportion for good Works.

And however all men should in their Life do all the good that regularly they
can do: For who can expect that his Son should do that good with his Estate,
which he had not a Heart to do himself? And who would not rather secure a
reward to himself than to his Son?

Q. 31. Do you disallow of the Common Course, which is to give all that men can
get to their Children, save some small droppings now and then to the Poor?

A. I take it to be the effect of that SELFISHNESS, which is the grand Enemy to
the Love of God and Man. A carnal Selfish man does live to his Flesh and Carnal
Self, for which he gathers all that he can get: And when he must needs dye and
can no longer enjoy it, he takes his Children to be as parts of himself, and
what they have he thinks he almost has himself: And so out of mere Self-love
does Love them and enrich them. But a Holy person thinks all is Gods, and that
it is best used which is best improved to his Will and Kingdom.

But Alas, what have Selfish carnal worldlings to account for? When the best
they can say of the use of Gods talents, is, that they pampered the flesh with
as much as it craved, and the rest they gave their Children to make them rich,
that their Flesh also might be pampered, and their lust might want no fuel or
provision, nor their Souls want temptation. Hundreds or Thousands given to
Daughters, and Lands purchased for their Sons, and now and then a Farthing or a
Penny given to the Poor. And though the Hypocrites take on them to believe
Christ, that it is harder for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God, than
for a Camel to go through a Needle's eye, yet they live as if nothing were the
desire and business of their lives, but to make their own and their Childrens
Salvation by Riches thus next to impossible. Psalm. 49. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15.


Q. 32. Is it well, as is usual, to give the eldest Son all the Inheritance?
Genesis 25. 31.


A. Nature and Scripture tell us of some preeminence of the eldest: This
Birthright Jacob thought worth the buying of Esau: Christ is called the
Firstborn of every Creature, because the firstborn have the preeminence of
Rule, Wealth and Honor: And the heavenly Society are called The general
Assembly of the firstborn whose Names are enrolled in Heaven, Heb. 12. Because
they are in Honor and Power above others. But yet, 1. The Younger also are
Sons, and must have their part: And it pleased God to leave on record how often
he has preferred the Younger: Even an Abel before Cain, a Seth before his
Seniors; a Sem before Iaphet and Cham: Isaac before Ishmael; Jacob before Esau:
David and Solomon before their Elder Brethren.

2. But to the faithful, though Nature be not disregarded, yet Grace teaches
us what to prefer. And Christ and his members are dearer to us than our Sons or
natural members. Mat. 19. 21. Mar. 10. 21. Luke 12. 33. and 18. 22.
In cases where we must deny our selves for Christ and the public good, we may
also deny our natural Kindred; For they are not nearer to us than our selves.
And if an eldest Son be wicked or unprofitable, a believing Parent should give
him the less, and more to a younger (yea to a Stranger) that will do more
service to God and his Country; and not prefer a fleshly difference and
privilege, before a Spiritual and his Masters Service.

Q. 33. What is the Duty of Husbands to their Wives?

A. To love them as themselves, and live with them in conjugal Chastity as
Guides and Helpers, and provide for them and the Family, to endeavor to cure
their infirmities and passions, and patiently bear what is not cured; to
preserve their honor and authority over inferiors, and help them in the
education of their Children, and comfort them in all their sufferings. Ephesians. 5.
25. Col. 3. 19. 1 Pet. 3. 7.


Q. 34. What is the duty of Wives to their Husbands?

A. To live with them in true Love and Conjugal Chastity and Fidelity; to help
them in the Education of Children, and governing Servants, and in worldly
affairs; To learn of them and obey them: To provoke them to duties of Piety and
Charity, and to bear with their infirmities, and Comfort and Help them in their
Sufferings: And both must live as the Heirs of Heaven, in preparation for the
Life to come. Ephesians 5. 22, 24. Col. 3. 18. Tit. 2. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3.


Q. 35. What is the duty of Masters to their Servants?

A. To employ them suitably, not unmercifully, in profitable labor, and not in
sin or vanity: To allow them their due wages, and maintenance, keeping them
neither in hurtful Want, nor in Idleness, or sinful fullness: To teach them
their duty to God and Man, and see that they join in public and Family
Worship, and live not in any wilful sin: And as Fellow Christians (if they are
such) to further their comfortable passage to Heaven. Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 4. 1.


Q. 36. But what if we have Slaves, that are no Christians?

A. You must use them as Men, that are Capable of Christianity, and do your
best with pity to cure their Ignorance and Unbelief and sin, and to make them
Christians, preferring their Souls before your wordly commodity.

Q. 37. Is it lawful to buy and use men as Slaves?

A. It is a great mercy accidentally for those of Guiny, Brasile, and other
Lands, to be brought among Christians, though it be as Slaves: But it is a sin
in those that Sell and buy them as Beasts, merely for Commodity, and use them
accordingly: But to buy them in compassion to their Souls as well as for their
Service, and then to sell them only to such as will use them Charitably like
men, and to employ them as aforesaid, preferring their Salvation, is a lawful
thing, specially such as Sell themselves, or are sold as Malefactors.

Q. 38. What is the duty of Servants to their Masters?

A. To honor and obey them, and faithfully serve them, as part of their
service of Christ, expecting their chief reward from him: To be trusty to them
in Word and Deed, not lying, nor stealing, or taking any thing of theirs
without their consent, nor wronging them by idleness, negligence or fraud.
Learning of them thankfully and sincerely, and obediently, joining with them in
public and Family Worship of God. 1 Pet. 2. 18. Tit. 2. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.
Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7. Col. 3. 22.


Q. 39. Does God require Family Teaching, and daily Worship?

A. Yes, both by the Law of Nature and Scripture. All Christian Societies must
be sanctified to God: Christian Families are Christian Societies: They have as
Families constant dependence on God, constant need of his protection, help and
blessing, and constant work to do for him, and therefore constant use of prayer
to him: And as Nature and Necessity will teach us to eat and drink every day,
though Scripture tell us not how often, nor at what hour, so will they tell us
that we must daily ask it of God. And stated times are a hedge to duty, to
avoid omissions and interruptions: And Scripture Commands Parents to teach
and persuade their Children constantly, lying down and rising up, etc. Act. 10.
2, 3. ^ Cor. 1. 16. Genesis 18. 19. 2 Samuel 6. 11, 20. Exo. 12. 3, 4.
Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. And to bring them up in the Nurture and admonition of the
Lord: Cornelius, Crispus and others Converted, brought in their households with
them to Christ. Daniel prayed openly daily in his House. The fourth Commandment
requires of Masters that all in their House do Sanctify the Sabbath. Reason
and Experience tells us, that it is the keeping up Religion and Virtue in
Families, by the constant instruction, care, and Worship of God by the
Governors, that is the chief means of the hopes and welfare of the world, and
the omission of it the great cause of all public corruption and confusion.
Act. 12. 12. Act. 2. 46. and 5. 42. Prove. 3. 33.


Q. 40. What must Children, Wives, Servants and Subjects do that have bad
Parents, Husbands, Masters and Magistrates?

A. Nature binds Children in minority so to their Parents, and Wives to their
Husbands (except in case of lawful divorce) that they must live in patient
bearing with what they cannot amend: And so must such Servants and Subjects as
by Law or Contract may not remove, nor have legal remedy. But those that are
free may remove under better Masters and Princes when they can.

Q. 41. But whole Nations cannot remove from Enemies and destroyers?

A. It is God and not I that must answer such cases. Only I say: 1. That there
is no Power but of God.

2. That Governing Power is nothing but Right and Obligation to Rule the People
in order to the Common good. Romans 13. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 10. 8. and 13.
10. 1 Pet. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.


3. That destroying the Common good is not Ruling, nor any act of Power given
by God.

4. That all man's Power is limited by God and subordinate to his universal
Government and Laws, and he has given none Authority against himself or his
Laws.

5. That so far as Gods Laws have not determined of the species and Degrees of
Power, they must be known by the humane Contracts or Consent which found them.

6. Nations have by Nature a right to self-preservation against destroying
Enemies and Murderers.

7. And when they only seek to save themselves against such, they resist not
Governing Authority.

8. But particular persons must patiently bear even wrongful destruction by
Governors: And whole Nations tolerable injuries, rather than by Rebellions and
Wars to seek their own preservation or right, to the hurt of the Commonwealth.
Mat. 17. 25, 26. and 22. 19, 20.


9. They are the great enemies of Government, who are for Perjury, by which
mutual Trust is overthrown.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Sixth Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the Words of the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall do no Murder.

Q. 2. What is Murder?

A. Killing unjustly a reasonable Creature: And that culpably tends to it,
brings an answera^^e degree of guilt.

Q. 3. Why is this command the first that forbids ^^ivate wrongs?

A. Because a man's Life is more precious than the ^^cidents of his Life; Death
depriveth him of all ^ time of Repentance and earthly Mercies; and ^^priveth
all others of the benefit which they might ^^ceive by him. They rob God and the
King of Subject: Therefore God who is the giver of Life, a dreadful avenger of
the sin of Murder; Cain ^^as cast out with terror for this sin: for it was the
^evils first Service, who was a Murderer from the ^^ginning: Therefore God made
of old the Law against eating Blood, lest men should be hardened ^ cruelty, and
to teach them his hatred of blood^^iltiness. Deu. 19. 10, 13. 1 King. 2. 31. 2
King. ^1. 16. and 22. 4. Prove. 6. 17. Genesis 4. 10, 11. ^ 9. 4, 5, 6. and 37. 26.
and 42. 22. Prove. 28. ^7. Hos. 4. 2.
And it was the Murder of the Pro^^ets and of Christ himself and his Apostles,
that ^^ought that dreadful destruction on the Jews, when ^rath came upon them
to the uttermost. Mat. 23. 31. and 27. 25. 4. ^^k. 11. 50. Rev. 16. 6. Act. 22.
20.


Q. 4. If God hate murder, why did he Command ^ Israelites to kill all the
Canaanites, Men, Women ^^d Children?

A. Justice done by God or his Authority on Ca^^tal Malefactors, is not murder.
You may as well ^ why God will damn so many in Hell, which worse than Death.
The Curse was fallen on Chams ^osterity: They were Nations of Idolaters, and
Murderers of their own Children, offering them to Ido^ and so drowned in all
wickedness, that God justly man the Israelites his Executioners to take away
the forfeited Lands and Lives. Deu. 27. 15. and 18. 9. and 29. 17. 2 Ki^* 16.
3. Lev. 18. 26, 27. Deu. 18, 12.


Q. 5. When is killing Murder, or unlawful?

A. When it is done without Authority from Go^ who is the Lord of Life.

Q. 6. To whom does God give such authority to ^^ men?

A. To the Supreme Rulers of Common-wealt^ and their Magistrates to whom they
communic^ it. G^^* 26. 11. Exo. 19. 12. and 21. 12, 15, 16, 17. D^^* 17. 6, 7.
and 21. 22. and 24. 16. Ios. 1. 18.


Q. 7. May they kill whom they will?

A. No: None but those whose crimes are so g^ as to deserve death by the Law of
God in Nat^ and the just Laws of the Land: even such wh^ crimes make their
death the due interest of the (...) public, and needful to its good and safety.

Q. 8. What if a Prince think that the death (...) an Innocent man is
accidentally necessary to the s^ty of himself or the Commonwealth, through
other (...) fault: may he not kill him? I^^* 18. 14.


A. No: he is a Murderer if he kill the Innoce^^ or any whose fault deserves
not death; should (...) permit killing on such pretenses, no men's lives wo^ be
safe. In Factions there be other ways of ^medy: and such wicked means do but
hasten (...) increase the evil which men would so prevent. 1 Samuel 14. 43, 44,
45.


Q. 9. May not Parents have power to kill bad ^^^ldren?

A. No: I have given you the reason under the (...) Commandment.

Q. 10. May not a man kill another in the neces^^^y defense of his own Life?

A. In some cases he may, and in some not: He ^y in case it be his equal or
inferior as to pub^^^ usefulness, and he have no other means being ^ulted by
him to save his Life from him. But (...) may not, 1. If by flight or other just
means he (...) save his own Life: 2. Nor if it be his King, (...) Father; or
any public Person, whose death ^uld be a greater loss to the Commonwealth
than (...) own. So David to Saul.


Q. 11. How prove you that?

A. Because the Light of Nature tells us, that see^ Good and Evil are the
objects of our Willing (...) Nilling, therefore the Greatest Good should still
(...) preferred, and the greatest evil be most avoid^: and that the Good or
Hurt of the Common^^alth is far greater than of a single private per^.

Q. 12. But does not Nature teach every Creature preserve its life, and rather
than die to kill ano^?

A. The Nature of man is to be Rational, and ^ve brutish Nature, and to choose
by Reason ^gh against sensitive inclination. 1 Chr. 11. 19. 1 Ioh. ^6. Rev. 12.
11.
Why else ^^t Martyrs choose to dye rather than to sin? and ^^ldiers choose
their own death before their Captains or their Kings; in which God and reason
ju^fie them.

Q. 13. But by this Rule an Army should kill the General, rather than to be
killed or betrayed to de^^ by him: because all their lives are better than one
man.

A. If they be but some part of an Army, a^ the Generals life be more useful to
the rest, and (...) their King and Country and the public good, the all
theirs, they should rather dye, as the Theb^ Legion did: But if the General be
a Traitor to (...) King and Country, and would destroy all or p^ of the Army
to the public loss and danger, i^ no Murder if they kill him when they have no
o^ way to save their Lives.

Q. 14. How many sorts of Murder are there, (...) which are the worst?

A. I. One of the worst is Persecution: Kill^ men because they are good, or
because they (...) not break Gods Laws. And lower degrees of P^secution, by
Banishment, Imprisonment, Mul^ participate of guilt against this Command. Prove.
29. 10. Rev. 6. 10, 12. and 18. and 19. 2. Mat. 23. 35.


II. A second sort of heinous Murder is by (...) sacres, and unlawful Wars. In
which multitudes (...) murdered, and that studiously and with greatest (...)
dustry, and Countries ruined and undone. The m^^titude of heinous Crimes that
are contained in (...) unlawful War, are hardly known but by sad ^^perience.

III. Another sort of heinous Murder is, when (...) rents kill their own
Children, or Children their (...) rents.

IV. Another is when Princes destroy their own Subjects whom by Office they are
bound to protect, or Subjects their Princes, whom they are bound to obey, and
defend, and honor.

V. Another sort of heinous Murder, is when it is committed on pretense of
Justice, by Perjured Witnesses, false Accusers, or false Judges or Magistrates:
1 King. 25. 19.
As Naboth was murdered by Iezebel and Ahab, and Christ by the Jews upon false
accusations of Blasphemy and Treason. For in this case the Murder is fathered
on God and on Justice which most abhor it, and the best things which should
preserve the peace of the Innocent, are used to the worst ends, even to destroy
them: And a man has no defense for himself, as he may have against Murderers
or open Enemies; and he is destroyed by those that are bound to defend him: And
the most devilish wicked Perjured men are made the Masters of men's Lives, and
may conquer Subjects by perverting Law.

VI. One of the most heinous crimes is soul-murder: which is done by all that
draw or drive men into sin, or from their duty to God and the care of their
Salvation: either by seducing false Opinions, opposing necessary Truth and
Duty, or by scorns, or threats. But none here sin so grievously as wicked
Rulers, and wicked Teachers and Pastors of the Churches: Others kill Souls by
one and one, but these by hundreds and thousands: And therefore it is the
Devils main endeavor through the World, to get Rulers and Teachers on his
side, and turn the Word and Sword against him that did ordain them. All the
Idolatrous World that know not Christ, are kept under the Power of the Devil,
principally by wicked Rulers and Teachers: And so is the Infidel and Mohammedan
World. When the Turks had once conquered the Eastern Empire, how quickly did
those famous Churches and large Nations forsake Christ, and turn to the
grossest of Deceivers! O how many millions of Souls have been since hereby
destroyed! And what wicked deceitful, and contentious Teachers have done to the
murdering of Souls, alas! the whole Christian World is witness. Some by
Heresy, and some by Proud Tyranny, and some by malignant opposition to the
serious practice of that holy Law of God which they preach; and some by
Ignorance, and some by slothful treacherous negligence, and some by
Church-divisions, by their Snares, or contentiousness. Such as Paul speaks of,
Phil. 1. 15, 16. and 2. 3. And some in envy malign and hinder the preaching of
the Gospel, by such as they distaste, 1 These. 2. 16.

VII. But of all Soul Murder, it is one of the greatest which is done by wicked
Parents on their own Children, who breed them up in Ignorance, Wickedness, and
profane neglect, if not hatred and scorn of serious Holiness. Deu. 12. 31.
Psalm. 106. 37, 38.
And teach them malignant principles, or hinder them from the necessary means
of their Salvation: That by Example teach them to Swear and lie, and be drunken
or profane: For Parents to be the cruel damners of their own Children, and this
when in false hypocrisy they Vowed them in baptism to God, and promised their
godly education, is odious cruelty and perfidiousness.

VIII. And it is yet a more heinous Sin to be a Murderer of ones own Soul; as
every ungodly and impenitent sinner is: For Nature teaches all men to Love
themselves, and to be unwilling of their own destruction. And no wonder that
such are unmerciful to the Souls of Wives, Children and Servants, who will damn
themselves; and that for nothing; and that, after all the importunities of God
and man to hinder them. Prove. 13. 13. and 29. 1. and 6. 32. and 21. 15.


Q. 15. When may a man be accounted a Soul-selfmurderer? seeing every man has
some sin?

A. Every sin, (as every sickness to the body) is an enemy to life, though it
destroy it not: And as wounding a man (yea or injurious hurting him or desiring
his hurt,) is some breach of this Command, as Christ tells us Math. 5. so every
sin is as hurtful to the Soul: But those are the mortal murdering sins, which
are inconsistent with the Predominant habitual Love of God and Holiness; and
are not only from the Imperfection of this Divine Nature and Image, but from
the absence of it: such as are the sins of the unbelievers and impenitent.

Q. 16. But he shall not be hanged for killing another that does it against his
Will: And no man is willing to damn himself?

A. But a man will himself be a dead man if he kill himself unwillingly: And
all wicked men do willingly murder their own Souls: They be not willing to burn
in Hell: but they are willingly ungodly, Worldly, Sensual; And unholiness is
the death or misery of the Soul; and the departing of the Heart or Love from
God, and choosing the world and fleshly pleasure before his Grace and Glory, is
the true Soul-murdering: Romans 2. 5, 6, 8. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Ephesians. 5. ^, 6, 7.
When God makes Poison destructive to man's Nature, and forbids us taking it,
and tells a man that it will kill him, if this man will yet take the Poison
because it is sweet, or will not believe that it is deadly, it is not his being
unwilling to die that will save him. When God has told men, that unholiness
and a fleshly Mind is death, he destroys his Soul that yet will choose it.
Heb. 12. 16. Mar. 8 36. Heb. 12. 14.


And it is a heinous aggravation that Poor sinners have so little for the
Salvation which they sell. The Devil can give them nothing that is to be put
into the balance against the least hope or possibility of the Life to come:
And for a man to sell his own Soul, and all his hopes of Heaven for a base
lust, or a transitory shadow, as profane Esau sold his birthright for a Morsel,
is Self-murder of a most odious kind.

Q. 17. But you make also our Friends that Love us to be murderers of us, if
they draw us to sin, or neglect their duty?

A. As the Love of his own flesh does not hinder but further the Drunkards,
Fornicators and idle persons murder of his own Soul; so your Friends carnal
love to you, may be so far from hindering that it may further your destruction.
They that draw each other to Fornication, to Gaming, to timewasting Plays, to
Gluttony and Drunkenness, may do it in Love. If they give you poison in Love,
it will kill you. Gal. 4. 17, 18.


And if Parents that are bound to feed their Children, do famisn them, do you
think they do not murder them by omission? So may they, and so may Ministers
murder the Souls that they are by Nature or Office entrusted to instruct and
diligently govern.

Q. 18. Are there any other ways of Murder?

A. So many that it is hard to number them. As by rash Anger, Hatred, Malice,
by Drunkenness disposing to it: By Magistrates not punishing murderers; By not
defending the Lives of others when we ought: and abundance more which you may
read in Bishop Downames Tables on the Commandments.

Q. 19. Must I defend my Parents or Children against the Magistrate or any one
that would kill them by his Commission.?

A. Not against Justice no doubt, what you must do against Subjects who pretend
an illegal Commission to rob or kill your self, Parents or Children, or destroy
Cities, and Countries, is partly touched on under the fifth Commandment, and
partly matter unmeet for a Catechism, or private unlearned men's unnecessary
discourse.

Q. 20. Are there more ways of self murder?

A. Among others excess of Meat and Idleness destroy men's health and murder
millions.

CHAP. XL. Of the Seventh Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the Words of the Seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Commit Adultery.

Q. 2. What is the sin here forbidden?

A. All unlawful carnal Copulation, and every evil inclination, or action or
omssion which tends thereunto, or partaketh of any degree of unchastity or
Pollution.

Q. 3. Is all lust or inclination to Generation a Sin?

A. No: For 1. Some is natural to man, and that not as corrupt; But as God
said, Increase and Multiply before the Fall, so no doubt he inclined Nature
thereto. Heb. 13. 4. Genesis 1. 22, 28. and 9. 7. and 22. 17. and 26. 4, 24.
2. And the regular propagation of Mankind, is one of the noblest natural works
that man is instrumental in: A Man being a more excellent thing than a house or
any Work of art. 3. And God has put some such inclination into Nature, in
great Wisdom and Mercy to the world: For if Nature had not some considerable
appetite to Generation and also strong desire of Posterity, Men would hardly be
drawn to be at so much care, cost and labor to propagate Mankind, but
specially Women would not so commonly submit to all their sickness, pain,
danger and after-trouble which now they undergo. But if a few self-denying
persons did propagate Mankind only as an act of obedience to God, the multitude
of the ungodly would not do it.

Q. 4. If it be so, why is any carnal acts of Generation forbidden? specially
when it is an act of Love, and does no body any harm?

A. God has in great Wisdom and Mercy to man made his Laws for restraining men
from inordinate Lust and Copulation.

1. The noblest things are basest when Corrupted. Devils are worse than men
because they were higher and better before. A wicked man is incomparably worse
and more miserable than a Beast or a Toad, because he is a nobler nature
depraved. And so humane Generation is worse than that of Swine or Dogs when it
is vicious.

2. Promiscuous unregulated Generation tends to the utter ruin and vitiating of
Mankind, by the overthrow of the just Education of Children, on which the
welfare of Mankind does eminently depend. Alas, all care and order is little
enough and too little to keep corrupted Nature from utter Beastiality and
malignity; much more to make Youth wise and virtuous, without which it had been
better never to have been born: When Fathers know their own Children, and when
Mothers have the love and encouragement and Houshold-advantage of order which
is necessary, some good may be done. But lawless exercise of Lust will
frustrate all. 1. Women themselves will be Slaves, or their advantage mutable
and uncertain: For such Lust will serve its turn of them but for Novelty, and
will be still for change; And when a younger or a fairer comes, the Mother is
cast off and hated: Act. 15. 20, 29. Romans 1. 29, 30. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 18. and 7.
2. and 10. 8. Gal. 5. 19. Ephesians. 5. 3. 4. Col. 3. 5. 1 These. 4. 3. Rev. 2. 14,
20. Mat. 15. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 11. Heb. 12. 16.
And then the next will hate her Children, or at least not love them as
necessary* Education does require. And when the Father has forsaken the
Mother, it is like he will forsake the Children with her. And when Women's lusts
are lawless as well as Men's, men being uncertain what Children are their own,
will be regardless both of their Souls and Bodies: So that Confusion would
destroy Religion and Civility, and make the World worse than most of the
American Savages are, who are taught by nature to set bounds to lust.

And besides all this, the very Lust it self thus increased by lawless liberty
would so corrupt men's Minds, and Fantasies and Affections into a sordid beastly
Sensuality, that it would utterly indispose them to all spiritual and heavenly
yea and manly employments of Heart and Life; men will grow sottish and stupid,
unfit to consider of Heavenly things, and incapable of Holy pleasures.

Q. 5. But if these evil consequents be all, then a man that can moderately use
Fornication so as shall avoid these evils, sins not?

A. Sin is the breach of Gods Law: These mischiefs that would follow lawless
lust, show you that God made this Law for the welfare of Mankind: But Gods own
Wisdom and Will is the Original reason of his Law, and must satisfy all the
World. But were there none but this forementioned, to avoid the Worlds
confusion and ruin, it was needful that God set a Law to Lust: And when this
is done for the Common good, it is not lest to man to break Gods Law whenever
he thinks he can avoid the consequents and secure the end of the Law. For if
men be left to such liberty as to judge when they may keep Gods Law and when
they may break it, lust will always find a reason to excuse it, and the Law
will be in vain. The World needed a regulating Law: and Gods Law must not be
broken.

Q. 6. Which are the most heinous sorts of filthyness?

A. Some of them are scarce to be named among Christians: 1. Sodomy: 2.
Copulation with Bruits. 3. Incest; sinning thus with near kindred: 4. Rapes or
forcing Women. But the commonest sorts are Adultery, Fornication,
self-Pollution and the filthiness of the thoughts and affections, and the words
and actions which partake of the Pollution. Genesis 18. 1 Cor. 5. Lev. 18.


Q. 7. Why is Adultery so great a sin?

A. Besides the foresaid evils that are Common to it and Fornication, it is a
perfidious violation of the Marriage Covenant, and destroys the conjugal Love
of Husband and Wife, and confounds Progeny, and as is aforesaid corrupts
Family order and humane Education. Mat. 5. 32. and 19. 6. Mal. 2. 13.


Q. 8. Why may not a man have many Wives now as the Jews had?

A. As Christ says of Putting away, From the beginning it was not so, but it
was permitted for the hardness of their Hearts; that their Seed might be
multiplied, in which they placed their chief prosperity. And (that we may not
think worse of them than they were) as God has taught the very Bruits to use
Copulation no ofter than is necessary to Generation, so it is probable by many
passages of Scripture, that it was so ordinarily then with men; and
consequently that they that had many Wives used them not so often as now too
many do one, and did not multiply Wives so much for Lust as for Progeny. Genesis
29. 30, 34. and 30. 15. 18. 20. D^^. 25. 6, 7.


Q. 9. But is no ofter use of Husband and Wife lawful than for Generation?

A. Yes, in Case of necessitating Lust: But such a measure of Lust is to be
accounted inordinate, either as sin or a disease; and not to be causlesly
indulged; though this remedy be allowed it. 1 Cor. 7. 9.


Q. 10. But why may not many Wives be permitted now as well as then?

A. 1. No man can either dispense with Gods Laws, or forgive sin against them,
but God himself. If he forbear men in a sin, that does not justify it. 2. If a
few men and many Women were cast upon a Wilderness, or sent to plant it by
Procreation, the case were liker the Israelites, where the Men were ofter
killed by Wars and Gods Judgments than the Women: But with us there is no
pretense for the like Polygamy; but it would confound and disquiet Families.

If one should make a difficult case of it, whether a Prince that has a Barren
Wife may not take another, for the safety of a Kingdom, when it is in notorious
danger of falling into the hands of a destroyer (as Adams own Sons and
Daughters lawfully married each other because there were no others in the
World,) this would be no excuse, where no such public notorious necessity can
be pleaded.

Q. 11. Why must marriage be a public act?

A. Because else Adultery and unlawful Separations cannot be known nor
punished, but Confusion will come in.

Q. 12. But is it not Adultery that is committed against secret Marriage, which
was never published or legally Solemnized?

A. Yes: Secret consent makes a Marriage before God, though not before the
World: and the violation of it is Adultery before God.

Q. 13. May not a man put away his Wife, or depart from her, if she seek his
death, or if she prove utterly intolerable?

A. While he is Governor he has diverse other Remedies first to be tried: A
Bedlam must be used as a Bedlam: And no doubt but if he have just cause to fear
poisoning or other sort of Murder, he may secure his life against a Wife as
well as against an Enemy: Christ excepted not that case, because Nature
supposes such Exceptions.

Q. 14. But if utter unsuitableness make their Cohabitation an insuperable
temptation or intolerable misery, may they not part by consent for their own
good; seeing it is their mutual good which is the end of Marriage?

A. 1. The public good is a higher end of all men's worldly Interests and
Actions than their own: And when the Example would encourage unlawful
Separators, they must not seek their own ease to the public detriment. Mat. 5.
32. and 19. 6.
2. And if it be their own sinful distempers which makes them unsuitable, God
binds them to amend, and not to part: And if they neglect not his Grace, he
will help them to do what he commands: And it is in his way and not their own,
by the Cure of their sin, and not by indulging it that they must be healed: But
as the Apostle says in another Case, if the faulty Person depart, and the
other cannot help it, a Brother or Sister is not left in Bondage, but may stay
till the allay of the Distemper incline them to return. Mat. 5. 32. and 19. 6.


Q. 15. What is inward heart Fornication or Uncleanness?

A. 1. Inordinate filthy thoughts are some degree; 2. Inordinate desires are a
higher degree: 3. Inordinate contrivance and consent are yet a higher. And when
such thoughts and desires become the ordinary Inhabitants of the Soul, and
pollute it when they lie down and when they rise, and shut out holy and sober
thoughts, and become a filthy habit in the Mind, then the degree is so great,
as that an unclean Devil has got great advantage, if not a kind of possession
of the Imagination and the Soul. Mat. 5. 28, 29. Ephesians. 5. 4, 5. Iam. 1. 21. 2
Pet. 2. 18. 1 Ioh. 2. 16. Job 31. 1.


Q. 16. Which way are the other senses guilty of this sin?

A. 1. When an ungoverned Eye is suffered to fetch in lustful thoughts and
desires into the mind. 2. Much more when to such immodest or unchas^e Looks,
there is added immodest Actions and dalliance, unfit to be named. 3. And when
fleshly Appetite and Ease do bring in fuel to unchaste incli^ations. 4. And
when the Ear is set open to ribald and defiling words.

Q. 17. How is the Tongue guilty of Uncleanness?

A. By the aforesaid filthy or wanton talk, reading alluring Books, using
alluring words to others, ^ut worst of all by defending, extenuating or
excu^^ng any filthy Lusts.

Q. 18. What are the chief Causes of this sin?

A. It is supposed that God put into Nature an ^rdinate Governable Appetite to
Generation in Man^ind: But that which rendereth it inordinate and un^^ly and
destructive, is, 1. Overmuch pampering ^^e flesh by pleasing Meats and Drinks.
2. Idleness: ^ot keeping under the Body by due labor; nor ^eeping the Mind in
honest employment, about our ^allings, and the great matters of our Duty to God
^^d of our Salvation, which leave no room for Filth ^^d Vanity. 3. Want of a
sanctified Heart and ten^er Conscience to resist the first degrees of the sin.
^ Specially wilful running into temptation. Deu. 6. 21. Ezekiel. 16. 49.


Q. 19. By what degrees do Persons come to Forni^ion?

A. 1. By the foresaid cherishing the Causes, Ap^ite and Idleness.

2. By this means the lustful Inclinations of the ^^esh grow as strong and
troublesome in some as a ^lent Itch, or as a Thirst in a Fever. Ephesians. 2. 3. ^d.
12. 7, 8. 2 Pet. 2. 14. 16. 18. 1 Ioh. 2. 16. ^l. 5. 19, 20.


3. Then an ungoverned Eye must gaze upon some tempting piece of Flesh.

4. And if they get opportunity for frequent privacy and familiarity, and use
it in immodest sights and actions, they are half overcome.

5. For then the Devil as an unclean Spirit gets possession of the Imagination,
and there is a strong inclination in them to think of almost nothing else, but
fleshly filth, and the pleasure that their Sense ha^ in such immodest
bruitishness. When God should have their Hearts Morning and Night, and perhap^
at Church and in holy Actions, this unclean Spirit rules their thoughts.

6. Then Conscience growing senseless, they fea^ nor to seed these pernicious
flames with ribba^ talk, and Romances, and Amorous foolish Plays and
conversing with such as are of their ow^ mind.

7. After this where their Fancy is infected, the^ study and contrive
themselves into further temptation, to get that nearness, opportunity and
Secrec^ which may encourage them.

8. And from thence Satan hurryeth them (usuall^ against Conscience) into
actual Fornication.

9. And when they are once in, the Devil and ^ Flesh say, Twice may be pardoned
as well ^ once.

10. And some at last with seared Conscience grow to excuse it as a small sin:
And sometim^ are forsaken to fall into utter Insidelity or Atheis^ that no fear
of Judgment may molest them. ^ others sin on in horror and despair: Of whom the
two there is more hope, as having less qui^ness in their sins to hinder their
repentance.

Q. 20. What are the best Remedies against all Unchastity and uncleanness of
Mind and Body?

A. 1. The principal is the great work of renewing grace which takes up the
Heart of man to God, and makes him perceive that his Everlasting concerns are
those that must take up his Mind and Life: And this work still mortifieth the
flesh with the affections and lusts thereof.

2. Another is to make it seriously a great part of ^^r Religion, to subdue and
destroy all fleshly sin^ul lusts: and not to think a bare Conviction or Wish
will do it: But that it requires more Labor, than ^o kill Weeds in your
ground, or to tame unruly Colts or Cattle. Romans 8. 1, 5, 7, 12, 13. 2 Pet. 2.
10. Gal. ^. 13, 17, 24.


3. Another means is, to resolve upon a constant ^iligence in a lawful Calling.
Poor laboring men ^re seldom so vicious in Lust, as idle Gentlemen ^e. Jude
23. 1 Cor. 9. 17, Romans ^. 13, 14. Prove. 5. 8. Genesis 34.


4. Temperance, and Fasting when there is need, and avoiding fullness, and
flesh-pleasing meats and ^rinks: Gluttons and Drunkards are fitted to be ^oars
and Stallions.

5. To keep a Conscionable Government of the ^ye, and Thoughts, and call them
off as soon as Satan ^empteth them.

6. Above all to be sure to keep far enough from ^empting persons. Touch them
not: Be not pri^te with them: There is no safety when fire and ^powder are long
near: Nor in an infectious ^ouse. Distance is the greatest means of safety.

7. Another means is to foresee the End, and think what will follow: specially
think of Death and Judgment: Consider what the alluring flesh will be when the
Smallpox shall cover it with Scabs, or when i^ shall have lain a few weeks
stinking in a grave: Thi^ must be: But O the thoughts of the Judgment o^ God,
and the torment of a guilty Conscience should be more mortifying helps. To go
to the house o^ Mourning and see the end of all men, and see wha^ the dust and
bones of men are when they are ca^^ up out of the grave, and to think where the
So^ are and must be for ever, methinks should cure the folly of Lust.

Q. 21. Is it unlawful for Men and Women, especially the unmarryed, to set out
themselves in such Ornaments of Apparel, as may make them seem most comel^ and
desirable?

A. 1. The common Rule is to be clothed wit^ decent but modest Apparel, such
as shows the Body without deceit to be what it is, which is neithe^ loathsome,
nor alluring. 2. And persons must b^ invited to conjugal desires, by Truth and
not by D^ceit, and by the matters of real worth, such as wi^dom, godliness,
patience and meekness, and not b^ fleshly snares: For Marriages so contracted
are lik^ to turn to continued misery to both, when the Body is known without
the Ornaments, and decei^ and the diseases of the Soul become vexatious.

3. But there is much difference to be made ^ the Time, and Ends. Ier. 2. 32. 1
Pet. 3. 3, 4. Genesis 38. 15. Pro^* 7. 10.
A young Woman the has a Suitor and intends Marriage, may go furth^ i^
adorning her self to please him that chooses her, and a Wife to please her
Husbands Eye, than they ^ay do to Strangers, where there is no such pur^ose or
Relation. To use a Procatious garb to be ^hought amiable to others, where it
may become a ^^are but can do no good, is the act of one that ^ath the folly of
Pride, and some of the dispositi^n of a Harlot; even a pleasure and desire to
have ^ose think them amiable, desirable persons, in whom ^ may kindle
concupiscence liker than any good.

Q. 22. But may not a crooked or deformed person ^de their deformity by apparel
or other means?

A. Yes, so far as it only tends to avoid men's dis^in in a Common Conversation;
But not so as to ^eceive men in Marriage-desires, or purposes or pra^^ice.

Q. 23. What if ones Condition be such that Mar^ge is like to impoverish them
in the World, and cast ^ into great streights and temptations, and yet they ^ a
bodily necessity of it?

A. God casts none into a necessity of sinning. ^ication must not be
committed to avoid pover^: If such can by lawful means overcome their lust, ^er
must do it: If not, they must marry though they ^er poverty.

Q. 24. What if Parents forbid their Children ne^ry marriage?

A. Such Children must use all lawful means to ^ke Marriage unnecessary to
them. But if that can^ be done, they must marry whether their Parents ^ or not.
For man has no Power to forbid what ^d Commands.

Q. 25. Is that Marriage void which is without ^ consent of Parents, and must
such be separate as ^lterers?

A. Some Marriage as aforesaid is Lawful without their consent: some is
sinful, but yet not Null nor to be dissolved, which is the most usual Case.
Because all at age do choose for themselves, even in the matters of Salvation:
And though they ough^ to be ruled by Parents, yet when they are not, their own
act binds them. But if the incapacity of the persons make it null, that is
another Case.

Q. 26. How shall men be sure what degrees ar^ prohibited, and what is Incest,
when Moses Law i^ abrogated, and the Law of Nature is dark and doubtful in it,
and Christ says little of it?

A. Those passages in Moses Law which are b^ Gods Explication of a dark Law of
Nature, do st^ tell us how God once expounded it, and conseque^ly how far it
does extend, though Moses Law ^ such be abrogated.

2. The Laws about such restraint of Marriag^ are Laws of Order: And therefore
bind when ^ der is necessary for the thing ordered; but not wh^ it destroys
the good of the thing ordered, whi^ is its End. Therefore Incest is unlawful
out of ^ cases of Necessity; but to Adams Sons and Daug^ters it was a Duty: And
all the Children of No^ three Sons must needs marry either their own B^ there is
and Sisters, or the Children of their Fath^ Brethren, which moved Lo^s
Daughters to do w^ they did.

3. In these matters of Order some Laws of ^ Land must be obeyed, though they
restrain ^ more than the Laws of God.

Q. 27. Is Marriage in every forbidden degree ^ be dissolved?

A. Not if it be a degree only forbidden by M^ Laws: Or if it were in such
foresaid cases of absolute necessity: But that which God does absolutely
forbid, must not be continued but dissolved; as the Case of Herod, and him 1
Cor. 5. tells us.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Eighth Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the Words of the Eighth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Steal.

Q. 2. What is the Stealing here forbidden?

A. All injurious getting or keeping that which is ^others.

Q. 3. When is it injurious?

A. When it is done without right: And that is ^hen it is done without the
Owners Consent, or by ^ fraudulent or forcible getting his consent, and without
just Authority from a superior power, who may ^arrant it.

Q. 4. What Power may allow one to take that which ^ another?

A. 1. God who is the only Absolute Owner of ^, did allow the Israelites to
take the Egyptians and Canaanites goods, and so may do by whom he ^ill. 2. And
a Magistrate may take away the goods ^f a Delinquent who forfeiteth them: And
may take ^m an unwilling Subject such Tribute as is his due, ^ as much of his
(...) as the Law allows him to take for the necessary defense of the
Commonwealth; and may force him to pay his debts: And a Father may take from
his Child who is but a conditional Subproprietor, what he sees meet.

Q. 5. But what if it be so small a matter as will be no loss to him? Is it
sinful Theft to take it?

A. Yes; if there be none of his Consent, nor any Law to warrant you, it is
Theft how small soever the thing be. But if the common sense of Mankind suppose
that men would consent if they knew it; or if the Law of God, or the just Law
of Man enable you to take it, it is no Theft. And so God allowed the Israelites
to pluck the Ears of Corn, or eat Fruit as they passed through a Vineyard in
hunger, so be it that they carried none away. And a man may gather a Leaf or an
Herb for Medicine in another Man's Ground, because Humanity supposes that the
Owner will not be against it. Deu. 23. 25. Mat. 12. 1. Luke 6. 1.


Q. 6. But what if he can spare it, and I am in great necessity, and it be his
duty to relieve me, and he refuses?

A. You are not allowed to be your own Carver* The common good must be
preferred before you^ own. And if every one shall be judge when their Necessity
allows them to take from another, the Property and Right of all men will be
vain, and the common Order and Peace be overthrown. And while you may either
beg, or seek to the Parish, or Magistrate for Relief, there is no place for a
just Plea o^ your Necessity.

Q. 7. But should a man rather die by Famine than take from another that is
bound to give, and will not?

A. If his taking will by encouraging Thieves do the Commonwealth more hurt
than his Life will do good, he is bound rather to die than Steal. But I dare
not say that it is so where all these following Conditions concur: 1. If it
be so small a thing as is merely to save Life (as God allowed the foresaid
taking of Fruit and Corn.) 2. If you have first tried all other Means, as
Begging or seeking to the Magistrate. 3. If by the Secrecy, or by the Effect,
it be no hurt to the Commonwealth but good: As for instance, If to save life
one take an Apple from a Tree of him that is unwilling; or eat Pease or Corn in
the Field: If Children have Parents that would famish them: If a company in a
Ship should lose all their Provision save one man's, and he have enough for them
all, and would give them none; I think the Law of Nature allows them to take
as much as will save their Lives, against his will. If David the Lords Anointed
and his six hundred men want Bread, they think they may take it from a churlish
Nabal. Even K. Ahab might not take Naboths Vineyard.
If an Army, which is necessary to save the Kingdom from a foreign Enemy,
should want Money and Food, and none would give it them, it seems unnatural
to say that they should all famish and lose the Kingdom, rather than take Free
Quarter, or things absolutely necessary from the unwilling. The Commonwealths
right in every Subjects Estate is greater than his own, as the Common good is
better than his. But these rare Cases are no excuse for the unjust taking of
the least that is another without his consent.

Q. 8. But may not a Child or Servant take that Meat or Drink which is but
meet, if the Parents and Masters be unwilling?

A. No, unless as aforesaid merely to save Life. If Children have hard Parents
they must patiently bear it: If Servants have hard Masters, they may leave
them, or seek Remedy of the Magistrate for that which they are unable to bear.
But the World must not be taught to invade other men's Property, and be Judges
of it themselves.

Q. 9. But what if he owe me a debt and will not pay me, or keep unjust
possession of my goods, may I not take my own by stealth or force, if I be able?

A. Not without the Magistrate, who is the Preserver of common Order and Peace,
when your taking it would break that Order; and such liberty would encourage
Robbery. If you take it, you sin not against his Right, but you sin against the
greater Right and Peace of the Commonwealth.

Q. 10. But what if I owe him as much as he owes me, may I not stop it, and
refuse to pay him?

A. Yes, if the Law and common good allow it; but not else: For you must rather
lose your Right than hurt the Commonwealth by breaking the Law which keeps its
Peace.

Q. 11. What if I win it by Gaming or a Wager; when he consented to run the
hazard?

A. Such Gaming as is used in a covetous desire of getting from another,
without giving him any thing valuable for it, is sinful in the winner and the
loser; And another covetous sinful consent to stand to the hazard, makes it
not lawful for you to take it. You forfeit it on both sides, and the Magistrate
may do well to take it from you both. But if a moderate wager be laid, only to
be a penalty to the loser for being Confident in some untruth, it is just to
take his wager as a penalty, and give it to the Poor. But the just Law of
Exchanging rights by contract is, to take nothing that is another, without
giving him for it that which is worth it.

Q. 12. Is it lawful to try Masteries for a prize or wager: As running of Men,
or Horses, Cock-fights, Fencing, Wrestling, contending in Arts, etc?

A. It is not lawful to do it: 1. Out of Coveteousness, desiring to get another
man's money, though to his loss and grief: 2. Nor by Cruelty, as hazarding men's
lives by overstriving, in running, wrestling, fencing, etc. But if it be used
as a manly Recreation, and no more laid on the wager than is meet to be spent
on a Recreation, and may be justly spared without Coveteousness, or hurting
another, I know not but it may be lawfully done.

Q. 13. What are the rules to avoid sinful injury in buying and selling?

A. 1. That you give the true worth, that is, the Market-price for what you
buy, and desire not to have it cheaper, unless it be of a rich man that abateth
you the price in kindness or Charity, or one that having bought it Cheaper can
afford to sell accordingly. Lev. 25. 14. Prove. 20. 14.
And that you neither ask nor desire more than the said true worth for what you
sell, unless it be somewhat that you would not otherwise part with, which is
worth more to some one man than to others, or one that in liberality will give
you more.

2. That you do as you would be done by, if you were in the same circumstances
with the other; supposing your own desires just.

3. That you work not on the ignorance or necessities of another, to get more
or take less than the worth.

4. And therefore that you deceive him not by hiding the fault of what you
sell, nor by any false words or wiles.

5. That if a man be overseen, you hold him not to his bargain to his loss, if
you can release it without a greater loss. Yet that you stand to your own word
to him if he will not discharge you. More I omit. Amos 8. 6.


Q. 14. Is it lawful to take Usury, or gain for Money lent?

A. The great difference of men's judgments about Usury, should make all the
more Cautelous to venture on none that is truly doubtful. I shall give my
Judgment in some Conclusions.

1. It is evident that Usury of other things as well as of Money was forbidden
the Jews, Deuteronomy. 23. 19, 20. Lev. 25. 36, 37. Exodus 22. 25. And by Usury is
meant any thing more than was lent taken for the use of it.

2. It is manifest the word [ Nesheck] fignifying biting, Usury, that it is
unmerciful hurting another that is here meant.

3. It is manifest that it was to the Poor that this manner of lending was not
to be used: And that only to a Brother or Israclite, who also might not be
bought as a forced Servant; But to a Stranger it was lawful.

4. The Israelites then used no Merchandise, or Buying and Selling for gain.
They lived on Flocks, Herds and Vineyards and Figtrees. So that it is only
taking usury of any thing that was lent to the needy, when Charity bound them
to relieve them by lending, that is here meant.

5. To exact the Principal or thing lent was as truly forbidden, when the Poor
could not pay it: And so it was to deny to give him freely in his need.

6. All this plainly shows that this supposes a case in which one is bound
to use Mercy to another in want, and that it is mere unmercifulness that is
here forbidden.

7. The Law described the sin, and the Prophets when they speak against Usury
do but name it; making no new Law, but supposing it described in the Law before.

8. The Law of Moses as such bound not the rest of the World, nor binds
Christians now, 2 Cor. 3.

9. Therefore there is no Usury forbidden but what is against the Law of
Nature, or the Supernatural Revelation of Christ

10. The Law of Nature and of Christ forbid all Unjustice and Uncharitableness,
and therefore all Usury which is against Justice or Charity. Every man must in
Trading, lending and giving keep the two Grand precepts; [ Do as you would
(justly) be done by] and [ Love your Neighbors as your selves.]

11. To take more for the Use than the use of the Money, Horse, Goods or any
thing was really worth to the User, is injustice. And to take either Use or
Principal when it will do more hurt to him that pays it, than it is like to
do good to our selves or any other to whom we are more obliged, is contrary to
Charity: And so it is, Not to Give where we are obliged to give.

12. Merchandise or Trading by buying and selling for gain is real Usury. They
that lay out Money on goods, and sell them for more than they gave for them, do
take use or increase for their Money of the buyer: which was forbidden the
Israeliets to Poor Brethren. And it is all one to make a Poor man pay one
Shilling in the Pound for the use of the Money to buy Cloth with, as to make
him pay one Shilling more than was paid for the cloth. And if a Draper be bound
to lend a Poor man money to buy Cloth without use, he is as much bound to sell
him Cloth without gain.

13. Merchandise or Trading for gain is not unlawful, being used without
injustice and uncharitableness.

14. Every one that has Money is not bound to lend it at all: And not to lend
it at all, is as much against the good of some borrowers, as to lend it and
take but what the use of it was worth to them.

15. No more must be taken for Use, than the User had real Profit by it; unless
it be when the Rich are willing to pay more, or run the hazard, or what a man
loses by one bargain he gets by another. Deu. 23. 20.


16. Some Usury is an Act of great Charity: viz. A Landlord offers to sell
his Tenant his Land for much less than the worth: The Tenant has not Money to
buy it: A Rich Neighbor told him [ The Land is also offered to me; but if you
will, I will lend you Money on use to buy it, and pay me when you can.] It was
Wood* Land: The Tenant borrows the Money; and in two years sells the Wood which
paid it all, and had the Land for almost nothing. Was not this charitable
Usury. Mat. 25. 27. Luke 19. 23.


I knew a worthy Person that trading in Iron works, did partly for himself and
partly in Charity, take to Use the Moneys of many honest mean people, that knew
not else how to live or to use it; and from a small Estate he grew to purchase
at least Seven thousand pound per Annum to himself and his Sons; was there any
uncharitableness in this Usury? Prove. 22. 16.


17. It is great uncharitableness in some, not to give use for Money, and
Cruelty to set it out without use: As when poor Orphans are left with nothing
but a little Money to maintain them, and abundance of Poor Widows that have a
little Money, and no trade to use it in, and must beg if they presently spend
the stock; If they lend it the Rich or those that gain by it in trading, the
gainers are unmerciful if they pay not use for it, as well as unjust.

18. They that say, we must not lend to make men rich, but only to the needy,
do put down all common Trading: And forbid most young men to marry: For that
which will maintain a single man plentifully, will not maintain a Wife and
Children, and provide them necessary Portions: And if he must not endeavor to
grow richer than he is, how shall he maintain them, who had but enough for
himself before? And how shall he be able to relieve the Poor, or do any such
good works, if he may not endeavor to grow richer?

Q. 15. If a Merchant find that it is usual to deceive the Custom-house, or poor
men think Chimney-Money or other Legal Taxes to be an Oppression, may they not
by Concealment save what they can?

A. No: The Law has given it the King, if you like not to be his Subjects on
the Terms of the Law, remove into another Land; If you cannot, you must
patiently suffer here: It is no more lawful to rob the King than to rob another
man.

Q. 16. Is it necessary to restore all that one has wrongfully got?

A. Yes, if he be able. Ex^. 22. 5, 6, 12. Lev. 6. 4. Luke 19. 8.


Q. 17. What if he be not able?

A. If he can get it by his Friends, he must; if not, he must humble himself to
him that he wronged, and confess the debt, and bind himself to pay him if ever
he be able.

Q. 18. But what if it be a malicious man, that will disgrace or ruin him if
he know it: Is he bound to Confess it?

A. Humanity it self will tell a man that Repentance is the greatest Honor,
next to Innocence; and that a Repenting person that w^ll do it at so dear a
rate, is unlike to wrong him any more: And therefore we may suppose that there
are few so inhumane as to undo such a penitent. But if he that knows him have
good cause to judge that the injured person will make use of his Confession, ^.
To the wrong of the King or the Commonwealth, or the Honor of Christianity, or
to a Greater hurt of the Confessor than the Confession is like to prove a good
to any, he may then forbear such a Confession to the person injured, and send
him secretly his Money by an unknown hand: or if he cannot pay him, Confess it
to God and his spiritual Guide.

Q. 19. What if a man can restore it, but not without the wrong or ruin of his
Wife and Children, who knew not of his sin?

A. His Wife took him with his debts, as he did her; and this is a real debt:
She can have no right by him in that which he has no right himself to: And ^e
cannot give his Children that which is none of ^is own.

Q. 20. What if I wronged a Master but in some small matter in Marketting,
which is long since gone?

A. The debt remains: And if you have the Value you must offer satisfaction;
Though its like, that for ^mall things few will take it; But you must Con^ess
the fault and debt: And forgiveness is equal to ^estitution.

Q. 21. What if those that I wronged be dead?

A. You owe the value to those that they gave their Estate to: Or if they be
dead, to the next ^eirs: And if all be dead, to God in some use of Charity.

Q. 22. What if any Father got it ill, and left it ^s?

A. He can give you no Right to that which he ^^d none to, himself; sinful
keeping is Theft as well ^s sinful getting.

Q. 23. What if the thing be so usual as well as small, as that none expect
confession or restitution: As for Boys to rob Orchards?

A. Where you know it would not be well taken, Restitution is no duty: But if
you have opportunity it is safest to confess.

Q. 24. Is it Thievery to borrow and not pay?

A. Deceitful borrowers are of the worser sort of Thieves, against whom one
cannot so well save his Purse as against others: And they would destroy all
charitable lending by destroying mutual belief and trust. Many Tradesmen that
after break, do steal more and wrong more than many Highway Robbers that are
hanged. But it is not all Breakers that are so guilty. Romans 13. 8, 9.


Q. 25. What borrowing is it that is Theft?

A. 1. When you have no intent to pay. 2. When you know that you are not able
to pay, nor like to be able. 3. When there is a great hazard and danger of your
not paying, with which you do not acquaint the Lender, and so he consents not
to run the hazard. Psalm. 37. 21.


Q. 26. What if it would crack my Credit, and ruin my Trade if I should reveal
the hazard and weakness of my Estate?

A. You must not rob others for fear of ruin to your self. If you take his
Money without his Consent, you rob him. And no man that is Ignorant i^ said to
consent: If you hide that which would hind him from consenting if he knew it,
you have not really his consent, but rob him.

Q. 27. What is the duty required in this eighth Commandment?

A. To further the Prosperity or Estate of your Neighbor as you would do your
own, that is, with the same sincerity.

Q. 28. Must a man work at his Trade for his Neighbor as much as for himself:
Or as much use his Estate for others?

A. I said [ with the same sincerity] not in the same manner and degree. For
there are some duties of Beneficence proper to our selves as the Objects, and
some common to others. And as Nature causes the Eye to wink for it self, and
the Gust to taste for it self immediately, and yet also consequently for every
Members good, and principally for the whole Man, so every Man must get, possess
and use that he can immediately for himself. But as a Member of the Body which
has a due regard to ^e good of every Member, and is more for the ^hole than
for himself. 1 Cor. 12. 21. Ephesians. 4. 28.


Q. 29. Who be the greatest breakers of this Com^andement?

A. 1. They that care for no body but themselves, ^^d think they may do with
their own as they list; (...) if they were absolute Proprietors; whereas they
^e but the Stewards of God: And it is the pleasure (...) the Flesh which is the
use they think they may ^t all their Estates to.

2. Those that see their brother have need, and ^at up the bowels of their
compassion from him: Deu. 15. 11. Ephesians. 4. 28. Iam. 2. 16. 1 Ioh. 3. 17. Mat. ^.
Prove. 31. 20. Psalm. 72. 13. Ezekiel. 16. 49.
that is, Relieve him not, when it is not for want o^ ability, but of
compassion and will. Or that drop but some inconsiderable pittance to the Poor,
like the crumbs or bones to the Dogs; the leavings of the Flesh, while they
please their Appetites and Fancies with the rest, and live as he Luke 16. who
wa^ clothed in Purple and Silk, and fared sumptuously or deliciously daily,
while the Poor at the door had but the Scraps. That make so great a difference
between themselves and others, as to prefer their own Superfluities and
Pleasures, before the Necessity of others, even when multitudes live in
distressing Poverty.

3. Those that live Idly, because they are Prove. 31. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
ric^ or slothful, and think they are bound to labor for none but themselves:
whereas God binds all tha^ are able, to live in some profitable Labor for
others and to give to them that need. So also they that b^ Prodigality,
Drunkenness, Gaming, Luxury or other Excess, disable themselves to relieve the
Poor.

4. Those that out of a covetous worldly Mind, hea^ up Riches for themselves
and their Children, Nabal.
t^ leave a Name and great Estate behind them (th^^ their Children may as
hardly be saved as themselves;) As if all that they can gather were their
Childrens due, while others better than they are u^ terly neglected.

5. Those that give with grudging, or make to^ great a matter of their Gifts,
and set too high (...) Price upon them, and must have it even extorte from them.

6. Those that neglect to pay due wages to them that labor for them, and would
bring down the Price below its worth, so that poor Laborers cannot live upon
it: And that strive in all their Bargainings to have every thing as cheap as
they can get it, without respect to the true worth, or the Necessities of
others. 1 Timothy 5. 8. Iam. 5. 4, 5.


7. Those that help not to maintain their own Families and Kindred as far as
they are able.

Q. 30. Who are the greatest Robbers, or breakers of both parts of this
Command, Negative and Preceptive?

A. 1. Emperors, Kings and other Chief Rulers, who oppress the People, and
impoverish them, while they are bound by Office to be Gods Ministers for their
good. Exo. 3. 9, 10. Psalm. 12. 5, 6. Prove. 28. 16. Psalm. 73. 8. Eccle. 4. 1, 2.
1 Samuel 12. 3, 4.


2. Soldiers who by unjust Wars destroy the Countries, or in just war unjustly
rob the People: O the Woeful ruins that such have made? So that Famine has
followed the Poverty and desolations, to the death of Thousands.

3. Unrighteous Judges, who for Bribes or Partiality, or culpable ignorance, do
fine righteous men, or give away the Estates of the just, and do wrong men by
the pretense of Law, Right and Justice, and deprive the just of their remedy.

4. Perfidious Patrons, who Simoniacally Sell, or Sacrilegiously alienate, the
devoted maintenance of the Church.

5. Much more those Rulers and Prelates who ^actiously, maliciously or
otherwise culpably, silence and cast out Faithful Ministers, Sacrilegiously
alienating them from the Work of Christ, and the Churches service, to which
they were consecrated and devoted, and casting them out of their public
ministerial Maintenance. 2 Cor. 7. 2.


6. All Persecutors who unjustly fine men and deprive them of their Estates,
for not sinning against God by Omission or Commission: especially when they
ruin multitudes.

7. Cruel, oppressing Landlords who set their poor Tenants such hard Bargains
as they cannot live on. Isa. 5. 7. Ier. 6. 6.


8. Cruel Lawyers, and other Officers, who take such Fees as undo the Clients;
so that men that have not Money to answer their Covetous expectations, must
lose their right.

9. Unmerciful Physicians, who consider not the scarcity of Money with the
Poor; but by Chargeable Fees and Apothecaries bills, put men to die for want of
Money. Is^* 3. 12. and 19. 20. and 16. 4.


10. Unmerciful Usurers and Creditors, that will not forgive a debt to the
poor, who have it not to pay.

11. People that rob the Ministers of their Tithes.

12. Cheaters, who by Gaming, false Plays, and tricks of Craft, or false
Writings, Concealments, o^ by quirks in Law that are contrary to Equity, d^
beguile men of their right; Lev. 19. 13. 1 Cor* 6. 7^. 8. 1 These. 4. 6.
And especially the Poor, who cannot contend with them: Yea and some their own
Kindred.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Ninth Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the Words of the ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

Q. 2. What is it which is herein forbidden?

A. All Falsehood injurious to the innocence, right or reputation of another;
especially in witness-bearing, accusations or judgments contrary to public
Justice. The Act forbidden is Falsehood: The object against which it is done, is
our Neighbors good or right of any sort; whether his good Name, or Estate, or
Life, especially as it perverteth the hear^^s Judgment and Love, or public
Justice. Lev. 19. 11. Prove. 14. 5.


Q. 3. Is all Lying here forbidden, or only injurious Lying?

A. All Lying is injurious, and forbidden. Col. 3. 9. ^^v. 21. 17. and 22. 15.


Q. 4. What injury does a jeasting Lie do to any one? ^r a Lie which only
saves the speaker from some hurt, without hurting any other? Yea some Lies
seem to be ^^rofitable and necessary. As if a Parent or Physici^n tell a Lie to
a Child or Patient to get them to take a Medicine to save their lives, or a
Subject tell a lie to a Traitor or Enemy to save the Life of the King? Tell me
I pray you, why God forbids all such Lies?

A. 1. You must consider that God is the Author of Order: And Order is to ^^e
World it is useful disposition to it is Operations and Ends: Just as it is to a
Clock or Watch, or a Coach, or Ship or any such Engine; Disorder the parts, and
it is good for nothing: A Kingdom, Army, Church, or any Society, is essentiated
by Order, without which it is destroyed. And the World of Mankind being made up
of individual persons, the ordering of particular Men is the Chief thing to the
Order of the humane World: As we dye, when disorder of parts or humors makes
the Body incapable of the Souls Operations. So a man's Soul is vitiated and dead
to it is Chiefends, when it is Order is overthrown. All Godliness and Morality is
nothing but the right Order of the dispositions and acts of man, in our
subordination to the Governing Will of God (which is our Law:) It is not
another Substance that Grace makes in us, but another Order. And all sin is
nothing but the contrary Disorder: And that man^ Words be the true and just
Expression of his Mind is a great part of the Order of his Words, without which
it were better Man were speechless.

And 2. You must consider, that God has mad man a sociable Creature, and each
one a part of the World, which is One Kingdom of God the Universal King. And
that each part is more for the wh^^ than for it self, because the common
welfare of the whole, is better than of any part, as being a high^ End of
Government, and more illustriously shewi^ the Glory of God.

And 3. You must consider, that because God only knows the Heart, there can
be no Society and Conversation but by Words and other Signs: And that without
mutual Trust, there can be no Society of Love, Concord or mutual Help: But
utter distrust is a Virtual War: There can be no Prince and Subjects, no
Husband and Wife, no Pastor and Flocks, without some trust. And Trustiness is
Truthtelling: So far as a Man is taken for a Liar, he is not believed or
trusted. Prove. 6. 17. and 12. 19, 22. and 13. 5. and ^. 7. 1 Timothy 1. 10.


4. You must consider, that if God should leave it to man's discretion in what
cases to Lie, and in what not, and did not absolutely forbid it, Selfishness,
Interest and Folly would scarce leave any credibility or trustiness in Mankind.
For how can I know whether your Judgment now bid you not Lie, for some reason
that I know not.

5. So that you see, that Leave to Lie when we think it harmless, would be but
to pluck up a floodgate of all deceit, untrustiness and utter confusion, which
would shame and confound and ruin Societies and the World. And then it is easy
to know that it is better that any man's Commodity or Life miscarry (which yet
was scarce ever done merely for want of a Lie) than that the World should be
thus disordered and Confounded: As men sick of the Plague must be shut up
rather than go about to insect the City; and some Houses must be blown up
rather than the fire not be stopped. And as Soldiers burn Suburbs to save a
City, etc. so no man's private Romans 3. 7.
good must be pretended for the Corruption and Misery of the World. 1 King. 22.
22. Ioh. 8. 44. Tit. 1. 2. Heb* 6. 18.


6. And Remember that Lying is the Devils Character and Work, and so the work
and Character of his Servants. And Truth is the effect of Gods Perfection, and
his Veracity so necessary to Mankind, that without it we could have no full
assurance of the future blessedness which he has promised: If God could Lie,
our hopes were all shaken; for we should be still uncertain whether his Word be
true. And Gods Laws and his Image must signify his perfection. Romans 3. 4.


Q. 5. Wherein does the Truth of words consist?

A. In a threefold respect: 1. In a suitable significancy of the Matter: 2. In
an agreeable significancy of the Mind of the Speaker. 3. And both these as
suited to the Information of the hearer.

Q. 6. What is false-speaking?

A. 1. That which is so disagreeable to the Matter as to represent it falsely.
2. That which is so disagreeable to the Speakers Mind, as to represent it
falsely to another. 3. That which speaks the Matter and Mind aptly as to
themselves and other hearers, but so as the present hearer who we know takes
the Words in another sense, will by our design be deceived by them.

Q. 7. Is all false speaking Lying, or what is ^ Lie?

A. Lying properly signifies a culpable speaking ^^ falsehood: And it has
diverse degrees of culpability* When falsehood is spoken without the speakers
fault it is not morally to be called a Lie: Though improperly the Hebrews
called any thing a Lie which would deceive those that trust in it: and so all
men and Creatures though blameless are Liars to such as overtrust them. Prove.
12. 17. Psalm. 52. 4. and 120. 7. Psalm. 116. 11. Ephesians. 5. 6.


Q. 8. Which are the diverse degrees of Lying or Culpable false speaking?

A. 1. One is privative; When men falsely represent things by Diminutive
Expressions: Things may be falsely represented by defective as well as by
Excessive speeches: He that speaks of God, and Heaven and Holiness faintly as
Good, says a graminatical truth: But if he speak not of them as Best or
Excellent, it is Morally a false Expression through defect. He that says
Coldly, To Murder, to be Perjured, to Silence Christ's Ministers unjustly, is
not well, as Eli said of his Sons Wickedness; or only says, [I cannot justify
it,] or [ It Is hard to justify it] says a Grammatical Truth, but a Moral
falsehood by the extenuating words, as if he would persuade the hearer to think
it some small or doubtful matter, and so to be impenitent.

2. He that speaks falsely through rashness, heedlesness, neglect of just
Information, or any ignorance which is Culpable, is guilty of some degree of
Lying. But he that knowingly speaks falsely, is a Liar in a higher degree.

3. He that by Culpable forgetfulness speaks falsely, is to be blamed: But he
that Remembers and Studieth it, much more.

4. He that lies in a small matter which seems not to hurt but perhaps to
profit the Hearer, is to be blamed: But he that lies in great matters, and to
the great hurt of others, much more.

5. He that speaks either contrary to his Mind, or contrary to the Matter
culpably, lies. But he that speaks both contrary to his Mind and the Matter,
lies worse.

6. He that by Equivocation uses unapt and unsuitable expressions, to deceive
him that will misunderstand them, is to be blamed: But he that will stand
openly bold-faced in a Lie, much more.

7. It is sin to speak Untruths of our own, which we might avoid: But it is much
worse to father them on God or the Holy Scripture. 1 Cor. 15. 15. 1 Ioh. 5. 10.


8. It is sin by falsehood to deceive one, but much more to deceive multitudes,
even whole Assemblies or Countries.

9. It is sin in a private man to Lie to another about small things: But much
more heinous for a Ruler, or a Preacher, to deceive multitudes even in matters
of Salvation.

10. It is a sin rashly to drop a falsehood: But much greater to write Books or
dispute for it, and justify it.

11. It is a sin to Lie from a good intent: But much more out of envy, malice
or malignity.

12. It is a sin to lie in private Talk: But much more to lie to a Magistrate
or Judge who has power to Examine* us.

13. It is a sin to assert an Untruth as aforesaid: But much greater to swear
it, or offer it to God in our Profession or Vows.

Q. 9. Is all Deceiving of another a sin?

A. No: There is great difference, 1. Between deceiving one that I am bound to
inform, and one that I am not bound to inform: 2. And between deceiving one to
his benefit or harmlesly, and to his hurt and injury: 3. And between deceiving
him by just means, and by unjust forbidden means.

I. I am under no Obligation to inform a Robber or an usurping Persecutor as
such. But to others I may be obliged to open the Truth. II. I may deceive a
Patient or Child to profit him, when I may not do it to hurt him. III. I may
deceive such as I am not bound to inform, by my silence, or my looks, or
gestures, which I suppose he will misunderstand, when I may not deceive him by
a Lie.
Q. 10. Is it not all one to deceive one way or another?

A. No: 1. I am not bound to open my Mind to all men: What right has a Thief
to know my Goods or Heart? or a Persecutor to know where I hide my self?

2. But I have before largely showed you, that Lying is so great an evil
against common Trust and Society in the World, as is not to be used for
personal Commodity or Safety.

3. And other Signs, Looks and gestures being not appointed for the natural and
common Indications of the Mind, are more left to humane Liberty and Prudence,
to use for Lawful ends. As Christ, Luke 24. made by his motion, as if he would
have gone further: And even by words about Caesar's Tribute, and other Cases,
concealed his Mind, and often denied the Pharisees a resolution of Questions
which they put to him. Stratagems in a Lawful War are lawful, when by actual
shows and seemings an Enemy is deceived.

Q. 11. But the Scriptures mention many Instances of Equivocation and flat
Lying, in the Egyptian Midwives, in Rahab, in David and many others, without
blame, and some of them with great commendation and reward, Heb. 11?

A. 1. It is Gods Law that tells us what is Sin and Duty, when the History often
tells us but what was done, and not how far it was well or ill done.

2. It is not the Lie that is commended in the Midwives and Rahab, but their
Faith and Charity.

3. That which God pardons (as he did Polygamy and rash Divorce) to Godly men
that are upright in the main, and specially such as knew it not to be sin, is
not thereby justified; nor will it be so easily pardoned to us, who live in the
clearer Gospel light.

Q. 12. But when the Scripture says, that All men are Liars, and sad
Experience seems to confirm it, what credit do we owe to Men, and what
certainty is there of any History?

A. History (by Writing or Verbal Tradition) is of so great use to the World,
that Satan makes it a chief part of his work, as he is the Deceiver and Enemy
of Mankind, to corrupt it. And false History is a most heinous sin, and
dangerous S^are, by which the great Deceiver keeps up his Kingdom in the World.
Heathenism, Mahometanism, Popery, Heresy, and Malignity and Persecution, are
all maintained by false Tradition and History. Therefore we must not be too
hasty or confident in Believing Man: And yet denying just Belief will be our
sin and great loss.

Q. 13. How then shall we know what and whom to believe?

A. 1. We must believe no men that speak against God or his Word: For we are
sure that God cannot lie: And the Scripture is his infallibly Sealed Word.

2. We must believe none that speak against the Light of Nature and common
Notices of all Mankind: for that were to renounce Humanity: And the Law of
Nature is Gods first Law. But it is not the Sentiments of Nature as depraved
which is this Law.

3. We must believe no men against the common Senses of Mankind, exercised on
their duly qualified Objects. Faith contradicts not common Sense, though it
go above it. We are Men before we are Christians; and Sense and Reason are
presupposed to Faith: The Doctrine which says, There is no Bread nor Wine
after Consecration in the Sacrament, does give the lie to the Eyes, Taste and
Feeling, and intellectual Perception of all sound men, and therefore not to be
believed: For if Sense be not to be trusted, we know not that there is a
Church, or a Man, or a Bible or any thing in the World, and so nothing can be
believed. Whether all sound Senses may be deceived or not, God has given us no
surer way of certainty.

4. Nothing is to be believed against the certain Interest of all Mankind, and
tending to their destruction; That which would damn Souls, or deny their
Immortality and future Hope, or ruin the Christian World or Nations, is not to
be believed to be duty or lawful: For Truth is for Good, and Faith is for
Felicity; and no man is bound to such destructive things. 1 Ioh. 4. 1, 2.


5. Nothing is to be believed as absolutely certain, which depends on the mere
honesty of the Speakers: For all men are liable to mistake or lie.

6. The more Ignorant, malicious, unconscionable, factious, siding, any man is,
the less credible he is. And the wiser and nearer to the action any man is, and
the more conscionable, peaceable and impartial he is, the more credible he is.
An Enemy speaking well of a man, is so far more credible than a Friend:
Multitudes, as capable and honest, are more credible than one.

7. As that Certainty which is called Moral, as depending on men's Free Will,
is never absolute, but has many degrees, as the witness is more or less
credible; so there is a Certainty by men's Report, Tradition or History which is
Physical and wholly infallible: As that there is such a place as Rome, Paris,
etc. and that the Statutes of the Land were made by such Kings and Parliaments
to whom they are ascribed; and that there have been such Kings, etc. For proof
of which know, 1. That besides the free acts, the Will has some acts as
necessary as it is to the Fire to burn, viz. To Love our selves and Felicity,
and more such. 2. That when all men of contrary Interest, Friends and Foes,
agree in a matter that has sensible Evidence, it is the Effect of such a
Necessitating Cause. 3. And there is no Cause in Nature that can make them so
agree in a lie. Therefore it is a Natural Certainty. Look back ^o the sixth
Chapter.

Q. 13. Why is false Witness in Judgment so great a sin?

A. Because it contains in it all these odious Crimes conjunct: 1. A
deliberate lie: 2. The wrongful hurting of another, contrary to the two great
Principles of Converse, Justice and Love: ^. It depriveth the World of the
benefit of Government and Judicatures: 4. It turns them into the ^^ague and
ruin of the innocent: 5. It blasphe^eth or dishonors God, by whose
Authority Rulers judge, as if he set up Officers to destroy us by false
Witness, or knew it not, or would not re^enge Injustice. 6. It overthrows
humane Con^erse and Safety, when Witnesses may destroy whom they please, if
they can but craftily agree. Mat. 26. 62. and 27. 13. Mar. 14. 55, 56. Number. 35.
30. Act. 6. 13. Deu. 19. 16, 17, 18. Pro. 6. 19. and 12. 17. and 21. 28. and
25. 18. Ps. 35. 11.


Q. 14. Is there no way to prevent this danger to Mankind?

A. God can do it: If he give wise and righteous Rulers to the World, they may
do much toward ^t: But wicked Rulers use false Witness as the Devil does, for
to destroy the Just. As Iezebel did.

Q. 15. How should good Rulers avoid it?

A. 1. By causing Teachers to open the danger of ^t to the People. 2. Some old
Canons made inva^id the Witness of all notorious wicked men: How can he be
trusted in an Oath, that makes no Conscience of Drunkenness, Fornication,
Lying or other Sin?

Q. 16. How then are so few destroyed by false Witnesses?

A. It is the wonderful Providence of God, declaring himself the Governor of
the World: that when there are so many thousand wicked men, who all have a
mortal hatred to the Godly, and will daily Swear and Lie for nothing; and any
two of these might take away our Lives at pleasure, there are yet so few this
way cut off. But God has not left himself without witness in the World, and
has revenged false Witness on many, and made Conscience a terrible Accuser for
this Crime. Prove. 19. 5. 9.


Q. 17. What is the positive Duty of the ninth Commandment?

A. 1. To do Justice to all men in our places.

2. To defend the Innocent to the utmost of ou^ just Power. If a Lawyer will
not do it for the Love of Justice and Man, without a Fee when he cannon have
it, he breaks this Commandment.

3. To reprove Backbiters, and tell them of their Sin.

4. To give no Scandal, but to live so blamelesly that Slanderers may not be
believed.

5. On all just occasions especially to defend the Reputation of the Gospel,
Godliness and Good men the Cause* and Laws of God, and not silently for self
saving to let Satan and his Agents make them Odious by Lies, to the Seduction
of the People^ Souls. Prove. 25. 23. Psalm* 15. 3, 5.


CHAP. XLIII. Of the Tenth Commandment.
Qu. 1. WHat are the Words of the Tenth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors House: Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his ^x, nor his
Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

Q. 2. What is forbidden here, and what Command^d?

A. 1. In sum, the thing forbidden is SELFISHNESS, and the thing Commanded is
to LOVE OUR NEIGHBOR AS OUR SELVES.

Q. 3. Is not this employed in the five foregoing Commandments?

A. Yes: and so is our LOVE to GOD in all the Nine last. But because there are
many more particular Instances of Sin and Duty than can be distinctly named and
remembered, God thought it meet to make two General Fundamental Commandments
which should contain them all: which Christ calls the first and second
Commandment, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc. And
thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy Self. The first is the Summary and root of
all the duties of the other nine, and specially of the second, third and
fourth. The Other is the Summary of the second Table duties: And it is placed
last, as being instead of all unnamed instances. As the Captain leads the
Soldiers, and the Lieutenant brings up the rear. Mat. 19. 19. Luke 10. 27.
Romans 13. 9. Lev. 16. 24. Mar. 8. 34.


Q. 4. What mean you by the Sin of SELFISHNESS?

A. I mean that inordinate self-esteem, self-love and self-seeking, with the
want of a due proportionable Love to others, which engages men against the
good o^ others, and inclines them to draw from others to themselves: It is not
an ordinate Love of our selves but a diseased self-love. Ier. 45. 5. Mat. 16.
22* 23. Luke 14. 26, 29, 32, 33.


Q. 5. When is Self-Love Ordinate? and when i^ it Sinful?

A. That which is ordinate, 1. Valueth not a ma^^ Self blindly above his Worth:
2. It employeth ^ man in a due care of his own Holiness, Duty an^ Salvation. 3.
It regards our Selves but as little members of the common great body, and
therefore inclines us to Love others as our selves, without mu^^ partial
disproportion, according to the diverse degree^ of their amiableness, and to
Love public good, the Church and World, and much more God above o^ selves. 4.
It makes us studious to do good to others, and rejoice in it as our own,
rather than to draw from them to our selves. ( c)

II. Sinful selfishness, 1. Does esteem and love an^ seek self-interest above
it is proper worth: It is ove^ deeply affected with all our own concerns. 2. ^
has a low, disproportionable Love and regard (b) Phil. 2. 4, 21 1 Cor. 12. and
10. 24.
others good. 3. And when it grows to full ma^^gnity, it makes men envy the
prosperity of others, and covet that which is theirs, and desire and re^oyce in
their disgrace and hurt, when they Stand against men's Selfish Wills: and to
endeavor to draw from others to our selves: Selfishness is to the Soul like an
Inflammation or Impostume to the Body; which draws the Blood and Spirits to it
self, from their ^^ue and Common course, till they corrupt the in^^amed part.

Q. 6. What mean you by Loving others as ourselves?

A. Loving them as members of the same Body or Society (the World or the Church
as they are) ^mpartially with a Love proportionable to their worth, and such a
careful, practical, forgiving, Patient Love, as we Love our selves. Col. 3. 12,
13. 1 Cor. 13. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2.


Q. 7. But God has made us Individual persons, with so peculiar a Self-love,
that no man can possibly love another as himself?

A. 1. You must distinguish between sensitive Natural Love, and Rational Love.
2. And between Corrupt, and Sanctified Nature.

1. Natural Sensitive Love is stronger to ones Self, that is, (more sensible of
self-interest) than to all the World. I feel not another Pain or Pleasure, in
it self. I hunger and thirst for my self: A Mother has that Natural Sensitive
Love to her own Child (like that of Bruits) which she has not for any other.
Prove. 14. 10.


2. Rational Love valueth and loves, and prefers every thing according to
the degree of its amiableness, that is, it is Goodness.

3. Rational Love destroys not Sensitive; but it Moderateth and Rules it,
and Commands the Will and Practice to prefer and desire and seek and
delight in higher things, (as Reason rules Appetite, and the Rider the Horse;)
and to deny and forsake all carnal or private Interests, that stand against a
greater good.

4. Common Reason tells a man, that it is an unreasonable thing in him that
would not dye to save a Kingdom; Much more that when he is to love both himself
and the Kingdom inseparably, yet cannot Love a Kingdom, yea or more excellent
persons, above himself. But yet it is Sanctification that must Effectually
overcome inordinate self-Love, and clearly illuminate this Reason, and make a
man obey it. 1 Cor. 10. 33. Tit. 1. 8. Iam. 3. 15, 17. Col. 1. 24.


5. To conquer this Selfishness is the sum of all Mortification, and the
greatest Victory in this World: And therefore it is here perfectly done by
none: but it is done most where there is the greatest Love to God, and to the
Church and public good, and to our Neighbors.

Q. 8. What is the sinfulness and the hurt of Selfishness?

A. 1. It is a Fundamental Error and Blindness in the Judgment: We are so many
Poor Worms and little things; And if an Ant or Worm had Reason, should it think
it is Life or Ease or other interest more valuable than a Man's, or than all the
Countries?

2. It is a fundamental Pravity and disorder of Man's Will: It is made to Love
Good as Good, and therefore to Love most the greatest good.

3. Yea it blindly casts down and trampleth on all Good in the World which is
above self-interest. For this prevailing Selfishness takes a man's self for his
ultimate end, and all things else but as means to his own Interest: God and
Heaven and all Societies and all Virtue, seem no further Good to him than they
are for his own good and welfare. And Selfishness so overcomes Reason in some,
as to make them dispute for this fundamental Error as a Truth, That there is
nothing to be accounted Good by me, but that which is Good to me as my interest
or welfare: And so that which is Good to others, is not therefore Good to me.
Prove. 3. 5. and 20. 6. and 23. 4. and 25. 27. and 26. 5, 12, 16. and 27. 2. and
28. 11.


4. And thus it blasphemously deposes God in the Mind of the sinner; making
him no further Good to us, than as he is a means to our Good; and so he is set
quite below our selves: As if he had not made us for Himself, and to Love him
as God, for his own Goodness.

5. I told you before (of the First Commandment) how this makes every man his
own Idol, to be Loved above God.

6. Yea, that the Selfish would be the Idols of the World, and have all men
conformed to their Judgment, Wills and Words.

7. A Selfish man is an Enemy to the public Peace of all Societies, and of all
true Unity and Concord: For whereas Holy persons as such have all one Center,
Law and End, even God and his Will, the Selfish have as many Ends and Centers
and Laws as they are persons. So that while every one would have his own
Interest, Will and Lust to be the Common Rule and Center, it is by the
wonderful overruling Power of God, that any order is kept up in the World; and
because when they cannot be all Kings, they agree to make that use of Kings
which they think will serve their Interest best.

8. A Selfish man so far can be no true Friend: For he loves his Friend but as
a Dog does his Master, for his own Ends.

9. A Selfish Person is so far untrusty, and so false in Converse and all
Relations: For he chooses and changes and uses all, as he thinks his own
interest requires. If he be a Tradesman, believe him no further than his
interest binds him: If he be a Minister, he will be for that Doctrine and
Practice which is for his Carnal Interest: If he be a Ruler, woe to his
Inferiors. And therefore it is the highest point in policy, next Conscience
and Common Obedience to God, to contrive if possible so to twist the Interest
of Princes and People, that both may feel tha^ they are inseparable, and that
they must live and thrive or dye together. Phil. 2. 4, 21.


10. In a word, Inordinate Selfishness, is the gran^ pravity of Nature, and the
Disease and Confusion o^ all the World: whatever Villainies, Tyrannies,
Rebellions, Heresies, Persecutions, or Wickedness yo^ read of in all History,
or hear of now on Earth, ^ is but the effects of this adhering by inordinate
selflove to self-interest. And if Paul say of one branch of its effects [ The
Love of Money is the root of all Evil,] we may well say it of this radical
Comprehensive sin.

Q. 9. Alas! who is it that is not selfish? How Common is this sin! Are there
then any Saints on Earth? Or any hope of a remedy?

A. I. It is so Common and so strong, as that 1. All Christians should most
Fear it, and Watch and Pray and Strive against it; 2. And all Preachers should
more open the Evil of it than they do, and live themselves as against it and
above it.

1. How much do most overvalue their own dark Judgments, and weak reasonings,
in comparison of others! 1 King. 22. 8. 2 Chronicles. 18. 7.


2. How commonly do men measure the Wisdom or Folly, Goodness or Badness of
other men, as they are for or against their selfish Interest, Opinions, Side or
way!

3. How impatient are men if self-will, Reputation or Interest be Crossed!

4. How will they stretch Conscience in Words, Deeds or Bargaining for gain!

5. How soon will they fall out with Friends or Kindred, if Money or Reputation
come to a Controversy between them!

6. How little feeling Pity have they for another in Sickness, Poverty, Prison
or Grief, if they be but well themselves!

7. How ordinary does Interest of Body, Reputation, Wealth, corrupt and change
men's Judgments in Religion: So that Selfishness and Fleshly interest chooses
not only other Conditions and Actions of Life, but also the Religion of most
men; yea of too many Teachers of Self-denial. 1 Ioh. 15.


8. And if Godly people find this and lament it, how weakly do they resist it,
and how little do they overcome it.

9. And though every truly Godly man prefer the Interest of his Soul above
that of his Body, how few get above a Religion of Caring and Fearing for
themselves; to study more the Churches good, and more than that to Live in the
delightful Love of God as the Infinite Good.

10. And of those that Love the Church of God; how many narrow it to their sect
or party, and how few have an Universal impartial Love, to all true Christians
as such. Col. 1. 4, 8.


Q. 10. Where then are the Saints, if this be so?

A. All this sin is predominant in ungodly men, (saving that common Grace so
far overcomes it in some few, that they can venture and lose their Estates and
Lives for their special Friends, and for their Country:) But in all true
Christians it is but in a subdued degree. 2 Timothy 3. 2.
They hate it more than they Love it: They all Love God and his Church with a
far higher Estimation than themselves, though with less passion. They would
forsake Estate and Life rather than forsake Christ and a Holy Life. Luke 14.
26, 27, 33. 1 Cor. 13.
They were not true Christians if they had not learnt to bear the Cross and
Suffer. They seek and hope for that Life of perfect Love and Unity where
Selfishness shall never more divide us.

Q. 11. What is it that makes the Love of others so great a duty?

A. 1. It is but to Love God, his Interest and Image in others. No man has
seen God: But rational Souls, and specially Holy ones are his Image, in which
we must see and Love him. And there is no higher duty than to Love God.

2. Love makes us meet and useful members in all Societies, especially in the
Church of God. It makes all to love the Common good above their own.

3. It makes all men use their utmost power for the good of all that need them.

4. It overcomes Temptations to hurtfulness and division: It teaches men
patiently to bear and forbear: It is the greatest keeper of Peace and Concord.
As one Soul uniteth all parts of the Body, one Spirit of Love uniteth all true
Believers. It is the Cement of Individuals; the vital healing Balsom which does
more than Art to cure our Wounds. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 16. Romans 12. ^,
10.


If all Magistrates loved the People as themselves, how would they use them? If
Bishops and Teachers loved others as themselves, and were as loath to hurt them
as to be hurt, and to reproach them as to be reproached, and to deliver them
from Poverty, Prison or Danger, as to be safe themselves; what do you think
would be the consequent?

How few would study to make others odious, or ^o ruin them? how few would
backbite them, or ^ensoriously condemn them, if they loved them as themselves?
If all this City and Kingdom loved each other as themselves, what a foretast
would it be of Heaven on Earth! How delightfully should we all live together!
Every man would have the good of all others to rejoice in as his own; And be as
ready to relieve another as the right hand will the left. We can too easily
forgive our selves our faults and errors; and so should bear with others. 2
Cor. 2. 4, 8. and 8. 7, 8, 24.


Love is our Safety: who is afraid of any one who he thinks loves him as
himself? who is afraid that he should persecute, imprison or destroy himself,
unless by ignorance or distraction? Love is the delight of Life, when it is
mutual and is not disappointed: what abundance of Fears, and Cares and
Passions, and Law-suit's would it End? It is the fulfilling of the preceptive
part of the Law; and as to the penal part, there is no use for it where Love
prevails: To such says Paul, there is no Law: They are not without it, but
above it so far as it works by fear. Ro^* 13. 10. Gal. 5. 6, 13, 22. Phil. 1
15, 17. and ^ 1, 2, 3. 1 These. 4. 4. 1 Timothy 6. 11. Heb. 13. 2. 1 Ioh. 4. 7, 18.
Ephesians. 4. 16.


5. Love is the Preparation and Foretast of Glory Fear, Care and Sorrow are
distantly preparing works; but it is Joyful Love which is the immediate
Preparation and foretast: There is no War, no Persecution, no Hatred, Wrath or
Strife in Heaven But perfect Love, which is the uniting Grace, wi^ there more
nearly unite all Saints, than we that a^ in a dividing world and body, can now
conceive or perfectly believe.

Q. 12. Is there any hope that Love should reign on Earth?

A. There is hope that all the Sound Believers should increase in Love, and get
more victory over Selfishness: For they have all that Spirit of Love, and obey
Christ's last and great Command, and are taught of God to Love one another; yea
they dwell in Love, and so in God, and God in them; and it will grow up to
Perfection.

But I know of no hope that the Malignant Seed of Cain should cease the hating
of them that are the Holy seed; save as Grace converteth any of them to God: Of
any Common or universal Reign of Love, I see no Prognostics of it in Rulers,
in Teachers or any others in the World: Prophesies are dark: But my greatest
hope is fetched from the three first Petitions of the Lords Prayer, which are
not to be put up in Vain.

Q. 13. What should we do toward the increase of Love?

A. 1. Live so blamelesly that none may find just matter of hatred in you. 1
Pet. 2. 17. and 3. 8.


2. Love others whether they Love you or not. Love is the most powerful cause
of Love.

3. Do hurt to none but by necessary Justice or defense: And do as much good as
you can to all.

4. Praise all that is good in men, and mention not the Evil without necessity.

5. Do all that you can to make men Holy, and win them to the Love of God;
And then they will Love each other by his Spirit and for his sake. (r) Iam. 2.
8.


6. Do all that you can to draw men from sinful worldly Love: For that Love of
the World which is Enmity to God, is also Enmity to the love of one another.
Further than you can draw men to center in Christ and in holy Love, there is no
hope of true Love to others.

7. Patiently suffer wrongs rather than provoke men to hate you by unnecessary
seeking your right or revenge.

Q. 14. Is all desire of another man's unlawful?

A. All that is to his hurt, loss and wrong. You may desire another man's
daughter to Wife, by his Consent; or his House, Horse or Goods when he is
willing to sell them: But not else. Psalm. 10. 3. 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11. and 6. 10.
Ephesians. 5. 5. Luke 12. 15.


Q. 15. But what if in gaming, betting or trading, I desire to get from him,
though to his loss?

A. It is a covetous, selfish, sinful desire: You must desire to get nothing
from him to his loss and hurt.

Q. 16. But what if he consent to run the hazard, as in a Hors^-race, a Game, a
Wager, etc? It Is no wrong to a Consenter?

A. The very desire of hurtful drawing from him to your self, is selfish sin:
If he consent to the hazard, it is also his covetous desire to gain from you:
And his sin is no excuse for yours: And you may be sure it was not the Loss
that he consented to: But if he do it as a Gift, it is another Case. Act. 20.
33. 1 Timothy 6. 10.


Q. 17. What be the worst sorts of Covetousness?

A. 1. When the Son wishes his Fathers death for his Estate.

2. When men that are Old and near the Grave, still covet that which they are
never like to need or use.

3. When men that have abundance are never satisfied, but desire more.

4. When they will get it by Lying, Extortion or other wicked means, even by
Perjury and Blood, as Iezebel and Ahab got Naboths Vineyard.

5. When Princes not content with their just Dominions, invade other Men's, and
plague the World with unjust Wars, Blood and Miseries, to enlarge them. Josh.
7. 21. Mic. 2. 2. Pro. 21. 26. H^b. 2. 9. Exodus 18. 21. Prove. 28. 16.


Q. 18. How differ Charity and Justice?

A. Charity Loves all because there is somewhat in them lovely; and does them
good without respect to their Right, because we love them. Justice respects
men as in the same Governed Society (under God or Man) and so gives every man
his due.

Q. 19. Is it Love or Justice that says, Whatever you would that men should do
to you, do ye also to them?]

A. It is both. Justice says, Do right to all, and wrong to none, as you would
have them do to you. Charity says, Love and pity and relieve all to your
power, as you would have them Love, Pity and Relieve you.

Q. 20. Has this Law no exceptions?

A. It supposes that your own Will for your selves be just and good: If you
would have another make you drunk, or draw you to any sinful or unclean
Pleasure, you may not therefore do so by them. But do others such right and
good as you may lawfully desire they should do to you.

Q. 21. What are those Foundations on which this Law is built?

A. 1. That as God has made us Individual Persons, so he is the free
Distributer of his allowance to every Person, and therefore we must be content
with his allowance, and not covet more.

2. That God has made us for Holiness and endless Happiness in Heaven: And
therefore we must not so Love this World, as to covet fullness, and desire more
of it than God allows us. Heb. 13. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Phil. 4. 11. 1 Ioh* 2. 15.
Ps. 119. 36. Ezekiel. 33. 31.


3. That God has made every man a member of the humane World, and every
Christian a Member of the Church, and no one to be self-sufficient, or
Independent, as a World to himself: And therefore all men must Love themselves
but as Members of the Body, and Love the Body or public good above themselves,
and Love other Members as their place and the common Interest does require. 1
Cor. 12* and 6. 20. and 7. 23.


4. That we are not our own, but his that did Create us and Redeem us: And
therefore must Love our selves and others, as His, and according to his Will
and Interest; and not as the selfish narrow Interest tempts us.

5. That the Faithful are made Spiritual by the sanctifying Spirit; and
therefore savor the things of the Spirit, and refer all outward things
thereto: And therefore must not so overvalue Provision for the Flesh as to
Covet and draw from others for its pleasure. Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. Romans 13. 13. Luke
12. 21. Mat. 7. 22.


So that 1. As the first Greatest Command engages us wholly to God as our
Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, against that SELFISHNESS which is the
Idol-Enemy to God, including the Privation of our LOVE to him, and against the
Trinity of his Enemies, the FLESH which would be first pleased, the WORD which
it would be pleased by, and the DEVIL who deceives and tempts men by such
Baits of Pleasure; Ephesians. 5. 3. Col. 3. 5.
Even so this tenth (which is the second summary Command) engages us to Love
God in our Brethren, and to Love them according to his Interest in them, as
Members of the same Society, with an impartial Love, against that SELFISHNESS
which is the Enemy of impar^ial Love, and Common good, and against the Lusts of
the FLESH which would be first pleased, and the WORLD which is the Provision
which it coveteth, and the DEVIL who would by such worldly baits and FLESHLY
Pleasure deceive Mankind into ungodliness, sensuality, malig^ity, mutual
enmity, contention, oppression, persecution, pe^sidious^ess, and all iniquity;
and finally into endless misery, in separation from the God of Love, and the
heavenly perfected united Society of LOVE: Ephesians. 5. 3. Col. 3. 5.


And this is the true meaning of the tenth Commandment.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Sacred Ministry, and Church, and Worship.
Qu. 1. THough you have opened the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and the
Communion of Saints, before in Expounding the Creed, because the Sacraments
cannot be understood, without the Ministry and Church, will you first tell us
what the Ministerial Office is?

A. The Sacred Ministry is an Office instituted by Christ, in subordination to
his Prophetical Office, to Teach, and to his Priestly Office, to Intercede in
Worship, and to his Kingly Office, to ^e Key-bearers of his Church, to try and
judge of men's ti^^ to its Communion; And this for the converting of the Infidel
World, the gathering of them into the Christian Communion, and the helping,
guiding and edifying them therein. Mat. 28. 19, 20. and 16. 19. Act. 2. 42.
Ro^* 1, 2. Mat. 24. 45. and 22. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.


Q. 2. Are they Ministers in Office ^^ any but the Church?

A. Yes: their first work is upon the World, t^ make them Christians, and
gather them into the Church by Teaching and Baptizing them. Act* 14. 23. and
20. 28. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 3.


Q. 3. Is not that the common work of Lay-me^ that are no Officers?

A. Laymen must do their best in their capacity and station; but 1. Officers
do it as separated to ^his work, as their Calling: 2. And accordingly do ^t by
a special Commission and Authority from Christ: ^. And are tried, chosen and
dedicated thereto, as ^pecially qualified.

Q. 4. What must Christ's Ministers say and do for ^he Worlds Conversion?

A. Luke 14. and Mat. 22. tell you: They must ^ell men of the Marriage Feast,
the blessed Provi^^on of Grace and Glory by Christ, and by Evi^ence and Urgency
compel them to come in. More ^articularly,

1. They must speak to sinners as from God, and ^^ his Name, with a [ Thus
says the Lord.] They ^ust manifest their Commission, or at least, that ^^e
Message which they bring, is his; that men may ^now with whom they have to do;
and that he that ^espiseth, despises not men but God. Act. 26. 17, 18. Luke
10. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8. ^at. 9. 13. Luke 24. 47.


2. They must make known to Sinners their sinful, ^angerous and miserable
State, to convince them of ^^e necessity of a Savior. As if they should say, ^
He that has no sin, that is no Child of Adam, ^^t shall not die and come to
Judgment, that needs ^o Savior, Pardon and Deliverance; Let him neg^^ct our
Invitation: But Sin and Misery are all men's ^ecessity.]

3. They are to tell men what God has done for ^^em by Christ; what a Savior
he has given us: that Christ has done and suffered for us. Ioh. 3. 16. Heb.
10. ^4. Romans 3. 1. 10. Tit. 2. 14.


4. They are to tell men what Grace and Glory is purchased for them, and
offered to them, and what they may have in Christ and by him.

5. They are to tell men how willing God is of men's Recovery, so that he
beseeches them to be reconciled to him, and Ministers are sent to entreat them
to accept his Grace, who refuses none that refuse not him.

6. They are to acquaint men with Gods Conditions, Terms and Expectations: Not
that they giv^ him any satisfying or purchasing Price of their own, but that
they Accept his free gift according to i^^ proper nature and use, and come to
Christ th^^ they may have Life; but that they come in time and come sincerely
and resolvedly, and believe an^ penitently return to God; for which he is ready
t^ assist them by his Grace. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Luke 14. 17.


7. They must acquaint men with the methods ^^ the Tempter, and the hindrances
of their Faith an^ Repentance, and what opposition they must expec^ from the
Flesh, the World and the Devil, and ho^ they must overcome them.

8. They must acquaint men what great Assista^ces and Encouragements they shall
have from Christ how good a Master, how perfect a Savior and Co^forter, how
sure a Word, how sweet a Work, ho^ good and honorable Company, and how many
m^^cies here, and how sure and glorious a reward f^^ ever: and that all this is
put in the Balance for th^^^ choice, against a deceitful transitory shadow. 1*
T^^* 3. 5. Ephesians. 6. 11. 2 Cor. 2. 11. Heb. 11. Heb. 12. 2* 29. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 18.


9. They must answer the carnal Objections of deceived Sinners, and show them
clearly that all is Folly that is said against Christ and their Conversion.

10. They must make men know how God will ^ake it, if they unthankfully neglect
or refuse his Grace, and that this will leave them without remedy, and greatly
add to their Sin and Misery, and that ^here is no more Sacrifice for sin, but
a fearful look^ng for of Judgment, from that God who to such ^s a consuming
fire: and that it will be easier for ^odom in the day of Judgment than for
such. 2 Timothy 2. 25. Tit. 2. 8. Heb. 2. 3. and 10. 2, 23.


Q. 5. In what manner must Christ's Ministers preach ^ll this?

A. 1. With the greatest Gravity, and Holy Re^erence, because it is the Message
of God.

2. With the greatest Plainness: because men are ^ull of understanding.

3. With the clearest Proof and convincing Evi^ence, to conquer Prejudice,
Darkness and Unbe^^ef.

4. With powerful winning Motives, and urgent ^mportunity, because of men's
disaffection and avers^ess. And, O what powerful motives have we at ^and, from
Self-love, from God, from Christ, from ^ecessity, from Heaven and Hell! Tit. 2.
6, 7, 8. Heb. 5. 10, 11. 1 Cor. ^ 17, 18. Mat. 7. 29. Act. 2. 37.


5. With Life and Fervency, because of the un^peakable importance of the
Matter, and the dead^ess and hardness of men's Hearts.

6. With Frequency, in season and out of season, because of men's aptness to
lose what they have heard and received, and their need still to be carried on.

7. With Constancy to the end, that grace may be preserved and increased by
degrees.

8. With seemly and decent Expressions, because of captious Cavilling hearers,
and the Holiness of the work.

9. With Concord with all the Church of Christ, as preaching the same Faith and
Hope.

10. By the Example of Holy practice, doing what we persuade them to do, and
excelling them in Love, and Holiness, and Patience, and Victory over the Flesh
and World: and winning them, not by Force, but by Light and Love. 1 Cor. 14. 2 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Pet. 3. 16. A^^* 20. 25. 29. 31, 32.


Q. 6. What is it that all this is to bring m^^ to?

A. 1. To make men understand and believe what God is to them, what Christ is,
what Grace and Glory are, as is aforesaid in the Christian Faith.

2. To win men's Hearts to the Love of these from the Love of sinful fleshly
Pleasure, and to fi^ their Wills in a resolved Choice.

3. To engage them in the obedient Practice o^ what they Love and Choose, and
help them to overcome all Temptations to the contrary. Act. 20. 21.


Q. 7. Why will God have all this and the rest which is for the Church, to be
an Office, Work of chosen, sep^rated, consecrated Persons?

A. 1. It is certain that all men are not fit for i^ (Alas too few!) The
Mysteries of Godliness are dee^ and great. The Chains of Sinners are strong:
and God uses to work according to the suitableness of means. Great abilities
are requisite to all this: And God would not have his cause and work
dishonored, by his Ministers unfitness: Alas! unfit men have been the Churches
great Calamity and Reproach. 1 Timothy 3. 16, 1, 2. Tit. 1. 6, 9. 2 Timothy 2. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 15.


2. God would have his work Effectually done; and therefore by men that are
wholly devoted to it. Were they never so able, if they have avocations and do
it by the Halves, dividing their Labors between it and the World, this will
not answer the Necessity and the End: Even a Paul must do it publicly and from
House to House, night and day with Tears, Act. 20. 20, 28. It must be done in
season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Timothy must meditate on these
things, and give himself wholly to them, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Paul was separated to
the Gospel of God, Romans 1. And Ministers are Stewards of his Mysteries, to give
the Children their Meat in season.

3. It is much for the Comfort of the Faithful to know that it is by Gods own
ordained Officer, that his Message of Invitation, and his Sealed Covenant,
Pardon and Gift of Christ and Grace, are delivered to them. 2 Cor. 5. 19.


4. The very being of an Ordered Church requires a Guiding official part: It
is no Rules Society without a Ruler: No School without a Teacher. Men must know
to whom to go for Instruction: The Law was to be sought from the mouth of the
Priest, as the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7. Read Act. 14. 23.
Tit. 1. 5. Ephesians. 4. 14, 15, 16. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Luke 12. 42, 43.

5. The safety and preservation of the Truth requires the Ministerial Office.
As the Laws of England would never be preserved without Lawyers and Jugdes, by
the common People; so the Scriptures, and the Faith, Sacraments and Worship
would never have been brought down to us as they are, without a stated
Ministry, whose Interest, Office and Work it is continually to use them. See 1 Timothy 5. 20. Ephesians. 4. 14. Romans 16. 16, 17. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Heb. 13. 7, 9, 17. None
have leisure to do this great work as it must be done, but those that by Office
are wholly separated thereto. Will you leave it to Magistrates, or to the
People, who if they were able, have other work to do? Deny the Office, and you
destroy the Church and Work.

Q. 8. How are men called and separated to the Sacred Ministry?

A. There are many things concur thereto. The first Ministers were called
immediately by Christ himself, and extraordinarily qualified: But ever since,
all these things must concur:

1. A Common Obligation on all men to do their best in their places to
propagate the Gospel and Church, and to save men's Souls, is presupposed, as a
preparatory antecedent.

2. There must he necessary qualifying Abilities: 1. Natural Wit and Capacity.
2. Acquired improvement and so much Knowledge as must be exercised in the
Office. 3. If Apt to Teach and Able, signified no more than to Read what is
prescribed by others, a Child, Fool or an Infidel were Apt and Able. Ability
for competent Utterance and Exercise. 4. And to his Acceptance with God and his
own Salvation, saving Faith and Holiness is necessary. If you would know the
necessary degrees of ability, it is so much without which the necessary acts of
the Office cannot be done, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things that thou have heard of me
among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to Faithful men, who shall be able
to teach others also.

3. The approving Judgment of other Senior Ministers is ordinarily necessary;
For men are not to be the only Judges themselves where the public interest is
concerned. And the Investing Ordination of such, is the orderly Solemnizing of
their entrance, and delivery of Christ's Commission; and is that to the General
Office of the Ministry, which Baptism is to Christianity, and Solemn Matrimony
to Marriage, or Coronation to a King. This is not done by the Election of the
People; It is not their Work to choose Ministers to the General Office, or men
to call the World. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14. 23. and 9. and 13. 2.


4. To make a man the Pastor of a particular Church or Flock, the consent both
of the Man and of the Flock is necessary; and to the well being also, the
Consent of the Neighbor Pastors, and to Peace and Liberty the Princes. This is
an Ordination or Relation which may be often renewed and changed; but the
Ordination to the General Office is to be but once: To license a Physician, and
to choose him for my Physician are diverse things: And so it is here.

Q. 9. What Laws or Canons have Pastors power to make for the Church?

A. 1. None to the Universal Church, for that has no Ruler or Lawmakers or
Judge but Christ; man being utterly incapable of it.

2. None which shall Cross the Laws of Christ, in Nature or Scriptures.

3. None which are of the same kind and use with Christ's own universal Laws,
and no more needful to one Place or Age than to all: For this will accuse
Christ, as if he had been defective in his own Legislation, when more must be
added of the same kind. Isa. 33. 22. Iam. 4. 12. 1 Timothy 4. 6. 1 Cor. 3. 5. and
4. 1.


4. Taking the Word [ Laws] strictly, Pastors as such have no Legislative
power. But taking it laxly, for Mandates or Directions given by just Power,
such as a Parent or Tutor has, they may make such Laws as these: 1. Such as
only enjoin the obeying of Christ's own Laws. 2. And such as only determine of
such mere Accidents of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, as Christ has
commanded in General, and virtually, and left the particular sort to humane
determination of Governors (as Time, Place, Utensils, etc.) 3. Such as are not
extended beyond the Churches of which they are Pastors, to others of whom they
are no Rulers. 4. Such as being Indifferent are not made more necessary than
their Nature and Use requires; Nor used to the Churches Destruction or hurt,
but to it is Edification. 5. Such as being mutable in the Reason or Cause of
them, are not fixed. And continued when the reason of them cease. Mat. 20.
27, 28. 2 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 1 Pet. 4. 9, 10, 11.


Christ calls us Minsters that we may not think we are Lords of his Heritage:
Our Work is to expound and apply his Laws and persuade men to obey them, and
not to make Laws of our own of the same kind, as if we were his Equals, and
Lords of his Church. It Is true, he has bid us determine of Circumstances to
the Churches Edification, and the Pastor is Judge for the present Time and
Place, what Chapter he shall read, what Text he shall preach on, and in what
Method, what Psalm shall be Sung and in what Tune, and such like: But who made
him Lord of other Churches, to impose the like on them? Or how can he prove
that the very same circumstances are necessary to all, when a day may alter the
case with himself, which depends on mutable causes. If all the World or Land be
commanded on such a day to read the same Psalm and Chapter, and occurrents make
any Subject far more suitable, who has power to deprive the present Pastor of
his Choice, and to suppose Ministers unable to know what Subject to read or
preach on, unless it be they that make such men Ministers that they may so rule
them?

Q. 10. Why must there be stated Worshipping Congregations?

A. 1. For the Honor of God and our Redeemer, who is best honored in united
solemn Assemblies, magnifying him with one Mind and Heart and Mouth. 1 Cor. 14.
Heb. 10. 21, 22. Act. 14. 23.


2. For the preservation of Religion, which is so best exercised; honored and
kept up.

3. For the Benefit and Joy of Christians, who in such concordant Societies,
receive Encouragement, Strength and Comfort.

4. For the due Order and Honor of the particular Churches and the whole.

Q. 11. Is every worshipping Congregation a Church?

A. The Name is not much worthy of a debate: There are diverse sorts of
Christian Assemblies which may be called [ Churches.] 1. There are occasional
accidental Assemblies that are not stated. 2. There are stated Assemblies like
Chapels, which have only Curates, and are but Parts of the lowest political
Governing Churches. 3. Christians statedly associated under such Pastors as
have the Power of the Church Keys for personal Communion in Holy Doctrine,
Worship and Conversation, are the lowest sort of Political Governed Churches.
4. Synods, consisting of the Pastors and Delegates of these may be called
Churches in a laxe sense. 5. And so may a Christian Nation under one King. 6.
And all the Christian World is one Catholic Church as Headed by Jesus Christ.
7. And the Roman Sect is a spurious Church, as it is headed by a humane
incapable Sovereign, claiming the Power of Legislation and Judgment over all
the Church on earth.

Q. 12. But how shall I know which is the true Church, when so many claim the
Title; the Papists say it is only theirs?

A. I have fully answered such doubts on the Article of the Holy Catholic
Church and Communion of Saints, in the Creed. Either you speak of the Whole
Church, or of a Particular Church which is but a Part. If of the whole Church,
it is a foolish question, [How I shall know which is the true Church] when
there is but one. If of a Particular Church, every true Christian Society
(Pastors and Flocks) is a true Church, that is, a True Society as a part of the
Whole.

Q. 13. But when there are diverse contending Churches, how shall I know which
of them I should join with?

A. 1 If they are all true Churches, having the same God, and Christ, and
Faith, and Hope, and Love, You must separate from none of them, as Churches,
though you may separate from their sins: But must communicate with them in all
lawful Exercises, as occasion requires. 2. But your fixed Relation to a
particular Pastor and Church peculiarly, must be chosen, as your own Case and
Benefit, all things considered, does require. When you can have free choice,
the Nearest and Ablest and Holiest Pastor and Society should be chosen: When
Violence interposeth, a Rulers will may do much to turn the scales for a
tolerable Pastor and Society: if it make it most for the common good, and your
Edification.

Q. 14. May men add any thing to the prescribed Worship of God?

A. Worship is a doubtful Word; If you will call mere mutable Accidents and
Circumstances by the Name of Worship, Man may add to them, such as is putting
off the Hatt, the Meetre and tune of Psalms, and such like. But men may do
nothing which implies a defect in the Laws of Christ, and therefore may make
no new Articles of Faith, or Religion, or any thing necessary to Salvation, nor
any Sacraments or Ordinances of Worship of the same kind with Christ's, much
less Contrary thereto.

Q. 15. May we hold Communion with a faulty Church and Worship?

A. Or else we must have Communion with none on Earth: All our personal Worship
is faulty; we join with them for Christian Faith and Worship. If the Minister
say or do any thing contrary, it is his sin, and our presence makes it not
ours. Else we must separate from all the World. But we may not by false
Professions, Subscribing, Swearing or Practice, commit any sin our selves for
the Communion of any Church on Earth. Luke 4. 16. and 6. 6. Mat. 8. 4.


CHAP. XLV. Of Baptism.
Qu. 1. WHat is Baptism.

A. It is a Sacred action (or Sacrament) instituted by Christ, for the
Solemnizing of the Covenant of Christianity between God and Man, and the solemn
investing us in the State of Christianity, obliging us to Christ, and for his
delivering to us our Relation and right to him as our Head, and to the gifts of
his Covenant. Mat. 28. 29. Act. 2. 38, 41. and 8. 12, 13, 16, 37, 38* and 19.
5. and 22. 16. Romans 6. 3, 4. Gal. 3. 27 Ephesians. 4. 5. Col. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 21.


Q. 2. Why did Christ institute such a Ceremony as Washing in so great and
weighty a Work as our-Christening?

A. 1. A Soul in flesh is apt to use sense, and needs some help of it. 2.
Idolaters had filled the World with Images and outward Ceremonies, and the Jews
had been long used to abundance of Typical Rites. And Christ being to deliver
the World from these, and teach them to Worship in Spirit and Truth, would not
run into the extreme of avoiding all sensible signs and helps, but has made
his Sacraments, few and fitted to their use, to be instead of Images, and men's
vain Inventions and the Jewish burdens, as meet and sufficient helps of that
kind to his Church, that men might not presume to set up any such things of
their own, on pretense of need or usefulness.

Q. 3. What does this great Sacrament contain?

A. 1. The Parties Covenanting and Acting: 2. The Covenant as on both parts,
with the Benefits given of God, and the Duty professed and promised by man. 3.
The outward signs of all.

Q. 4. Who are the Parties Covenanting and Acting?

A. God and Man: that is, 1. Principally God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
and Ministerially under him, the Baptizing Minister: 2. The party baptized; And
if he be an Infant, the Parent or Owner on his behalf:

Q. 5. In what Relations is God a Covenanter with man?

A. 1. As our Creator and Governor, offended by sin and reconciled by Christ,
whom his Love gave to be our Savior. 2. As Christ is our Redeemer and Savior.
3. As the Holy Ghost is our Rgenerator and Comforter; sent* by the Father and
the Son.

Q. 6. In what Relation stands the person to be baptized?

A. As a Sinner miserable by guilt and pravity, and loss of his blessed
Relation to God, but Redeemed by Christ and called by him, and coming to
receive him and his saving Grace.

Q. 7. What is it that God does as a Covenanter with the baptized?

A. You must well understand that two Covenanting acts of God are presupposed
to Baptism, as done before. I. The first is Gods Covenant with Jesus Christ as
our Redeemer by Consent; In which God requires of him the work of man's
Redemption as on his part, by perfect Holiness, Righteousness, Satisfactory
Suffering, and the rest: And promises him as the reward to be Lord of All, and
the saving and Glorifying of the Church with his own perpetual Glory. Ioh. 17.
1, 2, 3. and 3. 35. and 5. 22, 27* and 6. 39.


II. A Promise and Conditional Covenant, or Law of Grace made to lost Mankind
by the Father and the Son, that whoever truly believes, that is, becomes a
true Christian, shall be saved. Ioh. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. 1 Ioh. 5. 11, 12.


Now Baptism is the bringing of this Conditional Promise upon man's consent to
be an actual mutual Covenant.

Q. 8. And what is it that God there does as an actual Covenanter?

A. First, he does by his Minister stipulate, that is, demand of the party
baptized whether he truly consent to his part. And next on that supposition, he
delivers him the Covenant-gifts which at present are to be bestowed.

Q. 9. What be those?

A. 1. The Relation of a pardoned reconciled sinner and adopted Child of God,
or that God will be his God in Love through Christ. (d) 1 Pet. 3. 21, 22.


2. A Right and Relation to Christ as his actual Savior, Head, Teacher,
Intercessor and King.

3. A Right and Relation to the Holy Ghost, to ^e to Him the Illuminating,
Sanctifying, quicken^^g Spirit of Light and Love and Holy Life; and deliverance
from the Devil, the World and Flesh, and from the Wrath of God. Gal. 3. 27. 1
Cor. 12. 13.


Q. 10. What is it that God requires of Man, and ^e professes?

A. That he truly believes in this God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and
Presently and Resol^edly consents to be His in these Relations, taking ^im as
His God and Father, his Savior and his San^tifier, repenting of his sins, and
renouncing the ^ontrary Government of the Devil, World and ^lesh. Mat. 28. ^^,
20. 1 Ioh. 5. 7, 11, 12.


Q. 11. What are the Outward signs of all this?

A. 1. The Water, 2. And the Actions of both ^arties. I. The Action of the
Minister on Gods ^^rt is to wash the body of the baptized with the Water, which
in hot Countries was by dipping ^^em over head and taking them up. To signify,
^. That they are washed from the guilt of Sin by ^^e Blood of Christ. 2. And
are as dead and bu^^ed to sin and the World and Flesh, and risen to a ^ew and
Holy Life and heavenly Hope. 3. And ^^at by this act we are solemnly bound by
God to ^^e Christians.

II. The Action of the baptized is, To be a wil^^^g receiver of this Washing,
to signify, his believ^^g and thankful receiving these free Gifts of Christ,
and his solemn self-engagement to be henceforth a Christian.

Q. 12. Are Infants Capable of doing all this?

A. No: They are personally capable of receiving both the sign and the Grace,
even Right to Christ and Life, but not themselves of actual believing and
covenanting with Christ.

Q. 13. Why then are they baptized, who cannot Covenant?

A. That you may understand this rightly, yo^ must know. 1. That as Children
are made Sinne^ and miserable by their Parents, without any act o^ their own;
so they are delivered out of it by th^^ free Grace of Christ, upon a Condition
performe^ by their Parents: Else they that are visibly born i^ sin and misery
should have no visible or certain wa^ of Remedy: Nature makes them as it were
pa^ of the Parents, or so near as causes their Sin a^^ Misery: And this
nearness supposed, God by fr^^ Grace has put it in the power of Parents to
acce^^ for them the blessings of the Covenant, and to e^ter them into the
Covenant of God, the Pare^^ Will being instead of their own, who yet have no^
to Choose for themselves. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Isa. 65. 23. Psalm. 37. 2^ Act. 2. 39.


2. That Baptism is the only way which God ha^^ appointed for the entering of
any one into the Ch^^stian Covenant and Church.

3. That the same Sacrament has not all the sa^^ Ends and uses to all, but
varyeth in some things ^ their capacites differ. Christ was baptized, and yet
n^^ for the remission of Sin: And the use of Circumcision partly differed to
the Old and to the In^ants.

4. It is the Will of God that Infants be Members ^^ the Christian Church, of
which Baptism is the en^^ance. For 1. There is no proof that ever God ^ad a
Church on Earth in any age, of which Infants ^ere not members.

2. The Covenant with Abraham the Father of the ^aithful was made also with his
Infant Seed, and ^ealed to them by Circumcision. And the Females ^ho were not
circumcised, were yet in the Church ^^d Covenant: and when the Males were
uncircum^^^ed forty years in the Wilderness, they were yet ^embers of the
Jewish Church: And Deuteronomy. 19. the ^arents entered their little ones into the
renewed Co^enant: And Christ came not to cast all Infants out ^^ the Church who
were in before.

3. Christ himself says, that he would have ga^^ered Jerusalem as a Hen
gathers her Chickens, ^^d they would not: so that he would have taken ^^ the
whole Nation, Infants and all that were in be^^re.

4. And Romans 11. it is said, that they were broken ^^f by unbelief: Therefore if
their Parents had not ^een unbelievers, the Children had not been broken ^^f.

5. And Christ himself was Head of the Church in ^s Infancy, and entered by the
Sacrament then in ^rce, though as Man he was not capable of the ^ork which he
did at age: Therefore Infants may ^ members. Mat. 19. 13, 14. and ^. 3.
(h) Mat. 23. 37.


6. And he rebuked his Disciples that kept su^ from him, because of such is the
Kingdom of God* He would have them come as into his Kingdom.

7. And plainly the Apostle says to a believing P^rent, that the unbeliever is
sanctified to the believing (for the begetting of a Holy Seed) else we^^ your
Children unclean, but now they are Holy; mee^ Legitimation is never called
Holiness; nor are He^thens Children Bastards. 1 Cor. 7. 14.


8. And most plainly, Christ when he institute^^ baptism says, Go, Disciple me
all nations, baptizi^^ them: which fully shows that he would have M^nisters
endeavor to Disciple and baptize Nation^ of all which Infants are a part. Mat.
28. 19, 20. R^ 11. 15.


9. And accordingly many Prophesies foretell, th^^ Nations shall come in to
Christ; and Christians a^^ Called, A Holy Nation. And it is said [ The Ki^^doms
of the World are become the Kingdoms of t^^ Lord and of his Christ.]

Q. 14. But though Infants be Church-Member^ is it not better that their
Baptism be delayed till th^^ know what they do?

A. Christ knew what is best: And he has to^^ us of no other door of entrance
into the visib^^ Church regularly but by Baptism. And if he (...) intended so
great a change to the believing Iems* to unchurch all their Infants, he would
have told ^ And the Apostles would have had more ado to qui^^ them in this,
than they had for casting off Circum^on: But we read of no such thing; but the
c^^stant baptizing of whole households.

Q. 15. But Infant Baptism seems to let in all the Corruption of the Churches,
while Infants receive they know not what, and are all taken after for
Christians, how ^ad soever, or without knowing what Christianity is: Whereas if
they stayed till they understood ^t, it would engage them to be resolved
Christians indeed?

A. This is not long of Infant Baptism, but of unfaithful Parents and
Ministers. For 1. If the Parents were told their Duty, and also what a Blessing
^ is to have their Children in Christ's Church and Covenant, it would awaken
them better to do their ^rt, and comfort them in their Childrens state of Grace.

2. And if Infants were not betime engaged, the ^sage would tempt Multitudes to
do as some did of ^^d, even sin on as long as they durst, that Baptism ^^ght
wash it away at last.

3. And doubtless with unfaithful Ministers, Bap^ism at age also would be made
but a Ceremony, ^^d slubbered over as Confirmation is now, and as ^^stomary
going to the Church and Sacrament is.

4. But that which should be done is, that at age ^ery baptized person before
he is admitted among ^^ult Communicants, should be as diligently Cate^^ized,
and as solemnly own and renew his Baptis^al Vow and Covenant, as if it were now
to be ^^st done. The full nature of Baptism is best to be ^^derstood by the
case of the adult who were ca^^ble of more than Infants are. And no adult
Per^^n must be baptized without serious deliberate un^^rstanding Profession of
Faith, Repentance and ho^ Obedience to Christ. Infants cannot do this: though
they must not do that again which they did and could do, viz. receive Baptism;
yet they must do that which they did not nor could do.

I confess to you, of the two evils, I think the Church is more corrupted for
want of such a solemn serious renewing of the Baptismal Covenant at age, and by
turning Confirmation into a Ceremony, than by those Anabaptists, who call
People to be seriously rebaptized, as the Africa Council did those that had
been baptized by Heretics.

Q. 16. Do you think that Anabaptists should be tolerated, or that all should
not be forced to bring their Children to Baptism?

A. 1. Infant Baptism is no such easy Controversy or Article of Faith, as
that no one should be tolerated that receives it not.

2. The ancient Church which we most reverence left all men to their liberty to
be baptized only when they pleased, and compelled none for themselves or their
Children. Tertullian was for the delay till they understood: Gregory Nazianzen
was ^o^ staying some years. Augustine and other of the Fathers were baptized at
age.

3. Baptism gives so great a gift, even Christ a^^ Pardon and Adoption, and
Right to Life Eternal, ^^ Condition of thankful acceptance and believing
Consent, that undoubtedly the unwilling have no rig^ to it. The ancient Church
baptized none till the desired and sought it (for themselves or Children* Yea
they must be willing of it on self-denyal-term^ forsaking the Flesh, the World
and the Devil, a^^ taking God instead of all. So that to force any (...) be
Baptized by Mulcts and Penalties, and bapti^^ those so forced, is to deceive
Souls, defile Chris^^ Church, and profane the Sacred Ordinance of God.

Q. 17. I have often wondered what harm twice baptizing does, that it should be
accounted a Heresy and intolerable?

A. It is a fault, because it is contrary to Christ's appointed Order: Baptism is
the Sacrament of our New Birth: and we are born but once. To be baptized again
implies an Untruth, that we were not baptized before: But I suppose none do
it, but through Ignorance: And Cyprian and the Bishops of many Countries in
many Councils were so ignorant is to be guilty of rebaptizing all that
Heretics baptized. The great fault of the Anabaptists is their Schism, that
they cannot be contented when they are rebaptized to live in Love and Communion
with others, but grow so fond of their own Opi^^on, as to gather into separated
Churches, and avoid Communion with all that are not of their Mind, and ^^end
their time in contentious Endeavors to draw ^en to them.

Q. 18. What the better are Infants for being baptized?

A. The Children of the Faithful are stated by it ^ a Right to the foresaid
Benefits of the Covenant, ^e Pardon of their Original sin, the Love of God, ^^e
Intercession of Christ, and the help of the Holy Ghost when they come to Age,
and title to the Kingdom of Heaven, if they die before they for^e^t it.

Q. 19. Rut how can we judge all such in a state ^f Salvation, when we see many
at age prove wicked ^^d Enemies?

A. This is a point of so great difficulty, that I ^ay but humbly propose my
Opinion to trial. ^. There is a degree of grace or goodness, which does only
give a man a Power to believe or obey God, but not give a rooted habitual
determination to his will: such the fallen Angels had, and Adam before his
fall, who was thereby in a state of Life, till he fell from it by wilful sin:
And so it may be with the baptized Infants of Believers: But when the special
sanctifying gift of the Holy Ghost is given them, and they are habitually
rooted in the Love of God, as the seed sown in good ground, they fall not
totally away. 2. As Parents and Children are Covenanters for their several
Duties, if Parents will per^idiously neglect their promised duty for the holy
Education of their Children, or Children rebelliously sin against that Power
and Measure of Grace which they received, they may perish by Apostasy, as the
Angels did, or need as Adam a renewing by Repentance. All Christ's Grace is not
confirming: As the best may lose much and fall into foul sin, and grow worse
than they once were, so common Grace, and I think this middle Infant Grace
which Children have as related to their Parents, may be lost.

Q. 20. But is it not safer to hold that Baptism put^ none but the Elect, who
never lose it, into a title to Salvation?

A. 1. Then it would be little comfort to Parents when their Children die, who
know not whether one of ten thousand be Elect. 2. And it would be little
satisfaction to the Minister to Baptize them, who knows not the Elect from
others. 3. It Is plain that it is not another, but the same Covenant of Gra^^
which is made with Infants and Adult. And th^^ Covenant gives pardon of Sin,
and right to Life to all that have the requsiite qualification; And ^ that
qualification in the Adult is Faith and R^pentance, so in Infants it is nothing
but to be the Children of the faithful dedicated to God. God never insti^uted
any Baptism which is not for Remission of Sin. If I thought Infants had no
visible right to Remssion in which Baptism should invest them, I durst not
Baptize them. I think their Holiness contains a certain title to Salvation.

Q. 21. But is it not enough to know that they are of the Church visible?

A. All at Age that are of the visible Church are in a state of Salvation
except Hypocrites. Therefore all Infants that are of the visible Church, are
also of the Mystical Church, except such as had not the requisite
qualification; and that is, such as were not the Children of the Faithful.

All the World are in the Kingdom of the Devil who are not in the Kingdom of
God. And if there be no visible way of Salvation for them, what reason have we
to hope that they are saved.

Q. 22. Some say we must leave their case to God as unknown to us, and that he
will save such of them as he electeth?

A. True Faith and Hope is grounded on Gods Promise. What reason have we to
believe and hope that any are saved whom God never promised to save? This would
reach wicked men to presume that God will save them too, though he do not
promise it. And this gives no more comfort to a Christian than to an ^nfidel:
How know we but by his promise whether God elect one of ten thousand, or any at
all. But God has promised a special blessing to the Seed of the Faithful above
all others.

Q. 23. You make the Mercy so very great, as makes the denial of it seem a
heinous sin in the Anabaptists?

A. There are three sorts of them greatly differing: 1. Some say that no
Infants have Original sin, and so need no Baptism nor Pardon: Or if it be sin,
it is done away by Christ's mere death, and all Infants in the World are saved.

2. Others say that Infants have Original sin, but have no visible Remedy, nor
are any in Covenant with Christ, nor Members of his Church, because no Pardon
is promised but to Believers.

3. Others hold that Infants have Original sin, and that the Promise is to the
Faithful and their Seed, and that Parents ought thankfully to acknowledge this
Mercy, and devote them to Christ as Infantmembers of his Church: but that
Baptism is not for Infant-members, but only as the Lords Supper for the adult;
This last sort are they whom I speak of as such whom I would not separate from,
if they separate not from us: But the other two sorts are dangerously
erroneous. When God has made so many plain Promises to the Seed of his
Servants; and in all Ages before Christ, has taken Infants for Church Members,
and never made a Covenant but to the faithful and their Seed, to say that
Christ the Savior of the World, came to cast all Infants out of the Visible
Church, into the visible Kingdom of Satan, and give them no greater Mercy
instead of it, seems to me very great Ingratitude, and making Christ too like
to Satan, as coming to do much of his destroying work.

Q. 24. But every where Salvation is promised only to Believers?

A. The Promise is to them and their Seed, keeping Covenant. The same Text that
says, He that believes shall be saved, says, He that believes not shall be
damned. Which shows that it is only the Adult that it speaks of; Or else
all Infants must be damned for Unbelief. It shuts them no more out of Baptism
than out of Heaven.

Q. 25. But the Scripture speaks of no Infants baptized?

A. 1. No Infants are to be baptized but the Infants of the Faithful: Therefore
the Parents were to be made Believers first. 2. The Scripture speaks of
baptizing diverse Households. 3. No Scripture mentions that ever any Child of a
Believer was baptized at age. 4. The Scripture commands it, and that is
enough; Disciple Nations baptizing them, Mat. 28. 19. Act. 16. 15, 33. and 18.
8.


Q. 26. How can Infants be Disciples that learn not?

A. 1. Did Christ mistake when he sent them to Disciple Nations, of which
Infants are a part? 2. Cannot Infants be Disciples of Christ, if Christ an
Infant can be the Master and King of his Church? Christ was our Teacher, Priest
and King in his Infancy, by Right, Relation, and Destination, and undertaking,
and Obligation to what he was after to do: and so may Infants be his Subjects
and Disciples: May not an Infant be a King that cannot rule? And are not
Infants the Kings Subjects, though they cannot obey? May not they be Knights
and Lords, and have right to inheritances? 3. Yea, are not Infants called Gods
Servants, Levit. 25. 42. Yea and Christ's Disciples, Act. 15. 10. Peter says,
those that would have imposed Circumcision would put a Yoke on the neck of the
Disciples: But it was Infants on whom they would have put it.

Q. 27. We are all by Nature Children of Wrath, and none can enter into Heaven
that is not regenerate and born of the Spirit?

A. But we are all the Children of God (we and our Seed) by the Grace of
Christ: And Infants are capable of being regenerate by the Spirit. Or else they
would not be called Holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Q. 28. The Apostle only gives a reason why a believing Husband may lawfully
live with an unbelieving Wife.

A. True: But what is the Reason which he gives? The doubt was not whether it
be Fornication: that was past doubt: But the Faithful must in all their
Relations be a peculiar Holy People, and the doubt was, Whether their Conjugal
Society became not such as Infidels, common and unholy; And Paul says, No: To
the pure all things are Sanctified: The Unbeliever is not Holy in her self, but
sanctified to the Husband for conjugal Society: Else says he, ( Your Children
were unclean, not Bastards, but unholy as those without are;) But now are they
Holy, as the Israelites adult and Infants were a Holy People, separated from
the World to God, in the Covenant of peculiarity, and not common and unclean.

Q. 29. Is it the Infants of all professed Christians and Hypocrites, or only
the Infants of sincere Christians, who have the Promise of Pardon and Salvation
delivered and sealed by Baptism?

A. As the Church is to receive all the adult who make a credible profession,
so are they to receive all their Infants: For God only knows the Heart. But
it is with the Heart that man believes to righteousness, Romans 10. And as adult
Hypocrites are not pardoned by God who knows the Heart, so neither is there
any promise of pardon to their Seed. No text of Scripture gives any pardon but
to sincere Believers and their Seed. And the Child is in the Covenant as the
Child of a believer devoted to God: And that Faith which qualifieth not the
Parent for pardon, cannot qualify the Child for it. I know no more promise of
Pardon and Life to an Hypocrites, than to a Heathens Child.

Q. 30. But what if the Godfather, or Grandfather be a true Christian, or the
Ancestors and the Parents both Infidels: may not the Child be baptized and
pardoned?

A. The further you go from the Parent, the darker is the Gase. We are all the
offspring of Righteous Noe, and yet that makes not the Infants of Heathens
baptizable or pardoned. But the case of Abraham's Covenant makes it probable,
that whoever is the true owner of the Child by Nature, Purchase or Adoption,
may devote it acceptably to God in baptism: Because the Infant having no
choosing power, the Will of his Owner goes for his own, in accepting the
Mercies of the Covenant and obliging him to such conditions as are for his
good; which if he like them not, he may renounce when he comes to age. But if
the Grandfather or Godfather be no Owner of the Child, I know no proof that
their causing him to be baptized helps him to Pardon and Salvation. If we dream
that Baptism gives pardon to all Infidels, and Heathens Children, whose owners
were not in the Covenant themselves, we make a Gospel, which as far as I can
find, Christ never made.

Q. 31. May not any man take an Infant out of the Street and give him food and
raiment; much more offer him to Baptism, which is an Act of greater Charity?

A. The first God allows: But Pardon and Salvation is none of ours to give,
but Gods; and we can ministerially deliver the investing signs to none that
have no title to which God has promised the gift: If as some think, bare
Redemption has given a right to all the World, then all Infidels and Heathens
shall be saved if baptized: If they say it is to all Infants in the World, then
whether they have Godfathers or no they may be baptized: And if all that are
baptized are saved, it is irrational to think that want of Baptism without their
fault shall hinder their Salvation. But though God offer to all men Pardon and
Life for themselves and their Infants, yet no Scripture gives it to either
without Acceptance and Con^ent of the adult: we must not make a Gospel of our
own.

Q. 32. Some say, that so much Faith will serve for a Title to Baptism, as
takes Christ for a Teacher and makes us Disciples, that we may after attain
to saving Holiness, but that it is not special saving Faith, that must needs be
then professed?

A. This is to make a new Baptism and Christianity to vie with that which alone
Christ made. No adult person is a Christian in Scripture sense, who believes
not in Christ as Christ. Which is as Savior, as Prophet, Priest and King: The
essentials of Christ's Office and gifts as offered, are essential to that
accepting Faith, which makes us Christians: A Disciple and a Christian were
words of the same importance, Act. 11. Mar. 16. 16. Romans 10. 10, 14.
Christ made no Baptism but for the remission of Sin, and giving men a
Relationright to Father, Son and Holy Ghost: Baptism saves by the answer of a
good conscience to God. Arise and wash away thy sins; was the word to Saul. We
are Sacramentally buried and risen with Christ; as dead to Sin, and made new
Creatures, when we are baptized, Romans 6. Therefore it is called The Laver of
Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. All the Church of Christ from the Apostles, taught
that Baptism put away the guilt of Sin, to all that were truly qualified for
that Sacrament. And they required the profession of a Saving Faith and
Repentance: And all the form of Baptism used in England and the whole Christian
World, so happily agrees in expressing this, that whoever will bring in the
Opinion, [ That the Profession of a Faith short of that which has the promise
of Pardon and Life, entitleth to Baptism,] must make a new Baptismal form.

Q. 33. But many Divines say, that Baptism is not administered to Infants on the
title of a present Faith, nor to give present pardon; but on a promise that
they shall believe at age, and so have the Ben^fits of Baptism at age?

A. None dare say so of the adult: If they say, we repent not nor believe now,
but we promise to do it hereafter, no wise man will baptize them. It is present
Believing, and not a mere promise to believe that is their Title. And Infants
title is the Parents Faith and dedication. By this Doctrine, Infants of
Christians are not in the same Covenant or Baptism as their Parents, nor are
any more pardoned than Heathens. Act. 2. 39.


Q. 34. What use are we to make of our Baptism ever after?

A. It is of great and manifold use. 1. We must live under the humble sense of
that miserable state of Sin from which Christianity does deliver us. Romans 3.
Rev. 1. 5. and 7. 14. Romans 6. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 10. 22.


2. We must live in the thankful sense of that Grace of God in Christ which did
deliver us: and in the Exercise of our belief of that Truth and Love which was
then Sealed to us.

3. We must live in the faithful remembrance of that Covenant which we Sealed,
and that Obedience which we promised, and in that War against the Devil the
World and the Flesh in which we then engaged our selves.

4. It is the Knowledge of the Baptismal Covenant which tells us what
Christianity is, and who we must take and Love as Christians, while Sects and
Dividers by narrow false measure, do limit their Christian Love and Communion,
and hate or cast off the Disciples of Christ.

5. Accordingly it is the baptismal Covenant that must tells us what true Faith
is, viz. Such a Belief as causes us truly to consent to that Covenant; and
what true Conversion is, viz. Such a change as contains a true consent to
that Covenant: And so it tells us how to judge of our sincerity of Grace; viz.
When we unfeignedly consent to that Covenant; And tells us what sin is mortal,
that is, inconsistent with true Grace and Title to Salvation, viz. All sin
which is not consistent with an unfeigned consent to the Covenant of Grace.
Ioh. 13. 8. Ephesians. 5. 26. Tit. 3. 5. Act. 22. 16.


6. It tells what the Catholic Church is, viz. Visibly all that profess
consent to the baptismal Covenant, and forsake it not: and mystically all that
sincerely do consent to it.

And 7. So it tells us how to exercise Church Discipline, that we cast not out
those as none of Christ's members for their Infirmities, who are not proved by
sufficient witness to have done that which cannot stand with the sincere
keeping of that Covenant.

And thus Baptism, not as a mere Outward washing, but as including the Grace
which it signifies, and the Covenant and Vow which it seals, is the very
Kernel of the Christian Religion, and the Symbol, or Livery of the Church and
Members of Christ.

Q. 35. Are all damned that die unbaptized?

A. Baptism is the solemn devoting men in Covenant to Christ. All that hear the
Gospel are condemned that consent not to this Covenant. But the Heart-consent
for our selves and Children is our Titlecondition before God, who damns not men
for want of an outward Ceremony, which by Ignorance or necessity is omitted:
Believers Children are Holy because they and theirs are devoted to God, before
Baptism: Baptism is to Christianity what public Matrimony is to Marriage,
Ordination to the Ministry, listing to a Soldier, and Crowning to a King.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Sacrament of Christ's sacrificed Body and Blood.
Qu. 1. WHat is the Sacrament called the Lords Supper or Eucharist?

A. It is a sacred Action in which by Bread and Wine Consecrated, broken and
poured out, given and taken, and eaten and drunk, the Sacrifice of Christ's Body
and Blood for our Redemption is Commemorated, and the Covenant of Christianity
mutually and solemnly renewed, and sealed, in which Christ with the benefits of
his Covenant is given to the Faithful, and they give up themselves to Christ,
as members of his Church, with which they profess Communion. Mat. 26. 26, 27,
28. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. and 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. 28.


Q. 2. Here are so many things contained, that we must desire you to open them
severally: And first what Actions are here performed?

A. 1. Consecration, 2. Commemoration, 3. Covenanting and communication.

Q. 3. What is the Consecration?

A. It is the seperating and Sanctifiing the Bread and Wine, to this holy use;
by which it cease to be mere common Bread and Wine, and is made
Sacramentally, that is, by signification and representation, the Sacrificed
Body and Blood of Christ.

Q. 4. How is this done, and what Action consecrateth them?

A. As other holy things are consecrated, as Ministers, Utensils,
Church-maintenance, Oblations, the Water in Baptism, etc. which is by an
authorized devoting it to it is proper holy use.

Q. 5. But some say, it is done only by saying these words, This is my Body; or
by Blessing it?

A. It is done by all that goes to a Dedication or Separation to it is holy
use: and that is, 1. By declaring that God commands and accepts it, (which
is best done by reading his Institution) and that we then accordingly devote
it. 2. By Praying for his Acceptance and Blessing 3. By pronouncing
Ministerially that it is now Sacramentally, Christ's Body and Blood.

Q. 6. Is the Bread and Wine the true Body and Blood of Christ?

A. Yes, Relatively, Significantly, Representatively, Sacramentally: that is,
it is consecrated Bread and Wine on these accounts so called.

Q. 7. But why do you call it that which it is not really, when Christ says,
This is my Body, ^^d not, this signifies it?

A. The Name is fitly taken from the Form: And ^ Sacramental form is a Relative
form. If you see ^ Shilling of the Kings Coin, and the question be Whether this
be a Shilling, or the Kings Coin, or Silver? You will answer, It is all three:
The matter of it is Silver; The General Relation is Money or Coin; The Special
Relative form is, It Is a Shilling. And this is the fittest name when the value
is demanded. So the question is, Whether this be Bread and Wine, or a
Sacrament, or Christ's Srcrificed Body and Blood. It is all these: and the
Answer must be according to the meaning of the question.

It is usual to say of Pictures, This is the King, and This is such a one, and
This is my Father, etc. Certainly the two parts of the Sacrament must be
understood alike: And of one Christ says [ This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood which is shed for you, Luke 22. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25. Where none can deny
that by [ Cup] is meant the Wine, and by [Is the New Testament] is meant, [ Is
the Exhibition and Sealing of the New Testament] and not the very Testament it
self.

And its known that Christ's common Teaching was by Parables and Similitudes,
where he says, Mat. 21. 28. A Certain man had two Sons, etc. v. 33. A Certain
Householder planted a Vineyard, etc. And so frequently, Mat. 13. 21, 22, 23, 37,
38, 39. He that sows is the Son of Man: The Field i^ the World. The good Seed
are the Children of the Kingdom: The tares are the Children of the Wicked one:
The Enemy is the Devil: The Reapers are the Angels, that is, They are
signified: This is ordinary in the Gospel, Ioh. 15. 1. I am the Vine, and my
Father is the Husbandman: Joh. 10. 7, 9, 14. I am the Door, I am the good
Shepherd, ( as David, Psalm. 22. 6. I am a Worm and no man;) Mat. 15. 13, 14.
Ye are the salt of the Earth: the Lights of the World: that is, Ye are like
these things.

Yea, the Old Testament uses [ is] for [ Signifieth] most frequently, and has
no other word so fit to express it by.

Q. 8. Why then do the Papists lay so much stress on the Word [is:] Yea, why do
they say That, there is no Bread and Wine after the Consecration, but only
Christ's Body and Blood under the show of them?

A. The Sacrament is exceeding Venerable, being the very Eating and Drinking,
Christ's own Sacrificed Body and Blood in similitude or representation. And it
was meet that all Christians should discern the Lords Body and Blood in
similitude, from common Bread and Wine: And in time the use of the Name when
the Church was drowned in Ignorance, was taken (about one thousand years after
Christ) for the thing signified without the sign; As if they had said, This is
the King; Therefore it is not a picture, nor is it Cloth or Colors. And it
being proper to the Priests to consecrate it, they found how it exalted them to
be judged able to make their Maker, and to Give or Deny Christ to men by their
Authority, and so they set up Transubstantiation, and by a General Council made
it Heresy, to hold that there is any Bread or Wine left after Consecration.

Q. 9. Wherein lies the evil of that Opinion?

A. The Evils are more and greater than I must here stay to recite. In short,
1. They feign that to be Christ's Body and Blood, which was in his Hand or on
the Table when he spoke the words, as if he had then two Bodies

2. They feign his Body to be broken and his Blood shed before he was crucified.

3. They feign him to have Flesh and Blood in Heaven, which two General
Councils have condemned; his Body being a Spiritual Body now.

4. They feign either himself to have eaten his own Flesh and Drunk his own
Blood, or at lest his Disciples to have done it while he was alive.

5. They feign him to have been the Breaker of his own Flesh and Shedder of his
own Blood, and make him to do that which was done only by the Jews.

6. They contradict the express words of the Scripture, which three times
together call it Bread after the Consecration, in 1 Cor. 11. So 1 Cor. 10. 15.
Act. 20. 7, 11. and 2. 42. 46. 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26, 27, 28.
When yet they say, It is not Bread.

7. They condemn the belief of the soundest senses of all men in the World, as
if it were heresy. All our Eyes, Touch, Taste, etc. tells us that there is
Bread and Wine, and they say there is none.

8. Hereby they deny all certainty of Faith, and all other certainty: For if a
man may not be certain of what he Sees, Feels and Tastes, he can be certain
of no sensible thing: For we have no Faculties but sense to perceive things
sensible as such: Nor any way to transmit them to the Intellect but by sense.
And we can no otherwise know that there is a Bible, a Church, a Council, a
Pope, a Man, or any thing in the World, and therefore much less can believe any
of them. So that all Humane and Divine Faith are thus destroyed, yea man is set
below a Beast that has the Benefit of sense.

9. Hereby they feign God to be the grand deceiver of the World; For, things
sensible are his Works, and so is Sense: And he makes us know no supernatural
Revelation but by the intromission of some Sense: And if God may deceive all
men by the way of sense, we can never be sure but he may do it otherwise.

10. They set up Men who confess their own senses are not to be credited, to be
more credible than all our senses, and to be the Lords of the understandings of
all Princes and People in despite of sense: And he that is to be believed
before our senses, is an absolute Lord.

11. They deny it to be a Sacrament: For if there be no sign there is no
Sacrament.

12. They feign every ignorant drunken Priest every time he consecrateth, to
work greater Miracles than ever Christ wrought, and so to make Miracles common
and at the Wills of thousands of wicked men. I must not here stay to handle all
this: But in a small Book called Full and Easy Satisfaction which is the true
Religin, I have showed thirty one Miracles with twenty Aggravations which all
Priests are feigned to work at every Sacrament.

Q. 10. What is it that is called the Mass, which the Papists say that All the
Fathers and Church used in every age, and we renounce?

A. In the first Ages the Churches were gathered among Heathens; and men were
long Instructed and Catechized hearers before they were baptized Christians:
And the first part of the day was spent in public, in such Common Teaching and
Prayer as belonged to all, and then the Deacon cried Missa ^est; that is,
Dismissed the unbaptized hearers, and the rest that were Christians spent the
rest of the time in such duties as are proper to themselves, especially the
Lords Supper and the Praises of God. Hereupon all the Worship following the
Dimission of the unchristened and suspended, came to be called barbarously the
Mass, or Dismission. And this Worship has been quite changed from what it was
in the beginning, and the Papists by keeping the Name [ Mass] or Dismission,
make the ignorant believe that the Worship it self is the same as of old.

Q. 11. What be the changes that have been made?

A. More than I may now stay to number. Justin Martyr and Tertullian describe
it in their Time to be just such as the Scripture mentions, and we now
commonly perform; that is, In Reading the Scripture, opening and applying it;
Praying as the Minister was able, Praising God, Baptizing, and administering the
Lords Supper. After this Ministers grew less able and trusty, and they decreed
that they should pray and Officiate in set forms; yet so that every Bishop
might choose his own, and every Presbyter must show it to the Bishops and have
their approbation: The Creed, Lords Prayer, and Commandments, and the Words of
Baptism and Delivery of the Lords Supper were always used in forms before.
After this they grew to use the same forms called a Liturgy in whole
Provinces: some Ceremonies were so Ancient that we cannot find their Original,
that is, The Anointing of the baptized, the giving them Milk and Honey to
taste, dipping them thrice, clothing them in a white Garment after, to Worship
with their faces toward the East, and not to kneel in Prayer or Adoration any
Lords day in the year, nor any Week day between Easter and Whitsuntide, and
specially to observe those two yearly Festivals, and Good Frydaies fast.

And quickly after the encouraging of persecuted Christians to suffer, drew
them to keep a yearly day at the place where a Martyr was killed or buried, to
honor their memories and give God thanks for them. After this they built
Altars over them: And they built their Churches where their graves or ^ome of
their bones were laid, and in honor of their memory called the Churches by
their Names. Next they brought their Names daily into the Church Liturgies; And
next they added to them the Names of such Bishops of those particular Churches
as had left an honorable memorial behind them. And the Lords Supper was
celebrated much like as it is in our English Liturgy (save these Names.) And
thus far the changes were then accounted laudable, and were not indeed such as
should discourage any Christians from Communion: Nor do we read of any that
were against them. Besides which they overvalued the use of Crossing.

But quickly (though by degrees) a Flood of Ceremonies came in, and Popes and
Prelates added at their Pleasure, till Gods public Worship was made quite
another thing.

I. God who is a Spirit and will be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth, is by
Mass-Priests and Papists Worshipped by such a mass of Ceremonies, as makes it
like a Stage Play, and represents God so like the Heathens Idols, delighted
in Mummeries and toyish actions, as is greatly to the dishonor of Religion and
God. Ioh. 4. 20, 22, 23, 24. Act. 17. 23, 25. Phil. 3. 3. 1 Cor. 14. 2, to 27.
Luke 11. 52. Ioh. 5. 39. ^ 17. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
II. They have brought in the Worshipping of God in a Language which the People
understand not, and praying for they know not what. III. They have locked up the
very Scriptures from the people, and forbid all to use it in their known Tongue
translated, but those that get a special License for it. IV. They abolish all
substantial Signs in the Sacrament, as is aforesaid, and say, There is no Bread
or Wine, and so make it no Sacament. V. They give the Laity the Bread only
without the Cup. VI. They call the Consecrated Bread by the Name of their Lord
God, and taking it to be no Bread but Christ's Body worship it with Divine
Worship, which seems to me flat Idolatry. VII. They reserve it as their God,
long after the Sacrament, to adore and to work pretended Miracles by. VIII.
They solemnly celebrate a Sacrament before the Congregation, where none
communicate but the Priests, and the People look on. IX. They say these Masses
by number, to deliver Souls out of the Flames of Purgatory. X. They have many
Prayers for the Dead as in Purgatory for their ease and deliverance. XI. They
Pray to the Dead Saints to intercede for them and help them, and to the Virgin
Mary for that which is proper to Christ. XII. They worship God by Images, and
adore the Images as the representations of Saints and Angels; Yea and of God,
and some profess that the Cross, and the Images of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are to be worshipped with honor participatively Divine. Col. 2. 18.

These with abundance more, and many false Doctrines on which they depend, are
brought into Gods public Worship, and called The Mass, and are added by
degrees to that sounder Worship which was called the Mass at first.

Q. 12. You have spoken much about the Consecration in the Sacrament; What is
it which you call the Commemoration?

A. It contains the signal representation of the Sacrificing of Christ, as
the Lamb of God to take away the sins of the World. Where the Signs are, 1. The
Materials, the Bread and Wine; 2. The Ministers Breaking the Bread and Pouring
out the Wine; 3. The Presenting them to God as the Commemoration of that
Sacrifice in which we trust: and declaring to the people that this is done to
this Commemoration.

The things signified are, 1. Christ's Flesh and Blood when he was on Earth: 2.
The Crucifying of Christ, the piercing of his Flesh, and shedding his Blood: 3.
Christ's Offering this to God as a Sacrifice for man's Sin. And this
Commemoration is a great part of the Sacrament.

Q. 13 What think you of the name Sacrifice, Altar and Priest, here?

A. The Ancient Churches used them all, without exception from any Christian
that ever I read of. I. As the Bread is justly called Christ's Body as
Signifying it, so the Action described was of old called a Sacrifice, as
representing and commemorating it. And it is no more improper than calling our
Bodies, and our Alms, and our Prayers Sacrifices. Romans 12. 1. Ephesians. 5. 2. Phil.
2. 17. and 4. 18. Heb. 13. 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 26,
27.


II. And the naming of the Table an Altar as related to this representative
Sacrifice, is no more improper than that other, Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar
whereof they have no right to eat, seems plainly to mean the Sacramental
Communion. And the Rev. 6. 9. and 8. 3. 5. and 16. 7. and often uses that word.

III. And the word Priest being used of all Christians that offer praise to
God, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9. and Rev. 1. 6. and 5. 10. and 20. 6. It may sure as well
be used of those whose Office is to be Subintercessors between the People and
God, and their mouth to God, in Subordination to Christ's Priesthood: Causless
scruples harden the Papists. We are not offended that the Lords day is called
the Sabbath, though the Scripture does never so call it; and a Sabbath in
Scripture sense was a day of Ceremonial rest: and the ancient Church called it
the Christian Sabbath, but by such allusion as it (more commonly) used the word
Sacrifice and Altar.

Q. 14. But we shall too much countenance the Papists Sacrifice by using the
same Names?

A. We can sufficiently disclaim their turning a Commemoration of Christ's
Sacrifice into the feigned real Sacrificing of his Flesh and Blood, without
renouncing the names. Else we must for men's abuse renounce the name of a
Sabbath too, and a Temple, etc. if not also of a Church and Bishop.

Q. 15. You have spoken of the Sacramental Consecration, and Commemoration;
What is it which you call the Covenanting part and Communication?

A. It contains the Signs, and the things signified, as Communicated. The
Signs are, 1. The Actual delivering of the consecrated Bread and Wine (first
Broken and poured out) to the Communicants, with the Naming what it is that is
given them. 2. Bidding them Take, Eat and Drink: 3. Telling them the Benefits
and Blessings given thereby; And all this by a Minister of Christ, authorized
thus to act in his Name, as Covenanting, promising and giving what is offered.
Mat. 26. 26. Ioh. 6. 53, 54, 57, 58.


And on the Receivers part the Signs are, 1. Freely taking what is offered (the
Bread and Wine:) 2. Eating and Drinking: 3. Vocal Praise and Thanksgiving to
God, and Professed Consent to the Covenant.

Q. 16. What are the things signified and given?

A. I. 1. On Gods part, the renewed giving of a Sacrificed Savior to the
penitent Believer.

2. The Will and Command of Christ, that as Sacrificers feasted on the
Sacrifice, so the Soul by Faith should thankfully and joyfully feast on Christ
by hearty Acceptance of the free Gift. Zec. 9. 11. Heb. 10. 29. and 13. 20.


3. The actual Applicatory Gift of the Benefits of Christ's Sacrifice; which
are, 1. Our confirmed Relation to Christ as our Head and Savior, and to God as
our Father reconciled by him, and to the Holy Ghost as our Sanctifier, and to
the Church as his Kingdom or Body. 2. The Pardon of our Sins by his Blood. 3.
Our right confirmed to Everlasting Life. 4. The strengthening of our Faith,
Hope, Love, Joy, Patience and all Grace. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 14. Luke 22.
20. Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17, 18.


4. Christ's Promise and Covenant for all this Sealed to us.

II. On the Receivers part is signified, 1. That in the sense of his own Sin,
Misery, and Need, he humbly and thankfully receives his part in Christ as
Sacrificed. 2. That he endeavors by Faith to feast on him: 3. And that he
thankfully receives the Blessings purchased, to wit, his Relation to Christ as
his Head, to God as his Father, and to the Holy Ghost as his Sanctifier* and
Comforter, with the Pardon of Sin, the Sealed Promise and Right to Heaven, and
all the helps of his Faith and other Graces. 4. That he resolvedly renews the
Dedication of himself to God the Father, Son and holy Ghost, as thus, related
to these ends; Covenanting Fidelity in these relations, and renouncing the
contraries. 5. Doing all this as in Communion with all the Church of Christ, as
being united to them in the same Head; the same Faith, and Hope and Love. 6.
Thankfully praising God and our Redeemer for this Grace.

Q. 17. Should not one prepare for the Lords Supper by Fasting and Humiliation
before? or how should we prepare?

A. We must always live in habitual Preparation: and special Fasts are not
ordinarily necessary thereto: the Primitive Church did communicate not only
every Lords day, but on other days when they met to worship God; and therefore
used not every Week to spend a day in Fasting for Preparation. But as
Christians must use Fasting on just occasions, so must they do before this*
Sacrament in case that any heinous Sin, or heavy Judgment or danger call for
it; and preparing. Considerations and Prayers are necessary.

Q. 18. May one communicate who is uncertain of the sincerity of his Faith?

A. By Faith you mean either Objective, or Active Faith.

1. One that is so far uncertain that the Gospel is true, and that there is a
Life to come, as that he dare not say, I have no wavering or doubt of it, may
yet be a true Believer and may communicate, if his persuasion be but so
prevalent, as to resolve him to consent to the Covenant of Grace, and take God
for his God, and Christ for his Savior, and the Holy Ghost for his Sanctifier;
Gods Law for his Rule, his Promise for his Security, and Heaven for his
Happiness, and here to place his Hope and Trust, forsaking all that stands
against it. A weak and doubting Faith may bring a man to Martyrdom and to
Heaven, if it bring him to trust Christ with Soul and Body in the way of
Obedience to him. Act. 8. 37. Mar. 9. 24. Mat. 6. 30. and 8. 26. and 14. 31.
and 16. 8. Luke 17. 5.


2. If by Faith you mean the Act of Believing and Consenting, God has made the
Sincerity of our Faith necessary to our Salvation, but not the Certainty that
it is Sincere. Every man must do his best to discern the Trust, Consent and
Choice of his own Heart: And he that truly believes, and yet is not sure of
it, if he can say, As far as I am able to know my own Heart by Trial, I
seriously think that I resolvedly consent to the Covenant of Grace, and prefer
Christ, Holiness and Heaven before all this World, and trust to Christ and his
Promises for my Felicity; ought to come to the Table of the Lord,
notwithstanding his uncertainty. Ioh. 20. 25. Mat 28. 17. Act. 13. 39.


Q. 19. Whence is it that so many Christians are more terrified than comforted
by the Lords Supper?

A. 1. Some of them by an excess of reverence to this above all other
Ordinances of God; which by degrees brought in the Papists Transubstantiation
and Adoration. And by a dread lest by unworthy Receiving they should eat and
drink their own Damnation; And so coming thither with a deeper sense of the
danger than of the Benefit: And mistaking their Imperfections for this Unworthy
Receiving. 2. And some come with two high expectations, that God must suddenly
give them Joy, or all the grace that is signified by the Sacrament, while they
have not the Holy skill to fetch in Comfort by the exercise of their Faith. And
when they miss of what they expected, they are cast down. 3. And too many by
wilful Sin or Negligence deal falsely with God, and break their Covenant, and
renew their wounds of Conscience, and deprive themselves of the Comforts of the
Love of God, and the Grace of Christ, and the Communion of the Holy Spirit. 1
Cor. 11. 20, 30, 31.


Q. 20. Is not the Lords Supper a Converting Ordinance, which therefore should
be used by the unbelievers or ungodly?

A. Many things may accidentally by Gods Grace convert a man, which are not to
be chosen and used to that End. Plagues, Sickness, Death-approaching, may
convert men: Falling into a heinous Sin has affrighted some to leave their
Sin. But these are not means to be chosen for such Ends. And the Fear and Care
of preparing for a Sacrament has converted some, when it was not the Receiving
that did it. It is so evident as not to need long proof, that God never
appointed the Lords Supper to be chosen and used by Infidels or Impenitent
ungodly persons, as a means to convert them: 1. Because it is presupposed that
they be baptized who communicate. And I have proved that Baptism to the adult
presupposed the Profession of Faith and Repentance; And that it delivers
Pardon and Title to Salvation.

2. Because Faith and Repentance and Covenantconsent renewed are also to be
professed by all before they communicate.

3. Because it was ever an Ordinance proper to the Church, which consists of
Professors of Faith and Holiness. 4. And the Communicants are said to be One
Bread and one Body, and to Eat Christ's Flesh and drink his Blood, and Christ to
dwell in them by Faith, and to have Eternal Life hereby.

And as for them that say, it is not saving Faith but some Commoner Preparatory
sort which is necessarily to be professed in Baptism and the Lords Supper, I
have at large confuted them in a Treatise of Right to Sacraments: and the
reasons before and now named confute it. I add, that their Opinion is
destructive to true Christian Love; For by them, No one should be taken for a
Child of God and in a state of Salvation for being baptized and Communicants,
and so not Loved as such. And how Poor a Charity is it to love all Visible
Church Members, but as the Children of the Devil must be loved.

Q. 21. Must we Love all as true Christians who are baptized and communicate
and profess Christianity?

A. Yes, with these three exceptions: 1. That it is not as a certain Truth that
we must judge them sincere, but as Probable. 2. That there be diverse degrees of
Probability as there be of Profession: Some we are almost sure are sincere; And
some we have more Fear than Hope of. And we must measure our Love and Trust
accordingly. 3. If men by Word or Life Apostatize, or plainly contradict and
destroy their profession of Christianity, thereby they nullisie our Obligation
to take them for Christians. But till men render their Profession incredible by
Contrary Profession or Practice, we are by the Rules of Christian and Humane
Charity, to take all Professed baptized Communicating Christians to be sincere,
but only in various degrees of probability. Act. 11. 26. Mar. 16. 16. 1 Cor.
10. 16, 17. and 12. 8, 11, 13. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Gal. 3. 28. Ephesians. 4. 3, 5. Ioh. 4.
1. Act. 2. 38, 41. Romans 6. 3, 5. Mat. 10. 42. Luke 14. 26. 33. Act. 4. 32, 34.
and 2. 41, 42, 44, 45, 46. Ioh. 13* 35.


Q. 22. How must the Lords Supper be improved after the receiving?

A. By a serious remembering with Joy and thankfulness, how great Mercies we
have received of God? And with cheerful Obedience, what a Covenant we have
made, and what duty we have most solemnly promised: And in how near a Relation
and bond we are tied to the whole Church of Christ, and to all our fellow
Christians: And frequently to plead these great Receivings and Great
Obligations, to quicken our Faith, and Hope and Joy, and to overcome all
Temptations to the World and Flesh, to Unbelief, Disobedience and Despair. 1
Cor. 10. 16, 20, 21, 22.


Q. 23. Some say that no man should be kept from the Sacrament or
Excommunicated, because it is the Food of their* Souls, etc.

A. 1. If none be kept from Baptism, Heathens and Infidels, and professed
deriders of Christianity might be baptized to make a mock of Baptism: We must
make men Christ's Disciples before we baptize them. Mat. 28. 19. And then
Baptism would be no Baptism, nor the Ministry no Ministry, the specifying End
and Use being changed. 2. Then the Church would be no Church, but lie common
with the World: 3. And then Christ would be no King and Head and Husband of the
Church, that is, no Christ. Mat. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28, 29,
30. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
4. If all may not be baptized, all may not communicate; for Baptism enters
them into a state of Communion: Else the unbaptized and all Infidels might
communicate. 5. Some baptized persons turn Atheists, Sadducees or Infidels
after: And these are worse than common Infidels that never were baptized. The
Church is no Church if it be common to these. 6. Some that continue a Nominal
Christianity, openly hate and persecute the Practice of it, and live in common
Adultery, Perjury, Murder: And the Church is Holy, and a peculiar People, a
holy Nation, a royal Priesthood: Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
And Repentance and Obedience are necessary to the Church as well as Faith. If
therefore these notorious, flagitious, impenitent persons, must be Members in
Communion with the Church, it will be a Swine-sty and not a Church; a Shame to
Christ and not an Honor. If his Church be but like the rest of the World,
Christ will not be honored as the Savior of it, nor the Spirit as its
Sanctifier. It is the Unity of the Spirit that all Christians must keep in the
bond of Peace: Ephesians. 4. 3. 16. Romans 8. 9.
But these have none of his Spirit, and therefore are none of Christ's.

The Sacraments are Symbols of the Church as differenced from the World; and
Christ will have them be a visibly distinct Society. 7. Communicants come to
receive the greatest gift in the world, Pardon, Justification, Adoption, right
to Heaven: The Gospel gives these to none but Penitent Believers: To say that
Christ gives them to flagitious impenitent Rebels, whose Lives say, We will
not have him reign over us, is to make a new Gospel, contrary to Christ's
Gospel, which Paul curses were it done by an Angel, Gal. 1. 7, 8. They are not
yet capable of these precious gifts.

8. The Objectors take no notice of 1 Cor. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3. Romans 16. 16, 17. Tit.
3. 10. Rev. 2. and 3. where the Churches are reproved for suffering Defilers;
nor Heb. 13. 7. 17. 24. Luke 12. 42. 42. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. which describe the
Office of Church-guides, nor 1 Timothy 3. and 4, etc. where the governing of the
Church, and avoiding Communion of the Impenitent are described.

9. In a word, Christ's Office, Works and Law, the Nature of the Church and
Sacrament, the Office of the Ministry, the frequent Precepts of the Apostles,
and the constant practice of the Church in its greatest Purity, down from the
Apostles days, do all speak so plainly for keeping and casting out Infidels
and impenitent wicked men, and for keeping the Church as a Society of visible
Saints, separated from the World, that I can take him for no better than a
Swine or an Infidel, who would have the Church-Keyes cast away, and the Church
turned common to Swine and Infidels.

Q. 24. But it will make Ministers Lords and Tyrants, to have such power?

A. 1. Some body must be trusted with the Power, if the work must be done: The
Church must be differenced from the World: Therefore some must try and judge
who are fit to be baptized and to have its Communion. And who is fitter than
those whom Christ by Office has thereto appointed? Would you have Magistrates
or the People do it? Then they must be prepared for it by long study and skill,
and wholly attend it: For it will take up all their time. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Mat.
24. 45, 46, 47. 1 These. 5. 12.


Q. 25. Must Ministers examine People before they communicate?

A. They must Catechize and Examine the Adult before they baptize them; and
consequently those who were baptized in Infancy before they number them with
adult Communicants: or else Atheists and Infidels will make up much of the
Church, who will come in for worldly Interest: This Examination should go
before Confirmation, or the public owning of their Baptism. But there is no
Necessity of any more Examination before every Sacrament, except in case of
Scandal, or when persons need and crave such help.

Q. 26. Who be they that must be Excommunicated, or refused?

A. Those who are proved to be Impenitent in gross scandalous sins after
sufficient admonition and patience. And to reject such, is so far from Tyranny,
that it is necessary Church-Justice: without which a Pastor is but a Slave or
Executioner of the sinful will of others: Like a Tutor, Philosopher or
Schoolmaster, who is not the Master of his own School, but must leave it common
to all that will come in, though they scorn him and refuse his conduct. But no
man must play the Pastor over other men's Flocks, nor take the Guidance of a
greater Flock than he can know and manage: Much less be the only Key-bearer
over many Score or Hundred Churches: And least of all take upon him to Govern
and judge of Kings and Kingdoms and all the World, as the Roman deceiving
Tyrant does.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Preparation for Death and Judgment.
Qu. 1. HOw must we prepare for a safe and comfortable Death?

A. I have said so much of this in my Family Book, that to avoid Repetition I
must refer you thi^her; only in brief. I. Preparation for Death is the whole
work of Life, for which many hundred years are not too long if God should so
long spare and try us. And all that I have hitherto said to you, for Faith
Love and Obedience, upon the Creed, Lords Prayer and Commandments, is to teach
you how to prepare for Death. And though ^ound Conversion at last, may tend to
Pardon and Salvation, to them that have lived a careless wicked Life; Yet the
best, the surest, the Wisest Preparation, is that which is made by the whole
course of a holy obedient heavenly Life. Phil. 2. 12. Heb. 12. 28. Tit. 2. 11,
12. Heb. 5. 9. Luke 19. 9. Romans 10. 10, 11. 2 Pet. ^. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 1. 9. Luke
14. 26, 33.


Q. 2. What Life is it that is the best Preparation?

A. 1. When we have so well considered of the certain Vanity of this World, and
all its pleasures, and of the truth of Gods Promises of the Heavenly Glory, as
that by Faith we have there placed our chiefest Hopes, and there expect our
chief Felicity, and make it our chief business in this world to seek it,
preferring no worldly thing before it, but resolved for the hopes of it to
forsake them all when God requires it: This is the first part of our
preparation for Death. Mat. ^. 33.


II. When we believe that this mercy is given by Christ the Mediator between
God and Man, and trust in his Merits and Intercession with the Father, and take
him for our Teacher also and our Ruler, resolving to obey his Word and Spirit.
This is the second part of our preparation for Death. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 18. Ioh. 3.
16.


III. When the Holy Spirit has shed abroad Gods Love upon our hearts, and
turned their nature into a habit of Love to God and Holiness, and given us a
Victory over that Love of the World and fleshly Prosperity and Pleasure which
rules in the hearts of Carnal men, though yet our Love show it self but in
such Mortification, and endeavor, and grief for what we want, we are prepared
for a safe Death. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Heb. 12. 14. Romans 8. 9, 13.


But if the foretasts of Heavenly Glory, and sense of the Love of God, do make
our thoughts of Heaven sweeter to us than our thoughts of our Earthly hopes,
and cause us out of Love to God and our glorified Redeemer and his Church; and
out of love to a Life of perfect Knowledge, Love and Joy, to long to depart and
be with Christ; then we are prepared not only for a safe but a joyful Death. 2
Cor. 5. 1, 3, 8. Phil. 1. 21, 23.


Q. 3. O! But this is a great and difficult work?

A. It is not too hard for the S^ of Christ^ and a Soul renewed by it. It is
our great foll^ and naughtiness that makes it hard: Why e^ should it be hard
for a man that loves: himself, and knows how quickly a Grave, and rotting in
the Dark must end all his pleasures in this World, to be earnestly desirous of
a better after it. And why should it be hard for one that believes that man's
Soul is immortal, and that God has sent one from Heaven who is greater than
Angels to purchase it for us and promise it to us, and give us the first fruits
by his Holy Spirit; to rejoice that he dies not as an unpardoned Sinner, nor
as a Beast, but shall live in perfect Life and Light, and Love and Joy and
Praise for ever; What should rejoice a believing considering man like this? 1
Pet. 1. 6, 8. 1 These. 5. 16. Phil. 2. 16, 17, 18. and 4. 4. Heb. 3. 6.


Q. 4. O! But we are still apt to doubt of things unseen?

A. 1. You can believe Men for things unseen, and be certain by it; for
instance, that there is such a place as Rome, Paris, Venice, that there have
been such Kings of England as Hen. 8. King James, etc. You know not but by
believing others, whether ever you were Baptized, nor who was your Father or
Mother: 2. You see not your own Soul, nor any ones that you talk with; and yet
you feel and see such things as may assure any Sober man that he has a Soul.
God is not seen by us, yet nothing is more certain than that there is a God.

3. We see Plants, Flowers, Fruits, and all vital Acts, produced by an unseen
Power: we see ^ast, lucid, glorious Regions above us; and we see and feel the
effects of invisible powers: therefore to doubt of things because they are
unseen, is to doubt of all the vital noblest part of the World, and to believe
nothing but gross and lowest things; and to lay by Reason and become Bruits.
But of this I have said more near the Beginning.

Q. 5. What should we do to get the Soul so familiar above, as to desire to be
with Christ?

A. I. We must not live in a foolish forgetfulness of Death; nor flatter our
Souls into delays and dullness, by the expectations of long life on Earth, the
grave must be studied till we have groundedly got above the fears of it.

II. We must not rest quiet in such a humane belief of the Gospel and the Life
to come, as has no better grounds than the common opinion of the Country
where we live, as the Turks believe Mahomet and his Alcoran: for this leaves
the Soul in such doubts and uncertainty as cannot reach to solid Joy, nor
Victory over the World and Flesh: But the true Evidences of the Gospel and our
Hopes must be well digested, which I have opened to you in the beginning, of
which I give you a breviate in two Sentences.

1. The History of the Gospel of Christ's Life, Miracles, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, sending down the Spirit, the Apostles Miracles, and Preaching and
Writing and Sufferings, is a true History: Else there is none sure in the
World: for none of such Antiquity has greater Evidence. 2. And if the History
aforesaid be true, the Doctrine must needs be true: for it is part of the
History, and owned and sealed certainly by God.
III. We must not be content to be once satisfied of the Truth of the Life to
come, but we must mentally live upon it and for it: and know how great business
our Souls have every day, with our Glorified Lord, and the Glorified Society of
Angels and the perfected Spirits of the just, and with the blessed God of Love
and Glory: We must daily fetch thence the motives of our desires, hopes and
duties, the incentives of our Love and Joy. The Confutation (g) Phil. 3. 18,
19, 20. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 13. 22, 23, 24.
of all Temptations from the Flesh and World; and our supporting patience in
all our Sufferings and Fears. Read often Ioh. 17. 22, 23, 24. and 20. 17. Heb.
12. 22, 23, 24. Mat. 6. 19, 20, 21, 33. Col. 3. 4, 5. 2 These. 1. 10, 11. Heb.
11. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17. and 5. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8. Phil. 1. 21, 23. and 3. 18, 19,
20* They that thus live by Faith on God and Glory, will be prepared for a
joyful death.

IV. We must take heed that no worldly Hope or Pleasure, vitiate our
Affections, and turn them down from their true delight. Ephesians. 3. 17, 18.


V. We must live wholly upon Christ, his Merit, Sufficiency, Love and
Mediation; His Cross and his Kingdom, must be the sum of our Learning, Study
and Content. Ephesians. 4. 30.


VI. We must take heed of grieving the Spirit of Consolation, and wounding our
Consciences, by wilful Sin of Omission or Commission.

VII. We must Faithfully improve all our Time and Talents to do God all the
Service, and others all the good that we can in the World; that we may be ready
to give an account of our Stewardship.

VIII. We must be armed against Temptations to unbelief and despair.

IX. We must while we are in the Body in our daily thoughts fetch as much help
from sensible Similitudes as we can, to have a suitable Imagination of the
Heavenly Glory. And one of the most Familiar is, that which Christ calls the
Coming of the Kingdom of God, which was his Transfiguration with Moses and
Elias in Glorious appearance in the Holy Mount, Mat. 17. 1. Which made Peter
say, It Is good to be here. Mat. 17. 4.
Christ purposely so appeared to them to give them a sensible apprehension of
the Glory which he has promised. And Moses that was buried appeared there in a
Glorified Body.

And we must not think only of God but of the Heavenly Society, and even our
old Acquaintance, that our Minds may find the more Suitableness and Familiarity
in their objects and Contemplations.

X. We must do our best to keep up that Natural Vivacity and Cheerfulness,
which may be Sanctified for Spiritual Employment: for when the Body is diseased
with Melancholy, Heaviness, or Pains, and the Mind diseased with Griefs, Cares
and Fears, it will be hard to think joyfully of God or Heaven or any thing.

XI. We must exercise our selves in those duties which are nearest kin to the
work in Heaven. Specially laboring to excite Hope, Love and Joy by Faith, and
Praising God, especially in Psalms in our Families and the sacr^d Assemblies,
and using the most Heavenly Books and Company.

XII. We must not look when all is done to have very clear Conceptions of the
quality and acts of separated Souls, or the World of Spirits; But must be
satisfied with an implicit Trust in our Father and our Glorified Lord, in the
things which are yet above our reach: And giving up Soul and Body to him, we
should joyfully trust them with him as his own: And believe that while we know
as much as may bring us well to Heaven, it is best for us that the rest is
known by Christ, in whose Hand and Will we are surer and better than in our own.

As for the special Preparations in Sickness, I refer ^ou to the Family Book.

Q. 6. What shall one do that is tempted to doubt, ^ to think hardly of God
because he has made Heaven for so few?

A. 1. Those few may be assured that he will never forsake them, whom he has
so chosen out of ^ll the World, and made his Jewels and his Trea^^re.

2. It Is unprobable rashness, to say, Heaven is but ^or few: All this Earth is
no more to the Glorious World above us (even so far as we see) than one ^ch is
to all the Earth: And what if God forsake ^ne Inch or Molehill? See Heb. 12.
23, 24.

Again I say, I take Hell to be as the Gallows; and this Earth to be as Newgate
Jail, where some ^risoners are that shall die, and some shall live: and ^he
Superior World to be like the City and King^om. Who will say that the King is
unmerciful because Malefactors have a Prison and a Gallows, if ^ll else in the
Kingdom live in P^^^e.

And though this World ^eems almost forsaken as ^he Prison-way to Hell, yet
while the Elect are saved, and the superior lucid Glorious World is many
thousand and thousand and thousand times greater than all this Earth, I doubt
not but Experience will quickly tell us, that the Glory of Gods Love is so
unmeasurably manifested in Heaven, as that the Blindness, Wickedness,
Confusions and Miseries of ^his Earth and Hell, shall be no Eclipse or
disho^our to it for ever. ^nitur, Jan. 10. 1681/2.


FINIS.

