APHORISMS OF JUSTIFICATION, With their Explication annexed. Wherein also is
opened the nature of the Covenants, Satisfaction, Righteousness, Faith, Works,
etc. Published especially for the use of the Church of Kederminster in
Worcestershire. By their unworthy Teacher, RI. BAXTER.

Hebr. 9. 15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that
by means of death for the Redemption of the transgressions under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. HAGUE, Printed by Abraham Brown, Anno 1655.

To the Learned, zealous, Faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, Mr. Richard
Vines, Master of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, and Mr. Anthony Burges, Pastor of
Sutton-Cold-field in Warwickshire, Members of the Reverend Assembly of Divines,
my very much valued Friends and Brethren in the work and Patience of the Gospel.
Most Dear Brethren,
I Never well understood their meaning, who crave Patronage to their Writings
from the mere great ones of the times. If they need or desire a borrowed
honor, methinks they quite mistake their way, and go for water to the top of
Teneriffe, which they should seek in the valleys or stillflowing Springs. To
give them our Writings to instruct them, is agreeable to our Office and duty:
but to submit them to their censures, or crave the protection of their
Greatnesses, and prefix their names as the Signatures of Worth, as if Truth did
ever the more dwell within, where this gilded sign is hanged without: this
seems to me, to be as needless, as absurd. The self-idolizing sin of Pride
is so natural to all men, especially when furthered by dignities and wordly
pomp, that they are apt enough without a tempter, to take themselves for the
summum genus in every Predicament as well as their own. A little help will
mount them above their Teachers, and a little more above Ordinances; but the
top of the ambition is to be above God; that on them as the Alpha all may
depend, and to them as the Omega all may ascribe. I think it a more needful
work (not for our honor, but their own safety) to make them understand, that
Princes and Parliaments are Scholars in that School where Christ is the
Master, and we his Ushers: and that (at least) in respect of our Nuncupative,
Declarative power, we are their Rulers in spirituals, whom they are bound to
obey, Heb. 13. 7. 17. and that all Ministers are Bishops or Overseers in the
language of the holy Ghost, Act. 20. 28. Phil. 1. 1. etc. and not the servants
or pleasers of men, Gal. 11. 10.

They leave us the bare name of their Teachers, so that we will teach them
nothing but what they have taught us first, and leave out the hard sayings,
which they cannot bear. For my part, though I have found as much respect from
such as most, yet have I known very few of the most Religious great ones, but
if I would deal but half as plainly as my commission and patterns do require,
I should quickly turn their respect into indignation. If the old round dealing
Prophets and Apostles were among us, I doubt some pious Gentlemen would take
them for saucy, proud, pragmatical fellows; and would think their tongues
(though not their revenues) did need a reformation. All this is no blemish to
Magistracy, the Ordinance of God, but to humane nature, that for the most part
can as ill bear a high estate, as a man's brains can endure to stand on the
pinnacle of a steeple. Nor is this to blame any due honor to such, but to excuse
my self, that I employ not my breath to fill any empty bladder. For you who
are low, and full, I suppose the acknowledgement of your worth is less
dangerous. As I am more beholden to Reason and Religion, then to Greatness, so
do I feel them command my esteem and affections most powerfully. Your names
therefore have I chosen to prefix to this paper. 1. As acknowledging you indeed
fit censors of my Doctrine; having always valued the judgment of Aristotle in
Philosophy before Alexanders; and thinking your approbation more considerable
then all the Lords or Commanders in the Land. If you approve, I shall be the
more confirmed (and so will my people for whom I write it, who know and honor
you.) If you disallow, (for I cannot conceit that there is nothing to be
disallowed) I shall suspect, and search again.

2. I desire also hereby to acquaint the world with the reverend esteem I have
of you, and to show the contemners of the ministry some examples for their
confutation: That they who think that England has not as learned, holy,
experimental, judicious, humble, heart-piercing Preachers, as any other Nation
whatsoever, may look upon you and confess their error: That for all the
dissentions that have so wasted both Church and State, it may appear in you,
we had some that were lovers of peace; and if all had been so minded, our
wounds had bin healed. That our ignorant yonglings that rush upon the Ministry
(who may see themselves in that glass, 1. Tim. 3. 6. may consider their
distance from such as you, and be humbled. That those who wonder at the
spreading of errors in our people, may see in you, we had some that taught them
better; And Alexander did unjustly hang Ephestions Physician because he dyed.
And that our Authors or defenders of Ieroboams worship, whose fingers itch to
be doing with the Prophets that gain say them, may see what manner of men they
have to deal with, whose worth is sufficient to disgrace the proudest
persecutors, and make their names hateful to all generations: To whom I
commend Sir Walter Rawleighs true observation ( Hist. of the world par. 1. l.
4. c. 3. ^. 6.) [If Antipater upon his conquest had carried all other actions
never so mildly, yet for killing Demosthenes, all that read his eloquent
Orations, do condemn him for a bloody Tyrant to this day: Such grace and
reputation do the learned Arts find in all civil Nations, that the evil
done to a man famous in one of them, is able to blemish any action how good
soever otherwise it be, or honorably carried. To such ends as these have I here
prefixed your names; and not to interesse you in the dishonor of the
imperfections of this slender Tractate.

Farewell, Reverend Brethren, and go on to be exemplary in all spiritual
excellencies: And that the Lord of the Harvest would send forth more such, and
lengthen and succeed your labors to his Church, is the hearty prayer of.

Your unworthy fellow servants, RI. BAXTER.
Apr. 7. 1649.
To the Reader.
THe slow progress of knowledge, and the small addition that each age does
make to the foregoing, both in common Sciences and Divinity, does seem a wonder
to many. Among many others, these four are no small impediments to this
desirable increase.

1. Every ignorant, empty brain (which usually has the highest esteem of it
self) has the liberty of the Press, whereby (through the common itch that
pride exciteth in men, to seem somebody in the world) the number of books is
grown so great, that they begin with many to grow contemptible; and a man may
bestow a great many years to find out the Authors weakness, and that his
books have nothing in them but common; and so many must be tossed over before
we find out those few that are clear and solid, that much of our lives are
spent in the discovery: And yet he is thought to escape well that only loses
his time and labor and gets no more hurt by them. Some think the truth will
not thrive among us, till every man have leave to speak both in Press and
Pulpit that please: God forbid that we should ever see that day! If ten men's
voices be louder then one, then would the noise of Error drown the voice of
Truth: Ignorance is usually clamorous and loud, but Truth is modest, though
zealous: One Orthodox faithful Teacher, would scarce be seen or find room for
the crowd of seducers: For the godly, compared with the ungodly, are not near
so few as the men of clear understanding, in comparison of the ignorant: And
they are most forward to speak, that know least.

2. Others there are of much like understanding and ends as the former, who yet
take the contrary means to obtain those ends. They know no such way to be the
only men, as magisterially to silence all contradictors: If it were only for
apparent and weighty truths, I should commend their zeal: But the mischief
is, that they will be Creed-makers themselves, or put their Commentaries into
the Text, or so conjoyne them, as the Rhemists, that the Text may not walk in
the daylight alone: And so the Creed of many, who have a quick and easy
faith is swelled as big almost as Aquinas Sums. If one of the Primitive
Martyrs were alive among us, and professed but what was in his ancient Creed,
he would scarce be taken by many for a Christian. I am not all so narrow in my
Creed, as Doctor Tailor urges: but I have observed more of this sort of men
contemn his arguments, then are able to answer them. These men themselves
believe so much ( fide humana) that they know but little; and yet they would
have no body know more then they, or no body speak that says not as they.
They would have nothing said but what is said already; and then it is better
(in print) say nothing. They think it a reproach to change our opinions, or
hold them with reserves: Pudet haec opprobria nobis, etc. But O that these men
could tell us how to remedy it! To cry down that ignorance which dwells in
me, is more to the credit of Knowledge then of me. But these men are like many
superficial Scholars, who when they have spent many years in the
Universities, have no way to prove themselves proficients, but to extol
Learning, and cry down the unlearned, that so they may cast the suspicion from
themselves upon others: Even so do these in crying down errors. I know this
small Tract will not relish well with these men's pallats, neither is it
ambitious of their favor, or yet so quarrelsome as purposely to provoke them;
though some words may not be cut meet to their conceits. As I abhor the
project of Julian to destroy the Christian Faith, by giving all Sects a liberty
of contending; so am I loath that any such monster should be produced by nature
who should be a professed enemy to the advancement of Reason; or should presume
to bound that sea of Knowledge which God has promised shall cover the earth;
and to say, hitherto shall thou go, and no further: For my part, I must say as
Burgersdicius in praefat. ad secundam edit. Logic. (...) Vis enim humanae
mentis ita circumscripta est, ut omnia non videat omni tempore; and quae ante a
probavit, post accuratius examen iterum improbet, rejiciatque. Hoc adeo reipsa
comperio saepius in studiis meditationibusque meis, ut quae olim mihi visa sunt
certissima and quasi ex tripode pronunciata, ea melioribus rationibus motus
deprehendam, admodum esse a veritate aliena. And sure Divinity has as great
depths as Philosophy; especially where it is interwoven with it* And to them
that will certify me in my mistakes, I must say as Aristotle to his Physician
when he prescribed him the means of his cure ( referente Aeliano, lib. 9. de
var. Hist.) Ne, inquit, me cures velut bubulcum, velut fossorem, fed prius
causam edissere, sic enim facili persuasione me morigerum reddideris.
Crudelissima enim est (inquit Ritschel) and infanissima tyrannis, cum quis
alios, ut a se dictis assurgant, cogere vult, nulla dictorum evidentia allata.

3. But the greatest enemy to knowledge of all, is men's studying only names
and words, in stead of things. Both in Sciences and Divinity this has debased
men's understandings. Men get all the terms of Art, and Theological
definitions, Distinctions, Axioms, etc. at their fingers end; but to study the
nature of the things themselves, they are utterly careless. Their learning
lies more in their memory, than in their reason and judgment: There you may
find perhaps a large Nomenclature, or a Farrago Notionum secundarum, sed fere
sine primis. They have learned (as Parrots) to speak the same words which their
Tutors and Authors have put into their mouths; but put them out of their
beaten road, and they are at a stand: These men may with industry make good
Linguists or Historians* or perhaps be able to muster an Army without their
Roles: But for Philosophy and Divinity, they have little more then the Carriers
horse when he has a Library on his back. As learned Thomas White says, in
Dialog de mundo, page 370* Doctorum duae sunt Classes, Alii enim cruditi sunt
quasi memoria tenus docti; alii veritatum pensitatores. Duo itaque ad
authoritatem petuntur, ut and artis peritus sit, and ex eorum numero penes quos
depositum est scientiae Tribunal. What I would say to these men, they may read
(if they will bestow the labor) in Ritschell's Preface to his late
Contemplationes Metaphysicae.

And (which is the killing effect of this venom) these Preachers usually teach
their people a Christianity suitable to their own Theology, which consists
in repeating certain words, and forms, and using certain ceremonious actions,
and then they are as good Christians as they themselves are Divines.

4. And yet were there no miscarriage in our studies, Knowledge could not make
that happy progress which some expect: For it is not in studies as it is in
Manufactures, that one man may begin where another left; but every man must
fetch it from the very principles himself: Neither can we take the words of
those that have studied it before us; for that is neither a sound, nor
satisfactory knowledge: whence it comes to pass, (says Pemble Vind. Great. p.
168.) that while we are busy in examining our forefathers inventions, and
posterity employed in trying our examinations, neither we nor they have much
time to add any thing for the increase of Learned Knowledge: Whence you may
guess at one cause, why many Sciences, for some thousands of years have kept
one pitch, and not grown above that dwarfish stature that they had in their
infant invention: and also what the reason is that many that read most, prove
not the deepest Scholars; for no greater impediment to exact Learning then to
make use of other men's understandings, and neglect our own.

I speak not this, as if I had overcome these impediments any more then others;
but because I have perhaps more been hindered by them, and so take my self
bound to warn thee of the pit that I have fallen in: And with all to let thee
know, that if godly men themselves while they lie in these snares, shall oppose
any truth in this Tract, it is no wonder, but a thing to be expected.

To give thee the History of the conception and nativity of these Aphorisms,
and the reason why I trouble the world with more Books, which I blame in
others; understand, that this is but an Appendix to another Treatise going to
the Press on a more excellent Subject: Also, that having occasion therein to
touch upon* Matthew. 25. 35. I was desired to explain in what sense it is, that
Christ gives the reason of his sentence in judgment from men's works: In
answer hereto (and to clear some other incident doubts of the like nature) I
wrote these Positions or Aphorisms? which when some had got, they complained
of obscure brevity, and desired some fuller explication; which when I had done,
that which before was but two or three leaves, annexed as an Appendix to the
forementioned Treatise, did swell to this bigness, that I was feign to let it
go alone. Could I have got Copies enough for my own friends, whom I am bound to
instruct, other men had not been like to have been troubled with it; If thou
please, thou may let it pass without thine observation: If otherwise, it is
so small, that it will take up but little of thy time to read it, nor add much
to the common burden. Some few passages here are which I am not so clear and
confident in my self; As the nature of the Death threatened in the first
Covenant; The necessity of the punctual performance or execution of all
threatenings; The interest of Christ's Active Obedience to those Laws which did
bind men in innocence, in the work of satisfaction, as conjoined with his
Passive Obedience to make up the same price. But as these are but few, so I am
not utterly at a loss concerning them, but seem to discern a strong
probability of what I have written therein,

For you, my Friends, whom Christ has committed to my Teaching and Oversight,
as to an unworthy Usher under him in his School, and Steward in his House, and
of his Mysteries; I publish this for your sakes and use:

1. Because I have still thought that points controverted are better written
than preached, and read than heard; especially, where the greatest part of the
Auditory is incapable of understanding them.

2. Yet is this Doctrine of so great concernment, and so near the Foundation,
that of all the controversies agitated in the Church, there is few that do
better deserve your study, and few that I am so loath you should be ignorant
of. It is my exceeding joy, that God has kept you in his distracted age, from
doting about questions that engender strife, and has given you to cleave to
the most fundamental, undoubted, and practical Truths, and to spend your time
in practice, and peace, and promoting the salvation of the ignorant about you,
when others are taken up in censuring their brethren, renting the Church,
opposing the truth, or wrangling about lesser things; which are quite above
their understandings. Hold on this way; and if you have not in it more
Communion with Christ, more growth in Grace, and on your Deathbeds a more
comfortable review of your lives, and at last a better reckoning made thereof,
then the other, then say, I have deceived you. Yet, as I would have you neglect
no truth, so especially what time ^ou can spare for controversy, let it
chiefly be spent upon these that are so weighty. Be ashamed that men should
hear you disputing about Circumstanti^lls of Discipline, Baptism, Supper,
etc. before you know how to be justified before GOD, or understand the
Doctrine of the Covenants, Redemption, Faith, Obedience, etc,

3. The Books that are written of justification are many, and some great,
which I knew you had not time to read; and if you did, perhaps would lose much
of your labor, as I have done: Therefore I desired to set the most necessary
part before you in a narrower compass. I never intended the full handling of
the Doctrine of justification, these Apherismes being but for the Answering of
a particular Question: Especially what is in Master Bradshaw I omit, because I
expect that you will read and study him, the Book being so small, and of such
singular worth, containing as much as the greatest Volumes. In some places I
have omitted the proof of my Assertions, partly because they seemed plain, or
to be the evident consectaries of former Positions; partly for brev^ty, and
partly because it is for your use, to whom I am (yet) at hand to clear what
you doubt of; and who, I hope, do understand, that to take upon trust from
your Teachers what you cannot yet reach to see in its own evidence, is less
absurd, and more necessary than many do imagine. Moreover, knowing, that I
must shortly put off this Tabernacle, and be taken from you, I thought good to
use this endeavor, that you may be able after my departure, to have these
things in your understandings and remembrance (2 Pet. 1. 14. 15.) And while I
am in this flesh, I shall not cease to admonish you, and pray on your behalf,
that you may beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked,
fall from your own steadfastness; but may grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge
of our LORD and SAVIOVR, JESUS CHRIST: Nor shall I desire any greater Honor or
Advancement on this Earth, than with Ability, Sincerity, and Success, to be.

A Servant of Christ, in the work of your Salvation, RI. BAXTER.
Kederminster. November. 17. 1648.
APHORISMS OF JUSTIFICATION, With their Explication Annexed.
Wherein also is opened the Nature of the Covenants, Satisfaction,
Righteousness, Faith, Works, etc.
THESIS I.
GOd has first a Will of purpose, whereby he determines of Events: what shall
be, and what shall not be, de facto; Secondly, And a Legislative, or Preceptive
Will, for the government of the Rational Creature: whereby he determines what
shall be; and what shall not be, de jure, or in point of duty; and in order
thereto, concludes of Rewards and Punishments.

EXPLICATION.
THis distinction of the Will of God into his Will of Purpose and his Will of
Precept, is very commonly used by Divines, and explained by some, especially
Doctor Twisse frequently, and Doctor Edward Reignolds, in his Sermons on the
Humiliation days, on Hos. 14. Yet is not the exceeding necessity and
usefulness of it discerned by many, nor is it improved accordingly by any that
I have read: It is near of kin to the common distinction of Voluntas signi, and
Beneplaciti, but not the same: The Term [ signi] being more comprehensive, yet
(in my judgment) less proper and convenient then this [Legislative Will, or
voluntas Praecepti:] As the old verse shows, Praecipit ac prohibit, permittit,
consulit, implet. Two of these Acts, to wit, Permission and Operation, fall
under the Will of Purpose, as they are the effects and revelation of it; but
not under the Legislative Will: And indeed the Schoolmen by their Voluntas
signi, do intend not other Will, but the same which they call Beneplaciti,
whose Object is event, as it is uncertainly represented to us by those five
signs: And because they are such uncertain signs (the contrary to what they
seem to import; being frequenly certain;) therefore they tell us that this is
but metaphorically called the Will of God; viz. by a speech borrowed from the
manner of men, who signify their Will by such kind of Actions; see Aquin.
sum. 1a. 1ae. Quest. 19. Art. 11. 12. And Schibler. Metaph. of this.

But that which I call the Legislative or Preceptive will, has another object,
viz. not event but duty; and is Metonymically rather then Metaphorically called
Gods Will, it being the effect and revelation of his real unfeigned will. For
God does not seem to Will that this or that shall be our duty, and so speak
after the manner of men (according to the sense of their Voluntas signi) but
he wills it unfeignedly,

Neither is this Distinction the same with that which differenceth Gods
revealed Will from his secret. For his revealed Will contains also part of
the Will of his purpose, and all the will of precept: The mere prophesies, and
also the promises and threatenings, so far as they point out future event, are
the Revealed part of the Will of Gods purpose. Tilenus himself in his
conference with Camero seems to approve of this Distinction; where he
distinguishes of Gods Will according to its Object, viz. vel quod ipse vult
facere, vel quod a nobis vult fieri: If in this last branch he speak not de
officio and of this preceptive will, rather then de eventu and of the will of
purpose, then he can mean it only of a conditional will of purpose.

As we use to distinguish betwixt the legal will of the King publicly
manifesting our duty in the Laws, and his personal private will; so must we do
here.

The necessity of this distinction is so exceeding great, that but little of
the doctrinall part of Scripture can be well understood without it. The verity
of it is also unquestionable: for none but the grosely ignorant will deny, that
Event and Duty, Purpose and Law, are truly distinct, or that both these last
are called in Scripture and common custom of speech, The Will of God.

And therefore it is a senseless Objection, that we hereby make two wills in
God, and those contradictory. For first, we only make them two distinct Acts of
one and the same will: whereof that of purpose is less revealed, and does
less concern us, yet is most properly called his will, as being such as in man
we call the Elicite Act of it: but that of precept is all revealed and does
more concern us; yet as it is in his Law it is only Metonymically called his
Will, as being only the discovery of his Will properly so called.

And 2ly Contradiction there is none; for they are not de eodem; they have to
do with several Objects; To Will that it shall be Abraham's duty pro hoc
tempore to sacrifice his son; and yet that de eventu it shall not be executed,
are far from contradictory. To Will that it shall be the Jews duty, not to
kill Christ, and yet that eventually they shall kill him, is no contradiction.
To will that it shall be Pharaohs duty to let Israel go; and yet that in point
of event he shall not let them go, is no contradiction. Indeed, if God had
willed, that he shall let them go, and he shall not eventually, or that it
shall be his duty, and it shall not; either of these had been a contradiction
undoubted.

But I have largely explained and more fully improved this Distinction under
the Dispute about Universal Redemption, and therefore shall say no more of it
now.

THESIS II.
First, Praedestination, Election, Reprobation, or Preterition. Secondly, the
Covenant betwixt the Father and the Son. Thirdly, the absolute Promises of
Regeneration and perseverance. Fourthly, the fulfilling of those Promises by
differencing Grace, are all in the series under the Will of Gods purpose.

EXPLICATION.
IT is of very great use to understand which of these Wills every one of Gods
particular words or works do fall under.

1. That Predestination, Election, and Reprobation, are under this Will of
Purpose only, is undoubted.

2, Divines use to mention a Covenanting between the Father and the Son about
the work of Redemption: It is called a Covenant but improperly, speaking after
the manner of men. Properly it is but the Decree of God concerning Christ's
Incarnation, his work, and his sufferings, and the success of these, and what
God will further do thereupon. This therefore falls under this Genius, and so
does the Fathers giving the Elect to Christ, which is but part of this.

3. Those promises of taking the hard heart out of us, and giving hearts of
flesh, one heart, a new heart, and of putting his fear in us, that we shall
not depart from him, etc. are generally taken to be Absolute promises (for here
is no Condition expressed or intimated) made to all the Elect and only them,
as not yet regenerate; and so not to any either named or qualified persons.
These are not therefore fulfilled upon condition of our Faith, or made ours by
believing, as other promises are: For Faith is part of the thing promised, and
the persons are unregenerate, and consequently unbeleevers when these promises
are fulfilled to them. Therefore these Absolute promises are but mere gracious
predictions what God will do for his Elect, the comfort whereof can be received
by no man till the benefit be received, and they be to him fulfilled: Therefore
as all mere predictions, so also these promises do fall under the Will of
Purpose, and not of Precept.

4. So also does the fulfilling of these to particular persons: the actual
choosing or calling of some while others are past by: The bestowing of that
faith which is the condition of the Covenant: The giving of perseverance: And
all the passages of special, effectual, differencing Grace. The knowledge of
this is of great use in expediting the Arminian Controversies, as you shall
perceive after: Some parts of Scripture do in several respects belong to both
these Wills; such are some promises and threatenings conditional, which as they
are predictions of what shall come to pass, do belong to the will Purpose, but
as they are purposely delivered and annexed to the commands and prohibitions
for incitement to Duty, and restraint from Sin, (which was indeed the great end
of God in them) so they belong to the Will of Precept: For the promise of
Reward, and the threatening of Punishment, are real parts of the Law or
Covenant, so of History. All this is only a preparative to the opening more
fully the nature of the Legislative Will, and what falls under it: For the Will
of Purpose, and what is under it, I have no intention any further to handle.

THESIS III.
First, The Will of God concerning duty is expressed wholly in his written
Laws. Secondly Which Laws are promulgate and established by way of Covenant,
wherein the Lord engages himself to reward those that perform its
conditions, and threateneth the penalty to the violaters thereof.

EXPLICATION.
1. NOt but that much of Gods Will is also contained in the Law of Nature; or
may by the mere use of Reason be learned from Creatures, and Providence: But
yet this is nothing against the Scriptures sufficiency and perfection: For
besides all the superadded Positives, the Scripture also contains all that
which we call the Law of Nature; and it is there to be found more legible and
discernable than in the best of our obscure, deceitful, corrupted hearts.

2. All perfect compulsive Laws have their penalty annexed, (or else they are
but merely directive) but not usually any reward propounded to the obeyers: It
is sufficient that the Subject know his Sovereigns pleasure, which he is bound
to observe without any reward. Mere Laws are enacted by Sovereignty: Mere
Covenants are entered by equals, or persons dis-engaged to each other in
respect of the contents of the Covenants, and therefore they require mutual
consent. These therefore made by God, are of a mixed nature; neither mere Laws,
nor mere Covenants, but both. He has enacted his Laws as our Sovereign Lord,
whithout waiting for the Creatures consent, and will punish the breakers,
whether they consent or no: But as it is a Covenant, there must be a
restipulation from the Creature; and God will not perform his conditions there
expressed, without the Covenanters consent, engagement, and performance of
theirs.

Yet is it called frequently in Scripture (a Covenant,) as it is offered by
God, before it be accepted and entered into by the Creature: because the
condescension is only on Gods part; and in reason there should be no question
of the Creatures consent, it being so wholly and only to his advantage. Genesis 9.
12 17. Exodus 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 29. 1. 2 Kings 23. 3 etc.

There are some general obscure Threatenings annexed to the prohibitions in the
Law of Nature; that is, Nature may discern that God will punish the breakers
of his Law, but how, or with what degree of punishment it cannot discern: Also
it may collect that God will be favorable and gracious to the Obedient: but it
neither knows truly the conditions, nor the nature or greatness of the Reward,
nor Gods engagement thereto. Therefore as it is in Nature, it is a mere Law;
and not properly a Covenant. Yea to Adam in his perfection* the form of the
Covenant was known by superadded Revelation, and not written naturally in his
heart.

Whether the threatening and punishment do belong to it only as it is a Law, or
also as it is a Covenant, is of no great moment; seeing it is really mixed of
both. It is called in Scripture also, the curse of the Covenant: Deuteronomy. 29. 20.
21.

THESIS. IIII.
THe first Covenant made with Adam did promise life upon condition of perfect
obedience, and threaten death upon the least disobedience.

EXPLICATION.
THe promise of life is not expressed, but plainly employed in the threatening of
death. That this life promised was only the continuance of that state that
Adam was then in in Paradise, is the judgment of most Divines: But what death
it was that is there threatened, is a Question of very great difficulty, and
some moment. The same damnation that follows the breach of the New Covenant,
it could not be: no more then the life then enjoyed is the same with that which
the New Covenant promises. And I cannot yet assent to their judgment, who
think it was only that death which consists in a mere separation of soul
and body: or also in the annihilation of both. Adams separated soul must have
enjoyed happiness, or endured misery: For that our souls when separated are
in one of these conditions, and not annihilated or insensible, I have proved by
twenty Arguments from Scripture in another book. As Adams life in Paradise
was, no doubt incomparably beyond ours in happiness; so the death threatened in
that Covenant was a more terrible death then our temporal death. For though
his loss by a temporal death would have bin greater then ours now; yet he
would not have bin a Subject capable of privation, if annihilated; nor however
capable of the sense of his loss. A great loss troubles a dead man no more
then the smallest. Therefore as the joy of Paradise would have bin a perpetual
joy, so the sorrow and pain it is like would have bin perpetual, and we
perpetuated capable Subjects. See Barlow exercit. utrum melius sit miserum esse
quam non esse? I do not think that all the deliverance that Christ's Death
procured, was only from a temporal death or annihilarion: or that the death
which he suffered was aequivalent to no more.

THESIS. V.
THis Covenant being soon by man violated, the threatening must be fulfulled,
and so the penalty suffered.

EXPLICATION.
WHether there were any flat necessity of man's suffering after the fall, is
doubted by many, and denied by Socinus. Whether this necessity arises from
Gods natural Justice, or his Ordinate, viz. his Decree, and the verity of the
threatening, is also with many of our own Divines a great dispute: whether God
might have pardoned sin, if he had not said, the sinner shall die, may be
doubted of (though I believe the affirmative, yet I judge it a frivolous
presumptuous question. But the word of his threatening being once past,
methinks, it should be past question that he cannot absolutely pardon,
without the apparent violation of his Truth, or Wisdom. Some think that it
proceeds from his Wisdom rather then his Justice, that man must suffer: see
Mr. Io. Goodwin of justif. part. 2. page 34.) but why should we separate what
God has conjoined? However, whether Wisdom, or justice, or Truth (or rather
all these) were the ground of it, yet certain it is, that a necessity there
was that the penalty should be inflicted: or else the Son of God should not
have made satisfaction, nor sinners bear so much themselves.

THESIS. VI
THis penalty the offender himself could not bear, without his everlasting
undoing.

EXPLICATION.
THat is, not the full penalty: for part of it he did bear, and the Earth for
his sake: and (as I think) all mankind does bear part of it to this day. But
the full penalty would have bin a greater and everlasting suffering.

THESIS VII.
(1) Jesus Christ at the Will of his Father, (2) and upon his own Will, (3)
being perfectly furnished for this Work, (4) with a Divine power, (5) and
personal Righteousness, (6) first undertook, (7) and afterward discharged
this debt; (8) by suffering what the Law did threaten, and the offender
himself was unable to bear

EXPLICATION.
(1) THe Love of God to the World was the first womb where the work of
Redemption was conceived, Ioh. 3. 16. (as it is taken conjunct with his own
glory.) The Eternal Wisdom and Love found out and resolved on this way of
recovery, when it never entered into the thoughts of man to contrive or desire
it.

(2) The Will of the Father and the Son are one: The Son was a voluntary
undertaker of this task: it was not imposed upon him by constraint: when he is
said to come to do his Fathers Will ( Heb. 10. 7. 9.) it does also include his
own Will. And where he is said to do it in obedience to the Father, as it is
spoken of a voluntary obedience, so is it spoken of the execution of our
Redemption, and in regard to the humane nature especially; and not of the
undertaking by the divine Nature alone. Not only the consent of Christ did make
it lawful that he should be punished being innocent, but also that special
power which as he was God he had over his own life more then any creature has:
Ioh. 10. 18. I have power (...) says Christ, to lay down my Life.

(3.) No mere creature was qualifyed for this work: even the Angels that are
righteous do but their duty, and therefore cannot supererrogate or merit for
us. Neither were they able to bear and overcome the penalty.

(4.) It must therefore be God that must satisfy God; both for the perfection
of the Obedience, for dignifying of the duty and suffering, for to be capable
of meriting, for the bearing of the curse, and for the overcomming of it, and
doing the rest of the works of the Mediatorship, which were to be done after
the Resurrection. Yet mere God it must not be, but man also: or else it would
have been forgiveness without satisfaction, seeing God cannot be said to make
satisfaction to himself. Many other reasons are frequently given by Divines to
prove the necessity of Christ's Incarnation, Act. 20, 28. Heb. 1. 1, 2, 3.

(5.) Had not Christ been perfectly righteous himself he had not been capable
of satisfying for others: Yet is it not necessary that he must be in all
respects a fulfiller of Righteousness before he begin the work of
satisfaction, or that his righteousness and satisfaction be so distinct, as
that the same may not be both righteousness and satisfactory.

Though* many great Divines do so distinguish between Iustitiam personae, and
Iustitiam meriti, as that the former is only a preparatory to the latter; yet I
cannot see any reason but the same obedience of Christ to the whole Law may be
both personal and meritorious, (of the righteousness of the Divine nature, or
the habitual righteousness of the humane nature, I do not now dispute.)
Therefore I do not mean that all Christ's personal righteousness was only
preparatory to his satisfaction and merit, when I speak of his being furnished
with a personal Righteousness, though I confess I was long of that
judgment. See more after at page 45.

(6.) The undertaking of the Son of God to satisfy, was effectual before his
actual satisfying: As a man that makes a purchase, may take possession and
enjoy the thing purchased upon the mere bargain made, or earnes paid, before
he have fully paid the sum. To this purpose most understand that in Rev. 13. 8.
whose names were not written in the book of life, of the lamb slain from the
foundation of the World: But I doubt not but Weemse his interpretation is the
plain truth; that the words [from the foundation of the World] have reference
to the writing of their names in the book of Life, and not to the slaying of
the Lamb, as being thus to be read, whose names were not written in the book
of life of the slain Lamb, from the foundation of the World. It has the same
sense with Rev. 17. 8. which does expound this in leaving out the mention of
the slaying of the Lamb.

(7.) I know man's guilt and ^^^igation to suffer, is but Metaphorically called
his debt. Therefore when we would search into the nature of these things
exactly, we must rather conceive of God as the Lawgiver and Governor of the
World, then as a creditor, lest the Metaphor should mislead us. Yet because it
is a common and a Scripture phrase, and conveniently expresses our Obligation
to bear the penalty of the violated Law, I use it in that sense.

But here we are cast upon many and weighty and very difficult Questions.
Whether Christ did discharge this debt by way of solution or by way of
satisfaction? 2. whether in his suffering and our escape the threatening of the
Law was executed or dispensed with? 3. And if dispensed with, how it can stand
with the truth and justice of God? 4. And whether sinners may thence be
encouraged to conceive some hope of a relaxation of the threatenings in the
Gospel? 5. And whether the faithful may not fear lest God may relaxe a
promise as well as a threatening? 6. And lastly whether if the Law be relaxable,
God might not have released his Son from the suffering, rather then have put
him to so great torment, and so have freely pardoned the offenders? I shall
briefly answer to all these.

1. Quest. Mere and proper solution or payment is, when the very same thing is
paid which w^^ in the obligation, or suffered which was threatened. This payment
the creditor cannot refuse; nor the Ruler refuse this suffering, nor to acquit
the person that has so paid or suffered.

Satisfaction is the paying of somewhat that was not directly in the
Obligation, but is given to satisfye the creditor in stead of the debt, which
payment the Creditor may choose to accept; and if he do not consent to accept
it, though it were paid, yet the debtour should not be acquit. So also in
regard of suffering.

Here we take payment and satisfaction in the strict legal sense and not in
the large sense wherein they are confounded. And now the Question is, whether
Christ's suffering were the payment of the very debt, or of somewhat else in its
stead? The resolving of this depends upon the resolving of two other quaestions
both great and difficult.

1. What it was which the Law did threaten 2. What it was that Christ did
suffer?

1. Various are the judgments of Divines about the former; and exceeding
difficult it is to determine, because it has pleased the Holy Ghost to speak
of it so sparingly: and who can here understand any more then is written? 1.
Whether Adams soul and body should immediately have bin annihilated, or
destroyed so as to become insensible? 2. Or whether his soul should have bin
immediately seprarated from his body as ours are at death, and so be the only
sufferer of the pain? 3. Or if so, whether there should have bin any
Resurrection of the body after any certain space of time, that so it might
suffer as well as the soul? 4. Or whether soul and body without separation
should have gone down quick together into Hell? Or into any place or state of
torment short of Hell? 5. Or whether both should have lived a cursed life on
Earth through everlasting, in exclusion from Paradise, separation from Gods
favor and gracious presence, loss of his image, etc? 6. Or whether he should
have lived such a miserable life for a season, and then be annihilated, or
destroyed? 7. And if so, whether his misery on Earth should have bin more then
men do now endure? And the more important are these Questions of, because of
some other that depend upon them. As 1. what death it was that Christ redeemed
us from? 2. And what death it is that perishing infants die, or that our guilt
in the first transgression does procure? For it being a sin against the first
Covenant only, will be punished with no other death then that which is
threatened in that Covenant.

Much is said against each of these expositions of that first threatening.

1. Against the first I have said somewhat before; And that in 1. These. 1. 10.
seems to be much against it: Jesus that delivered us from the wrath to come:
This wrath was either the execution of the threatening of the Covenant of works,
or of the Covenant of grace: not the latter, for Christ saves none who deserve
it, from that: therefore it must needs be the wrath of the first Covenant, and
consequently that Covenant did threaten a future wrath to all sinners, which,
if the world or Adam himself had been destroyed, or annihilated immediately
upon his fall, we had not been capable of.

2. Against the second sense, it seems unlikely that the soul should suffer
alone, and the body lie quietly in the dust, because the body did sin as well
as the soul, and the senses were the souls inticers and betrayers.

3. Against the third there is no intimation of a Resurrection in the Scripture
as part of the penalty of the Covenant of works, or as a preparative to it.
That Adam should have risen again to be condemned or executed if Christ had
not come, no Scripture speaks; but rather on the contrary, Resurrection is
ascribed to Christ alone, 1 Cor. 15. 12. 21. 22.

4. Against the fourth it seems evident by the execution, that the separation
of soul and body was, at least, part of the death that, was threatened, or else
how comes it to be inflicted? and the Apostle says plainly, that in Adam all
dye, viz. this natural death, 1 Cor. 15. 22.

5. Against the fifth the same Argument will, ^erve.

6. Concerning the sixth and seventh they lie open to the same objection as the
second.

It is hard to conclude peremptorily in so obscure a case. If we knew
certainly what life was the reward of that Covenant, we might the better
understand what death was the penalty. Calvin and many more Interpreters think
that if Adam had not fallen, he should after a season have been translated into
Heaven without death, as Enoch and Elias. but I know no Scripture that tells us
so much. Whether in Paradise terrestrial or celestial I certainly know not;
but that Adam should have lived in happiness and not have dyed, is certain;
seeing therefore that Scripture tells us on the one hand, that death is the
wages of sin; and one the other hand, that Jesus delivered us from the wrath
to come; the 2, 6, and 7. Expositions do as yet seem to me the most safe, as
containing that punishment whereby both these Scriptures are fulfilled: Beside
that they much correspond to the execution, viz. that man should live here for
a season a dying life, separated from God, devoid of his Image, subject to
bodily curses and calamities, dead in Law, and at last his soul and body be
separated; his body turning to dust from whence it came, and his soul enduring
everlasting sorrows, yet nothing so great as those that are threatened in the
new Covenant.

The Objection that lies against this sense, is easier then those which are
against the other. For though the body should not rise to torment yet its
destruction is a very great punishment: And the soul being of a more excellent
and durable nature, is likely to have had the greater and more durable
suffering: And though the body had a chief hand in the sin, yet the soul had
the far greater guilt, because it should have commanded and governed the
body; as the fault of a man is far greater then the same in a beast.

Yet I do not positively conclude, that the body should not have risen again;
but I find no intimation of it revealed in the Scripture; but that the
sentence should have been immediately executed to the full, or that any such
thing is concluded in the words of the threat In the day thou eatest thou shall
die the death. I do not think; for that would have prevented both the being,
the sin, and the suffering of his posterity; and consequently Christ did not
save any one in the world from sin or suffering but Adam and Eve, which seems
to me a hard saying (though I know much may be said for it.)

Thus we see in part the first Question resolved; what death it was that the
Law did threaten? Now let us see, whether this were the same that Christ did
suffer? And if we take the threatening in its full extent, as it expresses not
only the penalty, but also its proper subject and its circumstances, then it is
undeniable that Christ did not suffer the same that was threatened; For the Law
threatened the death of the offender, but Christ was not the offender; Adam
should have suffered for ever, but so did not Christ; Adam did die spiritually,
by being forsaken of God, in regard of holiness as well as in regard of
comfort, and so deprived at least of the chief part of his Image; so was not
Christ.

Yet it is disputable whether these two last were directly contained in the
threatening, or not? whether the threatening were not fully executed in Adams
death? And the eternity of it were not accidental, even a necessary consequent
of Adams disability to overcome death and deliver himself, which God was not
bound to do? And whether the loss of Gods Image were part of the death
threatened, or rather the effect of our sin only, executed by our selves, and
not by God? Many Divines say, that God did not take away his Image, but man
thrust it away: So Capell of Temptations, page 8. etc. Though most judge
otherwise, because the same power must annihilate that must create.

I conclude then, that in regard of the proper penalty, Christ did suffer a
pain and misery of the same sort, and of equal weight with that threatened;
but yet because it was not in all respects the same, it was rather satisfaction
then the payment of the proper debt, being such a payment as God might have
chosen to accept.

The 2. Question was, Whether the threatening was executed, or relaxed and
dispensed with?

Answ. The Answer to this is plain in the answer to the former.

In regard of the mere weight of punishment, considered as abstracted from
person and duration, it was executed and not relaxed; yet taking the threatening
entirely as it was given out, and we must say it was dispensed with; for
mankind does not suffer all that is there threatened.

Yet some, who think that the death threatened did consist in out present
miseries and temporal death only, do also think that the threatening is fully
executed upon the sinners, and that Christ has only delivered us from the
accidental duration of it, but not prevented the execution.

If I could think that the threatening intended no punishment to the soul
further, after it is separated from the body, then I should think as they.

The 3. Question is, How it can stand with* the Truth and Justice of God to
dispense* with his Threats? Concerning his Justice, the question is not
difficult, and I shall say nothing to that; all the question is, how to
reconcile this dispensation with Gods truth. Here you must distinguish, 1.
Betwixt the letter of the Law and the sense. 2. Between the Law and the end of
the Law. 3. Between a Threat with exception either expressed or reserved, and
that which has no exception. 4. Between a threatening which only expresses
the desert of the sin, and what punishment is due, and so falls only under
the will of precept, and that which also intends the certain prediction of
event, and so falls under the will of purpose also. And now I answer:

1. The end of the Law is the Law, and that end being the manifestation of Gods
Justice and hatred of sin, etc. was fulfilled, and therefore the Law was
fulfilled.

2. Most think that the Threatening had this reserved exception, [ Thou shall
dye, i. e. by thy self, or thy surety.] And though it be sinful in man to
speak with mental reservations when he pretends to reveal his mind, yet not
in God, because as he is subject to no Law, so he is not bound to reveal to us
all his mind, nor does he indeed pretend any such thing.

3. So that the sense of the Law is fulfilled.

4. But the special answer that I give, is this, When Threatenings are merely
parts of the Law, and not also predictions of event and discoveries of Gods
purpose thereabouts, then they may be dispensed with without any breach of
Truth: For as when God says, [ Thou shall not eat of the Tree etc.] the
meaning is only [It is thy duty not to eate] and not that eventually he should
not eat: So when he says ( Thou shall die the death) The meaning is, (Death
shall be the due reward of thy sin, and so may be inflicted for it at my
pleasure) and not that he should certainly suffer it in the event. And I judge,
that except there be some note added whereby it is apparent, that God intended
also the prediction of event, no mere Threatening is to be understood otherwise
but as it is a part of the Law, and so speaks of the duenesse of punishment
only, as the Precept speaks of the duenesse of obeying.

If this be Grotius his meaning, I assent, that Omnes minae quibus non adest
irrevocabilitatis signum, intelligendae sunt ex suapte natura dejure
comminantis ad relaxandum nihil imminuere, (viz.) so far as they are no
predictions of event; otherwise Gods bare prediction is a note of
irrevocability: And his two notes, viz. An Oath, and a Promise, are not the
only signs of irrevocability: Gods Word is as sure as his Oath, and a
Threatening as true as a Promise, and when it falls, under Voluntas propositi,
will as surely be fulfilled. See Grotius de satisfactione Christi, cap. 3. and
Vossium ejus defenforem.

The 4. Question is, whether sinners may not hence be encouraged to conceive
some hope of a relaxation of the Threatenings in the New Covenant? To this I
answer.

1. No: For God has fully discovered that it is his purpose and resolution to
execute those Threats, and not to relax or reverse them; that he will come in
flaming fire to render vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. 2. These. 1. 7, 8. That there is no more
sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. 26, 27. And has revealed the manner how they shall
be condemned, Mat. 25.

2. If there were any hope of this, yet were it unexpressable madness to
venture ones everlasting state on that, when we see that God did not remit the
penalty of the first Covenant wholly, but would have his justice satisfied,
though by the suffering of his Son Christ: And yet that it also cost the
offenders so dear themselves.

The 5. Question is, May we not fear lest God may dispense with his Promises
as well as his Threats? I answer:

1. He did not dispense with his Threatening, but upon a valuable consideration.

2. No; for though the Promise as well as the Threat do belong to the Law, and
so discover what is due, rather then what shall come to pass, yet the thing
promised being once our due, cannot be taken from us without our consent: and
so, as Grotius says, Ex promisione jus aliquod acquiritur ei cui facta est
promtssio; justice binds to give all to another that is his due, but not
always and absolutely to inflict upon an offender as much punishment as he
deserves.

3. Beside, God has revealed it to be the will of his purpose also to confer
the things promised in the Gospel upon all Believers.

The 6 and last Question was. If the Law be relaxable, whether God might not
have freely remitted the offense, and have spared his Son his satisfactory
sufferings? I answer.

1. It yet remains under dispute whether the Threat speak not de eventu, as to
the sin, though but de jure, as to the sinner? And then the Truth of God
would forbid a dispensation as to the sin,

2. Though the Threatening do not flatly determine of the execution de eventu;
yet it intimates a strong probability of it, and seems to tell the world, that
ordinarily the Lawgiver will proceed according thereto, and gives the sinner
strong grounds to expect as much. Therefore if God should relax his Law, much
more if he should wholly dispense with it by remission, the Law would seem to
lose much of its authority, and the Lawgiver be esteemed mutable.

3. Besides, as no good Laws are lightly to be reversed, so, much less such
as are so agreeable to order, and the nature of God and so solemnly enacted as
this was.

4. Though GOD did dispense with his Law as to our impunity, because else
mankind would have utterly perished, and because he is abundant in mercy and
compassion ( Exo. 34. 7. Psalm. 103. 8. and III. 4, 5. and 145. 8. Isa. 55. 7.
Ier. 31. 20. Luk 6. 36. Romans 2. 4.) yet he is also holy and just, and a hater
of sin; and how would those his Attributes have been manifested or glorified,
if he had let so many and great sins go wholly unpunished. ( Prove. 11. 20.
Psalm. 5. 5. and 45. 8. Heb. 11. 2. Romans 1. 18.

5. It would have encouraged men to sin and contemn the Law, if the very first
breach and all other should be merely remitted; but when men see that God has
punished his Son when he was our surety, they may easily gather that he will
not spare them, if they continue rebels.

6. The very end of the Law else would have been frustrated, which now is
fulfilled by Christ's satisfaction: For Proxima sunt idem and tantundem.

7. Besides the exceeding love of God that is manifested in this suffering of
his Son, and the great engagemens that are laid upon the sinner.

They that will avoid all the supposed inconveniences of this Doctrine of Gods
dispencing with his Threatenings, must needs affirm, that the offenders do
suffer as much, and the same which was threatened.

(8.) Whether we are justified only by Christ's Passive Righteousness, or also
by his Active, is a very great dispute among Divines. By his Passive
Righteousness is meant not only his death, but the whole course of his
humiliation, from the Assumption of the humane nature to his Resurrection. Yea,
even his Obedientiall Actions so far as there was any suffering in them, and as
they are considered under the notion of Suffering, and not of Duty or
Obedience. By his Active Righteousness is meant the Righteousness of his
Actions, as they were a perfect obedience to the Law. The chief point of
difference and difficulty lies higher, How the Righteousness of Christ is
made ours? Most of our ordinary Divines say, that Christ did as properly obey
in our room and stead, as he did suffer in our stead; and that in Gods esteem
and in point of Law we were in Christ obeying and suffering, and so in him we
did both perfectly fulfill the Commands of the Law by Obedience, and the
threatenings of it by bearing the penalty; and thus (say they) is Christ's
Righteousness imputed to us, viz. his Passive Righteousness for the pardon of
our sins and delivering us from the penalty; his Active Righteousness for the
making of us righteous, and giving us title to the kingdom: And some say, the
habitual Righteousness of his humane nature instead of our own habitual
Righteousness; yea some add the righteousness of the divine nature also.

This opinion (in my judgment) contains a great many of mistakes.

1. It supposes us to have been in Christ, at least in legal title, before we
did believe, or were born; and that not only in a general and conditional
sense as all men, but in a special as the justified; indeed we are elected in
Christ before the foundation of the world, but that is a term of diminution,
and therefore does not prove that we were then in him; Neither Gods Decree or
foreknowledge gives us any legal title.

2. It teaches imputation of Christ Righteousness in so strict a sense, as
will neither stand with reason, nor the Doctrine of Scripture, much less with
the phrase of Scripture which mentions no imputation of Christ or his
Righteousness to us at all; and has given great advantage to the Papists
against us in this Doctrine of Justification.

3. It seems to ascribe to God a mistaking judgment, as to esteem us to have
been in Christ when we were not, and to have done and suffered in him, what we
did not.

4. It makes Christ to have paid the Idem, and not the Tantundem; the same
that was due, and not the value; and so to justify us by payment of the proper
debt, and not by strict satisfaction. And indeed this is the very core of the
mistake, to think that we have by delegation paid the proper debt of Obedience
to the whole Law, or that in Christ we have perfectly obeyed; whereas; 1. It
can neither be said, that we did it; 2. And that which Christ did, was to
satisfy for our non-payment and disobedience.

5. So it makes Christ to have fulfilled the preceptive part of the Law in our
stead and room in as strict a sense, as he did in our room bear the
punishment, which will not hold good (though for our sakes he did both.)

6. It supposes the Law to require both obedience and suffering in respect of
the same time and actions, which it does not. And whereas they say, that the
Law requires suffering for what is past, and Obedience for the future; this is
to deny that Christ has satisfied for future sins. The time is near when
those future sins will be past also; what does the Law require then? If we do
not obey for the future, then we sin; if we sin, the Law requires nothing but
suffering for expiation.

7. This opinion makes Christ's sufferings (by consequence) to be in vain, both
to have been suffered needlessly by him, and to be needless also now to us: For
if we did perfectly obey the Law in Christ, (or Christ for us, according to
that strict imputation,) then therere is no use for suffering for disobedience.

8. It fondly supposes a medium betwixt one that is just, and one that is
guilty; and a difference betwixt one that is just, and one that is no sinner;
one that has his sin or gui^t taken away, and one that has his
unrighteousness taken away: It is true, in bruits and insensibles, that are not
subjects capable of justice, there is a medium betwixt just and unjust, and
innocence and justice are not the same. There is a negative injustice which
deneminateth the subject non-justum, but not injustu^, where Righteousness is
not due: But where there is the debitum habendi, where Righteousness ought to
be, and is not, there is no negative unrighteousness, but primative: As there
is no middle betwixt strait and crooked, so neither between Conformity to the
Law, (which is Righteousness,) and Deviation from it, which is unrighteousness.)

9. It makes our Righteousness, to consist of two parts, viz. The putting away
of our guilt, and the Imputation of Righteousness, i. e. 1. Removing the
crookedness; 2. Making them straight.

10. It ascribes these two supposed parts to two distinct supposed causes; the
one to Christ's fulfilling the Precept by his actual Righteousness, the latter
to his fulfilling the threatening by his passive Righteousness: As if there must
be one cause of introducing light, and another of expelling darkness; or one
cause to take away the crookedness of a line, and another to make it straight.

11. The like vain distinction it makes between delivering from death, and
giving title to life, or freeing us from the penalty, and giving us the reward;
For as when all sin of omission and commission is absent, there is no
unrighteousness; so when all the penalty is taken away, both that of pain, and
that of loss, the party is restored to his former happiness. Indeed there is a
greater superadded decree of life and glory procured by Christ more then we
lost in Adam: But as that life is not opposed to the death or penalty of the
Covenant, but to that of the second; so is it the effect of Christ's passive, as
well as of his active Righteousness.

So you see the mistakes contained in this first Opinion, about the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness to us.

The maintainers of it (beside some few able men) are the vulgar sort of
unstudyed Divines, who having not ability or diligence to search deep into so
profound a Controversy, do still hold that opinion which is most common and in
credit.

If you would see what is said against it, read Mr Wotton, Pareus, Piscator, Mr
Bradshaw Mr Gataker, and Mr. Io: Goodwin.

The other opinion about our Participation of Christ's Righteousness is this,
That God the Father does accept the sufferings and merits of his Son as a full
satisfaction to his violated Law, and as a valuable consideration upon which he
will wholly forgive and acquit the offenders themselves, and receive them again
into his favor, and give them the addition of a more excellent happiness also,
so they will but receive his Son upon the terms expressed in the Gospel.

This Opinion as it is more simple and plain, so it avoydeth all the
forementioned inconveniences which do accompany the former. But yet this
difference is betwixt the maintainers of it: Most of them think, that Christ's
Passive Righteousness (in the latitude before expressed) is the whole of this
Satisfaction made by Christ, which they therefore call Iustitia Meriti, and
that his Actual Righteousness is but Iustitia Personae, qualifying him to be a
fit Mediator. Of this judgment are many learned and godly Divines, of singular
esteem in the Church of God, (the more to blame some of the ignorant sort of
their adversaries, who so reproach them as Heretics: I have often wondered when
I have read some of them, (as M. Walker, etc.) to see how strongly they revile,
and how weakly they dispute.) Sure if those two famous men Paraeus and
Piscator, beside Olevian, Scultetus, Cargius, learned Capellus, and many other
beyond Sea, be Heretics, I know not who will shortly be reputed Orthodox; and
if they be not mistaken all antiquity is on their side, beside Calvin, Vrsine,
and most other modern Divines that writ before this Controversy was agitated;
and sure they are neither unlearned nor ungodly that have in our own Country
maintained that opinion; witness Mr Anthony Wotten, Mr Gataker, Mr John
Goodwin, and (as I am informed) that excellent Disputant and holy, learned,
judicious Divine Mr John Ball, with many other excellent men that I know now
living.

Some others (though few) do think, that though Christ's Righteousness be not
imputed to us in that strict sense as the first Opinion expresses, but is ours
under the fore-explained notion of Satisfaction only, yet the Active
Righteousness considered, as such is part of this Satisfaction also, as well as
his Passive, and Iustitia Meriti, as as well as Iustitia Personae; and though
the Law do not require both obeying and suffering, yet Christ paying not the
Idem, but the Tantundem, not the strict debt it self, but a valuable
Satisfaction, might well put the merit of his works into the payment.

The chief Divines that I know for this Opinion (as it is distinguished from
the two former) are judicious and holy Mr Bradshaw, and Grotius, (if I may call
a Lawyer a Divine.)

And for my own part I think it is the truth, though I confess I have been ten
years of another mind for the sole Passive Righteousness, because of the
weakness of those grounds which are usually laid to support the opinion for the
Active and Passive; till discerning more clearly the nature of Satisfaction, I
perceived, that though the sufferings of Christ have the chief place therein,
yet his obedience as such may also be meritorious and satisfactory. The true
grounds and proof whereof you may read in Grotius de Satisfact. cap. 6. and
Bradshaw of Justification in Preface, and cap. 13.

The chief Objections against it are these;

1. Object. Christ's Passive Righteousness being as much as the Law required on
our behalf, as satisfaction for its violation, therefore the Active is
needless, except to qualify him to be a fit Mediator. I answer, This objection
is grounded upon the forementioned Error, That Christ paid the Idem, and not
the Tantundem: whereas it being not a proper payment of the debt, but
satisfaction, therefore even his meritorious works might satisfy. Many an
offender against Prince or State has been pardoned their offense, and escaped
punishment, for some deserving acceptable service that they have done, or that
some of their predecessors have done before them. And so Romans 5. 19. By the
obedience of one, many are made righteous.

2. It is objected, That Christ being once subject to the Law, could do no more
but his duty, which if he had not done, he must have suffered for himself; and
therefore how could his obedience be satisfactory and meritorious for us? I
answer, 1. You must not here in your conceivings abstract the Humane Nature,
which was created, from the Divine; but consider them as composing one person:
2. Nor must you look upon the Works of Christ, as receiving their valuation and
denomination from the Humane Nature alone or principally. 3. Nor must you
separate in your thoughts the time of Christ's servitude and subjection, from
the time of his freedom before his incarnation and subjection. And so take
these Answers. 1. Christ Jesus did perform several works which he was not
obliged to perform, as a mere Subject: Such are all the works that are proper
to his office of Mediator, his assuming the Humane Nature, his making Laws to
his Church, his establishing and sealing the Covenant, his working Miracles,
his sending his Disciples to convert and save the world, enduing them with the
Spirit, his overcoming Death and rising again, etc. What Law binds us to such
works as these? And what Law (to speak properly) did bind him to them? Yet
were the works in themselves so excellent, and agreeable to his Fathers Will,
(which he was well acquainted with) that they were truly meritorious and
satisfactory.

2. Some works he performed which were our duty indeed, but he was not bound to
perform them in regard of himself: Such as are all the observances of the
Ceremonial Law, his Circumcision, Offering, and so his Baptism, etc. Luke. 2.
21, 24. Gal. 4. 4. Isa. 53. 12. Ioh. 7. 2, 10. Mat. 26. 17, 18, 19. 20. and 3.
13. 10. These were the proper duties of sinners, which he was not: These two
are admitted by Mr Gataker, and most others.

3. Even his obedience to the Moral Law was not his duty, till he voluntarily
undertook it: It being therefore upon his consent and choice, and not due
before consent, must needs be meritorious. And though when he was once a
servant he is bound to do the work of a servant, yet when he voluntarily put
himself in the state of a servant, and under the Law, not for his own sake, but
for ours, his work is nevertheless meritorious. Suppose when a Soulder has
deserved death, his Captain should offer himself to the General to do the duty
of the private Soldier, and to perform some rare exploit against the Enemy,
though he lose his life in the Service, and all this to ransom the Soldier:
when he has undertaken the task, it becomes due, but yet is nevertheless
satisfactory. As he (says Bradshaw) who to satisfy for another, becomes a
slave to men; does in and by all those acts, which the Laws bind a slave unto,
make satisfaction: yea, though they be such acts, as he, becoming a slave, is
bound upon pain of death to undergo: so Christ, etc. and the greater was the
bond that he did undergo for the doing of them, the greater was the merit. Isa.
42. 1. and 53. 11. Phili. 2. 7. Luke 2. 20. Isa. 53. 9, 10. Gal. 4. 4. 2 Corinthians. 5. 11. Heb. 7. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 22, 24. and 3. 18. 1 Ioh. 3. 5.

4. Even some works that are due may yet be so excellent for matter and manner,
and so exceeding pleasing to him that commands them, that they may give him
satisfaction for former injuries, and he may think it his part to encourage the
Actor with some reward. So Ionathans delivering Israel by that rare exploit did
save him from death: Abners bringing in the Kingdom to David would have covered
his former service against him: Many of Ioabs faults were long covered by his
good service: Such were the actions of David in bringing in the fore-skins of
the Philistines; and of his Worthies, in fetching him of the waters of
Bethlehem. 1 Samuel 14. 44, 45, 2 Samuel 2. 3. 1 Samuel 18. 26, 27. 2 Samuel 23. 16. It
was not only the suffering or hazard in these actions that was meritorious,
but also the excellency of the actions themselves.

5. The interest of the Divine Nature, in all the works of Christ, makes them
to be infinitely meritorious, and so satisfactory.

THESIS VIII.
(1) WHerefore the Father has delivered all things into the hands of the Son;
and given him all power in heaven and earth, and made him Lord both of the dead
and living. Ioh. 13. 3. Mat. 28. 18. Ioh. 5. 21, 22, 23, 27. Romans 14. 9.

EXPLICATION.
(1) FOr Explication of this there are several Questions to be debated.

1. Whether the extolling of Christ the Mediator, or the restoring and saving
of the offenders, were Gods more remote end, and principal intention?

2. Whether this Authority and Dignity of Christ, be by Original Natural Right?
or by Donation? or by Purchase?

3. Whether Christ's Lordship over all, do imply or prove his redeeming of all?
or of all alike?

4. Whether God has delivered things out of his own power in any kind, by
delivering them into the power of his Son? or whether it be only the
substituting him to be Vicegerent to the Father?

To the first, I answer: That the saving of sinners was the end both of the
Father and the Son, is plain through the Gospel and that the exalting of Christ
to his Dominion was another end, is plain in Rom 14. 9. But which of these was
the principal end, I think is an unwarrantable question for man to propound: I
dare not undertake to assert a natural priority or posteriority in any of Gods
Decrees, de mediis ad finem ultimum; much less to determine which has the
first place, and which the second, Phil. 2. 9.

To the second question I answer: 1. The Divine Nature of Christ being one with
the Godhead of the Father, had an absolute sovereignty over all things from
their first being: and so derivately had the humane nature as soon as assumed
by virtue of the Hypostatical Union.

2. But there is further a power given him as Mediator to dispose of all at his
pleasure, to make new laws to the world, and to deal with them according to the
tenor of those laws: This power is partly purchased, and partly given (but not
gratis:) that is, Though God might have refused the tendered fatisfaction, and
have made the sinner bear the punishment yet he willingly accepted the merits
of his Son as a full ransom, and delivered up all to the Purchaser as his own:
And so well was he pleased with the work of Redemption, that he also gave a
further power to his Son, to judge his Enemies: and save his people with a far
greater Judgment and Salvation. So that this power may be said to be [given]
Christ, as it was the free act of God, without constraint: and yet to be
[purchased,] because it was given upon a valuable consideration.

To the third Question, I answer. This Authority of Christ implies the
purchasing of all things under his power or dominion, as is explained in the
last: But what redemption or benefit is procured to the party, I shall show you
more, when I come to treat of universal Redemption by it self.

To the fourth Question, I answer. This is more then a substituting of Christ
to be the Fathers Vicegerent. It is also a power of prescribing new terms of
Life and Death, and judging men according thereto, as is said before. Yet is
nothing properly given out of the Fathers power or possession: but a power to
suspend or dispense with the strict Covenant of Works is given to the Son; and
so God having parted with that advantage which his Justice had against the
sinning world, and having relaxed that Law, whereby he might have judged us, is
therefore said to judge no man, but to give all judgment to the Son. Ioh. 5.
22, 27.

THESIS IX.
(1) IT was not the inten^ either of the Father or Son, that by this
satisfaction the offenders should be immediately delivered from the whole curse
of the Law, and freed from the evil which they had brought upon themselves, but
some part must be executed on soul and body, and the creatures themselves; and
remain upon them at the pleasure of Christ. Rev. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 26.

EXPLICATION.
THe Questions that are here to be handled for the Explication of this Position
are these.

1. Quest. Whether the redeemed are immediately upon the price paid, delivered
from any of the curse of the Law? if not from all?

2. Quest. Whether the sufferings of the Elect before conversion are in
execution of any part of the curse of the Law?

3. Whether the sufferings of Believers are from the curse of the Law? or only
afflictions of Love, the curse being taken off by Christ?

4. Whether it be not a wrong to the Redeemer, that the people whom he has
ransomed are not immediately delivered?

5. Whether it be any wrong to the redeemed themselves?

6. How long will it be till all the curse be taken off the Believers, and
Redemption have attained its full effect?

To the first Question I answer:

In this case the undertaking of satisfaction had the same immediate effect
upon Adam, as the satisfaction it self upon us, or for us: To determine what
these are, were an excellent work; it being one of the greatest and noblest
questions in our controverted Divinity, What are the immediate effects of
Christ's Death? He that can rightly answer this, is a Divine indeed; and by the
help of this, may expedite most other controversies about Redemption and
Justification. In a word, The effects of Redemption undertaken, could not be
upon a subject not yet existent, and so no subject, though it might be for
them: None but Adam and Eve were then existent. Yet as soon as we do exist, we
receive benefit from it. The suspending of the rigorous execution of the
sentence of the Law, is the most observable immediate effect of Christ's death;
which suspension is some kind of deliverance from it. Of the other effects
elsewhere.

To the second Question. The Elect before conversion do stand in the same
relation to the Law and Curse as other men, though they be differenced in Gods
Decree, Ephesians. 2. 3^ ^2.

To the third Question. I confess we have here a knotty Question. The common
judgment is, That Christ has taken away the whole curse (though not the
suffering) by bearing it himself; and now they are only afflictions of Love,
and not Punishments. I do not contradict this doctrine through affectation of
singularity, the Lord knows; but through constraint of Judgment: And that
upon these grounds following.

1. It is undeniable, that Christ's taking the curse upon himself did not wholly
prevent the execution upon the offender, in Genesis 3. 7, 8, 10, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19.

2. It is evident from the event, seeing we feel part of the curse fulfilled on
us: We eat in labor and sweat; the earth does bring forth thorns and briars;
women bring forth their children in sorrow; our native pravity is the curse
upon our souls; we are sick, and weary, and full of fears, and sorrows, and
shame, and at last we dye and turn to dust.

3. The Scripture tells us plainly, that we all dye in Adam, (even that death
from which we must at the Resurrection be raised by Christ,) 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.
And that death is the wages of sin, Romans 6. 23. And that the sickness, and
weakness, and death of the godly is caused by their sins, 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31.
And if so, then doubtless they are in execution of the threatening of the Law,
though not in full rigor.

4. It is manifest, that our sufferings are in their own nature evils to us,
and the sanctifying of them to us takes not away their natural evil, but only
produces by it, as by an occasion, a greater good: Doubtless so far as it is
the effect of sin, it is evil, and the effect also of the law.

5. They are ascribed to Gods anger, as the moderating of them is ascribed to
his love, Psalm. 30. 5. and a thousand places more.

6. They are called punishments in Scripture, and therefore we may call them
so, Lev. 26. 41, 43. Lam* 3. 39. and 4. 6, 22. Ezra 9. 13. Hosea 4. 9. and 12.
2. Lev. 26. 18, 24.

7. The very nature of affliction is to be a loving punishment, a natural evil
sanctified, and so to be mixed of evil and good, as it proceeds from mixed
causes: Therefore to say that Christ has taken away the curse and evil, but
not the suffering, is a contradiction, because so far as it is a suffering it
is to us evil, and the execution of the curse. What reason can be given, why
God should not do us all that good without our sufferings, which now he does by
them, if there were not sin, and wrath and Law in them? Sure he could better us
by easier means.

8. All those Scriptures and Reasons that are brought so the contrary do prove
no more but this, That our afflictions are not the rigorous execution of the
threatening of the Law, that they are not wholly or chiefly in wrath; but as the
common Love of God to the wicked is mixed with hatred in their sufferings, and
the hatred prevails above the love, so the sufferings of the godly proceed
from a mixture of love and anger, and so have in them a mixture of good and
evil; but the Love overcoming the Anger, therefore the good is greater then the
evil, and so death has lost its sting, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. There is no
unpardoned sin in it, which shall procure further judgment, and so no hatred,
though there be anger.

9. The Scripture says plainly, That death is one of the enemies that is not
yet overcome, but shall be last conquered, 1 Cor. 15. 26, and of our corruption
the case is plain.

10. The whole stream of Scripture makes Christ to have now the sole disposing
of us and our sufferings, to have prevented the full execution of the curse,
and to manage that which lies on us for our advantage and good; but no where
does it affirm that he suddenly delivers us.

To the fourth Question: It can be no wrong to Christ, that we are not
perfectly freed from all the curse and evil as soon as he had satisfied: 1.
Because it was not the Covenant betwixt him and the Father. 2. It is not his
own will, and volenti non fit injuria. 3. It is his own doing now to keep us
under it, till he see the fittest time to release us. 4. Our sufferings are his
means and advantages to bring us to his Will. Mankind having forfeited his
life, is cast into prison till the time of full execution: Christ steppeth in,
and buyeth the prisoners, with a full purpose, that none of them yet shall
escape but those that take him for their Lord. To this purpose he must treat
with them, to know whether they will be his subjects, and yield themselves to
him, and his terms. Is it not then a likelier way to procure their consent, to
treat with them in prison, then to let them out, and then treat? and to leave
some of the curse upon them, to force them to yield, that they may know what
they must expect else, when the whole shall be executed.

To the fifth Question: It is no wrong to the sinner to be thus dealt with; 1.
Because he is but in the misery which he brought upon himself. 2. No man can
lay claim to the Satisfaction and Redemption upon the mere payment, till they
have a word of promise for it. 3. Their sufferings, if they will be ruled,
shall turn to their advantage.

To the sixth Question: The last enemy to be overcome is death, 1 Cor. 15 26.
This enemy will be overcome perfectly at the Resurrection; then also shall we
be perfectly acquit from the charge of the Law, and accusation of Satan:
Therefore not till the day of Resurrection and Judgment, will all the Effects
of Sin and Law, and Wrath be perfectly removed* 1 Cor. 15. 24.

THESIS X.
(1) MAn having not only broken this first Covenant, but disabled himself to
perform its Conditions for the future, and so being out of all hope of
attaining Righteousness and Life thereby, (2) It pleased the Father and the
Mediator to prescribe unto him a new Law, (3) and tender him a new Covenant,
(4) the Conditions whereof should be more easy to the Sinner and yet more
abasing, (5) and should more clearly manifest, and more highly honor the
unconceiveable Love of the Father and Redeemer.

EXPLICATION.
(1) WHether Man were only the meritorious Cause of this his disability, or
also the Efficient, is a great dispute, but of no great moment; as long as we
are agreed that Man is the only faulty cause. Whether he cast away Gods image?
or whether God took it from him for sin? whether God only could annihilate it?
Or whether Man may annihilate a Quality, though not a Substance? I will not
meddle with. But too sure it is, that we are naturally deprived of it, and so
disabled to fulfill the Law. If Christ therefore should have pardoned all that
was past, and renewed the first violated Covenant again; and set Man in the
same estate that he fell from, in point of guilt, yet would he have fallen as
desperately the next temptation: yea though he had restored to him his
primitive strength and holiness, yet experience has showed on how slippery
and uncertain a ground his happiness would have stood, and how soon he was
likely to play the Prodigal again with his stock.

(2) God the Father and Christ the Mediator, who have one will, did therefore
resolve upon a more suitable way of happiness.

(3) This way, as the former, is by both a Law and Covenant. As it is a Law, it
is by Christ, prescribed, and flatly enjoined; and either obedience, or the
penalty shall be exacted. As it is a Covenant, it is only tendered and not
enforced. It is called a Covenant as it is in Scripture written and offered (as
is said before) improperly, because it contains the matter of the Covenant,
though yet it want the form: Even as a Bond or Obligation before the sealing or
agreement is called a Bond: Or as a form of prayer as it is written in a book,
is called a prayer, because it contains the matter that we should pray for:
though to speak strictly, it is no prayer, till it be sent up to God, from a
desiring Soul.

(4) Though without Grace we can no more believe, then perfectly obey, (as a
dead man can no more remove a straw then a mountain) yet the conditions of the
Gospel considered in themselves, or in reference to the strength which God will
bestow, are far more facile then the old conditions. Mat. 11. 29, 30. 1 Ioh. 5.
3. And more abasing they are to the sinner, in that he has far less to do in
the work of his salvation: And also in that they contain the acknowledgement of
his lost estate, through his own former self destroying folly.

(5) Such incomprehensible amazing Love of God the Father, and of Christ, is
manifested in this New Covenant, that the glorifying thereof does seem to be
the main end in this design. Oh sweet and blessed End? should not then the
searching into it be our main study? and the contemplating of it, and admiring
it, be our main employment? Romans 5. 8. Tit. 3. 4. 1 Ioh. 4. 9. Ephesians. 3. 18. 19.
Ioh. 15. 13. No wonder therefore that God did not prevent the fall of man,
though he foresaw it, when he could make it an occasional preparative to such
happy ends.

THESIS XI.
NOt that Christ does absolutely null or repeal the old Covenant hereby: but he
super-addeth this as the only possible way of Life. The former still continues
to command, prohibit, promise, and threaten. So that the sins even of the
justified are still breaches of that Law, and are threatened and cursed thereby.

EXPLICATION.
I Acknowledge that this Assertion is disputable and dificult: and many places
of Scripture are usually produced which seem to contradict it. I know also that
it the judgment of learned and godly men, that the Law, as it a Covenant of
works, is quite null and repealed in regard of the Sins of believers: yea, many
do believe, that the Covenant of works is repealed to all the world, and only
the Covenant of grace in force.

Against both these I maintain this Assertion, by the Arguments which you find
under the following Position 13. And I hope, not withstanding that I extol
free Grace as much, and preach the Law as little, in a forbidden sense, as
though I held the contraty opinion.

THESIS XII.
THerefore we must not plead the repeal of the Law for our Justification; but
must refer it to our Surety, who by the value and efficacy of his once offering
and merits does continually satisfy.

EXPLICATION.
I Shall here explain to you, in what sense, and how far the Law is in force,
and how far not: and then prove it in and under the next head.

You must here distinguish betwixt,

1. The repealing of the Law, and the relaxing of it. 2. Between a dispensation
absolute and respective. 3. Between the alteration of the Law, and the
alteration of the Subjects relation to it. 4. Between a Discharge conditional,
with a suspension of execution, and a Discharge absolute. And so I resolve the
question thus;

1. The Law of Works is not abrogated, or repealed, but dispensed with, or
relaxed. A Dispensation is (as Grotius defines it) an act of a Superior,
whereby the obligation of a Law in force is taken away, as to certain persons
and things.

2. This Dispensation therefore is not total or absolute, but respective. For,
1. though it dispense with the rigorous execution, yet not with every degree of
execution. 2. Though the Law be dispensed with as it contains the proper
subjects of the penalty, viz. the parties offending, and also the circumstances
of duration, etc. Yet in regard of the mere punishment abstracted from person
and circumstances, it is not dispensed with: for to Christ it was not dispensed
with: His satisfaction was by paying the full value.

3. Though by this Dispensation our Freedom may be as full as upon a Repeal,
yet the Alteration is not made in the Law, but in our estate and relation to
the Law.

4. So far is the Law dispensed with to all, as to suspend the rigorous
execution for a time; and a Liberation or Discharge conditional procured and
granted them. But an absolute Discharge is granted to none in this life. For
even when we do perform the Condition, yet still the Discharge remains
conditional, till we have quite finished our performance. For it is not one
instantaneous Act of believing which shall quite discharge us; but a continued
Faith. No longer are we discharged, then we are Believers. And where the
condition is not performed, the Law is still in force, and shall be executed
upon the offender himself.

I speak nothing in all this of the directive use of the Moral Law to
Believers: But how far the Law is yet in force, even as it is a Covenant of
Works; because an utter Repeal of it in this sense is so commonly, but
inconsiderately asserted. That it is no further overthrown, no not to
Believers, then is here explained, I now come to prove.

THESIS. XIII.
IF this were not so, but that Christ had abrogated the first Covenant, then it
would follow, 1. That no sin but that of Adam, and final Unbelief, is so much
as threatened with death, or that death is explicitly (that is, by any Law) due
to it or deserved by it. For, what the Law in force does not threaten, that is
not explicitly deserved, or due by Law. 2. It would follow, That Christ dyed
not to prevent or remove the wrath and curse so deserved or due to us for any
but Adams sin, nor to pardon our sins at all: but only to prevent our desert of
wrath and curse, and consequently to prevent our need of pardon. 3. It would
follow, That against eternal wrath at the day of Judgment, we must not plead
the pardon of any sin, but the first, but our own non-desert of that wrath,
because of the repeal of that Law before the sin was committed. All which
consequences seem to me unsufferable, which cannot be avoided if the Law be
repealed.

EXPLICATION.
WHen God the absolute Sovereign of the World shall but command, though he
expressly threaten no punishment to the disobedient, yet implicitly it may be
said to be due; that is, the offense in it self considered, deserves some
punishment in the general: for the Law of Nature contains some general
Threatenings, as well as Precepts, (as I showed before;) Whether this Dueness
of punishment, which I call implicit, do arise from the nature of the offense
only, or also because of this general threat in the Law of Nature, I will not
dispute. But God deals with his Creature by way of legal government? and
keeps not their deserved punishment from their knowledge no more then their
duty; it being almost as necessary to be known for our incitement, as the
Precept for our direction. Gods laws are perfect laws fitted to the attainment
of all their ends: And by these laws does he rule the world; and according to
them does he dispose of his rewards and punishments: So that we need not fear
that which is not threatened: And in this sense it is that I say, That what no
law in force does threaten, that sin does not explicitly deserve: Not so
deserve as that we need to fear the suffering of it. And upon this ground the
three forementioned consequences must needs follow. For the new Covenant
threateneth not Death to any sin but final unbelief, or at least, to no sin
without final unbelief: And therefore if the old Covenant be abrogated, then no
law threateneth it: And consequently, 1 Our Sin does not deserve it (in the
sense expressed.) Nor Christ prevent the wrath deserved, but only the desert of
wrath. 3. And therefore not properly does he pardon any such sin, (as you will
see after when I come to open the nature of pardon.) 4 We may plead our non
deserving of death for our discharge at judgment. 5. And further, then Christ
in satisfying did not bear the punishment due to any sin but Adams first: For
that which is not threatened to us, was not executed on him. This is a clear,
but an intolerable consequence. 6. Scripture plainly teaches, That all men
(even the Elect) are under the Law till they believe and enter into the
Covenant of the Gospel. Therefore it is said, Ioh. 3. 18. He that believes
not, is condemned already: And the wrath of God abides on him, ver. 26. And we
are said to believe for Remission of sins. Acts 2. 38. Mark 1. 4. Luke 24. 47.
Act. 10. 43. and 3. 19. Which show, that sin is not before remitted, and
consequently the Law not repealed, but suspended, and left to the dispose of
the Redeemer. Else how could the Redeemed be by nature the children of wrath?
Ehp. 2. 3. The circumcised are debtors to the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3, 4. and
Christ is become of none effect to them. But they that are led by the Spirit
are not under the law, and against such there is no law. Gal. 5. 18, 23. The
Scripture has concluded all under Sin (and so far under the Law no doubt) that
the promise, by faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.
Gal. 3. 22. We are under the Law when Christ does redeem us. Gal. 4. 5. See
also Iam. 2. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 18. 1 Cor. 15. 56. Gal. 3. 19, 20, 21. Therefore our
deliverance is conditionally from the curse of the Law; viz. if we will obey
the Gospel. And this deliverance, together with the abrogation of the
Ceremonial Law, is it which is so often mentioned as a privilege of believers,
and an effect of the blood of Christ: which deliverance from the curse, is yet
more full when we perform form the Conditions of our freedom: And then we are
said to be dead to the Law. Romans 7. 4. And the Obligation to punishment dead as
to us. ver. 6. But not the Law void or dead in it self.

7 Lastly, All the Scriptures and Arguments, page 60. 61. which prove, That
afflictions are punishments, do prove also, that the Law is not repealed: For
no man can suffer for breaking a repealed Law, nor by the threats of a repealed
Law; yet I know that this Covenant of Works continues not to the same ends and
uses as before, nor is it so to be preached or used. We must neither take that
Covenant as a way to life, as if now we must get salvation by our fulfilling
its condition, nor must we look on its curse as lying on us remedilesly.

THESIS XIV.
(1) THe Tenor of the new Covenant is this, That Christ having made sufficient
satisfaction to the Law. Whosoever will repent and believe in him to the end,
shall be justified through that Satisfaction from all that the Law did charge
upon them, and be moreover advanced to far greater Privileges and Glory then
they fell from: But whosoever fulfilleth not these conditions, shall (2) have
no more benefit from the blood of Christ, then what they here received and
abused, but must answer the charge of the Law themselves? and for their neglect
of Christ must also suffer a far greater condemnation. Or briefly, Whosoever
believes in Christ shall not perish, but have everlasting life; but he that
believes not shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Mark 16.
16. John 3. 15, 16, 17, 18, 36. and 5. 24. and 6. 35, 40, 47. and 7. 38. and
11. 25, 26. and 12. 46. Acts 10. 43. Romans 3. 26. and 4. 5. and 5. 1. and 10. 4.
10. 1 John 5. 10. Mark 1. 15. and 6. 12. Luke 13. 3. 5. and 24. 47. Acts 5. 31.
and 11. 18. and 20. 21. and 2. 38. and 3. 19. and 8. 22. and 26. 20. Rev. 2. 5,
16. Heb 6. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 9.

EXPLICATION.
(1) Christ's Satisfaction to the Law goes before the new Covenant, though not
in regard of its payment, (which was in the fullness of time,) yet in regard of
the undertaking, acceptance and efficacy: There could be no treating on new
terms, till the old obligation were satisfied and suspended.

I account them not worth the confuting, who tell us, That Christ is the only
party conditioned with, and that the new Covenant, as to us, has no
conditions; (so Salt marsh, etc.) The place they alledg for this assertion in
that, Ier. 31. 31, 32, 33. cited in Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10. which place contains
not the full Tenor of the whole new Covenant: But either it is called the new
Covenant, because it expresses the nature of the benefits of the new Covenant
as they are offered on Gods part, without mentioning man's conditions, (that
being not pertinent to the business the prophet had in hand; or else it
speaks only of what God will do for his elect in giving them the first Grace,
and enabling them to perform the conditions of the new Covenant, and in that
sense may be called a new Covenant also, as I have showed before, page 7. 8.
Though properly it be a prediction, and belong only to Gods Will of Purpose,
and not to his legislative Will.

But those men erroneously think, that nothing is a condition, but what is to
be performed by our own strength. But if they will believe Scripture, the
places before alleged will prove, that the new Covenant has conditions on our
part, as well as the old.

(2) Some benefit from Christ the condemned did here receive, as the delay of
their condemnation, and many more mercies, though they turn them all into
greater judgments: But of this more when we treat of general Redemption.

THESIS XV.
THough Christ has sufficiently satisfied the Law, yet is it not his Will, or
the Will of the Father, that any man should be justified or saved thereby, who
has not some ground in himself of personal and particular right and claim
thereto; nor that any should be justified by the blood only as shed or offered,
except it be also received and applied; so that no man by the mere Satisfaction
made, is freed from the Law or curse of the first violated Covenant absolutely,
but conditionally only.

EXPLICATION.
I Have showed before, p. 57. 58. etc. That Christ intended not to remove all
our misery as soon as he dyed, nor as soon as we believed. I am now to show,
That he does not justify by the shedding of his blood immediately, without
somewhat of man intervening, to give him a legal title thereto. All the
Scriptures alleged page 79. prove this: We are therefore said to be justified
by faith. Let all the Antinomians show but one Scripture which speaks of
Justification from eternity. I know God has decreed to justify his people
from eternity, and so he has to sanctify them too, but both of them are done
in time: Justification being no more an imminent act in God then
Sanctification, as I shall show afterward.

The Blood of Christ then is sufficient in fuo genere, but not in omni genere
sufficient for its own work, but not for every work. There are several other
necessaries to justify and save, quibus positis, which being supposed* the
Blood of Christ will be effectual: Not that it receives its efficacy from
these, nor that these do add any thing at all to its worth or value; no more
then the Cabinet to the Jewel, or the applying hand to the medicine: or the
offenders-acceptation to the pardon of his Prince; yet without this acceptance
and application this blood will not be effectual to justify us. For (as
Grotius) Cum unusquisque actui ex sua voluntate pendenti legem possit imponere,
sicut id quod pure debetur novari potest sub condition, ita etiam possunt, is
qui solvit pro alio, and is qui rei alterius pro altera solutionem admittit,
pacisci, ut aut statim sequatur remissio, aut in diem, item aut pure, aut sub
condition, Fuit autem and Christi satisfacientis and dei satisfactione in
admittentis hic animus ac voluntas, hoc denique pactam and foedus, non ut deus
statim ipso perpessionis Christi tempore paenas remitteret, sed ut tum demum id
fieret; cum homo, vera in Christum fide ad deum conversus, supplex veniam
precaretur, accedente etiam Christi apud deum advocatione sive intercessione.
Non obstat hic ergo satisfactio quo minus sequi possit remissio satisfactio
enim nonjam sustulerat debitum, sed hoc egerat, ut propter ipsam debitum
aliquando tolleretur, Grot. de satis. cap. 6. So that, as Austin* he that made
us without us, will not save us without us, He never makes a relative change,
where he does not also make a real. Gods Decree gives no man a legal title to
the benefit decreed him, seeing purpose and promise are so different: A legal
title we must have, before we can be justified; and there must be somewhat in
our selves to prove that title, or else all men should have equal right,

THESIS. XVI.
THe obeying of a Law, and persorming the conditions of a Covenant, or
satisfying for disobedience, or nonperformance, is our Righteousness, in
reference to that Law and Covenant.

EXPLICATION.
IF we understand not what Righteousness is, we may dispute long enough about
Justification to little purpose: you must know therefore that Righteousness is
no proper real Being, but a Modus Entis, the Modification of a Being, The
subject of it is, 1. An Action, 2. Or a Person: An Action is the primary
subject, and so the Disposition; and the Person secondary, as being therefore
righteous, because his disposition and actions are so.

Righteousness is the conformity of Dispositions and Actions, and consequently
the person to the Rule prescribed.

It is not a being distinct therefore from the Dispositions and Actions, but
their just and well being.

This finition is only of the Creatures Righteousness.

God is the Primum Iustum, and so the Rule of Righteousness to the Creature,
and has no Rule but himself, for the measuring of his Actions.

Yet his Essence is too far above us, remote and unknown to be this Rule to the
Creature, therefore has he given us his Laws, which flow from his perfection,
and they are the immediate Rule of our Dispositions and Actions and so of our
Righteousness.

Here carefully observe, That this Law has two parts; 1. The Precept and
Prohibition prescribing and requiring Duty: 2. The Promise and Commination
determining of the reward of Obedience, and penalty of Disobedience. As the
Precept is the principal part, and the Penalty annexed but for the Precepts
sake; so the primary intent of the Lawgiver is the obeying of his Precepts,
and our suffering of the Penalty is but a secondary for the attaining of the
former.

So is there accordingly a twofold Righteousness or fulfilling of this Law,
(which is the thing I would have observed:) the primary, most excellent and
most proper Righteousness lies in the conformity of our actions to the
precept: The secondary, less excellent Righteousness) yet fitly enough so
called) (see Pemble of Iustificat. page ^.) is, when though we have broke the
precepts, yet we have satisfied for our breach, either by our own suffering, or
some other way.

The first has reference to the Commands when none can accuse us to have broak
the Law: The second has reference to the Penalty; when though we have broke
the law, yet it has nothing against us for so doing, because it is satisfied.
These two kinds of Righteousness cannot stand together in the same person, in
regard of the same Law and Actions: he that has one, has not the other: he
that has the First, need not the Second; There must be a fault, or no
satisfaction; this fault must be confessed, and so the first kind of
Righteousness disclaimed, before Satisfaction can be pleaded: and Satisfaction
must be pleaded, before a Dilinquent can be justified. This well understood,
would give a clearer insight into the nature of our Righteousness, and
Justification, then many have yet attained. The great Question is, of which
sort is our Righteousness whereby we are justified? I answer, of the second
sort, which yet is no derogation from it: for though it be not a Righteousness
so honoring our selves, yet is it as excellent in Christ, and honorable to
him. And this first kind of Righteousness as it is in Christ, cannot retaining
its own form, be made ours. And to that the Papists arguments will hold good.
The Law commanded our own personal obedience, and not another for us; We did
not so personally obey, we did not really obey in Christ: and God does not
judge us to do, what we did not; If we had, yet it would not have made us just:
for one sin will make us unjust, though we were never so obedient before and
after; Therefore if we had obeyed in Christ, and yet sinned in our selves, we
are breakers of the Law still. And so our Righteousness cannot be of the first
sort. This Breach therefore must be satisfied for, and consequently, our
Righteousness must be of the second sort: seeing both cannot stand in one
person as beforesaid. Christ indeed had both these kinds of righteousness, viz.
the righteousness of perfect Obedience; and the righteousness of Satisfaction,
for Disobedience. But the former only was his own personal Righteousness, not
communicable to another under that notion, and in that form of [a Righteousness
by obeying:] The latter, was his righteousness, as he stood in our room, and
was by imputation a sinner: and so is also our Righteousness in and through
him. Yet the former (as I have proved before etc.) is ours too, and our
Righteousness too (though many Divines think otherwise:) but how? Not as
retaining its form, in the former sense: but as it is also in a further
consideration, a part of the Righteousness by Satisfaction: seeing that Christ's
very personal obedientiall righteousness was also in a further respect
satisfactory. I entreat thee Reader, do not pass over this distinct
representation of Righteousness, as curious, or needless; for thou can not
tell how thou art righteous or justified without it. Nor do thou through
prejudice reject it as unsound, till thou have first well studied the Nature of
Righteousness in general, and of Christian Righteousness in special.

THESIS. XVII.
THerefore as there are two Covenants, with their distinct Conditions: so is
there a twofold Righteousness, and both of them absolutely necessary to
Salvation.

EXPLICATION.
AS Sin is defined to be (...) a Trangression of the Law. 1. Ioh. 3. 4. So
Righteousness is a Conformity to the Law. Therefore as there is a twofold Law
or Covenant; so must there be accordingly a twofold Righteousness; whether
both these be to us necessary is all the doubt. If the first Covenant be
totally repealed, then indeed we need not care for the righteousness of that
Covenant, in respect of any of our personal actions: but only in respect of
Adams first, and ours in him, But I have proved before that it is not repealed:
otherwise the righteousness of Christ imputed to us, would not be of a very
narrow extent; if it were a covering only to our first transgression. I take it
for granted therefore, that he must have a twofold Righteousness answerable to
the two Covenants, that expects to be justified. And the usual confounding
of these two distinct Righteousnesses, does much darken the controversies about
Justification.

THESIS XVIII.
Our Legal Righteousness, or righteousness of the first Covenant is not
personal, or consists not in any qualifications of our own persons, or
actions performed by us, (For we never fulfilled, nor personally satisfied the
Law:) but it is wholly without us in Christ. And in this sense it is that the
Apostle (and every Christian,) disclaimeth his own Righteousness, or his own
Works, as being no true legal Righteousness. Phil. 3. 7, 8.

EXPLICATION.
Object. 1 Does not the Apostle say, that as touching the Righteousness which
is in the Law, he was blameless? Phil. 3. 6. Ans. That is, He ^o exactly
observed the Ceremonial Law, and the external part of the Moral Law, that no
man could blame him for the breach of them. But this is nothing to such a
keeping of the whole Covenant, as might render him blameless in the sight of
God: otherwise he would not have esteemed it so lightly.

Object. 2. There are degrees of Sin. He that is not yet a sinner in the
highest degree, is he not so far Righteous by a personal Righteousness? Christ
satisfied only for our sin; so far as our actions are not sinful, so far they
need no pardon nor satisfaction. And consequently, Christ's righteousness and
our own works, do concur to the composing of our perfect Righteousness. Ans.
Though this objection does puzle some, as if there were no escaping this Popish
self-exalting Consequence; yet by the help of the foregoing grounds, the
vanity of it may be easily discovered. And that thus.

1. An Action is not righteous, which is not conformable to the Law; if in some
respects it be conformable, and in some not, it cannot be called a conformable
or righteous Action. So that we having no actions, perfectly: conformed to the
Law, have therefore no one righteous action. 2. If we had; Yet many righteous
Actions, if but one were unrighteous, will not serve to denominate the person
Righteous, according to the Law of Works. And that these joined with Christ's
Righteousness, do not make up one Righteousness for us, is plainthus; The
Righteousness which we have in Christ, is not of the same sort witht his
pretended partial Righteousness: For this pretends to be a Righteousness (in
part) of the first kind mentioned formerly viz. Obedientiall consisting in
conformity to the Precept. Now, Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, being only
that of the second sort ( viz. By satisfaction for nonconformity, or for our
disobedience,) cannot therefore possible be joined with our imperfect
Obedience, to make up one Righteousness for us. I acknowledge, that some
actions of ours, may in some respects be good, though that respect cannot
denominate it (strictly in the sense of the old Covenant) a good Work. I
acknowledge also, that so far it is pleasing to God: yet the Action cannot be
said to please him (much less the person,) but only that respective Goodness.
Also that Christ dyed only to satisfy for our actions so far as they were
sinful, and not in those respects wherein they are good and lawful. Yet that
these good works (so commonly called) can be no part of our Righteousness, I
think is fully proved by the foregoing Argument. Though I much question,
whether they that stand for the imputation of Christ's moral Righteousness in
the rigid rejected sense (as if (as if in him we had paid the primary proper
debt of perfect obedience) can so well rid their hands of this objection.

THESIS. XIX.
THe Righteousness of the new Covenant, is the only Condition of our interest
in, and enjoyment f the Righteousness of the old. Or thus: These only shall
have part in Christ's satisfaction, and so in him be legally righteous, who do
believe, and obey the Gospel, and so are in themselves Evangelically Righteous.

THESIS. XX.
Our Evangelicall Righteousness is not without us in Christ, as our leg all
Righteousness is: but consists in our own actions of Faith and Gospel
Obedience. Or thus: Though Christ performed the conditions of the Law, and
satisfied for our nonperformance; yet it is our selves that must perform the
conditions of the Gospel.

EXPLICATION.
THe contents of these two Positions* being of so near nature, I shall explain
them here together; though they seem to me, so plain and clear that they need
not much explication, and less confirmation: yet because some Antinomians do
downright oppose the^, and some that are no Antinomians have star^led at the
expressions, as if they had contained some self-exalting horrid doctrine; I
shall say something hereto, Though for my part, I do so much wonder that any
able Divines should deny them: that me thinks they should be Articles of our
Creed, and a part of Childrens Catechisms, and understood and believed by every
man that is a Christian: I mean the matter of them, if not the Phrase; though I
think it to be agreeable to the matter also.

That there may be no contention about words, you must take my phrase of
[Legall and Evangelicall Righteousness] in the sense before explained, viz. as
they take their name from that Covenant which is their rule, and I know not how
any righteousness should be called [Legall or Evangelicall in a sense more
strict and proper, nor whence the denomination can be better taken then from
the formal reason of the thing: Yet I know that the observance of the Law of
Ceremonies, and the seeking of life by the works of the Law, are both commonly
called Legal Righteousness, but in a very improper sense in a comparison of
this. I know also that Christ's Legal Righteousness, imputed to us is commonly
called [Evangelicall Righteousness,] but that is from a more aliene
extrinsecall respect; to wit, because the Gospel declares and offers this
Righteousness, and because it is a way to Justification, which only the Gospel
reveals. I do not quarrel with any of these forms of speech, only explain my
own, which I knew not how to express more properly, that I be not
mis-understood. The Righteousness of the new Covenant then being, the
performance of its conditions, and its conditions being our obeying the Gospel
or believing, it must needs be plain, That on no other terms do we partake of
the Legal Righteousness of Christ. To affirm therefore that our Evangelicall or
new Covenant-Righteousness is in Christ and not in our selves, or performed by
Christ and not by our selves, is such a monstrous piece of Antinomian doctrine,
that no man who knows the nature and difference of the Covenant can possibly
entertain, and which every Christian should abhor as unsufferable.

For 1. It implies blasphemy against Christ, as if he had sin to repent of, or
pardon to accept, and a Lord that redeemed him to receive and submit to; for
these are the conditions of the new Covenant.

2. It implies, that Jews, and Pagans, and every man shall be saved. Do not
say that I odiously wring out these consequences; they are as plain as can be
expected: For if any be damned, it must be either for breaking the first
Covenant or the second: If the former be charged upon him, he may escape by
pleading the second fulfilled: If the latter, the same plea will serve; so that
if Christ have fulfilled both Covenants for all men, then none can perish. If
they say, that he has performed the new Covenant conditions only for the elect;

3. Then this follows howsoever, That they are righteous, and justified
before they believe, (which what Scripture does speak?)

4. And that believing is needless, not only as to our Justification, but to
any other use: For what need one thing be so twice done? If Christ have
fulfilled the new Covenant for us, as well as the old, what need we do it
again? Shall we come after him to do the work he has perfected? Except we
would think with the Socinians, and as Sir Kenolm Digby, That Christ was but
our pattern to follow, and but set us a copy in obeying according to right
Reason.

5. That the saved and the damned are alike in themselves, but the difference
is only in Election, and Christ's intention. For the saved have broke the old
Covenant, as well as the damned; and if it be not they, but Christ, that
fulfill their conditions of the new, then the difference is all without them.

6. It confounds Law and Gospel, it overthrows all the Laws and Precepts of
Christ, by removing their end, it contradicts the whole scope of the
Scripture, which tells us, That Christ was made under the Law, (and not under
the Gospel,) fulfilled the Law, (but not the Gospel Covenant) bore the curse of
the (but not of the Gospel,) and which imposes a necessity of fulfilling the
conditions of the Gospel themselves upon all that will be justified and saved.
To quote the Scriptures that assert this, would be to transcribe almost all the
doctrinall part of the New Testament. What unsavory stuff then is that of Mr.
Saltmarsh, of free Grace, page 83. 84. Who directs those that doubt of their
Gospel sincerity to see it in Christ, because Christ has believed perfectly,
he has sorrowed for sin perfectly, he has repented perfectly, he has obeyed
perfectly, he has mortisied sin perfectly, and all is ours, etc. If this be
meant of Gospel-beleeving, repenting, sorrowing, obeying and mortifying, then
it is no uncharitable language to say, It is blasphemy in its clear
consequence; as if Christ had a Savior to believe in for pardon and life, or
sin to repent of, and sorrow for, and mortify: But if he meant it of legal
believing in God, or repenting sorrowing for, mortifying of sin in us, and not
in himself; then is it no more to the business he has in hand then a Harp to a
Harrow, as they say, It is not legal believing, which is the evidence doubted
of, or enquired after; and sure Christ's repenting and sorrowing for our sin, is
no clearing to us, that we repent of our own, nor any acquitting of us for not
doing it: And for his mortifying sin in us, that is the doubt, whether it be
done in the doubting soul or not? If he mean it of destroying the guilt of sin
meritoriously on the Cross, that is but a strange evidence of the death of it
in a particular soul: except he think (as diverse that I met with in
Glocestershire, and Wilt-shire,) That Christ took our natural pravity and
corruption together with our flesh. But I let go this sort of men, as being
fitter first to learn the grounds of Religion in a Cathechism, then to a manage
those Disputes wherewith they trouble the World.

THESIS XXI.
NOt that we can perform these Conditions without Grace: (for without Christ we
can do nothing:) But that he enableth us to perform them our selves; and does
not himself repent, believe, love Christ, obey the Gospel for us, as he did
satisfy the Law for us.

EXPLICATION.
THis prevention of an Objection I add, because some think it is a
self-ascribing, and derogating from Christ, to affirm our selves to be but the
Actors of these duties; though we profess to do it only by the strength of
Grace. But that it is Christ that repents and believes, and not we, is
language somewhat strange to those ears that have been used to the language of
Scripture or Reason. Though I know there is a sort of sublime Platonic,
Plotinian Divines, of late sprung up among us, who think all things be but one;
and those branches or beams of Gods Essence, which had their Being in him
before their Creation, and shall at their dissolution return into God again;
and so the souls of men are but so many parcels of God given out into so many
bodies; or at least but beams streaming from him by a fancyed Emanation. These
men will say, not only that it is Christ in us that does believe, but the mere
Godhead in essence considered. But it suffices sober men to believe that
Christ dwells in us; 1. By his graces or spiritual workings: 2. By our
constant love to him, and thinking of him: as the person or thing that we are
still affectionately thinking on, is said to dwell in our minds or hearts
(because their idea is still there,) or our minds and hearts to dwell upon
them. But in regard of the Divine Essence, which is every where, as it dwells
no otherwise (for ought I know or have seen proved) in the Saints, then in the
wicked and devils; so I think; as Sir Kenelm Digby thinks of the Soul; That the
Body is more properly said to be in the Soul, then the Soul in the Body, so we
are more properly said to live, and move and have our Being in God, then God to
live, and move, and have his Being in us.

I will not digress from my intended subject so far, as to enter here into a
disquisition after the nature or workings of that Grace which does enable us to
perform these Conditions. I refer you to Parkers Theses de Traductione
Peccatoris ad vit.

THESIS. XXII.
IN this fore-explained sense it is, that men in Scripture are said to be
personally righteous: And in this sense it is, that the Faith and duties of
Believers are said to please God, viz. as they are related to the Covenant of
Grace, and not as they are measured by the Covenant of Works.

EXPLICATION.
THose that will not acknowledge that the godly are called righteous in the
Scripture, by reason of a personal Righteousness, consisting in the rectitude
of their own dispositions and actions, as well as in regard of their imputed
righteousness, may be convinced from these Scriptures, if they will believe
them. Genesis 7. 2. and 18. 23, 24. Job 17. 9. Psa. 1. 5, 6. and 37. 17, 21, etc
Eccl. 9. 1, 2. Ezekiel. 18. 20, 24. and 33. 12, 13, 18. Mat. 9. 13. and 13. 43.
and 25 37, 46. Luke 1. 6. Heb. 11. 4. 1 Pet. 4. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 8. 1 Ioh. 3. 7,
12. Rev. 22. 11. Mat. 10. 41. Romans 5. 7. So their ways are called
Righteousness. Psalm. 15. 2. and 23. 3. and 45. 7. etc. Mat. 5. 20. and 21. 32.
Luke 1. 75. Act. 10. 35. Romans 6. 13. 16, 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 15. 34. 1 Ioh. 2.
29. and 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24. etc.

That men are sometime called righteous, in reference to the Laws and Judgments
of men, I acknowledge: Also in regard of some of their particular actions,
which are for the substance good: And perhaps sometimes in a comparative sense,
as they are compared with the ungodly: As a line less-crooked should be called
straight in comparison of one more crooked: But how improper an expression that
is, you may easily perceive. The ordinary phrase of Scripture has more truth
and aptitude then so. Therefore it must needs be that men are called Righteous
in reference to the new Covenant only; Which is plain thus: Righteousness is
but the denomination of our actions or persons, as they relate to some rule.
This rule when it is the Law of man, and our actions suit thereto, we are then
righteous before men. When this Rule is Gods Law, it is either that of Works,
or that of Grace: In relation to the former, there is none righteous, no not
one: for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. Only in Christ,
who has obeyed and satisfied, we are righteous. But if you consider our
actions and persons in relation to the rule of the new Covenant, so all the
Regenerate are personally righteous, because they all perform the conditions of
this Covenant, and are poperly ponounced righteous thereby. Neither can it be
conceived how the works of Believers, should either please God, or be called
righteousness, as they relate to that old Rule, which does pronounce them
unrighteous, hateful, and accursed.

Two sorts among us therefore do discover intolerable Ignorance in this point.
1. Those that commonly use and understand the words [Righteous, and
Righteousness] as they relate to the old Rule: as if the Godly were called
righteous (besides their imputed Righteousness, only because their
Sanctification and good Works have some imperfect agreement to the Law of
Works: As if it were a straight line which is in one place straight and another
crooked; much less that which is in every part crooked in some degree, I have
been sorry to hear many learned Teachers speak thus; most they say to maintain
it, is in this simple objection. If we are called holy, because of an imperfect
Holiness: then why not righteous, because of an imperfect Righteousness? Ans.
Holiness signifies no more but a Dedication to God, either by separation only,
or by qualifying the subject first, with an aptitude to its Divine employment,
and then separating or devoting it: as in our Sanctification. Now a person
imperfectly so qualified, is yet truly and really so qualified; and therefore
may truly be called holy so far. But Righteousness signifying a Conformity to
the Rule; and a Conformity with a quatenus, or an imperfect Rectitude, being
not a true Conformity or Rectitude at all (because the denomination is of the
whole Action or Person, and not of a certain part or respect therefore
imperfect Righteousness is not Righteousness, but Unrighteousness; It is a
contradiction in adjecto. Object. But, is our personal Righteousness perfect as
it is measured by the New Rule? Ans. Yes: as I shall open to you by and by.

I could here heap up a mulitude of orthodox Writers, that do call our
personal Righteousness by the title of [Evangelicall] as signifying from what
Rule it does receive its Name.

The second sort that show their gross ignorance, of the nature of
Righteousness, are the Antinomians, (and some other simple ones whom they have
misled) who if they do but hear a man talk of a Righteousness in himself; or
in any thing he can do, or making his own duty either his Righteousness, or
conducible thereto; they startle at such Doctrine, and even gnash the teeth, as
if we preached flat Popery, yea as if we cried down Christ, and set up our
selves: The ignorant wretches not understanding, the difference between the two
sorts of Righteousness; that of the old Covenant, which is all out of us in
Christ; and that of the New Covenant, which is all out of Christ in our selves:
(though wrought by the power of the Spirit of Christ.)

Quest. But how then is Ahabs and Nineve's humiliation accepted, and such other
works of those that are not in Christ, seeing they are yet under the Law?

Ans. 1. No man is now under the Law as Adam was before the new Covenant was
made; that is, not so under the Law alone, as to have nothing to do with the
Gospel; or so under the old Covenant, as to have no benefit by the new. 2. So
that wicked men may now find that tender and merciful dealing from God, that
even those works which are less unjust and sinful, and draw nearest to the
rectitude required by the Gospel, shall be so far accepted as that, for their
further encouragement, some kind of reward or suspension of wrath shall be
annexed to them, and God will countenance in them that which is good, though it
be not so much as may denominate it a good work. 3. But yet the best of an
unregenerate man's works have more matter in them to provoke God then to please
him, and he never accepts them as Evangelically Righteous; for they that are
in the flesh, and are without faith, cannot possibly so please God, Romans 8. 8.
Heb. 11. 6. As their righteousness is but a less degree of unrighteousness, and
therefore is most improperly called righteousness; so their pleasing God is but
a lower degree of displeasing him, and therefore but improperly called pleasing
him.

THESIS. XXIII.
IN this sense also it is so far from being an error to affirm, that Faith it
self is our Righteousness,] that it is a truth necessary for every Christian to
know; that is, Faith is our Evangelicall Righteousness, (in the sense before
explained,) as Christ is our Legal Righteousness.

EXPLICATION.
THis Assertion, so odious those that understand not its grounds, is yet so
clear from what is said before, that I need to add no more to prove it. For 1.
I have cleared before, that there must be a personal Righteousness, besides
that imputed, in all that are justified. And that 2. The fulfilling of the
conditions of each Covenant is our Righteousness, in reference to that
Covenant: But Faith is the fulfilling of the conditions of the new Covenant,
therefore it is our Righteousness in relation to that Covenant. I do not here
take Faith for any one single Act, but as I shall afterward explain it.

Quest. In what sense then is Faith said to be imputed to us for righteousness,
if it be our Righteousness it self?

Answ. Plainly thus; Man is become unrighteous by breaking the Law of
Righteousness that was given him; Christ fully satisfies for this
transgression, and buyeth the prisoners into his own hands, and makes with
them a new Covenant, That whosoever will accept of him, and believe in him, who
has thus satisfied, it shall be as effectual for their Justification, as if
they had fulfilled the Law of Works themselves. A Tenant forfeiteth his Lease
to his Landlord, by not paying his rent; he runs deep in debt to him, and is
disabled to pay him any more rent for the future, whereupon he is put out of
his house, and cast into prison, till he pay the debt; his Landlords son pays
it for him, takes him out of prison, and puts him in his house again, as
his Tenant, having purchased house and all to himself; he makes him a new
Lease in this Tenor, that paying but a pepper corn yearly to him, he shall be
acquit both from his debt, and from all other rent for the future, which by his
old Lease was to be paid; yet does he not cancel the old Lease, but keeps it
in his hands to put in suite against the Tenant, if he should be so foolish as
to deny the payment of the pepper corn. In this case the payment of the grain
of pepper is imputed to the Tenant, as if he had paid the rent of the old
Lease: Yet this imputation does not extol the pepper corn, nor vilify the
benefit of his Benefactor, who redeemed him: Nor can it be said, that the
purchase did only serve to advance the value and efficacy of that grain of
pepper. But thus; A personal rent must be paid for the testification of his
homage; he was never redeemed to be independent as his own Landlord and Master:
the old rent he cannot pay; his new Landlords clemency is such, that he has
resolved this grain shall serve the turn.

Do I need to apply this in the present case or cannot every man apply it? Even
so is our Evangelicall Righteousness, or Faith, imputed to us for as real
Righteousness, as perfect Obedience. Two things are considerable in this debt
of Righteousness; The value, and the personal performance or interest: The
value of Christ's Satisfaction is imputed to us, instead of the value of a
perfect Obedience of our own performing, and the value of our Faith is not so
imputed: But because there must be some personal performance of homage,
therefore the personal performance of Faith shall be imputed to us for a
sufficient personal payment, as if we had paid the full rent, because Christ
whom we believe in, has paid it, and he will take this for satisfactory
homage; so it is in point of personal performance, and not of value that Faith
is imputed.

THESIS XXIV.
THis personal Gospel Righteousness is in its kind a perfect Righteousness;
and so far we may admit the doctrine of personal Perfection.

EXPLICATION.
OUr Righteousness may be considered, either in regard of the matter and the
acts denominated righteous, or else in respect of the form which gives them
that denomination: Also our Faculties and Actions are considerable, either in
regard of their Being, or of their Quality.

1. The perfection of the Being of our Faculties or Acts is nothing to our
present purpose, as falling under a physical consideration only.

2. In regard of their Quality they may be called perfect or imperfect in
several senses.

1 As Perfection is taken for the transcendentall perfection of Being so they
are perfect.

2. And as it is taken for the complete number of all parts, it is perfect.

3. But as it is taken for that which is perfect, Efficienter or
Participaliter, that is, for a work that is finished for the Author, so our
holiness is still imperfect here.

4. And as it is taken for accidental perction, (so called in Metaphysics,
when it wants nothing which beyond the Essence, is also requisite to the
integrity, ornament and well being of it,) so our holiness is here imperfect.

5. As perfection is taken, pro sanitate, for soundness, so our holiness is
imperfect.

6. And as it is taken, pro maturitate, for ripeness, so it is imperfect.

7. In respect of the admixture of contrary qualities, our holiness is
imperfect.

8. But whether all this imperfection be privative and sinful, or merely
negative; and only our misery, whether it be a privation, physical or moral,
is a question that will be cleared, when I come to show the extent of the
Commands or Rule.

But not any of these kinds of perfection is that which I mean in the Position:
Holiness is a quality, and may be intended and remitted, in creased and
decreased; but it is the relative consideration of these qualities of our
faculties and acts, as they are compared with the Rule of the new Covenant; and
so it is not the perfection of our holiness that we enquire after, but of our
righteousness; which righteousness is not a quality as holiness is, but the
modification of our acts as to the Rule, which is not varyed, secundum majus
and minus: See Schibl. Metaph. li. 2, c. 9. Tit. 7. Art. 2. Therefore our
Divines usually say, That our Justification is perfect, though our
Sanctification be not; and then I am sure our Righteousness must be perfect.

A twofold perfection is here employed. 1. A Metaphysical Perfection of Being.
2. A Perfection of Sufficiency in order to its end.

1. The being of our Righteousness formally consisting in our relative
conformity to the rule, either it must be perfect, or not at all. He that is
not perfectly innocent in the very point that he is accused, is not innocent
truly, but guilty. Sincerity is usually said to be our Gospel-Perfection: not
as it is accepted in stead of perfection, but as it is truly so; for sincere
Faith is our conformity to the Rule of Perfection, viz. the new Covenant as it
is a Covenant; yet as it is sincere Faith, it is only materially our
Righteousness and Perfection, but formally as it is relatively our conformity
to the said Rule.

2. Our Righteousness is perfect as in its Being, so also in order to its end.
The end is, to be the condition of our Justification, etc. This end it shall
perfectly attain. The Tenor of the new Covenant is not, Believe in the highest
degree, and you shall be justified; But believe sincerely, and you shall be
justified; so that our Righteousness 1. formally considered, in relation to the
condition of the new Covenant, is perfect or none. 2. But considered materially
as it is holiness, either in reference to the degree it should attain, or the
degree which it shall attain, or in reference to the excellent object which it
is excercised about, or in reference to the old Covenant, or the directive,
(and in some sense) the preceptive part of the new Covenant; in all these
respects it is imperfect.

I speak not all this while of that perfection in Christ's Satisfaction, which
is also our perfect Righteousness, because few will question the perfection of
that.

THESIS XXV.
YEt is it an improper speech of some Divines, That Christ first justifies our
persons, and then our duties and actions: And except by [justifying] they mean,
his esteeming them to be a fulfilling of the Gospel Conditions, and so unjust,
it is unsound and dangerous, as well as improper.

EXPLICATION.
1. IT is improper in the best sense: 1. Because it is contrary to the
Scripture use of the word [ Iustifying]: which is the acquitting of us from the
charge of breaking the Law, and not from the charge of violating the new
Covenant, 2, It is against the nature of the thing; seeing Justification (as
you shall see anon) implies Accusation; but the esteeming of a righteous
action to be as it is, does not imply any accusation. 3. This speech, joining
Justification of Persons and Actions together, does seem to intimate the same
kind of justification of both, and so does tend to seduce the hearers to a
dangerous error. 2. For if it be understood in the worst sense, it will
overthrow the Righteousness of Christ imputed, and the whole scope of the
Gospel, and will set up the doctrine of Justification by Works. For if God do
justify our Works from any legal Accusation, (as he does our persons,) then
it will follow, That our Works are just and consequently we are to be justified
by them. There is no room for Scripture-justification where our own Works are
not first acknowledged unjustifiable: because there is no place for
Satisfaction and Justification thereby from another, where we plead the
Justification of our own Works in respect of the same Law. Justification of
Works is a sufficient ground for Justification by Works: seeing the justness of
his dispositions and actions is the ground of denominating the person just, and
that according to the primary and most proper kind of Righteousness as is
expressed in the distinction of it, page 98, 99.

THESIS XXVI.
(1) NEither can our performance of the conditions of the Gospel in the most
proper and strict sense, be said to merit the reward: seeing there is nothing
in the value of it, or any benefit that God receives by it, which may so
entitle it meritorious; neither is there any proportion betwixt it and the
reward. (2) But in a larger fence, as Promise is an Obligation, and the thing
promised is called Debt; so the performers of the Condition are called Worthy,
and their performance Merit. Though properly it is all of Grace, and not of
Debt. (1) Romans 4. 4, 10. and 5. 15, 16, 17. Hose. 14. 4. Mat. 10. 8. Romans 3.
24. and 8, 32. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Rev. 21. 6. and 22. 18. Romans 11. 6. Gal. 5. 4.
Ephesians. 2. 5, 7, 8. Genesis 32. 10. (2) Mat. 10. 11, 12, 13, 37. and 22 8. Luke 20.
35. and 21. 36. 2 These. 1. 5. 11. Rev. 3. 4, etc.

EXPLICATION.
IN the strictest sense he is said to Merit, who performs somewhat of that
worth in it self to another, which binds that other in strict justice to
requite him. This work must not be due, and so the performer not under the
absolute sovereignty of another? for else he is not in a capacity of thus
Meriting. It is natural Justice which here binds to Reward. All that we can
merit at the hands of Gods natural Justice is but these two things. 1. The
escape of punishment in that respect or consideration wherein our actions are
not sinful: or the not punishing of us in a greater degree then sin deserves:
(Though indeed it is questionable whether we are capable of suffering more.) 2.
Our actions thus deserve the honor of acknowledgment of that good which is in
them; yea, though the evil be more then the good. As a merciful Thief that
gives a poor man half his money again, when he has robbed him, as he deserves
a less degree of punishment, so that good which was in his action deserves an
answerable acknowledgment and praise, though he dye for the fact.

But this is a poor kind of meriting, and little to the honor or benefit of
the party: And is more properly called a less desert of punishment, then a
desert of reward.

2. The second kind of Merit, is that whereby a Governor, for the promoting of
the ends of Government, is obliged to reward the Obedience of the Governed:
That when Disobedience is grown common, the Obedience may be encouraged, and a
difference made. Among men even Justice binds to such reward; at least to
afford the obedience the benefit of protection and freedom, though he do no
more then his duty: But that is because no man has an absolute sovereignty de
jure over his subjects, as God has; but is indebted to his subjects as well as
they are to him. If our obedience were perfect, in respect of the Law of Works,
yet all the Obligation that would lie upon God to reward us (any further then
the foresaid forbearing to punish us, and acknowledging our obedience) would be
but his own wisdom; as he discerns such a Reward would tend to the
well-governing of the World, working morally with voluntary agents agreeable to
their natures. And when we had done all, we must say, we are unprofitable
servants; we have done nothing but what was our duty. Therefore this Obligation
to reward from the wisdom of God, as it is in his own breast known to himself
alone, so is it drawn from himself, and not properly from the worth of our
Works, and therefore this is improperly called Merit.

3. The third kind of Meriting is sufficiently explained in the Position:
where the Obligation to reward, is Gods ordinate Justice, and the truth of his
Promise: and the worthiness lies in our performance of the Conditions on our
part. This is improperly called Merit: This kind of Meriting is no diminution
to the greatness or freeness of the gift or reward: because it was a free and
gracious Act of God to make our performance capable of that title; and to
engage himself in the foresaid promise to us; and not for any gain that he
expected by us, or that our performance can bring him.

THESIS XXVII.
1 AS it was possible for Adam to have fulfilled the Law of Works by that power
which he received by nature; (2) So is it possible for us to perform the
Conditions of the new Covenant by the (3) Power which we receive from the Grace
of Christ.

EXPLICATION.
(1) THat it may be possible which is not future. A thing is termed possible
when there is nothing in the nature of the thing it self, which may so hinder
its production as to necessitate its non-futurity: Though from extrinsecall
Reasons, the same non-futurity may be certain, and in some respect necessary:
And all things considered, the futurity of it may be termed impossible; and yet
the thing it self be possible. So it was possible for Adam to have stood: And
so if you should take the word [possible] absolutely, and abstracted from the
consideration of the strength of the Actor; even the Commands of the Law are
yet possible to be fulfilled* But such a use of the word is here improper: it
being ordinarily spoken with relation to the strength of the Agent. (2) But in
the relative sense the Conditions of the new Covenant are possible to them that
have the assistance of grace. I intend not here to enter upon an Explication of
the nature of that Grace which is necessary to this performance; my purpose
being chiefly to open those things wherein the relative change of our estates
does consist rather then the real. Whether then this Grace be Physical or
Moral? Whether there be a Moral Suasion of the Spirit, distinct from the
Suasion of the Word, and other outward means? Whether that which is commonly
called the Work of Conscience, be also from such an internal suasory work of
the Spirit? How far this Grace is resistible? Or whether all have sufficient
Grace to believe, either given, or internally offered? with multitudes of such
questions, I shall here pass by; Referring you to those many Volumes that have
already handled them. All that I shall say of this shall be when I come to open
the Nature of Faith. See Parkers Theses before mentioned.

THESIS. XXVIII.
THe Precepts of the Covenants, as mere Precepts, must be distinguished from
the same Precepts considered as Conditions, upon performance whereof we must
live, or dye for non performance.

THESIS XXIX.
AS all Precepts are delivered upon Covenantterms, or as belonging to one of
the Covenants, and not independently; So have the same Precepts, various ends
and uses, according to the tenor and ends of the distinct Covenants to which
they do belong.

EXPLICATION.
THerefore it is one thing to ask, whether the Covenant of Works be abolished?
and another thing, whether the Moral Law be abolished? Yet that no one Precept
of either Moral or Ceremonial Law was delivered without reference to one of
the Covenants, is very evident. For if the breach of that Command be a sin, and
to be punished, then either according to the rigorous threatening of the old
Covenant, or according to the way and justice of the new. For the Law, as it
was delivered by Moses, may be reduced in several respects to each of these
Covenants, and cannot constitute a third Covenant, wholly distinct from both
these; and therefore Camero does more fitly call it a subservient Covenant,
then a third Covenant. For either God intended in that Covenant to proceed with
sinners in strict rigor of Justice, for every sin; and then it is reducible to
the first Covenant: Or else to pardon sin upon certain conditions, and to
dispense with the rigor of that first Covenant: And then it must imply
satisfaction for those sins; and so be reducible to the second Covenant: (For I
cannot yet digest the Doctrine of Grotius and Vossius, concerning satisfaction
by sacrifice for temporal punishment, without subordination to the
satisfaction by Christ:) Or if it seem in several phrases to savor of the
language of the several Covenants, (as indeed it does;) that is because they
are yet both in force; and in several respects it is reducible to both. So
that when we demand, whether the Moral Law do yet bind, the question is
ambiguous, from the ambiguity of the term [Binde.] For it is one thing to ask,
whether it bind upon the old Covenant terms? another, whether upon new
Covenant terms? and a third, whether as a mere Precept? Here a question or two
must be answered.

1 Quest. How could the Precepts delivered by Moses (when the old Covenant was
violated, and the new established) belong to that old Covenant?

2 Quest. In what sense does the Decalogue belong to the new Covenant?

3 Quest. Whether the Precepts of the Gospel do belong to the Decalogue?

4 Quest. Whether the Precepts of the Gospel belong also to the old Covenant?

But all these will be cleared under the following Positions, where they shall
be distinctly answered.

THESIS XXX.
THere is no sin prohibited in the Gospel which is not a breach of some Precept
in the Decalogue: and which is not threatened by the Covenant of Works, as
offending against, and so falling under the Justice thereof. For the
threatening of that Covenant extends to all sin that then was, or after
should be forbidden. God still reserved the prerogative, of adding to his Laws,
without altering the Covenant terms; else every new Precept would imply a new
Covenant: And so there should be a multitude of Covenants.

EXPLICATION.
1. THough the Decalogue does not mention each particular duty in the Gospel,
yet does it command obedience to all that are or shall be specified; and
expresses the genus of every particular duty. And though it were not a duty
from the general precept, till it was specified in the Gospel, yet when it
once is a duty, the neglect of it is a sin against the Decalogue. For instance;
The Law says, Thou shall take the Lord for thy God, and consequently believe
all that he says to be true; and obey him in all that he shall particularly
command you: The Gospel reveals (what it is that is to be believed, and
says, This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom the Father has
sent. Ioh. 6. 28, 29. The affirmative part of the second Commandment is, Thou
shall worship God according to his own institution: The Gospel specifieth some
of this instituted Worship, viz. Sacraments, etc. So that the neglect of
Sacraments is a breach of the second Commandment: And Unbelief is a breach of
the first. This may help you to answer that question, Whether the Law without
the Gospel be a sufficient Rule of Life? Answ. As the Lords Prayer is a
sufficient Rule of Prayer: It is sufficient in its own kind, or to its own
purposes: It is a sufficient general Rule for duty; but it does not enumerate
all the particular instituted species. Yet here, the Gospel revealing these
institutions, is not only the new Covenant it self; but the doctrine of Christ,
which is an adjunct of that Covenant also.

2. That every sin against the precepts of the Gospel and decalogue, are also
sins against the Covenant of Works, and condemned by it, will appear thus. 1.
The threatening of that Covenant is against all sin, as well as one, (though
none but eating the forbidden fruit be named:) But these are sins; and
therefore threatened by that Covenant. The major appears by the recital
afterward; Cursed is he that does not al things written. 2. I have proved
before, that the old Covenant is not repealed, but only relaxed to Believers
upon Christ's satisfaction; And then it must needs be in force against every
sin. 3. The penalty in that Covenant is still executed against such sins. So
that every sin against the Gospel is a breach of the Conditions of the Law of
Works: But every sin against that Law, is not a breach of the Conditions of the
Gospel. And it hinders not this, That the Moral Law by Moses, and the Gospel
by Christ, were delivered since the Covenant with Adam. For though that
Covenant did not specify each duty and sin: yet it does condemn the sin when
it is so specified. But the great Objection is this: How can Unbelief be a
breach of the Covenant of Works, when the very duty of believing for pardon is
inconsistent with the Tenor of that Covenant, which knows no pardon? Ans. 1.
Pardon of sin is not so contradictory to the truth of that Covenant, but that
they may consist upon satisfaction made. Though it is true, that the Covenant
it self does give no hopes of it; yet it does not make it impossible. 2.
Unbelief, in respect of pardon and recovery, is a Sin against the Covenant of
Works, not formaliter, but eminenter. 3. Not also as it is the neglect of a
duty, with such and such ends and uses, but as it is the neglect of duty in the
general considered; and so as it is a sin in general, and not as it is a sin
consisting in such or such an act or omission. The form of the sin lies in its
pravity or deviation from the Rule: So far Unbelief is condemned by the Law:
The substrate act is but the matter, (improperly so called.)

The review of the comparison before laid down will explain this to you: A
Prince bestows a Lordship upon a Slave, and makes him a Lease of it, the
tenor where of is, That he shall perform exact obedience to all that is
commanded him; and when he fails of this, he shall forfeit his Lease: The
Tenant disobeyeth, and makes the forfeiture; The Son of this Prince
interposeth, and buyeth the Lordship, and satisfies for all the damage that
came by the Tenants disobedience: Whereupon the Land and Tenant and Lease are
all delivered up to him, and he becomes Landlord. He finds the Tenant (upon
his forfeiture) dispossessed of the choycest rooms of the house, and chief
benefits of the Land, and confined to a ruinous corner; and was to have been
deprived of all, had not he thus interposed. Whereupon he makes him a new
Lea^e in this Tenor, That if in acknowledgment of the favor of his Redemption,
he will but pay a pepper corn, he shall be restored to his former possession,
and much more.

In this case now the non-payment of the pepper corn, is a breach of both
Leases: Of the old, because though he had forfeited his title to the benefits
of it, yet he could not disanull the duty of it, which was obedience during his
life: especially when the penalty was not fully executed on him, but he was
permitted still to enjoy some of the benefits. So that as it is an act of
disobedience in general, his non-payment is a further forfeiture of his old
Lease: But as it is the non-payment of a pepper-corn required of him in stead
of his former Rent, so it is a breach of his new Lease only. Even so is
Unbelief a violation of both Covenants.

THESIS XXXI.
THe Gospel does establish, and not repeall the Moral Law, and so is perfect
obedience commanded, and every sin forbidden, now, as exactly as under the
Covenant of Works: But this is but an adjunct of the new Covenant and not a
proper part of it: Neither is it on the same terms, or to the same ends, as in
the first Covenant.

EXPLICATION.
THat the Moral Law is yet in force, I will not stand to prove, because so
many have written of it already. See Mr. Anthony Burgesses Lectures: But to
what ends, and in what sense the Gospel continues that Law, and commands
perfect obedience thereto, is a Question not very easy.

1. Whether Christ did first repeall that Law, and then re-establish it to
other ends? So some think.

2. Or whether he has at all made the Moral Law to be the preceptive part of
the new Covenant? And so whether the new Covenant do at all command us perfect
obedience? or only sincere?

3. Or whether the Moral Law be continued only as the precepts of the old
Covenant, and so used by the new Covenant, merely for a directive Rule?

To the first I answer; 1. That it is not repealed at all I have proved
already, even concerning the Covenant of Works it self; and others enough have
proved at large of the Moral Law. 2. Yet that Christ uses it to other ends,
and for the advantage of his Kingdom, I grant.

To the other second Question, I answer; 1. That the Moral Law, as it is the
perceptive part of the Covenant of works, is but delivered over into the hands
of Christ, and so continued in the sense before expressed, seems plain to me.

2. That the same Moral Law does therefore so continue to command even
believers and that the perfect obeying of it is therefore their duty, and the
not obeying their sin, deserving the death threatened in that Covenant.

3. That Jesus Christ has further made use of the same Moral Law, for a
direction to his Subjects, whereby they may know his Will. That whereas your
sincere subjection and obedience to Christ, is part of the condition of the new
Covenant; that we may know what his Will is, which we must endeavor to obey,
and what Rule our actions must be sincerely fitted to, and guided by, he has
therefore left us this Moral Law as part of this direction, having added a
more particular enumeration of some duties in his Gospel. That as when the old
Covenant said, Thou shall obey perfectly; the Moral Law did Partly tell them,
wherein they should obey: So when the new Covenant says, Thou shall obey
sincerely; the Moral Law does tell us, wherein, or what we must endeavor to
do.

4. But that the Moral Law, without respect to either Covenant, should command
us perfect obedience; or that Christ, as the Mediator of the new Covenant,
should command us not only sincere, but also perfect obedience to the Moral
Law, and so has made it a proper part of his Gospel, not only as a Directory
and Instruction, but also as a Command: I am not yet convinced, (though I will
not contend with any that think otherwise,) my Reason is, because I know not to
what end Christ should command us that obedience which he never does enable any
man in this life to perform. If it were to convince us of our disability and
sin, that is the work of the Law, and the continuing of it upon the old terms,
as is before explained, is sufficient to that.

But I judge this Question to be of greater difficult then moment.

THESIS XXXII.
IF there be any particular sins against the new Covenant, which are not also
against the old; or if any sins be considerable in any of their respects, as
against the Gospel only, then Christ's death was not to satisfy for any such
sins so considered: For where no death is threatened, there none is explicitly
due, nor should be executed; and where it is not so due to the sinner, nor
should have been executed on him, there it could not be required of Christ, nor
executed on him: But the Gospel threateneth not death to any sin, but final
unbelief and rebellion, (and for that Christ never dyed, as I shall show anon,)
therefore Christ died not for any sin as against the Gospel, nor suffered that
which is no where threatened.

EXPLICATION.
A Sin may be said to be against the Gospel, 1. As Christ and his Gospel are
the object of it; 2. Or as it breaks the conditions of the Gospel: In the
latter sense only I here take it. To prove the point in hand, there needs no
more then the Argument mentioned: For to all that unbelief, and other sins of
the godly, which are forgiven, the Gospel does no where threaten death; and
therefore Christ could not bear it, as to satisfy the Gospel-threatening.
Though I confess I have been long in this point of another judgment, while I
considered not the Tenor of the Covenants distinctly; some further proof you
shall have in the next conclusion. Read Heb. 9. 15.

THESIS XXXIII.
AS the Active Obedience of Christ was not the Righteousness of the second
Covenant, or the performing of it. Conditions, but of the first, properly
called a Legal Righteousness; so also his Passive Obedience and Merit was only
to satisfy for the violation of the Covenant of Works, but not at all for the
violation of the Covenant of Grace for that there is no satisfaction made, and
there remains no sacrifice.

EXPLICATION.
THat Christ did not fulfill the conditions of the new Covenant for us: I have
proved already: That he has not satisfied for its violation, I think to the
considerate will need no proof: If you think otherwise, consider, 1. Christ is
said to be made under the Law, and to have born the curse of the Law, and to
have freed us from the curse of it, but no where is this affirmed of him in
respect of the Gospel. 2. There be terms by him propounded upon which men must
partake of the benefits of his Satisfaction; but these terms are only
conditions of the new Covenant, therefore he never satisfied for the
nonperformance of those conditions. 3. If he did, upon what conditions is that
satisfaction enjoyed by us? 4. But the Question is out of doubt, because that
every man that performs not the Gospel-conditions, does bear the punishment
himself in eternal fire, and therefore Christ did not bear it: So that as it
was not so grievous a death which was threatened in the first Covenant, as that
is which is threatened in the second; so it was not so grievous a kind of death
which Christ did bear, as that is which final unbelievers shall bear, (except
as ^he accumulation of sins of so many might increase it,) Therefore when we
say, That Christ suffered in his Soul the pains of hell, or that which is
equal; we must not mean the pains which is threatened in the Gospel, and the
damned unbelievers must endure; but only of that death which the Law of Works
did threaten. Woe therefore to the rebellious unbelieving world, that must bear
this second death themselves: For of how much soever punishment shall they be
thought worthy, who tread under foot the blood of the Covenant? Heb. 10. 29.

THESIS. XXXIV.
THe Covenant of Grace is not properly said to be violated, or its conditions
broken, except they be finally broken: For the violation consists in non
performance of the conditions, and if they are performed at last, they are
truly performed, and if performed, then the Covenant is not so violated, as
that the offender should fall under the threatening thereof.

EXPLICATION.
I Deny not but the new Covenant may be said to be neglected, and sinned
against, and the Command of Christ broken by our long standing out in unbelief,
though we come home at last. But the Covenant conditions are not broken, when
ever the precept of the Gospel is transgressed, or the Covenant neglected,
except it be final. The Condition is, Who ever believes shall be saved, not
limitting it to a particular season. Though both the precept of Christ, and
common Reason requires that we be speedy in the performance, because we have
no promise that the day of Grace shall continue, and because our neglect will
increase our disability, and our frequent resisting Will grieve the Spirit: So
that the new Covenant does not threaten death to every particular act of
disobedience or unbelief, nor to any but what is final, though the precept
require that we believe immediately, and every degree of unbelief be forbidden.

THESIS XXXV.
YEt the sins of Believers against the Gospel Precepts have need of pardon, and
are properly said to be pardoned, in reference to their deserved punishment; 1.
Both because the punishment, which naturally and implicitly is due to them, is
not so much as threatened in this gentle Covenant, and so becomes not
explicitly due, or in point of Law. 2. But specially because the old Covenant
condemning all sin, is yet unrepealed, which would be executed on us, even for
our sins against GRACE, did not the efficacy of CHRIST'S Satisfaction daily
interpose, which makes us therefore have continual need of that Satisfaction.

EXPLICATION.
THis is laid down to prevent the Objection which might arise from the
foregoing Doctrine: For many are ready to ask, If Christ dyed not for sin as
it is against the Gospell-Covenant, then how are such sins pardoned to
Believers? I answer, in the fore-expressed way: For certainly the Gospel cannot
be said to remit the punishment which it never threatened, (further then as it
is only implicitly due;) And that which it does threaten it does never remit.

THESIS XXXVI.
THe pardoning of sin is a gracious act of God, discharging the Offender by the
Gospell-Promise, or grant from the Obligation, to punishment, upon
consideration of the satisfaction made by Christ, accepted by the sinner, and
pleaded with God.

EXPLICATION.
THe true definition of Pardon, and of Justification does much conduce to the
understanding of this whole mysterious Doctrine. The former I have here laid
down as near as I can. I shall briefly explain the whole Definition,

1. I call it an Act of God; for so the Scripture ordinarily does. Mat. 6. 12.
14, 15. Mar. 11. 24. 26. Luke 23. 34. Ephesians. 3. 32. Some may object; If all
things be delivered into the hands of Christ the Redeemer, and all Judgment
committed to the Son, as is showed before, then the Son should forgive rather
then the Father. I answer. 1. So the Son is said to forgive also, Mar. 2. 7,
10. Luke 5. 24. 2. I showed you before, That the Father gives not away any
power from himself by giving it to the Son; but only does manage it in another
way upon other terms. 3. As the Mediator is a middle person, interposing
between God and the world for their reconciliation, so the Acceptance, Pardon
and Kingdom of the Mediator, is, as it were a Mean or step toward the Pardon,
Acceptance, and Kingdom of God. First Christ does cleanse men by his Spirit,
and Blood, and then offers them blameless and undefiled, without spot or
wrinkle to God, who so accepts them at his hands, and even the Kingdom also
will he deliver up to the Father, Ephesians. 5. 27. Col. 1. 22, 28. Jude 24. 1 Cor.
15. 24. Therefore the Sons pardoning and accepting being first in order of
Nature, and so but a mean to Gods pardoning and accepting where the whole work
is completely perfected, (when the sinner is fully brought home by Christ to
God, from whom he first fell, the act of pardoning is therefore most usually
and fitly ascribed to the Father, (that being the ultimate perfecting pardon,)
and we are said to ask it of him through Christ.

2. I call this Pardon, a gracious Act; For if it were not in some sort
gratuitous, or free, it were no Pardon. Let those think of this, who say, We
have perfectly obeyed the Law in Christ, and are therefore righteous. If the
proper debt either of obedience or suffering be paid, either by our selves, or
by another, then there is no place left for Pardon: For when the Debt is paid,
we owe nothing (except obedience de novo;) and therefore can have nothing
forgiven us. For the Creditor cannot refuse the proper Debt, nor deny an
Acquittance upon receipt thereof. But Christ having paid the Tantundem and not
the Idem, the Value and not the strict Debt, this satisfaction the Father might
have chosen to accept, or to have discharged us upon Christ's sufferings: which
yet because he freely does, therefore is his gracious Act properly called
Pardon.

The ignorant Antinomians think, it cannot be a Free Act of Grace, if there be
any Condition on our part for enjoying it. As if in the forementioned
comparison, page 153. the Tenants redemption were the less free, because his
new Lease requires the Rent of a pepper corn in token of homage! As if when a
pardon is procured for a condemned Malefactor, upon condition that he shall not
reject it when it is offered him, but shall take him that procured it for his
Lord, that this were therefore no free pardon! Indeed if we paid but a mite in
part of the debt it self, so far our pardon were the less free. But I will not
further trouble the Reader with these senceless conceits, the confutation
whereof is so easy and obvious.

3. I call this Act [ a Discharging] as being the proper term in Law to express
it by. We were before charged by the Law: we are by this Act discharged.

4. I call it a discharge of [ the Offender:] For an offender is the only
capable object or recipient of it. There can be no pardon where there is no
offender.

5. I call it a discharging [ from the Obligation to Punishment.] For. 1. You
must look at this whole process as legal, and not as referring chiefly to Gods
secret judgment or thoughts. Therefore when it is called a freeing man from the
wrath of God, you must understand it only of the wrath threatened in the
Covenant, and so from [the obligation to Punishment.] You must not conceive of
the change in God, but in the sinners relation, and consequently in the sense
and sentence of the Law, as to him. 2. The common word by which this terminus a
quo, or rather the evil which this pardon does directly free us from, is
expressed, is Guilt. But because the word Guilt is variously used, sometimes
referring only to the Fact, sometimes to the desert of Punishment, and
sometime to the dueness of Punishment or the Laws obliging the Offender to bear
it; I have therefore here taken it in this last expression, because I think
that Guilt is taken away only in this last sense; as I shall further open anon.
Therefore many define Guilt only in this last sense, Reatus est Obligatio ad
Poenam. This Obligation though expressed only in the Covenant, yet arises also
from the Fact: For if the Covenant had not been broken, it had not obliged to
suffering; but still to duty only.

6. I call it a Discharging [by the Gospell-promise or grant:] (It is called a
Promise in reference to the benefit as future, but more properly a Grant in
reference to the benefit as present or past; either in the conferring, or
already conferred.) This I do for these Reasons. 1. To clear the nature of this
Act. 2. To divert your thoughts from Gods secret judgment, where most suppose
this Act performed; and to turn them right, and free God from the imputation of
change.

A great question it is, Whether Remission and Justification be immanent or
transient Acts of God? The mistake of this one point was it that led those two
most excellent, famous Divines. Dr. Twisse and Mr. Pemble to that error and
pillar of Antinomianism, viz. Justification from Eternity. For (says Dr.
Twisse often) All Acts immanent in God, are from Eternity: but Justification
and remission of sin are immanent Acts: therefore, etc. by [immanent in God]
they must needs mean Negatively, not Positively. For Acts have not the respect
of an Adjunct to its subject, but an effect to its cause. Now whether all such
immanent Acts are any more eternal then transient Acts, is much questioned: As
for God to know that the world does now exist; That such a man is sanctified,
or just, etc. Gods fore-knowledg is not a knowing that such a thing is, which
is not; but that such a thing will be, which is not. Yet does this make no
change in God: no more then the Sun is changed by the variety of Creatures
which it does enlighten and warm; or the Glass by the variety of faces which it
represents; or the eye by the variety of the colors, which it beholds: (For
whatsoever some say, I do not think that every variation of the object makes a
real change in the eye, or that the beholding of ten distinct colors at one
view, does make ten distinct acts of the sight, or alterations on it: Much less
do the objects of Gods knowledge make such alterations.) But grant that all Gods
immanent Acts are Eternal (which I think is quite beyond our understanding to
know:) Yet most Divines will deny the Minor; and tell you that Remission and
Justification are transient Acts; Which is true: But a Truth which I never had
the happiness to see or hear well cleared by any. For to prove it a transient
act, they tell us no more, but that it does transire in subjectum extraneum, by
making a moral change on our Relation, though not a real upon our persons, as
Sanctification does. But this is only to affirm and not to prove; and that in
general only; not telling us what Act it is that makes this change. Relations
are not capable of being the Patients or subjects of any Act: seeing they are
but mere Entia Rationis, and no real Beings. Neither are they the immediate
product or effect of any Act: but in order of Nature are consequentiall to the
direct effects. The proper effect of the Act is to lay the Foundation from
whence the Relation does arise. And the same Act which lays the Foundation
does cause the Relation, without the intervention of any other. Suppose but the
subjectum fundamentum and terminus, and the Relation will unavoydably follow,
by a mere resultancy. The direct effect therefore of Gods Active Justification
must be a real effect, though not upon the sinner, yet upon something else for
him; and thence will his Passive Justification follow. Now what transient Act
this is, and what its immediate real Effect, who has unfolded? I dare not be
to confident in so dark a point: but it seems to me, that this justifying
transient Act is the enacting or promulgation of the new Covenant, wherein
Justification is conferred upon every Believer. Here, 1. The passing and
enacting this Grant is a transient Act. 2. So may the continuance of it (as I
think.) 3. This Law or Grant has a moral improper Action, whereby it may be
said to pardon or justify; which properly is but virtuall justifying. 4. By
this Grant God does, 1. Give us the Righteousness of Christ, to be ours when we
believe: 2. And disableth the Law to oblige us to punishment, or to condemn us:
3. Which real Foundation being thus laid, our Relations of [Justified and
Pardoned in title of Law] do necessarily result.

Object. But this Act of God, in granting Pardon to Believers, was performed
long ago: But our Justification is not till we believe. Answ. Though the
effects of Causes as Physical do follow them immediately, yet as Moral they
do not so: but at what distance the Agent pleases sometimes. A man makes his
son a Deed of Gift of certain Lands, to be his at such an age, or upon the
performance of some eminent Action. Here the Deed of gift is the fathers
instrument by which he gives these Lands: The passing this Deed is the proper
Act and time of Donation: Yet the son has no possession till the time
prefixed, or till the Condition be performed: At which time, the conditional
Grant becoming absolute, and giving him right to present possession, it is not
unfitly said, that his father does even then bestow the Lands: though by no new
intervening act at all, but only the continuation of the former Deed of gift in
force. So here, the conditional grant of Pardon and Justification does then
absolutely pardon and justify us, when we perform the Condition. Hence is the
phrase in Scripture of being [Iustified by the Law:] which does not only
signify [by the Law as the Rule to which men did fit their actions;] but also
[by the Law, as not condemning, but justifying, the person whose actions are so
fitted:] In which sense the Law did justify Christ: or else the Law should not
justify as a Law or Covenant, but only as a Direction: which properly is not
Justifying, but only a means to discover that we are Justifiable. As the Word
of Christ shall judge men at the last day, Ioh. 12. 28. So does it virtually
now, And if it judge, then does it condemn and justify. So Romans 2. 12. Iam. 2*
12. We shall be judged by the Law of Liberty. Gal. 5. 3. 4, 23. In the same
sense, as the Law is said to convince and curse ( Iam. 2. 9. Gal. 3. 13.) it
may be said that the Gospel or new Law does acquit, justify and bless. Romans
8. 12. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me from the Law
of Sin and Death. As the Law works Wrath, and where is no Law, there is no
Transgression, (Romans 4. 15.) And as sin is not imputed where there is no Law,
(Romans 5. 13. and the strength of sin is the law, (1 Cor. 15. 56 So the new law
is the strength of Righteousness, and works Deliverance from Wrath; and were
there no such new Covenant, there would be no Righteousness inherent or
imputed: Ioh. 7. 51.

So that I conclude, That this transient Act of God, pardoning and justifying
(constitutive) is his Grant in the new Covenant; by which as a Moral
Instrument, our Justification and Pardon are in time produced, even when we
believe: the Obligation of the Law being then by it made void to us.

And this is the present apprehension I have of the nature of Remission and
Justification: Si quid novisti rectius, etc. (yet I shall have occasion
afterward to tell you, That all this is but Remission and Justification in Law
and Title, which must be distinguished from that which is in Judgment or
Sentence; the former being vertual in respect of the Actuality of the latter)

2. The second kind of Gods Acts, which may be called Justifying, is indeed
Immanent; viz. his knowing the sinner to be pardoned and just in Law; his
Willing and Approving hereof as True and Good: These are Acts in Heaven, yea in
God himself; but the former sort are on earth also. I would not have those Acts
of God separated which he does conjoyn; as he ever does these last with the
former: But I verily think that it is especially the former transient legal
Acts which the Scripture usually means when it speaks of Pardoning and
(constitutive) Justifying: and not these Immanent Acts: though these must be
looked on as concurrent with the former. Yet most Divines that I meet with,
seem to look at Pardon and Justification as being done in heaven only and
consisting only in these later Immanent Acts: And yet they deny Justification
to be an Immanent Act too: But how they will ever manifest that these
celestial Acts of God, (viz. his Willing the sinners Pardon, and so forgiving
him in his own breast; or his accepting him as just,) are Transient Acts, I am
yet unable to understand. And if they be Immanent Acts, most will grant that
they are from Eternity: and then fair fall the Antinomians. Indeed if God have
a Bar in Heaven before his Angels, where these things are for the present
transacted, as some think; and that we are said to be justified only at the bar
now; then I confess that is a transient Act indeed. But of that more hereafter.

7. I add in the definition, That all this is done [ in consideration of the
Satisfaction, 1 made by Christ, 2. Accepted, 3. and pleaded with God.] The
satisfaction made is the proper meritorious and impulsive cause: 2. So the
Satisfaction, as pleaded by Christ the intercessor, is also an impulsive cause.
3. The Satisfactious Acceptance by the Sinner (that is Faith,) and the pleading
of it with God by the sinner (that is praying for pardon,) are but the
Conditions, or Causae sine quo.

But all these will be fuller opened afterward.

THESIS. XXXVII.
Justification is either 1. in Title and the Sense of the Law; 2. Or in
Sentence of Judgment. The first may be called Constitutive; The second
Declarative: The first Virtuall, the second Actual.

EXPLICATION.
I Will not stand to mention all those other Distinctions of Justification
which are common in others, and not so necessary or pertinent to my purposed
scope. You may find them in Mr Bradshaw, Mr John Goodwin, and Alstedius
Distinctions and Definitions, etc.

The difference between Justification in Title of Law, and in Sentence of
Judgment, is apparent at the first view: Therefore I need not explain it. It is
common, when a man has a good cause, and the Law on his side, to say, The Law
justifies him, or he is just in Law, or he is acquit by the Law; and yet he is
more fully and completely acquit by the sentence of the Judge afterward. In the
former sense we are now justified by faith, as soon as ever we believe: In the
latter sense we are justified at the last Judgment. The title of [Declarative]
is too narrow for this last: For the sentence of judicial absolution does more
then barely to declare us justified. I call the former [virtuall] not as it is
in it felf considered, but as it stands in relation to the latter.

All those Scriptures, which speak of Justification as done in this life, I
understand of Justification in Title opf Law: So Romans 5. 1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God. Romans 4. 2. Romans 5. 9. Being now justified by his
blood, etc. James 2. 21, 25. etc.

But Justification in Judgment, as it is the completing Act, so is it most
fitly called Justification; and I think the word in Scripture has most
commonly reference to the Judgment day; and that Justification in Title is
called [Justification] most especially, because of its relation to the
Justification at Judgment; because as men are now in point of Law, so shall
they most certainly be sentenced in Judgment.

Therefore is it spoken of many times as a future thing, and not yet done: Romans
3. 30 Mat. 12. 37. Romans 2. 13. But these may be called [Justification by
Faith,] for by Faith we are justified, both in Law Title. and at Judgment.

THESIS XXXVIII.
Justification, in Title of Law, is a gracious Act of God, by the Promise or
Grant of the new Covevant, acquitting the Offender from the Accusasation and
Condemnation of the old Covenant, upon consideration of the Satisfaction made
by Christ, and accepted by the sinner.

EXPLICATION.
HEre you may see 1. That pardon of sin, and this Justification in Law, are not
punctually and precisely alone: 2. And yet the difference is very small. The
chief difference lies in this, That the Terminus a quo of Remission, is the
obligation to punishment; but the Terminus of Justification, (or the evil that
it formally and directly does free us from,) is the Laws Accusation and
Condemnation: Now though the difference between these two be very narrow, and
rather respective then real, yet a plain difference there is: For though it be
one and the same Commination of the Law, by which men are both obliged to
punishment, accused as guilty, and condemned for that guilt, yet these are not
all one, though it is also true, that they all stand or fall together.

That pardon is most properly the removing of the Obligation, and that
Justification is the removing of Accusation and Condemnation in the Law, will
be evident to those that have read what Divines have written at large
concerning the signification of the words, especially such that have skill in
Law, which is a great advantage in this doctrine of Justification: Therefore as
Mr. Wotten, and Mr. Goodwin do a little mistake in making pardon of sin to be
the formal cause of Justification, (though they are far nearer the mark then
their opposers.) So Mr. Bradshaw does a little too much straiten the form of
it, making it to lie only in Apology or Plea. It consists in both the Acts;
1. Apology, in oppositio^ to Accusation; thus Christ our Advocate does
principally justify us: 2. In Sentence, (virtuall or actual,) and so it is
opposed both to Accusation and Condemnation; so Christ the Mediator as Judge,
and the Father as one with him, and as the supreme Judge, does justify: But
this latter is the chief Act. The rest of the Definition is sufficiently opened
under the foregoing Definition of Pardon, and will be more after.

THESIS XXXIX.
Justification in Sentence of Judgment is [a gracious Act of God by Christ,
according to the Gospel, by Sentence at his public Bar, acquitting the sinner
from the Accusation and Condemnation of the Law, pleaded against him by Satan]
upon the consideration of the Satisfaction made by Christ, accepted by the
sinner, and pleaded for him.

EXPLICATION.
THere is also a twofold Pardon, as well as a twofold Justification: One in
Law, the other in Sentence of Judgment. So. Acts 3. 19. Repent, that your sins
may be blotted out, when the time of refreshing comes, etc. But pardon of sin
is usually mentioned in respect to this life present, as being bestowed here;
because a man may more fitly be said to be fully quit from the Obligation of
the punishment, commonly called the guilt in this life, then from the
Accusation of that guilt which will be managed against him by Satan hereafter,
or from the Condemnation, which he must then most especially be delivered from.

The difference betwixt this Justification and the former, may easily be
discerned by the Definition without any further Explication.

THESIS XL.
WHen Scripture speaks of Justification by Faith, it is to be understood
primarily and directly of Justification in Law title, and at the bar of Gods
public Judgment; and but secondarily and consequentially of Justification at
the bar of Gods secret judgment, or at the bar of Conscience, or of the World.

EXPLICATION.
1. THat Justification by Faith is in foro-Dei, and not in foro conscientiae
primarily, see Dr. Downam's Appendix to Covenant of Grace against Mr Pemble.
Conscience is but an inferior, petty, improper Judge: The work must be
transacted chiefly at a higher Tribunal. View all the Scriptures that mention
Justification by Faith, and you shall find by the Text and Context that they
relate to the bar of God, but not one directly to the bar of Conscience. It is
one thing to be justified, and another thing to have it manifested to our
Consciences that we are so.

2. That it is not directly at the bar of the World, all will acknowledge.

3. That it is not directly at the bar of Gods secret Judgment, in his own
breast, may appear thus: 1. That is not a bar at which God deals with sinners,
for Justification or Condemnation in any known or visible way; No Scripture
intimates it. 2. We could not then judge of our Justification. 3. They are
immanent Acts; but Justification is a transient Act: Therefore Dr Downame in
the place before mentioned has proved against Mr Pemble, that Justification is
not from Eternity. And (as I judge by his following Tract of Justification) Mr
Pemble himself came afterward to a sounder Judgment in the nature of
Justification. 4. God deals with man in an open way of Law, and upon Covenant
terms, and so will try him at a public Judgment according to the Tenor of his
Covenants. There secrets of his breast are too high for us. By the word will he
judge us: That must justify or condemn us. Therefore when you hear talk of the
Bar of God, you must not understand it of the immanent Acts of Gods Knewledg or
Will, but of his Bar of public Judgment, and in the sense of the Word, Some
think that Justification by Faith is properly and directly none of all these
yet, but that it is a public Act of God in heaven before his Angels. I think
this opinion better then any of the three former, which would have it at the
Bar of Gods secret Judgment, or of Conscience, or of the World; and I know no
very ill consequence that follows it; But that God does condemn or justify
at any such Bar. I find no Scripture fully to satisfy or persuade me. Those
places, Romans 2. 13. Heb. 9. 24. Luke 12, 8, 9. and 15. 10. which are alleged
to that purpose, seem not to conclude any ^^ch thing, as that to be the Bar
where Faith does most properly justify: Yet I acknowledge that in a more
remote sense we may be said to be justified by Faith at all the four other
Bars, viz. Gods Immanent Judgment, and before the Angels, and before
Conscience, and the World: For God and Angels do judge according to Truth, and
take those to be just, who are so in Law and in deed: and so do our
Consciences, and Men when they judge rightly; and when they do not, we cannot
well be said to be justified at their Bar. Therefore I think they mistake, who
would have Works, rather then Faith, to justify us at the Bar of the World, as
I shall show afterward, when I come to open the conditions of Justification.

THESIS XLI.
THat saying of our Divines [That Justification is perfected at first, and
admits of no degrees] must be understood thus, That each of those Acts which we
call Justification, are in their own kind perfect at once; and that our
Righteousness is perfect and admits not of degrees. But yet as the former Acts,
called Justification, do not fully, and in all respects, procure our freedom,
so they may be said to be imperfect, and but degrees toward our full and
perfect Justification at the last Judgment.

THESIS XLII.
THere are many such steps toward our final and full Justification; As* 1.
Gods eternal Love and Decree of justifying us. 2. Christ's undertaking for
satisfying and justifying. 3. His actual satisfying by paying the price. 4.
His own Justification, as the public Person, at his Resurrection. 5. That
change which is made in our Relation upon our Regeneration, or receiving the
vital seed of Grace, where, among others, that is contained, which is called
the habit of Faith: these infants are capable of. 6. The change of our Relation
upon our actual Faith. 7. The pacyfying our own hearts is by the evidence of
Faith, and assurance there-upon, and witness of Conscience, and Testimony, and
Seal of the Spirit. 8. The Angels judging us righteous, and rejoicing therein.
9. Our Justification before Men. 10. And our final Justification at the great
Judgment.

But it is only the sixth and tenth of these which is directly and properly the
Justification by Faith, as is before expressed.

THESIS XLIII.
THe Justification which we have in Christ's own Justification is but
conditional as to the particular offenders, and none can lay claim to it, till
he have performed the conditions; nor shall any be personally justified t^ll
then: Even the elect remain personally unjust and unjustified, for all their
conditional Justification in Christ, till they do believe.

THis needs not explication, and for Confirmation there is enough said under
the 15, 18, 19, 20, Positions before.

THESIS XLIV.
MEn that are but thus conditionally pardoned and justified, may be unpardoned
and unjustified again for their nonperformance of the conditions, and all the
debt so forgiven be required at their hands; and all this without any change in
God, or in his Laws. See Ball of the Covenant, page 240.

THis is all plain; only for so much of it as seems to intimate an universal
conditional Justification, and consequently universal Redemption, I entreat
the Reader to suspend his Judgment, till I come to the point of Universal
Redemption, where I shall fully and purposely explain my meaning.

And for that which intimates in the following Position, the falling away of
the justified, understand, that I speak only upon supposition, and of a
possibility in the thing, and of the Tenor of the Gospel: But in regard of
Gods Will of Purpose, which determines eventually, whether they shall fall
quite away or not, I do believe, that the justified by Faith never do, or shall
fall away.

THESIS. XLV.
YEa, in case the justified by Faith should cease believing, the Scripture
would pronounce them unjust again, and yet without any change in God, or
Scripture, but only in themselves. Because their Justification does continue
conditional as long as they live here; the Scripture does justify no man by
name, but all believers as such; therefore if they should cease to be
believers, they would cease to be justified.

THESIS. XLVI.
Justification implies Accusation, either Virtuall or Actual.

EXPLICATION.
AS there is a Justification in Law or in Sentence, so is there the Accusation
of the Law, as it stands in force, which may be called a virtuall Accusation,
in reference to that at Judgment, which will be Actual from Satan's pleading
the violated Law against us. Mr Bradshaw does fully show you the reason of this
Position.

THESIS. XLVII.
THe new Covenant accuses no man, as deserving its penalty, but only those
that perform not its conditions; that is, the finally unbelieving and
impenitent rebels against Christ, and their rightful Lord.

EXPLICATION.
THat the Gospel does not condemn men, or threaten them with damnation for any
sins but unbelief, I dare not speak or think. But that the Gospel threateneth
no man with damnation but unbeleevers, is out of all question: And consequently
the proper sin threatened in the new Covenant as such, is unbelief; the rest
are but left and settled on the sinner by this.

THESIS XLVIII.
WHere the Gospell-Covenant does thus accuse, or where any one is truly thus
charged, there is no Justification for that person.

EXPLICATION.
I Mean, not where any man is accused of a temporary neglect, or delay of
performing the conditions: For the Gospel threateneth not death to such, if at
last they do perform them: But where there is a final nonperformance which is
the proper violation, there is no hope of Justification. See for this the 32,
33, 34, 35, Positions.

THESIS XLIX.
IT being the Laws Accusation and Condemnation only, and not the Gospels, which
we are justified against; therefore the Righteousness which must be pleaded for
our Iustifica^^^^ directly must be a legal Righteousness, which is only
Christ's Satisfaction.

THESIS L.
Our Faith therefore cannot be the least part of that Righteousness so to be
pleaded, it being not the Righteousness of that Covenant which does accuse us;
so that though we are justified by Faith, yet is it not any of the
Righteousness to be pleaded against the accuser.

THESIS LI.
YEt if Satan, or any other, should falsely accuse us of not performing the
conditions of the new Covenant, and so having no part in Christ's Satisfaction,
here we must be justified only by our Faith, or personal
Gospell-Righteousness, and not by any thing that Christ has done or suffered:
For in all false accusations we must defend our innocence and plead not guilty.

EXPLICATION.
BUt because there is no danger to us from false accusation before the
all-knowing God, therefore Scripture says nothing of any such Justification,
Yet at the bar of men it is frequently useful, where false accusations may be
heard; and therefore David, Job, etc. do plead their Innocence against their
accusers. Also at the bar of our own erroneous Consciences this kind of
Justification is frequently full; for there Satan has more hope that his false
accusations may take place, then at the Bar of God: Wherefore he more usually
accuses Christians to themselves of being graceless, and unbeleevers, and
impenitent, and of having no part in Christ, then of breaking the Law by their
sins. And in such cases, when the accusation is false, we have no way to answer
it, but by pleading not guilty, and casting back the accusation as a lying
slander, and producing our Faith and Gospel-Obedience, or what ever grace we
are accused to want: And so it is that our own graces and duties may be
properly our comfort: It will be but a senceless shift in such an accusation to
show Christ's Legal Righteousness in stead of our own Evangelicall
Righteousness. To tell Satan, that Christ has fulfilled the Law for us, when
he is accusing us of not fulfilling the Gospel; silly women are made believe
by Antinomian Teachers, that this is a solid way of comforting: But Satan is a
better Logitian then to take quid pro quo, and to be baffled with such arguing.
And as silly, and more false a shift it will be, to tell him, that Christ has
believed, repented and fulfilled the Gospell-Conditions for us, as I have
showed before. The best is, these Teachers do but spoil the comforts of
believers, and not their safety; for in the case in hand, we suppose the
accusation to be false: But yet by such grounds they may very easily overthrow
the safety also of unbeleevers, while they teach them how to comfort themselves
without Faith, or to look at all out of themselves in Christ, and so to silence
the accusation of both Covenants, by producing only the Righteousness of one.

THESIS LII.
WE must not plead for our Justification, that Christ has made us free from
the very fact; nor, (2) from the sinfulness of the fact; nor, (3) from its
desert of punishment; If Christ had done any of this for us, he must verify
Contradictories. But we must plead, that the penalty is not due to our persons
notwithstanding the fact, and its sinfulness and demerit, because Christ has
satisfied for all this.

EXPLICATION.
SO Mr Anthony Burgess in his book of Justif. page, 19. affirms as much,
though some take it for heinous doctrine. 1. That the fact should be done, and
not done, is a contradiction. 2. So is it, That the fact should be sinful, and
not sinful. 3. Or that it should deserve death, and not deserve it: Or that it
should be a sin against that threatening Law, and yet not deserve the penalty
threatened. Besides, if any of these three could have been taken off, what need
Christ have dyed? But that which Remission and Justification freeth us from, is
the dueness of punishment to our persons, notwithstanding the dueness of it to
the sin; because what is due to the sin, is inflicted on the person of another
already, even Christ. So that you see in what sense Christ takes away sin and
guilt, which you must observe, lest you run into the Antinomian conceit, That
God sees not sin in his justified ones. When we say therefore that God looks
on our sins as if they had never been committed, the meaning is, that, in
regard to punishment, they shall have no more power to condemn us, then if they
had never been committed.

THESIS LIII.
THe offending of God, and the desert and procuring of punishment, are not two
distinct effects of sin, as some make them; nor is the removal of the curse and
punishment, and the obtaining of Gods favor, two distinct parts of our
Justification.

EXPLICATION.
THis is plain, because Gods displeasure against our persons (for his dislike
of the sin is never taken off) is a chief part of our punishment, and therefore
not to be distinguished from it, but as the Species from its Genus. And so when
all the punishment is removed, then Gods displeasure, or the loss of his
favor, must needs be removed: Therefore that Justification in this differs
from Remission of sin, I cannot yet think, (as that godly and learned Servant
of Christ, whom I honor and reverence, Mr Burgess of Iustificat. page 259.
does,) That Justification, besides the pardon of sin, does connote a state that
the subject is put into, viz. a state of favor, being reconciled with God.
Because even Remission it self does connote that state of favor: For if the
loss of Gods favor be part of the punishment, and all the punishment be
remitted, then the favor which we lost must needs be thereby restored. Indeed
there is a twofold Favor of God, 1. That which we lost in the fall; 2. More
super-added by Christ, besides the former restored: Of these in the following
Position.

THESIS. LIVE.
REmission, Justification and Reconciliation do but restore the offender into
the same state of freedom and favor that he fell from; But Adoption and
Marriage-Vnion with Christ do advance him far higher.

EXPLICATION.
THe three former are all concomitant consequents of one and the same Act of
God by his Gospel: The freedom from obligation to punishment is called
Remission: the freedom from Accusation and Condemnation is called
Justification; and the freedom from enmity and displeasure is called
Reconciliation, which are all at once, and do all denote but our Restoration
to our former state. Adoption and Marriage-Union do add the rest.

Some may blame me for putting Union among the relative Graces, and not rather
among those that make a real physical change upon us, as Sanctificition and
Glorification. But I do herein, according to my judgment, whereof to give the
full reasons here would be too large a digression. I know that Caspar Streso,
and diverse others, do place it in an unconceivable, unexpressable medium
between these two, which yet must be called a Real Union, more then a
Relative, though not Physical: I will not now stand on ^his (...) knowledge a
Real Foundation of a Relative Union, and a Real Communion following
thereupon: But am very fearful of coming so near, as to make Christ and
sinners one real Person, (as the late elevated Sect among us do,) lest
blasphemously I should deifie man, and debase Christ to be actually a sinner.
And if we are not one real Person with Christ, then one what? It suffices me
to know as abovesaid, and that we are one with Christ in as strist a bond of
relation as the wife with the husband, and far stricter; and that we are his
body mystical, but not natural. That we shall be one with him, as he is one
with the Father, is true: But that [ as] does not extend the similitude to all
respects, but to a truth in some.

THESIS. LV.
BEfore it be committed it is no sin; and where there is no sin, the penalty is
not due; and where it is not due, it cannot properly be forgiven; therefore sin
is not forgiven before it be committed, though the grounds of certain Remission
be laid before.

EXPLICATION.
FOr proof of this I refer you to Master Burgess of Iustificati. Lect. 28.

THESIS LVI.
BY what has been said, it is apparent, That Justification in Title may be
ascribed to sever all Causes. 1. The principal efficient Cause is God. 2. The
Isntrumental is the Promise or Grant off the new Covenant. 3. The
Procatarctick Cause, (^o far as God may be said to be moved by any thing out of
himself, speaking after the manner of men,) is fourfold. 1. And chiefly the
Satisfaction of Christ. 2. The Intercession of Christ, and supplication of the
sinner. 3. The necessity of the sinner. 4. The opportunity and advantage for
the glorifying his Justice and Mercy. The first of these is the Meritorious
Cause; the second the moral persuading Cause; the third is the Objective, and
the fourth is the Occasion. 2. Material Cause properly it has none: If you
will improperly call Christ's Satisfaction the remote matter, I contend not. 3.
The formal Cause is the acquitting of the sinner from Accusation and
Condemnation of the Law, or the disabling the Law to accuse or condemn him. 4.
The final Cause is the Glory of God, and of the Mediator, and the deliverance
of the sinner. 5. The Causa sine qua non; is both Christ's Satisfaction, and the
Faith of the justified.

EXPLICATION.
HEre it will be expected, that I answer to these Questions. 1. Why I call the
Gospel the Isntrumental Cause? 2. Why I call Christ's Satisfaction the
meritorious Cause, and the Causa sine qua non? 3. Why I make not Christ's
Righteousness the material Cause? 4. Why I make not the Imputation of it the
formal Cause? 5. Why I make not Faith the Isntrumental Cause? 6. Why I make
it only the Causa sine qua non?

To the first Question: As a Lease or Deed of Gift is properly a man's
Instrument in conveying the thing leased or given; and as the Kings Pardon
under his Hand and Seal is his proper Iustrument of pardoning and justifying
the Malefactor, so is the new Covenant Gods Instrument in this case, or, as it
were, his Mouth, by which he pronounces a believer justified.

To the second Question: Christ's Satisfaction has several ways of causing our
Justification. 1. That it is the Meritorious Cause, I know few but Socinians
that will deny. 2 That it is besides properly a Causa sine qua non, cannot be
denied by any that consider, that it removes those great Impediments that
hindered our Justification. And what if a man should say, that because
impulsive and procatarcticall Causes have properly no place with God, that
therefore the greatest part of the work of Christ's Satisfaction is to be the
Causa sine qua non principalis? But because my assigning no more to Christ's
Satisfaction but merit, and this improper causality, does seem to some to be
very injurious thereto; I desire them so long to lay by their prejudice and
passion while they consider of this one thing, That we are not in this business
considering which cause has the pre-eminence, in regard of physical
production, but which in moral respect deserves the highest commendation. In
point of Morality the greatest praise is seldom due to the greatest natural
strength, or to the strongest natural causation. In Physics the efficient
has the greatest part of the glory; but in Morals the Meritorious Cause has a
singular share: As Diogenes said, Quare me non laudas qui dignus sum ut
accipiam? plus enim est meruisse quam dedisse beneficium. The like may be said
of some Causes sine qua non: That they deserve far greater praise in moral
respect, then some that have a proper causality do. It is agreed, that removens
impedimentum qua talis, is Causa sine qua non: And does not the greatest part
of a Physicians skill lie there? That which takes away the offending humor,
and cleanses out the corruption, and removes all hindrances, shall have the
greatest share in the glory of the cure, of any artificial cause. Suppose a
man be condemned by Law for Treason, one pays one thousand pound for his
Pardon, and thereby procured it under the broad Seal; hereby he suspendeth,
and afterward disableth the Law, as to the offender; This man is the efficient
of those happy effects, from which the justification of the Traitor will
follow: But as to his justification it self, he is but the Causa removens
impedimenta, taking away the force of the Law, and the offense of Majesty, and
whatsoever else did hinder the justification of the offender. And yet I think he
deserves more thanks then either the Laywer that justifies him by Plea, or
the Judge that justifies him by Sentence. So here; If you had rather: you may
call it a necessary Antecedent. Or, if any man think fitter to call these
Causes by another name, I much care not, so we agree concerning the nature of
the thing.

To the third question. Christ's Righteousness cannot be the material cause, of
an Act which has no matter. If any will call Christ's Righteousness the matter
of our Righteousness, though yet they speak improperly, yet far nearer the
truth, then to call it the Matter of our Justification.

To the fourth Quest. That Imputation is not the Form, is undeniable. The form
gives the name: especially to Actions, that have no matter. Imputation and
Justification denote distinct Acts: And how then can Imputing be the Form of
Justifying. Though I mention not Imputation in the Definition, nor among the
Causes here, yet it is employed in the mention of Satisfaction, which must be
made ours, or else we cannot be Justified by it. Though therefore, the
Scripture do not speak of imputing Christ's Righteousness or Satisfaction to
us; yet if by Imputing, they mean no more but, [Bestowing it on us, so that we
shall have the Justice, and other benefits of it as truly as if we had
satisfied our selves,] in this sense I acknowledge Imputation of Christ's
satisfactory Righteousness. But I believe that this Imputing, does in order of
nature, go before Justifying: And that the Righteousness so Imputed, is the
proper ground whence we are denominated Legally righteous, and consequently why
the Law cannot condemn us. It is a vain thing to quarrel about the Logical
names of the Causes of Justification, if we agree in the matter.

To the fifth Question. Perhaps I shall be blamed, as singular from all men, in
denying Faith to be the Instrument of our Justification: But affectation of
singularity leads me not to it. 1. If Faith be an Iustrument, it is the
Instrument of God or man: Not of man: For man is not the principal efficient;
he does not justify himself. 2. Not of God: For 1. It is not God that
believes; though its true, he is the first Cause of all Actions. 2. Man is the
Causa secunda, between God and the Action: and so still man should be said to
justify himself. 3. For (as Aquinus) The Action of the principal Cause and
of the Instrument is one Action: and who dare say, that Faith is so Gods
Instrument? 4. The Instrument must have influx to the producing of the effect
of the Principal cause by a proper Causalitie. And who dare say, that Faith
has such an influx into our Justification?

Object. But some would evade thus: It is (say they) a Passive Instrument not
an Active.

To which I Answer. 1 Even Passive Instruments are said to help the Action of
the principal Agent, ( Keckerm. Logic page 131.) He that says, Faith does
so, in my judgment, gives too much to it. 2. It is past my capacity to
conceive of a Passive Moral Instrument. 3. How can the Act of Believing (which
has no other being, but to be an Act) be possibly a Passive Instrument? Does
this Act effect by suffering? Or can wise men have a grosser conceit of this.
4. I believe with Schibler, that there is no such thing at all as a passive
Instrument. The examples that some produce (as Burgersdicius his Cultor and
gladius) belong to Active Instrument. And the Examples that others bring, (as
Keckermans Iurus instrumentum fabricationis, mensa and scamnum accubitus, terra
ambulationis) are no Instruments: except you will call every Patient or Object,
the Instrument of the Agent. The Instrument is an Efficient Cause. All
efficiencie is by action; and that which does not Act, does not effect* Indeed,
as some extend the use of the word instrument, you may call, almost, any thing
an Instrument, which is any way conducible to the production of the Effect
under the chief Cause; And so you may call Faith an Instrument.

Quest. But though Faith be not the Instrument of Justification; may it not be
called the Instrument of receiving Christ who Justifies us?

Answ. I do not so much stick at this speech as at the former: yet is it no
proper or fit expression neither. For 1. The Act of Faith, (which is it that
justifies) is our Actual receiving of Christ, and therefore cannot be the
Instrument of Receiving. To say our Receiving is the Instrument of our
Receiving, is a hard saying. 2. And the seed or habit of Faith cannot fitly be
called an Instrument. For, 1. The sanctified faculty it self cannot be the
souls Instrument; it being the soul it self and not any thing really distinct
from the soul: (nor really distinct from each other, as Scotus, D'Orbellis
Scaliger, etc. D. Iackson, Mr. Pemble, think: and Mr. Ball questions.) 2. The
holiness of the Faculties is not their Instrument. For, 1. It is nothing but
themselves rectified: and not a Being so distinct as may be called their
Instrument. 2. Who ever called Habits, or Dispositions, the souls Instruments?
The aptitude of a Cause to produce its effect, cannot be called the Instrument
of it: you may as well call a man's Life his Instrument of Acting or the
sharpness of a knife, the knives Instrument, as to call our holiness, or
habitual faith, the Instrument of receiving Christ.

To the sixth and last Question, I Answ. Faith is plainly and undeniably the
condition of our Justification. The whole Tenor of the Gospel shows that. And
a condition is but a Causa sine qua non; or a medium, or a necessary
Antecedent. Here by the way take notice, that the same men that blame the
advancing of Faith so high, as to be our true Gospel Righteousness. Posit.
17. 20. and to be inputed in proper sense, Posit 23. do yet, when it comes to
the trial ascribe far more to Faith, then those they blame: making it Gods
Instrument in justifying. 1. And so to have part of the honor of Gods own Act;
2. And that from a reason intrinsecall to faith it self; 3. And from a Reason
that will make other Graces to be Instruments as well as Faith. For Love does
truly receive Christ also. 4. And worst of all, from a Reason that will make
man to be the Causa proxima of his own Justification. For man is the Causa
proxima of believing and receiving Christ, and therefore not God but man is
said to believe. And yet these very men do send a Hue and Cry after the To
credere, for robbing Christ of the glory of Justification, when we make it but
a poor improper Causa sine qua non. (And yet I say as before, that in Morality,
yea, and in Naturality, some Causae sine qua non, do deserve much of the
honor; but that Faith does not so, I have showed in the 23. Position.) Some
think that Faith may be some small low Impulsive Cause: but I will not give it
so much: though if it be made a Procatarctick Objective Cause, I shall not
contend.

THESIS LVII.
IT is the Act of Faith which justifies men at age, and not the habit: yet not
as it is a good work, or as it has in it is self any excellency in it above
other Graces: But 1. In the nearest sense, directly and properly as it is, [The
fulfilling of the Condition of the New Convenant:] 2. In the remote and more
improper sense, as it is [The receiving of Christ and his satisfactory
Righteousness.]

EXPLICATION.
1. THat the habit of Faith does not directly and properly justify, appears
from the tenor of the Covenant: which is not [He that disposed to believe
shall be saved] But [he that believes.]

2. That Faith does not properly justify through any excellency that it has
above other Graces, or any more useful property, may appear thus: 1. Then the
praise would be due to Faith. 2. Then love would contend for a share, if not a
priority. 3. Then Faith would justify, though it had not been made the
Condition of the Covenant.

Let those therefore take heed, that make Faith to justify, merely because it
apprehends Christ: which is its natural, effentiall property.

3. That it is Faith in a proper sense that is said to justify, and not
Christ's Righteousness only which it receives, may appear thus. 1. From the
necessity of twofold righteousness, which I have before proved, in reference
to the twofold Covenant. 2. From the plain and constant Phrase of Scripture,
which says, He that believes shall be justified: and that we are justified by
Faith: and that faith is imputed for righteousness. It had been as easy for
the Holy Ghost to have said, that Christ only is imputed, or his
righteousness only, or Christ only justifies, etc. If he had so meant. He
is the most excusable in an error, that is lead into it by the constant
express phrase of Scripture. 3. From the nature of the thing: For the effect
is ascribed, to the several Causes (though not alike) and in some sort to the
Conditions, Especially, methinks they that would have Faith to be the
Instrument of Justification, should not deny that we are properly justified by
Faith as by an Instrument: For it is as proper a speech to say [our hand and
our teeth feed us,] as to say, [our meet feeds us.]

4. That Faith does most directly and properly justify [as its the fulfilling
of the Condition of the New Covenant] appears thus. 1 The new Covenant only
does put the stamp of Gods Authority upon it, in making it the Condition. A
twofold stamp is necessary to make it a current medium of our Justification.
1. Command. 2. Promise. Because God has neither Commanded any other means, 2.
Nor promised Justification to any other, therefore it is, that this is the
only condition; and so only thus Justifies. When I read this to be the tenor
of the New Covenant [Whosoever believes shall be justified:] does it not tell
me plainly why Faith Justifies? even because it pleases the Lawgiver and
Covenant-maker to put Faith into the Covenant, as its condition. 2. What have
we else to show at Gods bar for our Justification, but the New Covenant? The
Authority and Legality of it must bear us out. It is upon point of Law that we
are condemned; and it must be by Law, that we must be Justified. Therefore we
were condemned, because the Law which we break did threaten death to our sin:
If we had committed the same Act, and not under a Law that had threatened it
with death, we might not have dyed. So therefore are we Justified, because the
New Law does promise Justification to our faith. If we had performed the same
Act under the first Covenant, it would not have Justified. As the formal
Reason, why sin condemns is, because the Law has concluded it in its
threatening: so the formal Reason, why Faith justifies, is, because the New
Law of Covenant has concluded it, in its Promise. And as where there is no
Law, there is no Transgression nor Condemnation: because sin is formally a
transgression of the Law, and Condemnation is but the execution of its
Threatening: so where there is no fulfilling the new Law, there is no
Righteousness nor Justification: because Righteousness is formally a
conformity to the Law of Righteousness, and Justification is but the
performing of part of its Promise.

5. That Faith's receiving Christ and his righteousness, is the remote of
secondary, and not the formal Reason, why it does Justify, appears thus. 1.
I would ask any dissenter this Question. Suppose that Christ had done all that
he did for sinners, and they had believed in him, thereupon, without any
Covenant promising Justification to this faith: Would this faith have justified
them? By what Law? Or whence will they plead their Justification at the bar of
God? Well: but suppose that Christ having done what he did for us, that he
should in framing the New Covenant have put in any other Condition; and said
[whosoever loves God shall by virtue of my satisfaction be Justified.] Would
not this love have Justified? No doubt of it. I conclude then thus: The
receiving of Christ, is as the silver of this coin: the Gospell-promise is as
the Kings stamp which makes it current for justifying. If God had seen meet to
have stamped any thing else, it would have passed currantly. Yet take this.
Faith is, even to our own apprehension, the most apt and suitable condition
that God could have chosen: (for as far as we can reach to know;) There cannot
be a more Rational and apt condition of delivering a redeemed Malefactor from
Torment, then that he thankfully accept the pardon, and favor of redemption,
and hereafter take his Redeemer for his Lord.

So that if you ask me [what is the formal Reason, why Faith Justifies?]

I answer. Because Christ has made it the condition of the New Covenant, and
promised Justification upon that Condition.

But, 2. If you ask me further, Why did Christ choose this rather then any thing
else for the Condition?

I. Answer. 1. To ask a Reason of Christ's choice and commands is not always wise
or safe. 2. But here the reason is so apparent, that a posteriore, we may
safely adventure to say: That this is the most self-denying, and Christ
advancing work: Nothing could be more proportionable to our poverty, who have
nothing to buy with, then thus freely to receive: Nothing could be more
reasonable, then to acknowledge him who has redeemed us, and to take him for
our Redeemer and Lord: many more such Reasons might be given. In a word, then
Faith Justifies primarily and properly, as it is the Condition of the New
Covenant, (that is the formal reason.) And secondarily, remotely, as it is the
receiving of Christ and his righteousness: (that is the aptitude of it to this
use to which it has pleased Cod to destinate it.)

I stand the more on this, because it is the foundation of that which follows.

THESIS. LVIII.
THe ground of this is; because Christ's Righteousness does not Justify us
properly and formerly, because we Believe or receive it; but because it is ours
in Law, by Divine Donation, or Imputation.

THis is plain in it self, and in that which is said before.

THESIS LIX.
Justification is not a momentaneous Act, begun and ended immediately upon our
Believing: bnt a continued Act; which though it be in its kind complete from
the first, yet is it still in doing, till the final Justification at the
Judgment day.

EXPLICATION.
THis is evident from the nature of the Act: it being as I showed before, an
Act of God by his Gospel: Now 1. God still continues that Gospell-Covenant in
force. 2. That Covenant still continues Justifying Believers. 3. God himself
does continue to esteem them accordingly, and to Will their Absolution. 1. This
shows you therefore with what limitation to receive the Assersion of our
Divines, that Remission and Justification are, simul and semel, performed. 2.
And that the Justified and pardoned may pray for the continuance of their
pardon and Justification. 3. That of Christ's satisfaction and our Faith are of
continual use, and not to be laid by, when we are once Justified, as if the
work were done. See Dr. Downame of Iustific. of this point.

THESIS. LX.
THe bare Act of believing is not the only Condition of the New Covenant: but
several other duties also are part of that Condition.

EXPLICATION.
I Desire no more of those that deny this, but that Scripture may be Judge: and
that they will put by no one Text to that end produced, till they can give some
other commodious, and not forced Interpretation.

1. Then that pardon of sin and salvation are promised upon condition of
Repenting, as well as believing, is undeniably asserted from these Scriptures.
Prove. 1. 23. and 28. 13. Mar. 1. 15. and 6. 12. Luke 13. 3, 5. Act. 2. 38. and
3. 19. and 8. 22. and 17. 30. and 26. 20. and 5. 31. and 11. 18. Luke 24. 47.
Heb. 6. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Ezekiel. 18. 27, 28. and 33. 12. Hose 14. 2. Joel 2. 14,
15. Deuteronomy. 4. 30. and 30. 10.

2, That praying for Pardon, and forgiving others, are Conditions of Pardon, is
plain, 1 King. 8. 30, 39. Mat. 6. 12, 14, 15. and 18. 35. Mar. 11. 25, 26. Luke
6. 37. and 11. 4. 1 Ioh. 1. 9. Iam. 5. 15. Io. 14. 13, 14. 1 Ioh. 5. 15. Act.
8. 22.

3. That Love, and sincere Obedience, and Works of Love, are also parts of the
Condition, appears in these Scriptures, Luke 7. 47. (though I know in Mr
Pinks Interpretation of that) Ma. 5. 44. Lu. 6. 27. 35. 10. 11. 12. 17. 1 Cor.
2. 9. Romans 8. 28. Ephesians. 6. 24. 1 Cor. 16, 22. Iam. 1. 12. and 2. 5. Ioh. 14.
21. Pro. 8. 17, 21. Ioh. 16. 27. Ma. 10. 37. Luke 13. 24. Phil. 2. 12. Romans 2.
7. 10. 1 Corinthians. 24. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 18. 19. Rev. 22. 14. Luke
11. 28. Mat. 25. 41, 42. Iam. 2. 2, 22, 23, 24, 26.

THESIS LXI.
THerefore though the nonperformance of any one of these be threatened with
certain death; yet there must be a Concurrence of them all, to make up the
Conditions which have the promise of life.

EXPLICATION.
THerefore we oftener read, death threatened to those that repent not, then Life
promised to them that Repent: And when you do read of Life promised of any one
of these, you must understand it caeteris partibus, or in sensu composito, as
it stands conjunct with the rest, and not as it is divided. Though I think that
in regard of their existence, they never are divided (For where God gives one,
he gives all,) yet in case they were separated, the Gospel would not so own
them as its entire Conditions.

THESIS LXII.
YEt Faith may be called the only Condition of the new Covenant; 1. Because it
is the principal Condition, and the other but the less principal: And so as a
whole Country has of its name from the chief City; so may the Conditions of
this Covenant from Faith: 2. Because all the rest are reducible to it; either
being presupposed, as necessary Antecedents or means; or contained in it as its
parts, properties, or modifications; or else implied as its immediate product,
or necessary subservient means or consequents.

EXPLICATION.
SUbservient Actions are in common speech silently employed in the principal.
If the besieged be bound by Articles to surrender a Town to the besiegers at
such a time; it need not be expressed in the Articles, that they shall withdraw
their Guards, and cease resistance, and open the gates, and yield up this
house, or that street, etc. All this is employed clearly in the Article of
surrender.

If a redeemed gally-slave be freed, upon condition that he take him for his
Redeemer and Master that did deliver him; it need not be expressed, that he
shall leave the galleys, and his company, and employment there, and go with him
that bought him, and do what he bids him do: All this is plainly employed in the
foresaid words, of his Conditions.

So here, the great condition of Believing does include or imply all the rest.

I confess it is a work of some worth and difficulty, to show how each other
part of the Condition is reducible to Believing; and in what respect they stand
toward it. I dare not determine too peremptorily here, but I think they stand
thus. 1. Hearing the Word, consideration, conviction, godly sorrow, repentance
from dead works, are employed as necessary means antecedents. 2. Knowledge of
Christ, and Assent to the Truth of the Gospel are at least integrall parts of
flat necessity, if not essential parts of Faith. 3. Subjection, Acceptance,
Consent, cordial covenanting, self-resigning, are the very proper essential,
formal Acts of Faith.

4. Esteeming Christ above all in Judgment, preferring him before all in the
Will, loving him above all; I say this preferring of Christ above all in
Judgment, Will, and Affection, is (in my Judgment (the very Differentia fidei
maxim propria quae de ea essentialiter praedicatur, and sic pars ejus
essentialis; the very essential property of true Faith differencing it from
all false Faith, and so an essential part of it. I know this is like to seem
strange; but I shall give my reasons of it anon.

5. Sincerity and perseverance are the necessary Modifications of Faith: and
not any thing really distinct from its Being.

6. Assiance and sincere obedience, and works of Love, are the necessary
immediate, inseparable products of Faith; as heat and light are of fire; or
rather as Reasoning is the product of Reason: or yet rather as actions most
properly conjugall, are the effects of Conjugall contract. And as Faith is in
some sort more excellent then Affiance and Obedience, as the cause is better
then the effect: so in some sort they may be more excellent then Faith; as the
effect may be preferred before its Cause; the Act before the habit; as being
that which is the end of the habit, for whose sake it is; and to which it
tends as to its perfection.

7. The praying for forgiveness, the forgiving of others, the pleading of
Christ's satisfaction, are both parts of this obedience, and necessary
consequents of Faith, and Acts subseruient to it for the attaining of its Ends.

8. The denying and humbling of the flesh, the serious, painful, constant use
of Gods Ordinances, Hearing, Praying, Meditating, etc. are both parts of the
foresaid obedience, and also the necessary means of continuing and exercising
our Faith.

9. Strength of Grace; Assurance of Pardon and Salvation; Persuasion of Gods
favor; settled peace of Conscience; Joy in this Assurance and Peace; the
understanding of Truths not fundamental, or necessary in practice; All these
are no properties of the Condition of the Covenant; but separable adjuncts of
Faith; tending to the Well-being of it; but neither tending to, nor necessary,
proofs of the Being of it; which a Believer should have, but may possibly want.

I shall give you some reason of several of these Assertions, when I have
first made way by the Definition of Faith.

So then, as when you invite a man to your House, it is not necessary that you
bid him come in at the door, or bring his head, or his legs, or arms, or his
clothes with him; (though these are necessary) because all these are
necessarily employed: even so when we are said to be justified by Faith only;
or when it is promised, that he that believes shall be saved, all those
forementioned duties, are employed or included.

THESIS LXIII.
AS it is Gods excellent method in giving the Moral Law, first to require the
acknowledgment of his sovereign authority, and to bring men to take him only
for their God, (which is therefore called the first and great Commandment,) and
then to prescribe the particular subsequent duties; so is it the excellent
method of Christ in the Gospel, first to establish with men his Office and
Authority, and require an acknowledgment of them, and consent and subjection to
them; and then to prescribe to them their particular duties in subordination.

THESIS LXIV.
FAith therefore is the summary and chief of the conditions of the Gospel, and
not formally and strictly the whole: But as Love is the fulfilling of the Law,
so Faith is the fulfilling of the new Law; or as taking the Lord for our only
God, is the sum of the Decalogue, implying or inferring all the rest, and so is
the great Commandment; so taking Christ for our only Redeemer and Lord, is the
sum of the conditions of the new Covenant, including, implying or inferring all
other parts of its conditions, and so is the great Command of the Gospel.

EXPLICATION.
THe Observation in the 63 Position, is commended to you by Mr white of
Dorchester in his Directions for reading Scripture, p. 307.

The full subjection to the Authority commanding, does imply and infer
subjection to the particular Commands: therefore God does still make this the
sum of the conditions of the Law, that they take him only for their God, or
that they have no other Gods but him: And when he contracteth his Covenant into
an Epitome, it runs thus, I will be thy God, and thou shall be my people, Exodus
20. 3. and 23. 13. Deuteronomy. 7. 4. and 8. 19. and 13. 2, 3, etc. Ios. 24. 2, 16.
etc. Judge. 2. 12, 17, 19. and 10. 13. 1 Samuel 8. 8. 2 Kings 5. 17. and 17. 7.
Ier. 22. 9. and 7. 23. and 11. 4. and 30. 22. Ezekiel. 36. 28. Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17,
etc. And as Gods promise of taking us for his people does imply his bestowing
upon us all the privileges and blessings of his people, and so is the sum of
all the conditions of the Covenant on his part. Even so our taking the Lord for
our God, and Christ for our Redeemer and Lord, does imply our sincere obedience
to him; and is the sum of the Conditions on our part. And so as Idolatry is
that violation of the law of Nature, which does eminenter, contain all the
rest in it; So is Unbelief in respect of the Law of Grace. And as the formal
Nature of Idolatry lies in disclayming God, from being God, or form being our
God, or from being our alone God: Even so the formal nature of Unbelief lies
in disclaiming Christ, either from being a Redeemer and Lord, or from being Our
Redeemer and Lord, or from being Our only Redeemer and Lord. This being well
considered, will direct you truly and punctually, where to find the very
formal being and nature of Faith? Not in believing the pardon of sin, or the
favor of God, or our salvation; nor in Affiance or recumbency, (though that be
a most immediate product of it,) Nor in Assurance, (as Divines were wont to
teach 80. years ago.) Nor in Obedience or following of Christ as a guide to
Heaven, or as a Captain, or mere Pattern and Lawgiver (as the wretched
Socinians teach.) But in the three Acts above mentioned. 1. Taking Christ for a
Redeemer and Lord; which is by Assent. 2. Taking him for our Redeemer, Savior
and Lord; which is by consent. 3. Taking him for our only Redeemer, Savior
and Lord; which is the Moral sincerity of the former: And the essential
differencing property of it: Not whereby Faith is differenced from Love or joy,
etc. But whereby that faith in Christ, which is the Gospel condition, is
differenced from all other Faith in Christ. So that as Corpus and Anima, and
Rationale, do speak the whole essence of man: Even so this Assent, Consent,
and Preference of Christ before all others; do speak the whole Essence of Faith.

For the common opinion, that justifying Faith, as justifying, does consist in
any one single Act, is a wretched mistake, as I shall show you further anon.

THESIS LXV.
SCripture does not take the word [Faith] as strictly as a Philosopher would
do, for any one single Act of the soul; nor yet for various Acts of one only
Faculty: But for a complete entire Motion of the whole Soul, to Christ its
Object.

THESIS LXVI.
NEither is Christ, in respect of any one part or work of his Office alone, the
Object of Justifying Faith, as such: But Christ in his entire office
considered, in this Object: viz. as he is Redeemer, Lord and Savior.

THESIS LXVII.
MVch less are any Promises or benefits of Christ, the proper Object of
justifying Faith, as many Divines do mistakingly conceive.

THESIS LXVIII.
NOr is Christ's person considered as such, or for it self, the object of this
Faith: But the person of Christ as clothed with his Office and Authority is
this Object.

EXPLICATION.
I Put all these together, as aiming at one scope: and I shall now explain them
distinctly. (To the 65.) First, that Faith is not taken for any one single Act,
I prove thus. 1. If it were but one single Act (I mean specifically, not
numerically) then it could not (according to the common opinion of
Philosophers) be the Act of the whole Soul: But Faith must be the Act of the
whole Soul; or else part of the Soul would receive Christ, and part would not;
and part* of it would entertain him, and part not. Some think the soul is as
the body, which has a hand to receive things in the name, and for the use of
the whole. But it is not so, Christ is not only taken into the hand: But as
the blood and spirits, which are received into every living part. (Though I
intend not the comparison should reach to the manner of receiving.) Neither is
the soul so divisible into parts, as the body is; and therefore has not
several parts for several offices. 2. The most of our accurate studious
Divines of late, do take Faith to be seated in both faculties, Understanding
and Will: But if so; according to the common Philosophy, it cannot be any one
single Act.

Neither Secondly, is it in various Acts of one single faculty: For, 1. It will
(in my judgment) never be proved, that the soul has faculties which are
really distinct from it self, or from each other. These Faculties are but the
soul it self, able to do thus and thus from its natural being. Vide Scaliger
Exercit. 107. Sect. 3. Understanding and Willing are its immediate Acts: And
perhaps those very Acts, are more diversified or distinct in their objects,
then in themselves. The souls apprehension of an objects as true, we call
Understanding; in regard of its Metaphysicall Truth, it is a simple
apprehension; as we receive this Truth upon the word of another, it is Assent
and Belief; as this Object is considered as Good, our motion toward it, is
called, Willing; if absent, Desiring, Hoping; if present, Complacency, Joying;
when we Will a thing as Good, any thing strongly, and apprehend its Goodness
any thing clearly, this we call Love, etc. But whether all these be really
distinct kinds of Acts of the Soul, is very doubtful: Much more, whether they
proceed from distinct Faculties. As I am not of my Lord Brook's mind
concerning the Unity of all things: So neither would I unnecessarily admit of
any division: especially in so spiritual and perfect a piece as the Sold;
knowing how much of Perfection lies in Unity; and remembering the Pythagorean
curse of the Number Two, because it was the first that durst depart from Unity:
and frustra fit per plura etc. 2. But if it were proved that the Souls
Faculties are really distinct; yet both these Faculties are capable of
receiving Christ; and Christ is an Object suited to both: and then what doubt
is it whether Faith be in both?

1. For the Will no man will question it, that it is capable of receiving
Christ; and Christ a suitable Object for it.

2. And for the Understanding, it does as much incline to Truth, as the Will to
Goodness; and as truly receive its Object under the notion of True, as the
Will does receive its Object as Good. If you would see it proved fully, That
Assent is an Essential part of justifying Faith, read Dr. Downame of
Justification, on that Subject: and his Appendix to the Covenant of Grace, in
Answer to Mr. Pemble: Where though his Argument will not reach their intended
scope, to prove that Assent is the only proper Act of justifying Faith, yet
they do conclude, that it is a real part. And he well confuteth his opposer,
though he do not well confirm that his own opinion.

3. Consider further, that Christ does not treat of Faith, in sensu Physico sed
morali and Politico, not as a Natural Philosopher, but as a Lawgiver to his
Church. Now in Politics, we do not take the names of Actions in so narrow and
strict a sense, as in Physics and Logic. If a Town do agree to take or
receive such a man for their Mayor; or a Kingdom take or receive such a one as
their King: The words [Take, or Receive] here do not note any one single Act
of soul or body alone; but a compound, as it were, of Actions; which yet do all
take their name from the Principal, which is [Consent.]

To the 66. That Christ as a Savior only, or in respect of his Priestly
Office only, is not the Object of justifying Faith; but that Faith does as
really and immediately Receive him as King; and in so doing, Justify: this I
prove thus.

1. The Gospel does not reveal Christ's Offices as separated: But as they are
revealed, so they must be believed.

2. Neither does it Offer Christ in his Priestly Office only, as separated
from his Kingly: though it may sometime press our Acceptance of him in one
respect, and sometime in another: But as he is offered, so must he be received.

3. Scripture no where tyeth Justification to the receipt of him as our Priest
only, therefore we must not do so.

4. How commonly does Scripture join his Offices together, calling him usually,
Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?

5. If we receive him not as King, we receive him not as an entire Savior: For
he saves us, not only by dying for us, but also by reducing us really into
communion with God, and guiding us by his Laws, and protecting and perfecting
us by his Government, and subduing our enemies.

6. His Kingly Office is a true part of his entire Office of Mediatorship: Now
the sincerity of Acts in Moral respects, lies in their true suitableness to
the nature of their Objects: As God is not truly loved, except he be loved
entirely: so neither is Christ truly received, if you receive him not
entirely. It is a lame, partial Faith, and no true Faith, that takes Christ
only in the Notion of a deliverer from guilt and punishment, without any
accepting of him, as our Lord and Governor. Though I believe that the hope of
being pardoned and saved is the first thing that moves men to receive Christ,
yet do they, being so moved, receive him as their Lord also, or else they do
not receive him sincerely.

7. The exalting of his Kingly Office, is as principal an end of his dying,
and of his becoming Mediator, as is the saving of us, and the exalting of his
Priestly Office. See the second Psalm. and Romans 14. 9. To this end he both dyed,
rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead, and the living. And
therefore the receiving of him as Priest alone, is not like to be the Condition
of our Justification. So that if Christ put both into the Condition, we must
not separate what he has joined. But the main ground of their Error, who think
otherwise, is this: They think Acceptance of the mercy offered, does make it
ours immediately in a natural way, as the accepting of a thing from men; And
so as if he that accepted pardon, should have it, and he that accepted
sanctity should have it, etc. But Christ (as I have showed) establishes his
Offices and Authority, before he bestow his mercies; and though Accepting be
the proper condition, yet does it not confer the title to us, as it is an
accepting primarily, but as it is the Covenants Condition: If we should take
possession when we have no title in Law, God would quickly challenge us for our
bold usurpation, and deal with us, as with him that intruded without the
Wedding garment; There is more ado then come in: and sit down, and take what
we have a mind to: God has put all his Sons Offices into the Condition, to be
received and submitted to: either all or none, must be accepted: And if All be
in the Condition, then the receiving of all must needs Justify upon the
grounds that I have laid down before.

To the 67. That the promises or benefits are not the immediate proper object
of Justifying Faith, is evident from the gorunds already laid down: As also
from the constant language of the Gospel, which makes Faith to lie in
receiving, believing in him, and in his name, etc. still making Christ himself
the immediate object. Therefore if Mr Cotton say as the Lord Brook represents
him, That Faith can be nothing but a laying hold of that promise which God has
made; (in his Tract. of Truth and Vni. page 152.) it is a foul error in so
weighty a point; as is also his other, of Faith justifying and saving only
declaratively. Indeed that first less principal Act of Faith, which we call
Assent, has the truth of the Gospel revelation for its nearest and most
immediate object; but (I think, by the leave of those who contradict) not its
only nor chief object: The truth of the proposition is but a means to the
apprehending of the truth of the thing proposed; nor the truth of the history,
but a glass to show us the truth of the Acts which it relates. So that even
the Understanding it self does apprehend the person and offices of Christ in
their Metaphisicall Verity, by means of its apprehension of the Logical and
Moral verity of the Relation: and though the truth of the Word be the nearest
object of Assent, yet the truth of Christ's person, nature and offices is the
more principal: Or if about these, it may not have the name of Assent, yet
shall it have the same nature still.

To the 68. I think none will contradict it, and therefore there need nothing
be said.

THESIS LXIX.
IVstifying Faith is the hearty accepting of Christ for our only Lord and
Savior.

EXPLICATION.
IN this brief definition, you have nothing but what is essential to it.

1. The genus I need not mention; when it is the Act of Faith which I define,
you know the genus already.

2. The Understandings apprehension of Christ as a true Redeemer and Savior,
which in several respects is called Knowledge or Belief, I do imply this, and
not express it; because though I take it for a real part of Faith, yet not the
most principal and formal part. And as we use to imply Corpus, and not
express it when we define man to be Animal rationale; because the form, or
principal essential part part gives the name: So here (though I know Assent
is not properly a material cause) yet being the less principal Act, it gives
not the denomination.

3. That Christ, as Lord and Savior is the proper object, I have proved
before. His Prophetical Office whereby he is the Teacher of his Church, Jimply
in both these, because it may in several respects be reduced to these: For he
teaches by his Laws and Commandments, and his spirits teaching and governing
are scarce distinguishable, and he saves by teaching. Also his Office of
Husband, and Head, are in these employed; they signifying more the future
benefits and privileges of a believer, which he shall receive from Christ
believed in, then the primary offices which he is to acknowledge in believing.

4. The proper formal act of justifying Faith, which is most principally
essential to it of all other is [accepting:] If I must needs place it in one
only, it should be this.

My Reasons are, 1. Because the Scripture makes unbelief, and not receiving
Christ, all one, Ioh. 1. 11. and believing and receiving Christ, all one, Ioh.
1. 12. So it proclaims this as the great work of the Gospel, to Take, Eat,
Drink, etc.

2. The Gospel is the offer of Christ (and his benefits to them that first
accept himself;) Therefore Faith must be the accepting of the thing offered.
Both these are plain in Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever will, let him take of the water
of life freely: There is the free offer, upon condition of coming and taking,
or accepting.

3. The will is the commanding faculty of the soul, therefore its act is the
principal act, and that is accepting.

4. Christ is presented to us in the Gospel, as a Suitor, beseeching us by his
Spirit and Ambassadors, and wooing us to himself, and the enjoying of him,
which this drives at, is called our Marriage to him, and we his Spouse, and he
our Husband: Now you know that which tyeth the knot of Marriage is Acceptance
or Consent.

5. Yea the very nature of a Covenant requires this. Consent makes it a
complete Covenant. Therefore I said before page 219. That Acceptance, Consent,
Heart-Covenanting, and Self-resigning, are the proper essential Acts of this
Faith. For all these are the Wills acts to this their object, which are of flat
necessity to the very tying of the Covenant or Marriage knot. Romans 10. 10. With
the heart man believes unto Righteousness.

And here let me mind you of one useful observation more.

The Covenanting on our part, is a principal part of the Conditions of the
Covenant. Though this may seem strange, that a Covenanting and performing
Conditions, should be all most all one. But that is the free nature of the
Grace of the Covenant. As if you marry a poor woman that has nothing, you will
give her your self, and all you have, merely upon Condition that she will
Consent to have you: And that Consent is all the Condition on her part, for
obtaining present possession (I say, Acceptance, Consent, Covenanting,
Self-resigning; which are in a manner all one thing:) But because the end of
the marriage is the faithful performance of Marriage duties, though mere
Consent were the only Condition of the first possession, and the continuance
of her Consent is the chief Condition* of continuing her possession; yet the
performance of those Marriage duties, and not going into others, is part of the
Condition also of that continuance: So it is in the present case of
Justification.

5. Let me here also tell you, that I take love to Christ as our Savior and
Lord, to be essential to this Acceptance: and so some degree of Love to be
part of Justifying Faith, and not properly a fruit of it, as it is commonly
taken. My reasons are,

1. The Wills serious apprehension of a thing Good, which we call at earnest
Willing it, and Accepting it, is (in my judgment the same thing as Love, in an
other name. Love is nothing but such an earnest Willing, choosing and Accepting
it as it is Good.

It is generally acknowledged, that the Affections are but the Motions or Acts
of the Will. And if Love be an Act of the same Will, and have the same Object
with Consent, Election, Acceptance, etc. Why should it not then be the same
Act? Only Acceptance considers its Object as offered; Election considers
it, as propounded with some other competitor; Consent considers it, as we are
persuaded and invited to it: But all these are extrinsecall considerations:
They all consider their Object as Good, and so does Love.

You may object. 1. Then Desire and Hope may be essential to Faith.

I Answ. That Love which they imply in them is: but Desire and Hope, as such,
do properly consider their object as absent, which this Justifiing Faith does
not.

2. Object. Scripture often distinguishes Faith and Love.

Answ. 1. Sometime Faith is taken for Historical faith, or Faith of Miracles,
and then it may be distinguised. 2. Sometime true Faith is taken in the
strictest sense, and sometime larglier, as I shall show anon. 3. But
especially; so do I distinguish of Love, as it is considered by it self, and as
it is an essential part of this Acceptance. Love respects its Object merely
as Good, in it self and to the Lover. But Consent and Acceptance have several
other respects, as is expressed: And yet there may be Love in all such
Acceptance; though not properly Acceptance in all Love.

Object. 3. Then Love Justifies as well as Faith.

I Answ. When it is thus considered in Faiths Acceptance, it is not called by
the name of Love, but loses its name, as a lesser River that falls into a
greater; therefore it is not said that Love Justifies; but Faith that works
(even in its essential work of Accepting) by Love.

Object. But Love is the greater Grace, and shall outlive Faith, and Faith
should rather then be swallowed up in Love.

Answ. Love considering its object only as Good, shall continue for ever,
because the Goodness of its object shall so continue: But Acceptance, Consent,
etc. have other additionall considerations in their Objects which will vanish.
But which is the chiefest Grace in it self, is not the question, but which is
the chiefest in the present work. Now seeing Consent, Acceptance, etc. are the
chief as to Justification, that Love which is essentially in them may well lose
its name here: seeing in the business of Justifying it is considered but as an
essential part of the main duty.

My next-Reason is, because Christ does propound it in the Gospel, as of the
same necessity, with the same promises annexed to it, Io. 16. 27. For the
Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and believed, etc. Joh.
14. 21. He that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
show my self to him. Jam. 1. 12. and 2. 5. The Crown and Kingdom is prepared
for them that love him, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha, Ephesians. 6. 24. In a word, Faith is a
comprehensive duty, containing diverse Acts, whereof this seems to me to be
part: Neither can I yet conceive, how there can be a cordial Acceptance of
Christ, as our only Savior, and Love not to be an essential part of that
Acceptance: but if a finer wit can apprehend the difference better; yet as (I
said) Faith being considered here in Moral and Politic respects, and not in
its strict natural quiddity, may essentially be an Affectionate Acceptance,
for all that.

If any think fitter to make a wider difference between the nature of Faith and
Love to Christ, I will not contend; for the matter is not great: that both are
necessary to Justification, is doubtless: and that they are concurrent in,
apprehending Ch^^^: And that Love is a part of the Condition of the Covenant,
is also undoubted and therefore will have some hand in the business of
Justification, as I shall further clear.

6. I put in the word only in the Definition; because (as is said before) I
take the preferring of Christ before all others, and taking him for our Only
Lord and Savior, to be the essential difference of true Faith. There is a
twofold Verity or Sincerity in our duties requisite. 1. The verity of their
natural Being, which is called their Metaphysicall Truth. 2. The verity or
sincerity of them as Duties or Graces, which is their Moral sincerity: This
last consists in the true suiting of the Act to its Object. For example, one
man pretends to love his wife, and does not: There is neither Natural nor
Moral Truth. Another does love her, but not half so well as other women: There
is the Metaphysicall Truth, but not the Moral. A third loves her as a wife
above others: There is both Metaphysicall Truth and Moral.

So it is in our Love to God: To Love him as the chief Good, is to love him as
he is: And he that loves him never so much, and yet loves any thing else, as
much or more; though his Love have a Metaphysicall Truth of Being, yet it has
no Moral sincerity at all: So that the Preferring God before all, or taking
him for our Only God, is the very point of sincerity of Love. Why, just so it
is about our Faith: The taking him unfeignedly for our only Lord and Savior,
is the very point of the sincerity of our Faith in Christ. As Adultery is the
most proper violation of the Marriage Covenant, except actual renouncing and
deserting: So the taking of any other Lord or Savior besides Christ, or
conjunct with him, is the most apparent violation of the bond of our Covenant,
and most contradictory to the nature and Essence of Justifying Faith: except
only the Actual renouncing Christ, and the Covenant it self, by full
Apostasy; which is an unpardonable sin, Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 10. 26. Yet in
subordination to Christ, we may have other Lords and Saviors, but not in
competition and co-ordination. Some of his Government he exercises by
Ministers, and some by Magistrates under him (for I cannot consent to them that
say, the Magistrate is only the Officer of God as Creator, and not of Christ
the Mediator; because all things are delivered into his hands, and he is made
head over all.) Some also of his saving works, he performs by instruments and
means: And what they so perform under him, may be acknowledged without any
derogation from him at all.

But perhaps some may think that the Scripture Phrase seems rather to
intimate, that Faith is an Assent, and not such an Acceptance and Consent, as
is before mentioned; because it often times requires but this, To believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; he that should come into the world, etc.

To which I answer, 1. This proves only, that this Knowledge or Assent is part
of Faith: but not that it is the whole. 2. It is the use of Scripture to drive
at that duty which is most unknown, neglected, or resisted; and to speak little
of others, where there was then less need to speak, though perhaps the duty be
in it self more weighty: Therefore Christ and the Apostles did spend most of
their pains to persuade the Jews to this Assent: That the Messiah should come,
be their deliverer, they all knew: Even the poor woman of Samaria could tell
that, Ioh. 4. 25. And so ready were they to Receive him, if they had known him,
that it was the general expectation, and desire of the people, Mal. 3. 1. But
to persuade them that Jesus was the Christ, here lay the difficulty. Therefore
as Dr. Ames Medull. cap. 3.. 20.) though sometime Assent to the Truth
concerning God and Christ, Ioh. 1. 50. be taken for true Faith; yet the
special Election or Apprehension (for that the means by Fiducia. 13.) is
still included; and those words do but determine and apply that Fiducia to
Christ, which is presupposed to be already toward the Messiah.

And let me conclude this with one more practically useful observation. From
this definition of faith, now men may see what to enquire after in their
searching of their estates. As faith, being the Gospell-condition, is the main
thing to be looked for; So here you see what that faith is. The ignorance of
this deceives and troubles multitudes. Some think it lies in Assurance:
Some, in a quieting their hearts in confidence on Christ: Some think, as M.
Saltmarsh, That it is nothing else but a persuasion more or less of Gods love:
And then when poor troubled souls do feel neither assurance, confidence, nor
persuasion of that love, they conclude that they have no Faith. And how will
these mistaken Teachers help them to comfort? Why, as Mr. Saltmarsh does:
sometime to tell them, Christ has believed for them; and sometime to tell them
plainly, that he can but commend them to the Lord, who is the Author and
finisher of Faith: and sometime to tell them, that they should not question
their faith, any more then Christ himself. Thus their first way of comfort is
to tell them, they do ill to question their faith: If that would serve, all the
world might have comfort, and there needs no more. If that will not do, then
Christ has believed for them: Yet if that will serve, there is as much comfort
for one as another. But what if they say still, I cannot believe, (that is, as
you expound Belief:) why, then he confesses plainly, he is at a loss; he can
drive on the work of comforting no further; he can do no more but pray for
them. page 31. Is it not a wonder that this lamentable Comforter should be so
valued by the troubled spirits? I was many years my self under perplexing
doubts: If I had heard such comforting words as these, they would sooner have
driven me to despair then to comfort. He that has not so much wit as to
discern so gross fallacies, may as soon be comforted by a false and impertinent
argument, as by a sound one. Quest. But how would you comfort such a one, that
faith he cannot believe? Ans. Why, I would first make him know, that the very
essential form of faith lies in the Will^ acceptance of an offered Christ:
Then would I know of him, whether he be willing thus to have Christ both for
Lord and Savior, or not? If he say, He is willing: I shall answer, That then
he does believe; and then he is Justified: for his Willingness is his very
Consent or Acceptance (and that Consent is true Faith: Christ expects no more
to make up the match. If the match break, it must be either, because Christ is
unwilling, or because he is unwilling: not Christ; for he is the Suitor, and
Intreater, and Offerer: Not himself; for he confesses that he is willing. If
he say, I am not willing: I should ask; Why then do you look after it, or
regard it? Do men enquire after that, and lament the want of it, which they are
not willing to have? either temptation or melancholy makes you not know your
own mind; or else you do but dissemble in pretending trouble and sad
complaints. If you be indeed unwilling, I have no comfort for you, till you are
willing; but must turn to persuasions to make you willing: I should answer, The
Condition of the Covenant is not the Perfection, but the sincerity of Faith or
Consent: which way goes the prevailing bent or choice of your will. If Christ
were before you, would you accept him, or reject him? If you would heartily
accept him for your only Lord and Savior, I dare say, you are a true Believer.

Thus you see the comfortable use of right understanding, what justifying faith
is; and the great danger and inconvenience that follows the common mistakes
in this point.

THESIS LXX.
FAith in the largest sense, as it comprehends all the Condition of the new
Covenant, may be thus defined: It is when a sinner by the Word and Spirit of
Christ being thoroughly convinced of the Righteousness of the Law, the truth of
its threatening, the evil of his own sin, and the greatness of his misery
hereupon, and with all of the Nature and Offices, Sufficiency and Excellency of
Jesus Christ, the Satisfaction he has made, his willingness to save, and his
free offer to all that will accept him for their Lord and Savior; does
hereupon believe the truth of this Gospel, and accept of Christ as his only
Lord and Savior, to bring them to God their chiefest good, and to present them
pardoned and just before him, and to bestow upon them a more glorious
inheritance, and do accordingly rest on him as their Savior, and sincerely
(though imperfectly) obey him as their Lord, forgiving others, loving his
people, bearing what sufferings are imposed, diligently using his means and
Ordinances, and confessing and bewailing their sins against him, and praying
for pardon; and all this sincerely, and to the end.

EXPLICATION.
THis is the Condition of the new Covevenant at large, That all this is
sometime called Faith, as taking its name from the primary, principal, vital
part, is plain hence.

1. In that Faith is often called the Obeying of the Gospel but the Gospel
commands all this, Romans 10. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 22. and 4. 17. 2 These. 1. 8. Gal.
3. 1. and 5, 7. Heb. 5. 9.

2. The fulfilling of the Conditions of the new Covenant is often called by the
name of Faith, and so opposed to the fulfilling the Conditions of the old
Covenant, called works; But these forementioned are parts of the Condition of
the new Covenant, and therefore employed or included in Faith, Gal. 3. 12, 23,
25. Not that Faith is properly taken for its fruits, or confounded with them,
but (as I told you before) it is named in the stead of the whole Condition, all
the rest being employed as reducible to it, in some of the respects mentioned
under the 62 Position.

It may be here demanded, 1. Why I do make affiance or recombency an immediate
product of Faith, when it is commonly taken to be, the very justifying Act?

I answer: 1. I have proved already, that Consent or acceptance is the
principal Act, and Affiance does necessarily follow that. 2. For the most of
my Reasons; that Affiance is a following Act, and not the principal, they are
the same with those of Dr Downame against Mr Pemble, and in his Treatise of
Justification, whither therefore I refer you for Satisfaction.

2. Quest. Why do I make sincerity and perseverance to be so near kin to Faith,
as to be, in some sense, the same, and not rather distinct Graces?

Answ. It is apparent, that they are not real distinct things, but the Modi of
Faith. 1. Sincerity is the verity of it, which is convertible with its Being,
as it is Metaphysicall Verity, and with its Virtuous or Gracious Being, as it
is Moral or Theological Sincerity. 2. Perseverance or duration of a Being, is
nothing really distinct from the Being it self: Suarez thinks, not so much as a
Modus.

THESIS LXXI.
(1) THe sincere Performance of the summary, great Command of the Law, To have
the Lord only for our God, and so to love, obey, believe and trust him above
all, is still naturally employed in the Conditions of the Gospel, as of
absolute indispensible necessity, (2) and in order of nature, and of excellency
before Faith it self: (3) But it is not commanded in the sense, and upon the
terms, as under the first Covenant.

EXPLICATION.
(1) THis Command need not be expressed in the Gospel Conditions, it is so
naturally necessary, and implied in all: As the ultimate End need not be
expressed in directions and precepts so as ^he means, because it is still
supposed; and consultatio est tantum de mediis.

(2) Love to God, and taking him for our God and chief Good, is both in
excellency and order of nature, before Faith in Christ the Mediator; 1. Because
the End is thus before the means in excellency and intention: But God is the
ultimate End; and Christ as Mediator is but the means, Ioh. 14. 6. Christ is
the way by which men must come to the Father. 2. The Son as God-man or
Mediator, is less then the Father; and therefore the duties that respect him
as their Object, must needs be the less excellent duties, Ioh, 14. 13. The
glory of the Son, is but a means for the glory of the Father, Ioh. 14. 28. My
Father is greater then I: therefore the Love of the Father is greater then the
Love to the Son, etc. So also in point of necessity it has the natural
precedence: as the End has before the means: for the denying of the End does
immediately cashiere and evacuate all means, as such. He that makes not God
his chief Good, can never desire or Accept of Christ, as the way and means to
recover that chief Good. The Apostle therefore knew more reason, then merely
for its perpetuity, why the chiefest Grace is Love, 1. Cor. 13. 13. Though yet
the work of Justification is laid chiefly upon faith.

(3) That this Love of God, is not commanded in the sense, and on the terms as
under the Law, is evident. For, 1. The old Covenant would have condemned us,
for the very imperfection of the due degree of Love: But the Gospel accepts
of Sincerity, which lies in loving God above all; or as the chief Good. 2.
The old Covenant would have destroyed us, for one omission of a due Act of
Love; But the Covenant of Grace accepts of it, if a man that never knew God
all his life time, do come in at last.

Yet the sincere performance of it is as necessary now as then.

THESIS. LXXII.
AS the accepting of Christ for Lord, (which is the hearts subjection) is as
Essential a part of Justifying Faith, as the Accepting of him for our Savior:
So consequently, sincere obedience, (which is the effect of the former,) has
as much to do in justifying us before God, as Affiance, (which is the fruit of
the later.)

EXPLICATION.
I Know this will hardly down with many. But I know nothing can be said against
it, but by denying the Antecedent, viz. That Faith as it Accepts Christ for
Lord and King does Justify. But that I have proved before. If it be one Faith,
and have the Object entirely propounded as one, and be one entire principal
part of the Covenants Condition; then sure it cannot be divided in the work of
Justifying. This may be easily apprehended, if men will but understand these
three things. 1. That Faith is no Physical or natural proper Receiving of
Christ at all: But merely a moral Receiving though performed by a Physical
Act of Accepting: For thy Will does not naturally touch and take in the person
of Christ; That is an impossible thing, whatsoever the Transubstantiation, men
may say: (Though the Essence of the Godhead is every where.) 2. That this
accepting which is a Moral Receiving does not, nor possibly can, make Christ
ours immediately and properly, as it is a Receiving; But mediately and
improperly only: The formal cause of our interest, being Gods Donation by the
Gospel Covenant. 3. That this Covenant makes a whole entire Faith its
Condition: A Receiving of whole Christ with the whole soul: It is, as Amesius,
Actio totius hominis; And if the Covenant do make Christ as King, the object
of that Faith which is its Condition, as well as Christ, as a Deliverer or
Priest; Then may it be as fit a Medium for our Justification, as the other.

That Obedience is as near a fruit of Faith, as Affiance, is evident; if you
take it for the Obedience of the Soul, in Acts that are no more remote from the
heart then Affiance is: And so is the Obedience of our Actions external in its
formal respect (as Obedience): though not in its material, because the
imperate Acts are not all so near the fountain as the Elicite. I take it here
for granted, that Dr Downames arguments in the place forecited, have proved
Affiance to be but a fruit of the principal justifying Act of Faith.

THESIS LXXIII.
FRom what has been said, it appears in what sense Faith only justifies;
and in what sense Works also justify: viz. 1. Faith only justifies, as it
implies and includes all other parts of the condition of the new Covenant:
and is so put in opposition to the Works of the Law, or the personal
Righteousness of the old Covenant. 2. Faith only justifies as the great
principal master duty of the Gospel or chief part of its Condition, to which
all the rest are some way reducible. 3. Faith only does not justify in
opposition to the Works of the Gospel; but those Works do also justify, as
the secondary, less principal parts of the condition of the Covenant.

THESIS LXXIV.
SO that they both justify in the same kind of causality, viz. as Causa sine
quibus non, or mediums and improper Causes; or as Dr Twisse) Causae
dispositivae: but with this difference: Faith as the principal part; Obedience
as the less principal. The like may be said of Love, which at least is a
secondary part of the Condition: and of others in the same station.

EXPLICATION.
I Know this is the doctrine that will have the loudest outcries raised
against it: and will-make some cry out, Heresy, Popery, Socinianism! and what
not? For my own part the Searcher of hearts knows, that not singularity,
affectation of novelty, nor any good will to Popery, provokes me to entertain
it; But that I have earnestly sought the Lords direction upon my knees, before
I durst adventure on it: And that I resisted the light of this Conclusion as
long as I was able. But a man cannot force his own understanding, if the
evidence of truth force it not; though he may force his pen, or tongue, to
silence or dissembling.

That which I shall do further, is, to give you some proofs of what I say, and
to answer some Objections. Though, if the foregoing grounds do stand, there
needs no more proof of these assertions.

1. If Faith justify as it is the fulfilling of the Condition of the new
Covenant, and Obedience be also part of that Condition, then obedience must
justify in the same way as Faith: But both parts of the Antecedent are before
proved.

The other proofs follow in the ensuing Positions, and their Explications and
Confirmations.

THESIS LXXV.
THe plain expressions of Saint James should ternifie us from an interpretation
contradictory to the Text; and except apparent violence be used with his Chap.
2. 21. 24, 25, etc. it cannot be doubted, but that a man is justified by Works,
and not by Faith only.

THESIS LXXVI.
NEither is there the least appearance of a contradiction betwixt this and
Paul's doctrine, Romans 3. 28. If men did not through prejudice, negligence, or
wilfulness overlook this; That in that and all other the like places, the
Apostle does professedly exclude the Works of the Law only from Justification;
but never at all the Works of the Gospel as they are the Condition of the new
Covenant.

EXPLICATION.
IN opening this I shall thus proceed: 1. I will show the clearness of that in
James for the point in question. 2. That Paul is to be understood in the sense
expressed. 3. How this differs from the Papists Exposition of these places:
and from their doctrine of Justification by Works. 4. And how from the Socinian
doctrine.

1. The ordinary Expositions of St. James are these two: 1. That he speaks of
Justification before men, and not before God. 2. That he speaks of Works, as
justifying our Faith, and not as justifying our persons: or (as Mr. Pembles
phrase is) the Apostle when he says Works justify, must be undestood by a
Metonimy, that a working Faith justifies. That the former Exposition is falfe
may appear thus.

1. The worlds Justification freeth us but from the Worlds Accusation, to which
it is opposed: And therefore it is but either a Justifying from the Accusation
of humane Laws; Or else a particular Justification of us in respect of some
particular facts; or else an usurped Judgment and Justification: For they are
not constituted our Judges by God: And therefore we may say with Paul, It is a
small thing with me to be judged of you, or of man's Judgment: And so a small
thing to be Justified by men from the Accusations of the Law of God.

But the Justification in James is of greater moment: as appears in the Text.
For, 1. It is such as: salvation depends on; verse. 14. 2. It is such as
follows only a living Faith: but the world may as well Justify us when we
have no Faith at all.

I therefore affirm, 1. The World is no lawful Judge of our Righteousness
before God, or in reference to the Law of God. 2. Neither are they competent or
capable Judges. They cannot possibly pass any certain true sentence of our
Righteousness or unrighteousness. 3. If they could, yet Works are no certain
medium, or evidence, whereby the world can know us to be Righteous: For there
is no outward work which an Hypocrite may not perform: and inward works they
cannot discern: nor yet the principles from which, nor the ends to which our
works proceed and are intended. There is as much need of a divine
heart-searching knowledge, to discern the sincerity of Works, as of Faith it
self. So that if it be not certain, that the Text speaks of Justification
before God, I scarce know what to be certain of.

Once more: 1. Was Abraham justified before men for a secret Action! 2. Or for
such a^ Action as the killing of his only Son would have been? 3. Was not he
the justifier here, who was the imputer of Righteousness? But God was the
imputer of Righteousness, verse 23. therefore God was the Justifier, So I leave
that interpretation to sleep.

2. That it is the Person and not his Faith only, which is here said to be
justified by Works, is as plain in the Text almost as can be spoken, verse. 21.
Abraham (not his faith) is said to be justified by works. Verse. 24. By Works a
man is justified: If by a man were meant, a man's Faith, then it would run thus
sencelessely: By Works a man's Faith is justified, and not by Faith only, so
Verse 25,

3. For Mr. Pembles interpretation, That by Works is meant a Working Faith.

I Answer, I dare not teach the holy Ghost to speak; nor force the Scripture;
nor raise an exposition so far from the plain importance of the words, without
apparent necessity: But here is not the least necessity: There being not the
least inconvenience, that I Know of, in affirming Justification by Works, in
the fore-explained sense. Men seldom are bold with Scripture, in forcing it;
But they are first bold with Conscience enforcing it. If it were but some one
Phrase dissonant from the ordinary language of Scripture, I should not doubt
but it must be reduced to the rest. But when it is the very scope of a Chapter,
in plain and frequent expressions, no whit dissonant from any other Scripture;
I think he that may so wrest it, as to make it unsay what it says, may as well
make him a Creed of his own let the Scripture say what it will to the contrary:
what is this but with the Papist to make the Scripture a Nose of wax? If Saint
James speak it so often over and over; that Justification is by works, and not by
Faith only, I will see more cause before I deny it; or say, he means a
Working Faith.

If he so understand a Working Faith as that it justifies principally as
Faith, and less principally as working, then I should not differ from him,
only I should think the Scripture Phrase is more fafe and more propert; But he
understands it according to that common assertion and exposition, that Fides
solum justificat, non autem fides sola: Faith alone justifies, but not that
faith which is alone. The question therefore is, Whether Works do concur with
Faith (as part of the Condition) in the very business of Justifying? or
whether they are only Concomitants to that Faith which effects the business
without their assistance? The ground of the mistake lies here: They first
ascribe to much to Faith; and then because that nimium which they give to Faith
is not found agreeable to Works, therefore they conclude, that we are not
justified by works at all. They think that Faith is an Isntrumental efficient
cause of Justification (which that properly it is not, I have proved before:)
when if they understood that it justifies but as a Causa sine quanon, or
condition, they would easily yield, that Works do so too. I will not say
therefore that Works do effectually produce our Justification (For faith does
not so: Nor that they justify as equal parts of the condition: For faith is
the principal. But that they justify as the secondary lesse-principall part
of the Condition, (not only proving our Faith to be sound, but themselves
being in the Obligation as well as Faith, and justifying in the same kind of
causality or procurement as Faith, though not in equality with it) I prove
thus: 1. When it is said that we are Justified by Works the word By, implies
more then an Idle concomitancy: If they only stood by, while Faith does all, it
could not be said, that we are Justified by Works.

2. When the Apostle says, By Works, and not By Faith only, he plainly makes
them concomitant in procurement, or in that kind of causality which they have:
Especially, seeing he says not, as he is commonly interpreted, not By Faith
which is alone; but not, by Faith only, (...).

3. Therefore he says that Faith is dead being alone, Because it is dead as to
the use and purpose of Justifying: for in it self it has a life according to
its quality still. This appears from his comparison in the former verse 16.
that this is the death he speaks of. And so Works make Faith alive, as to the
attainment of its end of Justification.

4. The Analysis which Piscator and Pemble give, contradicts not this
Assertion. If in stead of a Working Faith, they will but keep the Apostles own
words, I shall agree to most of their Analysis. (Though conclusious drawn from
the Analysis are often weak, it is so easy for every man to feign an Analysis
suited to his ends) only the explication of the 22. verse. they seem to fail
in. For when the Apostle says, that Faith did, (...), work in and with his
works, it cleary aims at such a working in, and with, as makes them conjunct
in the work of Justifying: And when he says that Faith was made perfect with
Works, it is not (as they and others interpret) only a manifesting to be
perfect. But as the habit is perfected in its Acts, because they are the end to
which it tends; And as Marriage is perfected per congressum and
procreationem: or any Covenant when its conditions are performed. Faith alone
is not the entire perfect Condition of the New Covenant: but Faith with
Repentance and sincere Obedience, is; A condemned Gally-slave being Redeemed,
is to have his deliverance upon condition that he take his Redeemer for his
Master: This does so directly imply, that he must obey him, that his conditions
are not perfectly fulfilled, except he do obey him as his Master: And so taking
him for his Redeemer and Master, and obeying him as his Master, do in the same
kind procure his continued freedom. Indeed his mere promise and consent does
procure his first deliverance, but not the continuance of it. So I acknowledge,
that the very first point of Justification is by Faith alone, without either
the concomitancy or cooperation of Works; for they cannot be performed in an
instant: But the continuance and accomplishment of Justification is not without
the joint procurement of obedience. As a woman is made a man's wife, and
instated in all that he has, upon mere acceptance, consent, and contracts;
because conjugall actions, affection, the forsaking of others, etc. are employed
in the Covenant, and expressed as the necessary for future; therefore if there
be no conjugall actions, affections or fidelity follow, the Covenant is not
performed, nor shall the woman enjoy the benefits expected. It is so here,
especially seeing Christ may dis-estate the violaters of his Covenant at
pleasure.

This shows us how to answer the Objections of some: 1. Say they, Abraham's
Faith was perfect long before. Answ. Not as it is a fulfilling of the Covenants
Condition, which also requires its acting by Obedience.

2. Abraham (say they) was justified long before Isaac was offered, therefore
that could be but a manifesting of it. Answ. Justification is a continued Act.
God is still justifying, and the Gospel still justifying. Abraham's
Justification was not ended before.

3. Mr Pemble thinks, that as a man cannot be said, [to live by Reason] though
he may be said, to live by a reasonable soul, and as a plant lives not per
augmentationem, and si per animam auctricem: So we may be said to be justified
by a working Faith, but not by Works.

I Answ. Both Speeches are proper. And his simile does not square or suit with
the Case in hand: For Justifying is an extrinsecall consequent, or product of
Faith, and no proper effect at all: Much less an effect flowing from its own
formal essence, as the life of a man does from a Reasonable soul, and the life
of a Plant from a Vegetative. I hope it may be said properly enough, that a
Servant does his work, and pleases his Master, by Reason, as well as by a
reasonable soul: And a Plant does please the Gardener by augmentation, as well
as per animam austricem. So that a man pleases God, and is Justified by
sincere Obedience, as well as by a working Faith.

3. How this differs from the Papists Doctrine, I need not tell any Scholar
who has read their writings.

1. They take Justifying for Sanctifying: so do not I. 2. They quite overthrow
and deny the most real difference betwixt the Old Covenant and the New: and
make them in a manner all one: But I build this Exposition and Doctrine,
chiefly upon the clear differencing and opening of the Covenants.

3. When they say, We are Justified by Works of the Gospel; they mean only,
that we are sanctified by Works that follow Faith, and are bestowed by Grace,
they meriting our inherent justice at Gods hands. In a word, there is scarce
any one Doctrins, wherein even their most learned Schoolmen are more sottishly
ignorant then in this of Justification* so that when you have read them with
profit and delight on some other subjects; when they come to this, you would
pity them, and admire their ignorance.

They take our Works to be part of our Legal Righteousness: I take them not to
be the smallest portion of it: But only a part of our Evangelicall
Righteousness; or of the Condition upon which Christ's Righteousness shall be
ours.

5. But what difference is there betwixt it and the Socinian Doctrine of
Justification? Answ. In some men's mouths, Socinianisme is but a word of
reproach, or a stone to throw at the head of any man that says not as they.
Mr. Wotton is a Socinian, and Mr. Bradshaw, and Mr. Gataker, and Mr. Goodwin,
and why not Piscator, Pareus, etc. if some zealous Divines know what
Socinianisme is. But I had rather study what is Scripture-truth, then what is
Socinianisme: I do not think that Faustus was so Infaustus, as to hold nothing
true: That which he held according to Scripture is not Socinianisme. For my
part, I have read little of their writings; but that little gave me enough, and
made me cast them away with abhorrence. In a word: The Socinians acknowledge
not that Christ had satisfied the Law for us; and consequently is none of our
Legal Righteousness: but only has set us a copy to write after, and is
become our pattern, and that we are Justified by following him as a Captain and
guide to heaven: And so all our proper Righteousness is in this obedience. Most
accursed Doctrine! So far am I from this, that I say, The Righteousness which
we must plead against the Laws accusations, is not one grain of it in our
Faith of Works: but all out of us in Christ's satisfaction. Only our Faith,
Repentance, and sincere Obedience, are the Conditions upon which we must
partake of the former. And yet such Conditions as Christ works in us freely
by his Spirit.

6. Lastly, let us see whether St. Paul, or any other Scripture do contract
this. And, for my part, I know not one word in the Bible that has any strong
appearance of Contradiction to it. The usual places quoted are these, Romans 3.
28. and 4. 2. 3. 14. 15. 16. Gal. 2. 16. and 3. 21. 22. Ephesians. 2. 89. Phil. 3.
8. 9. In all which, and all other the like places, you shall easily perceive.
1. That the Apostles dispute is upon the question, What is the Righteousness
which we must plead against the Accusation of the Law? or by which we are
justified as the proper Righteousness of that Law? And this he well concludes,
is neither Works nor Faith. But the Righteousness which is by Faith; that is,
Christ's Righteousness.

But now St. James his question is, What is the Condition of our Justification
by this Righteousness of Christ? Whether Faith only? or Works also?

2. Paul does either in express words, or in the sense and scope of his
speech, exclude only the works of the Law, that is the fulfilling of the
Conditions of the Law our selves. But never the fulfilling of the
Gospell-Conditions that we may have part in Christ. Indeed, if a man should
obey the Commands of the Gospel, with a Legal intent, that it might be a
Righteousness conform to the Law of Works; this Obedience is not Evangelicall,
but Legal obedience: For the form gives the name.

3, Paul does by the word, Faith, especially direct your thoughts to Christ
believed in; For to be justified by Christ; and to be justified by receiving
Christ is with him all one.

4. And when he does mention Faith as the Condition, he always implies
obedience to Christ. Therefore Believing and obeying the Gospel, are put for
the two Summaries of the whole Conditions. The next will clear this.

THESIS LXXVII.
THat we are justified by sincere obedience to Christ, as the secondary part of
the Condition of our Justification; is evident also from these following
Scriptures. Mat. 12. 37. Mar. 11. 25. 26. Luke 6. 37. Mat. 6. 12. 14. 15. 1 John 1. 9. Act. 8. 22. Act. 3. 19. and 22. 16. 1 Pet. 4. 18. Romans 6. 16. 1 Pet.
1. 2. 22.

THESIS. LXXVIII.
Our full Justification, and our everlasting Salvation have the same Conditions
on our part. But sincere Obedtence is without all doubt, a Condition of our
Salvation: therefore also of our Justification.

EXPLICATION.
THe Antecedent is manifest, in that Scripture makes Faith a Condition of both
Justification and Salvation: and so it does Obedience also, as is before
explained. Therefore we are justified, that we may be saved. It would be as
derogatory to Christ's Righteousness, if we be saved by works, as if we be
justified by them. Neither is there any way to the former but by the latter.
That which a man is justified by, he is saved by. Though Glorification be an
adding of a greater happiness then we lost, so justification is not enough
thereto: Yet on our part, they have the same Conditions.

Yet here I say still, Our full Justification because, as I have showed our
first possession of it is upon our mere Faith or Contract with Christ. But I
think our Glorification will be acknowledged to have the same Conditions with
our final Justification at the bar of Christ. And why not to our entire
continued justification on earth? You may Object. Perseverance is a condition
of our Glorification; but not of our Justification here. I Answer, 1.
Perseverance is nothing but the same Conditions persevering. 2. As the
sincerity of Faith is requisite to our first possession of justification; so
the perseverance of Faith, is the Condition of persevering Justification. See
Hebr. 3. 14.

2. That Obedience is a Condition of our Salvation is undoubted, Hebr. 5. 6.
Christ is the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him; so fully,
Romans 2. 7. 8. 9. 10. Revel. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments,
that they may have Right to the tree of Life, and may enter by the Gates into
the City. And has that no hand in their Justification, which gives them right
to the tree of Life? Iam. 1. 22. 23. 24. 25. Mat. 5. from the 1. to the 13.
especially the 19. 20. Mat. 7. 13. 21. 23. 24. with the multitude the like.
Besides all those under Posit. 22. which prove a personal Righteousness, so
called from the conformity to the Gospel. See Romans 8. 4. 13.

THESIS. LXXIX.
THis Doctrine is no whit derogatory to Christ and his Righteousness: For he
that ascribes to Faith or Obedience no part of that work which belongs to
Christ's satisfactory Righteousness, does not derogate in that, from that
Righteousness. But he that makes Faith and Obedience to Christ, to be only
the fulfilling of the Conditions of the New Covenant, and so to be one^y
Conditions of justification by him, does give them no part of the work of his
Righteousness: Seeing he came not to fulfill the Gospel, but the Law,

EXPLICATION.
I Have proved this before, Posit. 20. I shall here only Answer some
objections. Object. 1. Christ was baptized because he must fulfill all
Righteousness: But that was no part of the Legal Righteousness. Answ. The
Priests were to be washed when they entered upon their office: There were many
Ceremonious washings then in force: Either Christ's Baptism was Legal; or else
by [fulfilling Righteousnesse] must needs be meant, The fulfilling all the
works of his own office: whereof one was, the instituting of Church Ordinances:
and he thought meet to institute this by Example as well as Doctrine. He that
will affirm, that Christ has fulfilled Evangelicall Righteousness for us, as
well as Legal, shall overthrow the office of Christ, and the nature of
Christianity. Object. 2. Mr. Bradshaw, and most others say, That he received
the Sacrament of his Supper, Ans. Wholly without book. I believe not that ever
he did it: for the Scripture no where speaks it: And many absurd consequences
would hardly be avoided: All the probability for it, is in those words, I will
drink no more of the fruit of, etc. Answ. 1. That may be a Reason why he would
not drink now; and does not necessarily imply that he did. 2. But clearly, Luke
who speaks distinctly of the two Cups (which the other do not) does apply,
and subjoyn these words to the first Cup, which was before the Sacramental.

2. If it were granted that Christ did receive the Sacrament; yet he never did
as an obedientiall Act to his own Gospel precepts? Did he obey a Law not yet
made? or his own Law, and so obey himself? Much less did he perform it as a
part of the New Covenant Condition on our part. But as a Lawgiver and not an
Obeyer thereof: It was a Law-making Action, (if any such had been.)

Object. If sincere obedience be a part of the Condition, then what
perplexities will it cast us into to find out, when our obedience is sincere?
Answ. 1. This difficulty arises also, if we make it but the Condition of our
Salvation: and yet few, but Antinomians, will deny that. 2. Why is it not as
hard to discern the sincerity of faith as of Obedience. 3. Obedience is then
sincere, when Christ is cordially taken for our only Lord; and when his Word
is our Law, and the main desire and endeavor is to please him; and though
through prevavalency of the flesh we slip into sin, yet the prevailing part of
our will is against it, and we would not change our Lord for all the world.

Mr. Saltmarsh thinks, that because we have so much sin with our Obedience,
all Believers have cause to suspect it; and so cannot conclude Justification
from it. As if sincerity might not stand with infirmity! Or could not be
discerned where there is any remaining imperfection! Might not Paul conclude of
the sincerity of his Willingness to obey Christ, because he did the evil which
he would not? And might he not conclude his Justification from that Willingness
to obey? Read Ball of the Covenant chap. 11.

THESIS LXXX.
TO conclude: It is most clear in the Scripture, and beyond all dispute, that
our Actual, most proper, complete Justification, at the great Judgment, will
be according to our Works, and to what we have done in flesh, whether Good or
Evil: which can be no otherwise then as it was the Condition of that
Justification. And so Christ, at that great Assize, will not give his bare Will
of Purpose, as the Reason of his proceedings: but as he governed by a Law; so
he will judge by a Law: and will then give the Reason of his Public Sentence
from men's keeping or breaking the Conditions of his Covenant; that so the
mouths of all may be stopped, and the equity of his Judgment may be manifest to
all; and that he may there show forth his hatred to the sins, and not only to
the persons of the Condemned; and his Love to the Obedience and not only to
the persons of the Justified.

EXPLICATION.
HEre I have these things to prove: 1. That the Justifying Sentence shall pass
according to Works, as well as Faith. 2. That the Reason is, because they are
parts of the Condition.

For the first, see Mat. 25. 21, 23. Well done, good and faithful servant!
Thou have been faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler over many
things: Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. And most plain is that from the
mouth of the Judge himself, describing the order of the process at that day,
Mat. 25. 34, 35. Come ye Blessed! inherit the Kingdom, etc. [For] I was hungry,
etc. So 1 Pet. 1. 17. Who without respect of persons judges according to every
man's work. So 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether good or bad. So Rev. 20. 12. 13. They were judged
every man according to his Works. Heb. 13. 17. Phil. 4. 17. Mat. 12. 36. etc.
But this is evident already.

2. As it is beyond doubt that Christ will then justify men according to their
Works: So that this is not only to discover the sincerity of their Faith, is
as evident; but that it is also, as they are parts of that Evangelicall
Righteousness which is the Condition of their Justification. 1. The very
phrases of the Text import as much, Mat. 25. 21, 23. Well done good and
faithful servant, etc. Mat. 25. 34, 35. [For] I was hungry, etc. And in the
rest [According] to their Works. Can any more be said of Faith, then that we
are justified or judged to Life, both [for] it, and [according to] it?

2. If Works be not then considered as part of the Condition; how then? 1. Not
as the Righteousness which the Law requires: For so shall no man living be
justified in the sight of God, Romans 3. 20. Psa. 143. 2. 2. Not as a mere sign
whereby God does discern men's faith: For he sees it immediately and needs no
sign, 3. Not as a mere sign to satisfy the justified person himself: For 1.
There is no such intimation in the Text. 2. Then it should be no further
useful then men remain doubtful of their sincerity. 3. The godly then know
the sincerity of their Faith. 4. Neither is the business of that Day, to
satisfy the doubting about the sincerity of their Faith, by Arguments drawn
from their former works: But to judge and justify them, and so put them out of
doubt by the Sentence, and by their Glory.

4. But the common opinion is, That it is to satisfy the condemned World of
the sincerity of the Faith of the godly. But this cannot stand with the Truth:
For 1. It is clearly expressed a ground or reason of the Sentence. 2. And to
the Consolation and Justification of the justified: and not to the satisfaction
or conviction of others only or chiefly.

3. The poor world will have somewhat else to take up their thoughts, as the
Text shows: to wit, the excusing of the sin for which they are condemned
themselves. Mat 25. 44

4. It seems that Christ does in the Text call them Righteous in reference to
this personal Evangelicall Righteousness mentioned in their Justifying
Sentence, verse. 46. The Righteous into life Eternal.

5. If Gods Justice engage him, not to forget their work and labor of Love,
Heb. 6. 10, 11, 12. If the dead in Christ are blessed, because their Works
follow them, Rev. 14. 13. If in every Nation, he that fears God and works
Righteousness be Accepted of him, Act. 10. 35. If men shall reap the fruit of
welldoing in due time, Gal. 6. 7, 8, 9. If Ministers save themselves in taking
heed to themselves and to doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 16. If he that does Righteousness
is righteous, 1 Ioh. 3. 7. If whatsoever good thing any man does, the same he
shall receive of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 8. If hearing and doing be building on a
Rock, Mat. 7. 24. If the doers of Gods Will be the mothers, sisters and
brothers of Christ, Mat. 12. 50, etc. Then the mention of these works at
judgment, is more then to signify their sincerity to the condemned world.

6. If Christ mentioned these works to convince the world. 1. Either it must be
his own Testimony of these works, that they are sincere evidences of a sincere
Faith. 2. Or else by the discovery which the works do make themselves. But 1.
Christ may testify of their faith immediately as well. 2. Works are no certain
signs of Faith to any stander-by, who knows not whether Works themselves are
sincere, or not. See more under the 76. Position.

If any say, that it is to silence the Accusacion of Satan, that these works
are mentioned at judgment; The same Answer will serve, as to the last.
Besides, Scripture gives us no intimation of any such accusation; but only
the managing the Laws Accusation. But if he should Accuse us falsely of
Hypocrisy, as he did Job; It must be only Gods heart-searthing knowledge of
our sincerity that can clear us.

Yet do I not deny in all this, but that Works are effects of Faith, and to the
person himself, who knows their sincerity, they may be some Argument of the
sincerity of Faith, and God will vindicate his peoples Righteousness before
all, and be admired in them. But his Justification primarily respects the
Law, and his own Justice, and the Righteousness and Salvation of the Justified,
and but remotely the beholders.

Let me conclude with two or three cautionary Quaeries concerning the
inconvenience of the contrary doctrine.

1 Qu. Does it not needlessly constrain men to wrest most plain and frequent
expressions of Scripture?

2 Qu. Does it not uphold that dangerous pillar of the Antinomian Doctrine,
that we must not work or perform our duties for Life and Salvation; but only
from Life and Salvation: That we must not make the attaining of Justification
or Salvation an end of our Endeavors, but obey in thankfulness only, because
we are saved and justified? A doctrine which I have elsewhere confuted; and if
it were reduced to practice by all that hold it, (as I hope it is not,) would
undoubtedly damn them: For he that seeks not, and that striveth not to enter,
shall never enter. Now if good Works or sincere Obedience to Christ our Lord,
be no part of the Condition of our full Justification and Salvation, Who will
use them to that end? For how it can procure Justification as a means, and not
by way of Condition, I cannot conceive.

3 Qu. Whether this doctrine does not tend to drive Obedience out of the world?
For if men do once believe, that it is not so much as a part of the Condition
of their Justification, will it not much tend to relax their diligence? I know
mere love and thankfulness should be enough: And so it will, when all our ends
are attained in our Ultimate End; then we shall act for these ends no more: we
shall have nothing to do but to love, and joy, and praise, and be thankful;
but that it is not yet. Sure, as God has given us the affections of Fear, and
Desire, and Hope, and so Care, so he would have us use them for the attainment
of our great Ends. Therefore he that takes down but one of all our Motives to
Obedience, he helps to destroy Obedience it self, seeing we have need of every
Motive that God has left us.

4 Qu. Does it not much confirm the world in their soul-cozening Faith? Sure
that Faith which is by many thought to justify, is it that our people do all
most easily embrace, that is, the receiving of Christ for their Savior, and
expecting Pardon and Salvation by him, but not withal receiving him for their
Lord and King, nor delivering up themselves to be ruled by him. I meet not with
one, but is resolved in such a Faith, till it be overthrown by teaching them
better. They would all trust Christ for the saving of their souls, and that
without dissembling, for ought any man can discern: Are all these men
justified? You will say, They do it not sincerely. Ans. There is evident a
sincerity opposite to dissimulation: But a Moral or Theological sincerity
there is not; Why is that? but because they take but half of Christ. Let any
Minister but try his ungodly people, whether they will not all be persuaded
very easily to believe that Christ will pardon them and save them, and to
expect Justification from him alone? But whether it be not the hardest thing in
the world, to persuade them really to take him for their Lord, and his Word for
their Law, and to endeavor faithful obedience accordingly? Surely the
easiness of the former, and the difficulty of the latter, seems to tell us
that it is a spiritual, excellent, necessary part of justifying Faith, to
accept unfeignedly of Christ for our Governor, and that part which the world
among us will most hardly yield to, and therefore has more need to be preached
then the other. (Though some think that nothing is preaching Christ, but
preaching him as a pardoning, justifying Savior.) Indeed among the Turks or
Indians, that entertain not the Gospel it is as necessary to preach his
pardoning Office, yea and the verity of his Natures and Commission: therefore
the Apostles when they preached to Jews or Pagans, did first and chiefly teach
them the Person and Offices of Christ, and the great benefits which they might
receive by him but when they preach (as James) to Professors of the Christian
Faith, they chiefly urge them, to strive to enter, to fight, that they may
conquer, so to run that they may obtain to lay violent hands upon the Kingdom,
and take it by force, and to be unwearied in laborious obedience to Christ
their Lord; to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord, forasmuch as they know their labor is not in vain in the Lord.

5. Lastly, Is not this excluding of sincere Obedience from Justification, the
great stumbling block of Papists? and that which has had a great hand in
turning many learned men from the Protestant Religion to Popery? When they see
the language of Scripture in the forecited places so plain to the contrary:
When Illyricus, Gallus, Amsdorfius, etc. shall account it a heresy in George
major, to say, That good Works are necessary to Salvation: And when (if
Melchior Adamus say true) eo dementiae and impietatis ventum erat, ut non
dubitarent quidam haec axiomata propugnare; Bona opera non sunt necessaria ad
salutem: Bona opera officiunt saluti: Nova obedientia non est necessaria. When
even Melancthons credit is blasted, for being too great a friend to good Works,
though he ascribe not to them the least part of the Work or Office of Christ:
And when to this day many Antinomian Teachers, who are magnified as the only
Preachers of Free Grace, do assert and proclaim, That there is no more required
to the perfect irrevocable justification of the vilest Murderer or Whoremaster,
but to believe that he is justified, or to be persuaded that God loves him.
And when such a Book as that, styled the Marrow of Modern Divinity, have so
many applauding Epistles of such Divines; when the Doctrine of it is, That we
must not Act for justification or salvation; but only in thankfulness for it:
contrary to the main drift of the Scripture, which so presses men to pray for
pardon, and to pardon others, that they may receive pardon themselves: and to
strive to enter, and run that they may obtain, and do Christ Commandments
that they may have right to the Tree of life, and enter in by the gate into the
City, Revel. 22. 14. Do these men think that we are perfectly justified and
saved already? before the absolving sentence at the great Tribunal; or the
possession of the Kingdom, for which we wait in Hope? Indeed when we have that
perfect salvation, we shall not need to seek it, or labor to attain it; but
must everlastingly be thankful to him that has purchased it, and to him that
has bestowed it. But in the mean time, he that seeks not, shall not find,
and he that runs not shall not obtain: No, nor all that seek and run neither,
Luke 13. 24. Luke 12. 31. 2 Timothy 2. 5.

This Doctrine was one that helped to turn off Grotius to Cassandrian Popery;
See Grotii votum, Page 21. 22. 23. 115. And was offensive to Melancthon, Bucer,
and other Moderate Divines of our own. And all arises hence. That men
understand not the difference betwixt Christ's part of the work, which he
performs himself, and that which he requires and enableth us to perform: nor
know they, that true justifying Faith does at once receive Christ, both as Lord
and Savior; and that sincere Obedience to Christ, is part of the Condition of
the New Covenant. Works (or a purpose to walk with God) (says Mr. Ball on the
Covenant page 73.) do justify as the Passive qualification of the subject
capable of Justification. See Calvin on Luke 1. 6. The common assertion then
That good Works do follow Justification, but not go before it must be thus
understood, or it is false, viz. Actual obedience goes not before the first
moment of Justification, But yet it is as true. 1. That the taking of Christ
for our Lord, and so delivering up our selves to his Government (which is the
subjection of the heart, and resolution for further obedience, and indeed an
essential part of Faith) does in order of nature go before our first
justification. 2. That Actual Obedience (as part of the Condition) does in
order of Nature go before our Justification as continued and confirmed. For
though our Marriage contract with Christ do give us the first possession, yet
it is the Marriage faithfulness and duties, which must continue that
possession. 3. That perseverance in faithful obedience does both in nature and
time go before our full, complete and final Justification; and that as part of
the Condition of obtaining it. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light,
we have fellow ship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. So Isai. 1. 16. 17. 18. 19. Wash you;
make you clean; put away the evil of your doings; cease to do evil; learn to
do well, etc. Come now, etc. though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; and though they be red like crimson, they shall be like wool,
So Ezekiel. 33. 14. 15, 16. and 18. 21. 22. Neither let any object that this is
the Law of works: For certainly that has no promises of forgiveness: And
though the discoveries of the way of Justification be delivered in the old
Testament, in a more dark and Legal language then in the New; yet not in
terms contradictory to the truth in the New Testament. Thus you may see in
what sense it is that Christ will judge men according to their Works: and will
say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom, etc. For I was hungry,
and ye fed me, etc. Well done, good and faithful Servant, thou have been
faithful in few things; I will make thee Ruler over many things: Enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord, Matthew. 25.

For being made perfect, he became the Author of Eternal salvation to all them
that obey him, Hebr. 5. 9. Of whom it shall be said, when they are glorified
with him: These are they that come out of great tribulation, and have washed
their robes in the blood of the Lamb, and made them white: Therefore are they
before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he
that si^teth on the throne shall dwell among them, Revel. 7. 14. 15. To whom be
Glory for ever. Amen.

REader, because an exact Index would contain a great part of the Book, I shall
omit it: and instead of it, I here lay thee down some of the chief
Distinctions, upon which this Discourse depends; desiring thee to understand
them, and keep them in memory. You must distinguish, 1. BEtwixt Gods Decretive
or Purposing Will: And his Legislative or Preceptive Will. The 1. is his
Determining of Events. The 2. of Duty and Reward. 2. Betwixt 1. the Covenant or
Law of Works, which says, Obey perfectly, and Live; or sin, and Dye. 2. And
the Covenant or Law of Grace, which says, Believe, and be saved, etc. 3.
Betwixt the two parts of each Covenant: viz. 1. The Primary, discovering the
duty in Precepts, and prohibiting the Sin. 2. The secondary, discovering the
Rewards and Penalties, in Promises and Threatenings. 4. Betwixt a twofold
Righteousness of one and the same Covenant. 1. Of perfect Obedience, or
performance of the Condition. 2. Of suffering, or satisfaction for disobedience
or nonperformance which makes the Law, to have nothing against us, though we
disobeyed. See Pemble of Justification, page 2. Our Legal Righteousness is of
this last sort, and not of the first. Both these sorts of Righteousness are
not possible to be found in any one person, except Christ, who had the former
Righteousness as his own, (incommunicable to us in that form) The second he had
for us, as he was by imputation a sinner: And so we have it in, or by him. Mark
this. 5. Betwixt two kinds of Righteousness, suitable to the two Covenants and
their Conditions 1. Legal Righteousness, which is our Conformity, or
satisfaction to the Law. 2. And Evangelicall Righteousness, which is our
Conformity to the new Covenant. Note, that 1. Every Christian must have both
these. 2. That our Legal righteousness is only that of Satisfaction: but our
Evangelicall is only that of obedience, or performance of the Condition. 3.
That our Legal Righteousness is all without us in Christ, the other in our
selves. 6. Betwixt Evangelicall Righteousness, improll perly so called, viz.
because the Gospel does reveain and offer it. This is our Legal righteousness
o Christ. 2. And Evangelicall righteousness prnt perly so called viz. Because
the new Covenar is the Rule to which it is conformed. This is ou performance of
the new Covenants Conditions. 7. Betwixt the Life or Reward in the first
Covenant: viz. Adams paradise happiness. 2. And the Life of the second
Covenant; which is, Eternal glory in heaven. 8. Betwixt the death or curse of
the old Covenant, which is opposite to its reward: This only was laid on
Christ, and is due to Infants by nature, 2. And the death of the second
Covenant, opposite to its life, called the second death, and far sorer
punishment. This final unbeleevers suffer. 9. Betwixt sins against the first
Covenant: For these Christ died. 2. And sins against the second Covenant: For
these he dyed not. 10. Betwixt sinning against Christ and the Gospel, as the
object of our sin only: So Christ died for them. 2. And sinning against the new
Covenant as such, or as a threatening Law: So Christ dyed not for them. 11.
Betwixt delaying to perform the conditions of the new Covenant. This is not
threatened with death. 2. And final nonperformance. This is proper violation
of the Covenant, and a sin that leaves no hope of recovery. 12. Betwixt paying
the proper debt of obedience (as Christ did himself,) or of suffering (as the
damned do.) 2. And satisfying for non-payment; as Christ did for us. 13 Betwixt
repealing the Law or Covenant (which is not done) 2. And relaxing it or
dispensing with it (which is done.) 14. Betwixt relaxation or dispensation in
the proper subject and circumstances of the Penalty. This is done in removing
it from us to Christ. 2. And dispencing with the Penalty it self. This is not
done; for Christ did bear it. 15. Betwixt the change of the Law: 2. And of the
sinners relation to the Law. 16. Betwixt the Laws forbidding and condemning
the sin: (so it does still.) 2. And its condemning the sinner: (So it does not
to the justified, because Christ has born the curse.) 17. Betwixt the Precepts
as abstracted from the Covenant terms, (which really they are not at all) 2.
And as belonging to the several Covenants. 18. Betwixt perfection of Holiness
(which is a quality.) This is not in this life. 2. And Perfection of
Righteousness, (which is a Relation:) This is perfect, or none at all. 19.
Betwixt recalling the Fact, or the evil of the Fact, or its desert of
punishment. These are never done, nor are possible. 2. And removing the
duenesse of punishment from the Offender. This is done. 20. Betwixt Pardon and
Justification Condiditionall, which is an immediate effect of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, or rather of the making of the new Covenant. 2. And Pardon and
Justification Absolute, when we have performed all the Conditions. 21. Betwixt
Conditional Pardon and Justification, which is only Potentiall. (Such is that
which immediately follows the enacting of the new Covenant to men before
Faith, or before they have sinned.) 2. And Conditional Justification, which is
actual, and of which the person has true possession, such is our Justification
after Faith, till the last Judgment, which is ours actually, but yet upon
condition of perseverance in Faith and sincere Obedience. 22. Betwixt Pardon
and Justification, as they are Immanent Acts in God, (improperly, and without
Scripture, called Pardon or Justification.) 2. And Pardon and Justification, as
they are Transient Acts, performed by the Gospell-Promise as Gods Instrument.
This is the true Scripture Justification. 23. Betwixt Justification in Title
and Sense of Law, (which is in this Life.) 2. And Justification in sentence of
the Judge, (which is at the last Judgment.) 24. Betwixt justifying us against
a true Accusation, (as of breaking the Law.) Thus Christ justifies us; and
here it is that we must plead his Safaction. 2. And justifying us against a
false Accusation, (as of not performing the Conditions of the Gospel.) Here we
must plead not guilty, and not plead the Satisfaction of Christ. 25. Betwixt
the Accusation of the Law, (from Christ does justify believers.) 2. And the
Accusation of the Gospel or new Covenant, for not per, forming its Conditions
at all, (from which no man can be justified, and for which there is no
sacrifice.) 26. Betwixt those Acts which recover us to the state of Relation
which we fell from; that is, Pardon, Reconciliation and Justification. 2. And
those which advance us to a far higher state, that is, Adoption and Union with
Christ. 27. Betwixt our first Possession of Justification, which is upon our
contract with Christ or mere Faith.) 2. And the Confirmation, Continuation and
Accomplishment of it, (whose Condition is also sincere Obedience and
Perseverance.) 28. Betwixt the great summary duty of the Gospel to which the
rest are reducible: which is Faith. 2. And the Condition fully expressed in all
its parts, where of Faith is the Epitome. 29. Betwixt the word, Faith, as it is
taken Physically, and for some one single Act: 2. And as it is taken Morally,
Politically and Theologically here; for the receiving of Christ with the whole
soul. 30. Betwixt the accepting of Christ as a Savior only, (which is no true
Faith, nor can justify.) 2. And Accepting him for Lord also (which is true
Justifying Faith.) 31. Betwixt the foresaid Receiving of Christ himself in his
offices (which is the Act that Justifies:) 2. And Receiving his Promises and
Benefits, (a consequent of the former:) Or betwixt accepting him for
Justification; 2. And believing that we are justified. 32. Betwixt the
Metaphysicall Truth of our Faith: 2. And the Moral Truth. 33. Betwixt the
Nature of the Act of Faith, which justifies, or its Aptitude for its office
(which is, its receiving Christ: 2. And the proper formal Reason of its
Justifying power, (which is, because it is the Condition upon which God will
give us Christ's Righteousness.) 34. Betwixt Works of the Law (which is perfect
Obedience: 2. And Works of the Gospel Covenant (which is Faith and sincere
Obedience to Christ that bought us.) 35. Betwixt Works of the Gospel used as
Works of the Gospel, i.e. in subordination to Christ, as Conditions of our
full Justification and Salvation by him. 2. And Works commanded in the Gospel
used a-Works of the Law, or to legal ends, viz. to make up in whole or in part
our proper legal Righteousness; and so in opposition to Christ's Righteousness,
or in coordination with it. In the first sense they are necessary to Salvation:
In the second, Damnable. 36. Betwixt receiving Christ and loving him as
Redeemer (which is the Condition it self:) 2. And taking the Lord for our God
and chief Good, and loving him accordingly; Which is still employed in the
Covenant as its End and Perfection; And so as more excellent then the proper
Conditions of the Covenant.


Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace; Good Will toward men, Luke
2. 14. Postscript.
WHereas there is in this Book an intimation of something which I have written
of Universal Redemption, Understand, that I am writing indeed a few pages on
that subject only by way of Explication, as an Essay for the Reconciling of
the great differences in the Church thereabouts: But being hindered by
continual sickness, and also observing how many lately are set a work on the
same subject, (as Whitfield, Stalham, How, Owen, and some men of note that I
hear are now upon it,) I shall a while forbear, to see if something may come
forth, which may make my endeavor in this kind useless, and save me the
labor: Which if it come not to pass, you shall shortly have it, if God will
enable me.

Farewell.
AN APPENDIX to the foregoing TREATISE; BEING An Answer to the Objections of a
Friend concerning some Points therein contained. And at his own Desire annexed
for the sake of others that may have the same thoughts.

Zanchius in Philip. 3. 13. What can be more pernicious to a Student yea to a
Teacher, then to think that he knows all things, and no knowledge can be
wanting in him; For being once puffed up with this false opinion, he will
profit no more. The same is much truer in Christian Religion, and in the
Knowledge of Christ. Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation,
through Faith in his blood, for Remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. READER,
THe disorder of the Interrogations and Objections, which extorted from me this
whole Tractate by pieces one after another, has caused me (an unfeigned lover
of method) to give thee such a disorderly, immethodicall Miscellany. Also the
quality of these Objections has occasioned me to answer many things trivial,
whilst I know more difficult and weighty points are overlooked: these things
need no excuse; but this information; That I was to follow and not to lead: and
that I write only for those who know less than my self; if thou know more,
thank God, and join with me for the instruction of the ignorant, whose
information, reformation, and salvation, and thereby Gods glory, is the top of
my ambition.

R. B.

AN ANSWER to some Objections and Questions OF One that perused this small
TRACTATE before it went to the Press.
The sum of the Objections is as follows.
1. IT seems strange to me, that you make the death which the first Covenant
did threaten to be only in the everlasting suffering of soul, separated from
the body and that the body should de turned to earth, and suffer no more but
the pains of death; and consequently not whole man, but only part of him should
de damned?

2. Though you seem to take in the Active Righteousness of Christ with the
Passive into the work of Justification, yet it is on such grounds, as that you
do in the main agree with them who are for the Passive Righteousness alone,
against the stream of Orthodox Divines?

3. I pray you clear to me a little more fully in what sense you mean, that no
sin but final unbelief is a breach or violation of the new Covenant, and how
you can make it good, that temporary unbelief, and gross sin is no violation of
it, seeing We Covenant against these?

4. Whether it will not follow from this doctrine of yours that the new
covenant is never violated by any; for the regenerate do never finally and
totally renounce Christ, and so they violate it not; and the unregenerate were
never truly in covenant, and therefore cannot be said to violate the Covenant
which they never made?

5. How you will make it appear, that the new Covenant is not made with Christ
only?

6. How make you Faith and Repentance to be ^^^ditions of the Covenant on our
part, seeing the bestowing of them is part of the condition on Gods part: Can
they be our conditions and Gods too?

7. Seeing God has promised us these which you call conditions, is not the
Covenant therefore rather absolute, and more properly a promise?

8. In making a general Covenant to all, you bring wicked men under promise,
whereas all the promises are Yea and Amen in Christ, and so belong only to
those in Christ: I find no promise in Scripture made to a wicked man.

9. May you not else as well give the seals to wicked men as the Covenant?
Except you will evade as Mr Blake. and say the Sacrament seals but
conditionally; and then let all come that will.

10. How can you make it appear, that Do this and live is not the proper voice
of the Covenant of Works? Or that according to the new Covenant we must act for
life, and not only from life; or that a man may make his attaining of life the
end of his work, and not rather obey only out of thankfulness and love?

11. Why do you single out the book called, The marrow of modern Divinity, to
oppose in this point?

12. Seeing you make faith and covenanting with Christ to be the same thing; do
you not make him to be no real Christian that never so covenanted? and
consequently him to be no visible Christian who never professed such a
Covenant? and so you bring in a greater necessity of public covenanting, then
those who are for Church-making Covenants?

13. Do you not go against the stream af all Divines, in denying the proper act
of Faith as it justifies, to be either Recumbency, Affiance, Persuasion, or
Assurance? but placing it in Consent or Acceptance?

14. Do you not go against the stream of all Divines, in making the Acceptance
of Christ for Lord, to be as properly a justifying act as the accepting him for
Savior, and all that you may lay a ground work for Justification by Gospel
obedience or Works; so do you also in making the Acceptance of Christ's Person
and Offices to be the justifying act, and not the receiving of his
Righteousness and of pardon?

16. How can you reconcile your Justification by Works with that of Romans 3. 24,
and 4. 4, 5, 6?

11. I desire some satisfaction in that which Maccovius, and Mr owen oppose in
the places which I mentioned.

THE ANSWER.
TO the first Objection about the death threatened in the first Covenant, I
answer: 1. I told you I was not peremptory in my opinion, but inclined to it,
for want of a better. 2. I told you, that the Objections seem more strong which
are against all the rest, and therefore I was constrained to make choice of
this, to avoid greater absurdities, then that which you object. For, 1. If you
say that Adam should have gone quick to Hell, you contradict many Scriptures,
which make our temporal death to be the wages of sin. 2. If you say that He
should have dyed, and rose again to torment: 1. What Scripture says so? 2.
When should He have risen? 3. You contradict many Scriptures, which make Christ
the Mediator, the only procurer of the Resurrection. 3. If you say He should
have lived in perpetual misery on earth, then you dash on the same Rock with
the first opinion. 4. If you say, He should have dyed only a temporal death,
and his soul be annihilated, then 1. you make Christ to have redeemed us only
from the grave, and not from hell, contrary to 1 These. 1. 10. Who has
delivered us from the wrath to come. 2. You make not hell, but only temporal
death, to be due too, or deserved by the sins of believers, seeing the Gospel
only (according to this opinion) should threaten eternal death, and not the
Law; but the Gospel threateneth it to none but unbelievers. You might easily
have spared me this labor, and gathered all this Answer from the place in the
book where I handled it; but because other Readers may need as many words as
you, I grudg not my pains.

TO your second Objection about Christ's active and passive Righteousness; You
should have overthrown my grounds, and not only urge my going against the
stream of Divines: As I take it for no honor to be the first inventing a new
opinion in Religion, so neither to be the last in embracing the truth: I never
thought that my faith must follow the major vote; I value Divines also by
weight, and not by number; perhaps I may think that one Pareus, Piscator,
Scultetus, Alstedius, Capellus, Gataker, or Bradshaw, is of more authority then
many Writers and Readers: View their Writings, and answer their Arguments, and
then judge.

TO your third, about the violation of the Covenant, I shall willingly clear my
meaning to you as well as I can, though I thought what is said had cleared it.
The 34 Aphorism (which is it you object against) does thus far explain it, 1.
That I speak of Gods Covenant of Grace only, or his new Law, containing the
terms on which men live or dye. 2. That by Violation I mean the breaking or
nonperformance of its conditions, or such a violation as brings the offender
under the threatening of it, and so makes the penalty of that Covenant breaking
due to him. 3. I there tell you, that the new Covenant may be neglected long,
and sinned against objectively, and Christ's Commands may be broken, when yet
the Covenant is not so violated. The Tenor of the Covenant me-think should put
you quite out of doubt of all this, which is He that believes shall be saved,
and he that believes not shall be damned. The unbelief and rebellion against
Christ, which the godly were guilty of before believing, is a neglect or
refusal of the Covenant; and I acknowledge that all that while they were in a
damnable state, that is, in a state wherein they should have been damned, if
they had so dyed; for then their unbelief had been final.

But your doubt may be, whether they did not deserve damnation while they were
in their unbelief for resisting Grace?

I answer you as before: 1. I look upon no punishment as deserved, in sensu
forensi, in the sense of the Law, but what is threatened by that Law: Now you
may easily resolve the Question your self, Whether the new Covenant do threaten
damnation to that their unbelief? If they believe not at all before death, it
pronounces them condemned, otherwise not. 2. Yet might they in this following
sense be said to deserve the great condemnation before they obeyed the Gospel,
viz. as their unbelief is that sin for which the Gospel condemns men,
wanting nothing but the circumstance of finality or continuance to have made
them the proper subjects of the curse; and it was no thanks to them that it
proved not final; for God did make them no promise of one hour of time and
patience, and therefore it was merely his mercy in not cutting them off, which
made their unbelief not to be final and damning: Many a man that lived not
half so long in rebellion, did yet prove a final condemned rebel; so that
they did deserve, that God in the time of their infidelity should have cut off
their lives, and so have let their infidelity be their destruction. But
supposing that God would not so cut them off, and so their unbelief should not
be final, (which is the case,) and so they are condemned or threatened by none
but the first Law or Covenant which Christ did satisfy: But as for the second
Law or Covenant it condemns them not, so that Christ need not bear the
condemnation of that Covenant for them; for He does not fetch any man from
under the condemning sentence of it, but only in rich mercy to his chosen: He
does prevent their running into that condemnation, partly by bearing with them
in patience, and continuing their lives, (for into the hands of the purchaser
are they wholly committed,) and partly by prevailing with them to come in to
him by the efficacy of his Word and Spirit; so that considering them as
unbelievers who were to be converted, and so they were neither the proper
subjects of the Promise of the new Covenant, nor of the threatening and
condemnation of it: Promise they had none, but conditional, such as they had
not received, and so were never the better for; and so they were without the
covenant, and without hope, and without God, and strangers to all the
privileges of the Saints: But yet not those to whom the Law or Covenant says,
You shall surely dye, except they had been such as should never have believed:
And for that wrath (Ephesians. 2. 3.) which they were children of by nature, it must
needs be only the wrath or curse of the first violated Covenant, and not the
wrath or curse of the second; for no man is by nature a child of that.

But I perceive you think it a strange saying, That a man by the greatest,
grossest actual sin may not be said to violate this Covenant, so as to incur
its curse, but only for final unbelief: Do not the godly sometimes break
Covenant with Christ?

Answ. I have two things to say to the helping of your right understanding in
this, viz. a twofold distinction to mind you of, which you seem to forget. 1.
Either the gross sins, which you speak of, are such as may stand with sincerity
of heart, or such as cannot: If they be sins of really godly men, then
certainly they violate not the Covenant, so as to make them the subjects of its
curse: For the Covenant says not, He that sins shall be damned; nor he that
commits this, or that great sin, shall be damned: But, he that believes not
shall be damned.

Object. But is not this Antinomianism, which you so detest? Is it not said,
that no whoremonger, or unclean person, or covetous person, etc. shall enter
into the Kingdom of Christ, or of God? Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 15. and Ephesians. 5. 5.
that for these things sake comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience?

Answ. I pray you remember that I have already proved, that Faith is the
consenting to Christ's Dominion and Government over us; or the accepting of him
for our Lord, that we may obey him, as well as for our Savior, that we may
have affiance in him: And consequently Unbelief (in this large sense in which
the Gospel uses it in opposition to that faith which is the condition of the
Covenant) contains in it all Rebellion against Christ's Government: I could
prove this to you out of many plain Scriptures, but the plainness of it may
spare me that labor: Even in the Text objected, the word translated [Children
of disobedience] does signify both Unbelief and Disobedience; or obstinate,
unperswadeable men, that will not be persuaded to believe and obey: 2 Thessalonians. 1.
8. Christ shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance to them that obey not
his Gospel: Certainly those are unbeleevers. Or if you will have it plainly in
Christ's own words, what is the damning sin opposed to Faith, see it in Luke 19.
27. But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither, and slay them before me. It is not then for every act of
those forementioned sins that the everlasting wrath of God does come upon men;
for then what should become of David, Noah, Lot, Mary Magdalen, and all of us?
But it is for such sins as do prove and proceed from a considerate wilful
refusal of Christ's Government, or an unwillingness that he should reign over
us: and that not every degree of unwillingness, but a prevailing degree, from
whence a man may be said to be one that would not have Christ reign, etc.
Because this is real unbelief it self, as opposite to that Faith which is the
condition of Life, which is the receiving of Christ for Lord as well as Savior.

Yet it is true, that temporal judgments may befall us for particular sins;
as also, that each particular sin does deserve the eternal wrath which the
first Covenant does denounce; but not (in a Law-sence) that which is denounced
in the second Covenant. Every great fault which a subject commits against
his Prince, is not capital, or high Treason. Every fault or disobedient act of
a Wife against her Husband does not break the Marriage Covenant, nor loose the
bond: but only the sin of Adultery (which is the taking of another to the
marriage bed, or the choosing of another husband (and actual forsaking the
Husband, or renouncing him.

And you need not to fear lest this doctrine be guilty of Antinomianism: For
their Error (which many of their adversaries also are guilty of) lies here;
That not understanding, that receiving Christ as Lord is an essential act of
justifying Faith, nor that the refusal of his Government is an essential part
of damning unbelief, they do thereupon acknowledge no condition of Life, but
bare Belief in the narrowest sense; that is, either Belief of Pardon, and
Justification, and Reconciliation, or Affiance in Christ for it: so also they
acknowledge no proper damning sin, but unbelief in that strict sense as is
opposite to this faith; that is the not believing in Christ as a Savior.

And upon the common grounds who can choose but say as they, that neither
drunkenness, nor murder, nor any sin, but that unbelief does damn men, except
he will say that every sin does; and so set up the Covenant of Works, and deny
his very Christianity, by making Christ to dye in vain: so great are the
inconveniences that follow the ignorance of this one point, That justifying
faith is the accepting of Christ for Lord and Savior; and that sincere
obedience to him that bought us, is part of the Condition of the new Covenant.

I have been sorry to hear some able Divines, in their confessions of sin,
acknowledging their frequent violation of this Covenant; yea, that in every
sinful thought, word or deed they break the Covenant which they made in
Baptism. Did ever any sober man make such a Covenant with Christ, as to promise
him never to sin against him? Or does Christ call us to such a Covenant? Does
his Law threaten, or did we in our Covenant consent, that we should be
condemned if ever we committed a gross sin? I conclude therefore, that those
sins which do consist with true faith, can be no breaches of the Covenant of
Grace; For else (Faith being the condition) we should both keep it, and break
it, at the same time.

2. But all the doubt is about the sins which are inconsistent with Faith.
Those are either, 1. Disobedience to the Law of Works; (but that cannot violate
the Covenant of Grace as such.) 2. Or else Refusal of Christ by Rebellion and
Unbelief privative,) for of negative unbelief I will not speak:) And that
Refusal is either, 1. Temporary, (of that I have spoken already:) Or, 2.
Final (and that I acknowledge is the violation of the Covenant.)

Perhaps you will object, That the sin against the Holy Ghost also is a damning
sin, and so a breach of the Covenant. To which I answer, Final Unbelief is the
Genus, and has under it these three sorts. 1. Ordinary final Unbelief, viz.
against Ordinary means. 2. The sin against the Holy Ghost. 3. Total Apostasy:
All these are unpardonable sins.

I have in another Treatise adventured to tell you my judgment concerning the
sin against the Holy Ghost viz. That it is when a man will not believe in
Christ notwithstanding all the testimonial miracles of the Holy Ghost, which
he is convinced de facto were wrought, but yet denies the validity of their
Testimony. This is the unpardonable unbelief, because uncureable: for it is the
last or greatest Testimony which Christ will afford to convince the unbeleeving
world; and therefore he that deliberately refuses this and will not be
convinced by it, is left by God as a hopeless wretch. So that the sin against
the Holy Ghost is but a sort of final unbelief. Lay by your prejudice against
the singularity of this interpretation, and exactly consider what the occasion
of Christ's mentioning this sin was, and what was the sin which those Pharisees
did commit, and then judge.

Lastly, For the sin of total Apostasy, I confess it is the most proper
violation of the Covenant, not only as it is a Law and Covenant offered, but
also as it is a Covenant entered and accepted. But it is unbelief which
Apostates do fall to; for it is only an explicit or implicit renouncing of
Christ either as Lord or Savior, or both, which is the unpardonable sin of
Apostasy, which is called falling away (that is, from Christ and the Covenant,)
and crucifying the Son of God afresh, and putting him to open shame, Heb. 6. 6.
And which is called Heb. 10. 26, 29. sinning wilfully, that is, considerate,
resolved rejecting Christ, or refusing his Government,) and so called, treading
under foot the Son of God, and counting the blood of the Covenant, vvherevvith
they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and doing despite to the Spirit of
Grace. As the nature of this Apostasy lies in returning to infidelity, so
being Total it is always also Final; God having in his just Judgment
resolved to withold from all such the grace that should recover them; and so
this is a sort of final unbelief.

A second distinction, which I must here mind you of, is, betwixt 1. the main
Covenant of Grace: and 2. Particular, subordinate, inferior Covenants, which
may be made between God and a believer. The former is not violated, but as I
have showed before: The latter is ordinarily broken by us. If any man make a
vow like Readiness or Ieptha's, he may break it possibly, and not be damned, but
recover by repentance. If in your sickness, or other affliction, or at
Sacrament, or on days of Humiliation, or Thanksgiving, you should Covenant
with God to forsake such a sin, or to perform such a duty, to mend your lives,
to be more holy and heavenly, etc. this Covenant you may perhaps break, and yet
recover. And of such Covenants it is that I mean, when in confession I do
bewail my Covenant Breaking with Christ, and not of the main Covenant of Grace;
for then I should confess my self a total irrecoverable Apostate. The Covenant
which ought to be made with Christ in Baptism, and which Baptism is the
professing sign and seal of, is the main Covenant of Grace; Therefore is there
no use for re-baptizing, because such Apostasy is an unrecoverable sin.

So you see what Covenant it is that the godly break, and what breach it is
that they use to confess.

To the fourth Objection.
YOur fourth Objection [that from this doctrine it will follow, that the
Covenant is never broken] is easily answered. 1. I think it is true, that the
regenerate do never break the Covenant: But yet the breach in it self, and in
respect of our strength is more then possible; and the controversy de eventu
will hold much dispute. Austin seems to me to be of this opinion, That there
are some effectually called that yet may fall away, but the elect cannot; so
that he distinguishes of calling according to purpose or election, (and that
he thinks cannot be lost.) and calling not following election, (which he
thinks may be lost,) so that he places not the difference in the calling,
but in the decree. I do not recite this as assenting to it; nor yet can I
assent to them, who make the very nature of Grace to be immortal, and from
thence do argue the certainty of perseverance. I think to be naturally
Immortal is Gods Prerogative, and properly imcommunicable to any creature:
Even Angels, and souls of men are Immortal only from the will and continued
sustentation of God; and if God did withdraw his hand, and not continually
uphold it, the whole Creation would fall to nothing, much more the quality of
holiness in the soul: To subsist of himself without continual influx from
another, is proper to God, the first, natural, necessary, absolute,
Independent Being: Yet I acknowledge, that when God will perpetuate any Being,
he fitteth the nature of it accordingly, and makes it more simple, pure,
spiritual, and less subject to corruption. But yet to say, that therefore it
is a Nature Immortal, or that cannot dye, I think improper: But I know
Philosophers and Divines do think otherwise, and therefore I do dissent, q^asi
coactus and petita venia. 2. But whether the Regenerate may break the Covenant
or not, certain I am the unregenerate may and do: And whereas you object, [That
they were never in Covenant, and therefore cannot be said to break it:] I must
desire you, besides the former distinctions, to remember these two more. 1.
Betwixt the Covenant as promulgate, and only offered on Gods part. 2. And the
Covenant as accepted and entered by the sinner. The former is most properly
called, The Law of Christ, or new Law, as containing the conditions of our
salvation or damnation; yet it is properly also and frequently in Scripture
called a Covenant, (though not in so full a sense as the latter,) because it
contains the substance or matter of the Covenant, and expresses Gods
consent, so we deny not ours; and also because the great prevailing part in it
is Mercy and promise, and the Duty so small and light in comparison of the said
Mercy, that in Reason there should be no Question of our performance: And so
Mercy obscuring or prevailing against Judgment, it is more frequenly called a
Covenant and Gospel then a Law; yet a Law also most properly it is, and often so
called. Now then that the Covenant in this sense may be broken, is no question:
God has said, He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not
shall be damned. Does not he that never believes break this Law or Covenant,
and incur the penalty? So that men that never accept the Covenant, do thus
break it by their refusal, and so perish.

2. You must distinguish betwixt 1. The Covenant accepted heartily and
sincerely, 2. Or nor heartily and sincerely: And so I answer you, Though
unregenerate men did never sincerely covenant with Christ, and so are not in
Covenant with him as the Saints are, yet they do usually Covenant with him,
both with their mouths, by solemn profession, acknowledging and owning him as
their Lord and Savior, and also by their external submitting to his Worship
and Ordinances, and taking the seals of the Covenant, and also in some kind
they do it from their hearts, (though not in sincerity.) Either they do it 1.
Rashly, and not Deliberately; Or 2. They do it out of fear, as a man that is in
the hands of a conquering enemy, that must yield to his will to prevent a worse
inconvenience, though he accounts it an evil which he is forced to, and had
rather be free if he might, and does covenant, but with a forced will, partly
willing (to avoid greater misery) and partly unwilling. 3. Or else they keep
secret reservations in their hearts, intending (as a man that as aforesaid
covenanteth with the conqueror,) to break away as soon as they can, or at
least to go no further in their obedience then will stand with their wordly
happiness or hopes (though these reservations be not expressed by them in their
Covenant.) 4. Or else they mistake Christ, and the nature of his Covenant,
thinking he is a Master that will let them please the flesh, and enjoy the
world and sin, and understand not what that Faith and Holiness is which his
Covenant does require, and so they are baptized into they know not what, and
subscribe to they know not what, and give up their names to they know not who;
and then when at last they find their mistake, they repent of the bargain and
break the Covenat or else never discerning their mistake, they break the
Covenant while they think that they keep it; or if they keep their own, they
break Christ's. All these ways men may enter Covenant with Christ, but not
sincerely; for sincere covenanting must be 1. Upon knowledge of the nature,
ends and conditions of the Covenant, though they may possibly be ignorant of
several Accidentals about the Covenant, yet not of these Essentials, if they
do it sincerely. 2. They must Covenant deliberately, and not in a fit of
passion, or rashly.

3. They must do it seriously, and not dissemblingly or slightly. 4. They must
do it freely and heartily, and not through mere constraint and fear. 5. They
must do it entirely, and with resolution to perform the Covenant which they
make and not with Reservations, giving themselves to Christ by the halves, or
reserving a purpose to maintain their fleshly interests. 6. And they must
especially take Christ alone, and not join others in office with him, but
renounce all happiness save what is by him, and all Government and Salvation
from any which is not in direct subordination to him. Thus you see that there
is a great difference betwixt covenanting sincerely, and covenanting in
hypocrisy and formality; and so betwixt Faith and Faith. Which I have opened
to you the more largely, because I forgot to do it when I explained the
Definition of Faith in that Aphorism, whereto you may annex it.

I conclude then, that multitudes of unregenerate men are yet in Covenant with
Christ, though not as the Saints in sincere Covenanting, which I further prove
to you thus: Those that are in Christ, are also in Covenant with Christ: But
the unregenerate are in Christ; therefore, etc. That they are in Christ is
plain, in Ioh. 15. 2, 6. There are branches in Christ not bearing fruit, which
are cut off, and cast away. So Heb. 10. 29, 30. They are sanctified by the
blood of the Covenant, and therefore they were in covenant in some sort. I
suppose it would be but lost labor to recite all those Scriptures which
expressly mention wicked men's entering into Covenant with God, and God with
them, and their Covenant Breaking charged on them: you cannot be ignorant of
these. Wherefore you see, that it is a common sin to violate the
Gospell-Covenant.

To the fifth Objection.
YOur fifth is a mere demand of my proof, That Christ is not the only person
with whom God the Father enters Covenant. Which Question I confess I am
ashamed to answer: Nor can I tell what to say to you, but [Read the Scripture]
Does not the whole scope of it mention Gods Covenants with man? Turn over your
whole Bible, and see whether it speak more of covenanting with Christ, or with
us? Nor can I imagine what should make you question this, except it be because
Mr Saltmarsh (or some such other) does deny it. How could Christ be the
Mediator of the Covenant, if it were to himself, and not to us, that the
Covenant were made? I know Dr Preston and other orthodox Divines do affirm,
That the Covenant is made primarily with Christ, and then with us: But I
confess I scarce relish that form of speech: For it seems to speak of one and
the same Covenant; and then I cannot understand how it can be true. For is this
Covenant made with Christ? [Beleeve in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved:
and if thou believe not, thou shall be damned?] This is the Covenant that is
made with us: and who dare say, that this is made with Christ; Or is this
Covenant made to Christ? [I will take the hard hearts our of their bodies, and
give them he arts of flesh, etc. I will be merciful to their transgressions,
and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more?] Had Christ, think you,
a hard heart to cure? I know some think the latter* clause belongs to him
first, and so to us; viz. as he was a sinner by imputation, and so had our
transgressions upon him: but very ignorantly: For was God merciful to him
concerning the debt? Did he not deall with him in rigorous Justice? and upon
the terms of the first severer Covenant? and make him pay the uttermost
farthing? Sure the Covenant, whose curse Christ did bear, did know no mercy to
transgressors.

Again, the Covenant is also a Law, and Christ himself is styled the Lawgiver;
therefore can he not be under the Law, or under the Covenant: He is not King
and Subject too. Moreover (as I said before) he is the Mediator, and therefore
not he to whom the Covenant is made. Perhaps you will say, was not Moses both?
To which I answer?: 1. Moses was but a Typical improper Mediator. 2. Moses was
in another respect a Subject to the Law whereof he himself was the Mediator; as
he was one that had a soul and body to save, or lose, upon the same terms with
the rest of the people: But it was not so with our Lord Jesus; He was only a
Mediator, as being a middle Person betwixt the offended Majesty, and the
offending Subjects: But Moses was one of the offending Subjects, chosen out to
supply the place of a true Mediator, as his Type. So that though Moses was both
Mediator, and also a Subject to that Law and Covenant; yet it is not so with
Christ. But the words, and tenor of the Covenant it self, are so plain an
Argument, that I need to say no more. Yet do I acknowledge that there are
several Promises in the Scriptures made only to Christ: As That he shall see
of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied: and by his knowledge justify
many, Isai. 53. 10, 11. That the Heathen shall be given for his inheritance,
and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession, etc. Psa. 2. But 1. These
not be the Covenant made with us. 2. And for my part, I take it not to be any
part of Gods Legislative Will, as it refers to Christ, but only as it
belongs to us, as a prophecy, what God would do in the advancing of Christ
and his Kingdom, and so of us; and so has partly the nature of a promise to us
also. For that which is commonly called the Covenant betwixt the Father and the
Son, is part of Gods purpose or decree, rather then of his Law. The Covenant
betwixt the Father and Son was from Eternity: So is not the Law, or Covenant
written. The Divine Nature, which undertook the Mediatorship, could not be
subject to Laws, or proper Covenants; Christ had no need of engagement from the
Father by word or writing for his encouragement or confirmation. So that all
the Promises to Christ in Scripture* are either mere Prophesies or do also
intimate some Promise to the Church; and so are written for our sakes, and also
for the spreading of the Meditators Glory; but not for proper Covenant ends
betwixt the Father and him. And this interpretation Christ himself has taught
me, John 12. 28. 30. Christ prays to the Father to glorify his Name viz. in
the Sons Death and Resurrection; He is answered by a voice from Heaven, I have
glorified it, and will glorify it: Christ tells the people that stood by,
That this voice came not because of him, but for their sakes.

I conclude therefore, That the Gospell-Covenant, properly and usually, so
called, is made betwixt God and man by the means of a Mediator, and so
delivered to us in the hands of a Mediator; and may also fitly be said to be
betwixt Christ and us: But not properly that it is betwixt the Father and the
Son: Much less is the Son the only person covenanted with. God does indeed give
up the World to Christ; and more especially the Elect to be saved by him: But
these are not the work of a written or temporary Covenant, but of an eternal
Decree.

To the sixth and seventh Objections.
THe same Answer will serve to your sixth and seventh Questions; viz. How Faith
and Repentance are both promised of God, and required of us; Can they be his
conditions and ours too? And then whether the new Covenant be not absolute?

I told you before that the Scripture mentions two sorts of Covenants,
absolute and conditional. The Absolute Covenant is found in Ezekiel. 11. 17, 18.
Ier. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. Ier. 32, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. and mentioned by the
Apostle in Heb. 8. 10. Concerning this Covenant you must understand, that as in
the first promise of it here by the Prophets, it seems to be made to the
particular Nation of the Jews, and is joined with the promise of their
temporal Restoration; so some do question, whether it be yet to them
fulfilled? or whether it be not a promise of some extraordinary permanent
happiness which they shall receive at their last and great deliverance by the
Messiah? (whether by coming personally to reign among them, or not, I now
dispute not.) Yet as the Apostle in Heb. 8. 8, 9. does extend it further then
to the Jews, so must we; but whether the Apostle mention it as an absolute
promise, is a great doubt; or whether he only respect the spirituallity of the
benefits, and so oppose the writing of the Law in our hearts, (which the new
Covenant promises) to the writing of it in stone, and revealing mercy in the
dark way of Ceremonies? But yet, for my part, I think you may call it an
absolute Promise: But then understand, that this is not the new Law or Covenant
made with mankind, revealing to them their duties, and the terms on which they
must live or dye: This is made to the elect only; this speaks nothing of
duty: No man can have any comfort by this Covenant, till it be performed to
him, and till he have received the promised benefits; for no man till then can
tell whether it be made for him, or not: It is made to the elect only; and no
man can know himself to be elect, till he be sanctified, and when he is
sanctified this promise is fulfilled; therefore the benefits of this promise are
not to be received by Faith: for Faith is part of the promised Good, as it is
contained in a new and a soft heart seminally; and therefore to receive this
promise by Faith, were to believe, that we may receive grace and power to
believe, then which what can be more absurd: No man therefore can say
beforehand, that he shall have a new and soft heart, because God has promised
it; for he cannot know that it is promised to him: So that I conclude, that
this is most properly but a prophecy what God will do, de eventu, as it has
reference to the parties on whom it shall be fulfilled, and so is the revealed
part of Gods purposing Will, and belongs not at all to his Preceptive or
Legislative Will, by which he does govern, and will judge the world: But as it
is revealed to the Church visible in general, and so in regard of the subject
is indefinite, intended only to reveall the quality and spiritual excellency
of the Mercy of the New Covenant procured by Christ, that so Christ may be
honored, and men drawn to seek after, and entertain this precious Covenant,
and not to stick to the old imperfect Dispensation; In this sense it belongs
to Gods Legislative Will: And in this sense I think it is that the Apostle to
the Hebrews does recite it; and not in the former sense, as it does respect the
particular persons that shall have it fulfilled, and so is an absolute Covenant
to the unknown Elect.

But now the Covenant which is mentioned through the whole Gospel is of another
kind, He that believes, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be
damned. This is frequently and plainly expressed, and not so darkly as the
former: This is made to all the world, at least, who hear the Gospel: This is
the proper new Law and Covenant, by which men must be judged, to justification
or condemnation. This properly succeeds in the place of the first Covenant,
which says Do this and live: And this is it which I still mean, when I speak of
the new law or Covenant.

So that now I hope you can hence answer to both your own demands. To the 7.
you see there is a Covenant absolute, and a Covenant conditional; but the last
is the proper Gospel Covenant. To the 6. you see, that in the absolute
Covenant, or Prophecy, he promises faith and repentance (in promising his
Spirit, and a new heart) to the elect, who are we know not who. And in the
conditional proper Covenant he requires the same Faith and Repentance of us,
if we will be justified and saved. So that they are Gods part which he has
discovered that he will perform in one Covenant; and they are made our
conditions in another.

Neither is there the least show of a contradiction betwixt these: For in the
absolute Covenant he does not promise to make us Believe and and Repent against
our wills: Much less, that He, or Christ, shall Repent and Believe for us; and
so free us from the duty: But that he will give us new and soft hearts, that we
may do it our selves, and do it readily and willingly: which that we may do, he
commands and persuades us to it in the conditional Covenant: not bidding us
do it without his help; but directing us to the Father to draw us to the Son;
and to the Son, as without whom we can do nothing; and to the Spirit, as the
sanctifier of our hearts, and exciter of our Graces.

To the eighth Objection.
IN your eighth Question I observe several mistakes. 1. You observe not how
ill it agrees with the two former. For if the Covenant were only absolute,
then it can be made to none but wicked men: and indeed the absolute Covenant is
made to none other. Sure those that God does promise to bestow new hearts upon,
and soft hearts, have yet their old and hard hearts: (except it were meant of a
further degree, and not of the first saving Grace.) 2. And as the absolute' so
the great conditional Promise, Believe and be saved is also made to ungodly
men. Is not this spoken to Unbeleevers? Will you speak it to none but those who
believe already? Were none of those Jews ungodly, to whom Peter says Act. 2.
39. The Promise is made to you and to your children? But I have proved a little
before, that not only as it is a Covenant offered of God, but also as it is a
Covenant entered by them, even wicked men are within the Covenant.

2. Yet you say, that [you no where find any promise to a wicked man.] Why then
you have found but a few of the Scripture promises. I have showed you, that the
absolute promise of a new and soft heart is made to wicked men, and the great
conditional promise of the Gospel: Would you have particular examples? In
Genesis 4. 7. there is to Cain a conditional promise of acceptance, and the
donation of Superiority and Government. Genesis 9. 11, 12. There is a Covenant
betwixt God and every living Creature. Genesis 27. 39, 40. Isaac is Gods mouth in
blessing Esau: Were all the Israelites godly, to whom the Land of Canaan was
promised and given? 1 Samuel 10. 4, 5, 6, 7. There the Spirit of God and other
favors are promised to Saul. 1 King. 11. 31, 32, 33, 38, 39. There are
promises to Jeroboam. How many score places in the Psalms and Prophet, do
mention promises and Covenants of God to ungodly Israelites? If I should
instance in all the promises made to Ahab Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Darius, etc.
it would be tedious.

Object. But all these are rather Prophesies then promises. Answ. If that which
expresses the engaging of the word and Truth of God to bestow good upon a man
be not a Promise, I would you would tell me what is. Object. These predictions
do only declare what God will do, but give no title to the mercy as a
Promise does.

Answ. Did not God give Cain a title to his Superiority and Government, and the
Israelites Title to the Land of Promise? and so the rest.

Promises do give Title to the thing promised; 1. Either full and absolute: 2.
Or imperfect and conditional. In the first sense we have title both by an
ansolute promise, and by a Conditional Promise, when we have performed the
condition. In the latter sense it gives title to men that have not yet
performed the condition.

Object. But these things which are given to wicked men, are not good to them,
but evil; therefore it is not properly a promise. Answ. It is good in it self
and would be to them, but for their wilful abuse. Shall man's sins make Gods
promises and mercies of less value? God promisd that Christ should come to his
own, the Jews, ( Isa. 53. Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3.) and yet his own received him
not, Ioh. 1. 11. Shall we say therefore, that God threatened them with a Christ,
rather then promised him? He promised and gave them both Prophets and Apostles;
was it no promise or mercy, because they killed and persecuted them?

To conclude this, the Scripture expressly contradicts you opinion, Romans 9. 4.
To the Israelites was the Adoption and Glory and Covenants, and the service,
and the Promises: And even to them for whom Paul would have been accursed: So
Act. 2. 39. And Heb. 4. 1. Take heed lest a promise being made of entering into
his Rest, any of you seem to come short of it. Prove 1. 23. 24. 25. Christ
promises the foolish and the scorners, that he will pour out his Spirit to
them, if they will turn at his reproof. Amos 5. 4, 6. Seek the Lord, and your
soul shall live. Isa. 55. 6. 7. Seek the Lord while he may be found; Call upon
him while he is near: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy on him;
and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon.

Are not all these promises to wicked men?

Object. But when they return and repent, they are not wicked.

Answ. But is not this conditional promise made to them before they return?

Object. the Promise is only to Believers, therefore not to all.

Answ. Either you speak of the making, or of the fulfilling of it: It is
fulfilled only to Believers, but it is made and offered to all that hear it,
on condition of Believing, as is proved. Object. Believing is not the condition
of the promise, but only the qualification of the persons to whom it is made.
Answ. This Objection has more subtilty then sense: Is not Believing (in plain
English) a Duty required in the Promise by the free Promiser and Lawgiver, of
him to whom the Promise is made and sent, and that upon these terms, that if
he perform it, the thing promised shall be his, otherwise it shall not? And is
not this properly a condition required of the party if he will enjoy the thing
promised? When you say [It is a qualification of the person to whom the Promise
is made] you speak in the darkness of ambiguity: For 1. Do you mean it is a
qualification which he has before the Promise is made to him? If so, I have
proved the contrary already. Or is it his qualification afterward, so it is
indeed: But not of all to whom it is made; but of all to whom it shall be
fulfilled. Again, do you mean an habitual qualification or an Actual? I
doubt not, but you know it is the act of Faith which we dispute of: And what is
the difference betwixt such an active qualification, required on the terms
before mentioned, and a proper condition?

But I perceive that which you stick at, is, that the Promises are all Yea and
Amen in Christ, and therefore are made to none but those in Christ.

Answ. It will be long before you will prove the Consequence. They are made
only on the ground of Christ's undertaking, and he is the Mediator of them,
and in him they are sure. But does it therefore follow, that Christ dispenses
then to none but those that are in him? Wicked men have benefits by Christ,
even those that are not in him so much as by a visible profession: And why then
may they not have some promises? Yet I know that believers are often called in
Scripture, the Children, and Heirs of the Promise. But to understand this, you
must know, 1. That the Holy Ghost has chiefly the respect to the Thing
promised, and of that Believers are the only Heirs: If you also consider,
that he speaks chiefly of the great Promises of Reconciliation, Remission,
Sanctification, Adoption, glorification. 2. I told you before, that the promise
before we perform the Condition does give a remote, imperfect, loosable title
to the good promised: And so the wicked are children of promise. But the
Promise when we have performed the Condition, (as also the absolute promises)
does give an immediate, proper, certain Title to the good promised, so that a
man may say, it is mine: And thus only the faithful are the heirs of the
Promise: They only have a propriety in the spiritual and special Mercies
there promised. But a wicked Israelite may have propriety in his Inheritance by
virtue of Divine Promise and Donation. For Christ has led captivity captive,
and recived gifts for men, even for the Rebellious, that the Lord might dwell
among them, psalm. 68. 18.

To the 9. Objection.
YOur 9. Objection is, That if I make the Covenant to belong to wicked men, I
may as well give them the seals.

To which I answer you, 1. You must mean only the main Covenant of grace, and
not inferior promises and Covenants: For the Sacraments are only to seal to
the maine Covenant. 2. As you must remember I distinguished betwixt the
Covenant offered and the Covenant entered by mutual consent; so must you
distinguish accordingly betwixt two sorts of wicked men: 1. Open Infidels, who
never accepted and consented to the offered Covenant. 2. Those who have
consented and entered the Covenant, and listed their names in the roll of
Christ: but yet not sincerely unreservedly, entirely, as is necessary to
salvation. To the former of these you may not give the seals: For they are not
willing of them as such: And they are not to be forced upon any: Neither are
the seals useful till the accepting and entering of the Covenant.

But to the latter the seals are most properly to be given by the Minister,
except they do again renounce Christ by word or deed, or by some gross sin
do constrain us to suspend their enjoyment of such privileges while they are
under trial, and till they discover their repentance.

Quest. What do you take for such a renouncing of their Covenant?

Answ. 1. When they shall in plain terms renounce it, as Christians do that
turn Turks.

2. When they renounce or deny any fundamental Article of the Faith.

3. When they do (not through weakness, but) wilfully and obstinately refuse
to yield obedience to Christ; for this is a renouncing of their subjection to
him, which is an essential part of their Covenant and Faith; and it is a
renouncing of his kingly Office, and so a renouncing of Christ, when they say,
He shall not reign over us. And though such may acknowledge him in words, yet
in works they do deny him, being disobedient, and to every good work,
reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. If therefore you shall deny the seals to any man that
is thus in Covenant with Christ, before he do thus disclaim his Covenant, you
must do it at your peril. Therefore you must not undertake to be the Judge of
his sincerity in the Covenant, except he plainly discover that he is not
serious. Dare not you to assume Gods Prerogative of searching the heart, nor to
dispense Gods seals upon your conjectures of the probability or improbability
of men's sincerity. Neither must you deny the seals to them, for any smaller
sin then as aforesaid: For as every sin is not a breach of Covenant, so every
sin must not deny them the seals.

Object. Then we must not deny it to them for every gross sin neither; seeing
you affirm, that every gross sin breaks not Covenant.

Answ. Yet because he that lives in known gross sin, cannot consent to the
Kingly Office or Government of Christ over him, therefore we have just cause to
suspend the giving of the seals, and also of fellowship with him, while we try
whether he did it through weakness or wilfulness.

Ob. But how shall we know that?

Answ. Christ has lined us out the way: We must reprove him, and see whether
he will hear and reform; if he do not we must tell the Church, and so
admonish and shame him publicly: If he hear not the Church we are to account
him as a man without the Covenant, and so unfit for seals or communion.

Quest. But when shall I take him for one that will not hear the Church?

Answ. When he will not be persuaded to confess and bewail his sin, nor to
give over the practice of it.

So that I do considerately advise you (after long study of this point, and as
cautelous a proceeding as most have used) for you know my former Judgment, and
that I never administered the Sacrament, till within this year, and that I was
then invited to it by an eminent wonder of providence) I say, I advise you to
beware how you deny to men the seals, till you have tried with them this way
prescribed by Christ: Christ is free in entertaining, and so must we; Christ
puts away none, but them that put away themselves; and then does he call
after them as long as there is hope of hearing, as one that is grieved at their
destruction, and not delighted in the death of sinners, but had rather they
would return and live: And even thus must we do too. Laziness is the common
cause of separation: when we should go with words of pity and love, and with
tears beseech sinners to return to theit duty, and show them their danger; we
neglect all this, to save us the labor and the suffering that sometime follows
this duty; we will plead that they are no Church Members, and so not the
Brethren that we are bound to admonish, and so lazily separate from them, and
say as Cain, Am I my Brothers keeper? or as the man to Christ, who is my
Neighbor? And thus when we have made his sin our own by our silence, and
not reproving him then we excommunicate him for it out of our society and from
the Ordinances, and so judge our selves out of our own mouths. Or we separate
from him for the neglect of some duty, when we our selves have neglected both
to him and others, this great and excellent duty of faithful admonition. It is
more comfortable to recover one soul then to cast off many by separation.
Though I know that the avoiding communion with wilful offenders, who by this
due admonition will not be reclamed, is a most necessary and useful duty too.
But do not execute a man before he is judged; nor judge him before you have
heard him speak, and fully proved that obstinacy is added to his sin; (except
it be to suspend him while he is under this legal trial,) But perhaps you
will object, that we have no discipline established, and so no Authority to do
thus and the means are vain which cannot attain their end. To which I answer:
1. You have divine authority: 2. And may do as much as I press without a
Presbitery, First, you may admonish privately: Secondly, before witness:
Thirdly, you may bring your Congregation to this, that the parties offended,
may accuse them openly: (The Presbyterians deny not to the Congregation the
audience and cognizance of the Fact, but only the power of judicial
sentencing.) And here you may admonish them before all: Fourthly, if yet they
prove obstinate, you may by your Ministerial Authority; 1. Pronounce against
him by name what the Scripture pronounces against such sinners: particularly,
that he is unfit to be a Churchmember, as openly denying obedience to the
known Laws of Christ, 2. You may charge the people from Scripture to avoid
familiarity with him. 3. You may also acquaint the Magistrate with his duty, to
thrust him out, if he violently intrude into Communion, or disturb the
Ordinances. 4. You may forbear to deliver the Sacrament particularly to his
hands. 5. You may enter and publish your dissent and dislike, if he intrude,
and take it himself. All this I could most easily and beyond doubt prove your
duty as you are a Christian and a Minister. And if there be any more that a
Classis may do, yet do you do this in the mean time: only be sure you try all
means in private (if the fault be not in public) before you bring a man in
public: And be sure you do it in tenderness and love* and rather with wary
then passionate reproaches: And be sure that you do it only in case of
undeniable sins, and not in doubtful disputable Cases: And be sure that the
matter of Fact be undoubtedly proved: And that no man be suffered to traduce
another publicly in a wrong way: Or if he do, that he be brought to
acknowledgement. The word Excommunication comprizeth several Acts: Those
before mentioned belong to you as a Minister, and are part of your proper
Preaching declarative power, which you may perform by your Nuntiative
authority. The power of Classes and Synods (I think) does differ only
gradually, and not specifically from that of every minister. I am ashamed that
I have contrary to my first purpose, said so much of this unpleasing
controversy. But when you are next at leisure privately, I shall undertake to
prove all this to you from Scripture; and that the Keys are put by Christ into
the hands of every Minister singly: and that with sobriety and wisdom you may
thus name the offenders publicly, as all Scripture Ministers have been used
to do. And if you question whether our ordinary Congregations are true real
Churches, where such works may be managed. I shall prove that they are, by
giving you a better definition of a Church, then that which you gave me, and
then trying our Churches by it: In the mean time this is not matter to intermix
here.

BUt you cannot, it seems digest Mr. Blakes assertion, that the Sacraments do
seal but conditionally. Answer, I have not Mr. Blakes book by me, and therefore
how he explaineth himself I cannot tell; But I remember he has often said so in
conference with me. But let me tell you two or three things. 1. That I question
whether you well understand him. 2. Or whether you be able to confute it, as
thus to except against it, 3. That Mr. Blake is as truly conscientious whom he
admits as you.

But for the Controversy, you must consider it a little more distinctly before
you are like to understand it rightly. It is in vain to enquire, whether the
Sacraments do seal absolutely or conditionally, till you first know well what
it is that they seal. Let us first therefore resolve that Question, what they
seal? and then enquire how they seal? You know a Christian does gather the
assurance of his Justification and Salvation by way of Argumentation, thus: He
that believes is justified, and shall be saved: But, I believe; therefore I am
justified and shall be saved. Now the Question is which of the parts of this
Argument the Sacrament does seal to? Whether to the Major, the Minor, or the
Conclusion? To which I answer: 1. That it seals to the Truth of Gods promise
(which is the Major proposition,) is unquestionable. But whether to this alone,
is all the doubt? 2. That it seals not to the truth of the Minor Proposition,
(that is, to the truth of our Believing) I take also for to be beyond dispute,
For, first it should else seal to that which is now here written: For no
Scripture says, that I do believe. 2. And then it should be used to strengthen
my Faith, in that which is no object of Faith: For, [that I do believe] is not
matter of Faith, or to be believed, but matter of internal sense, or to be
known by the reflex act of the understanding. 3. Also God should else set his
seal, to my part or condition of the Covenant, as well as his own, and seal to
the truth of my word, as well as to the truth of his own; for a justifying and
saving us, is Gods condition, which he undertaketh to perform; so believing or
accepting Christ is our condition, which we there profess to perform. So that
it is doubtless, that a Sacrament as it is Gods engaging sign or seal, does
not seal to the truth of my faith, or sincerity of my heart in Covenanting: It
were a most gross conceit to imagine this.

But withal you must understand, that as there is in the Sacrament reciprocal
actions, Gods giving, and our receiving; so is the Sacrament accordingly a
mutual engaging sign or seal. As it is given, it is Gods seal; so that as in
this full Covenant there is a mutual engaging; so there is a mutual sealing.
God says to us, here is my Son who has bought thee, take him for thy Lord
and Savior, and I will be thy reconciled God, and pardon and glorify thee: And
to this he sets his seal. The sinner says, I am willing Lord, I here take
Christ for my King, and Savior, and Husband; and deliver up my self
accordingly to him: And hereto by receiving the offered elements, he sets
his engaging sign or seal; so that the Sacrament is the seal of the whole
Covenant.

But yet you must remember, that in the present controversy, we meddle not
with it as it is man's seal, but only as it is Gods.

So then it is clear, that as it is Gods seal, it seals the major
proposition; and as it is ours, to the minor.

But yet here you must further distinguish betwixt sealing up the promise as
true in it self, and sealing it with application as true to me. And it is the
latter that the Sacrament does, the delivery being Gods act of application, and
the receiving ours; so that the Proposition which God seals to, runs thus, If
thou believe, I do pardon thee, and will save thee.

3. But the great Question is, Whether the Sacrament do seal to the conclusion
also, That I am justified, and shall be saved? To which I answer, No, directly
and properly it does not; and that is evident from the arguments before laid
down, whereby I proved that the Sacraments seal not to the minor.

For 1. this conclusion is now here written in Scripture.

2. And therefore is not properly the object of Faith: whereas the seals are
for confirmation of Faith.

3. Otherwise every man rightly receiving the seals, must needs be certainly
justified and saved.

4. And no Minister can groundedly administer the Sacraments to any man but
himself, because he can be certain of no man's justification and salvation,
being not certain of the sincerity of their Faith. And if he should adventure
to administer it upon probabilities and charitable conjectures, then should he
be guilty of profaning the ordinance, and every time he mistaketh, he should
set the seal of God to a lie: And who then durst ever administer a Sacrament,
being never certain: but that he shall thus abuse it? I confess ingenuously
to you, that it was the ignorance of this one point which chiefly caused me to
abstain from administering the Lords Supper so many years: I did not
understand, that it was neither the minor, nor conclusion, but only the major
proposition of the foresaid Argument, which God thus seals. And I am sorry to
see what advantage many of our most learned Divines have given the Papists
here. As one error draws on many, and leads a man into a labyrinth of
absurdities; so our Divines being first mistaken in the nature of justifying
faith thinking that it consists in A Belief of the pardon of my own sins,
(which is this conclusion) have therefore thought that this is it which the
Sacrament seals. And when the Papists allege, that it is no where written
that such or such a man is justified we answer them that it being written That
he that believes is justified this is equivalent: A gross mistake: As if the
major proposition alone were equivalent to the conclusion; or as if the
conclusion must, or can be merely Credenda, a proper object of Faith, when but
one of the promises is matter of faith, and the other of sense or knowledge,
The truth is the major, He that believes shall be saved is received by Faith:
The minor that I do sincerely believe is known by inward sense and
self-reflexion: And the conclusion therefore I shall be saved is neither
properly to be believed nor felt, but known by reason, deducing it from the two
former; so that faith, sense, and reason are all necessary to the producing our
assurance,

So you see, what it is that is sealed to.

2. Now let us consider, how it seals? Whether absolutely or conditionally?
And I answer, It seals absolutely. For the promise of God which it seals is
not conditionally, but absolutely true.

So that the sum of all I have said is this (which answers the several
questions.)

1. The Sacrament seals not the absolute Covenant or Promise, but the
conditional Believe and live.

2. It seals not the truth of my Covenant, as it is Gods seal; or it seals
not to the truth of my faith.

3. It seals not to the certainty of my justification and salvation.

4. But it seals to Gods part of the conditional Covenant.

5. And seals this conditional promise, not conditionally, but absolutely,
as of undoubted truth.

6. And not only as true in it self, but true with application to me.

So that by this time you may discern what is their meaning, who say, that the
Sacraments do seal but conditionally, that is, as it seals to the truth of
the major (which is the promise) so thereby it may be said to seal
conditionally to the conclusion; for the conclusion is, as it were, therein
contained, upon condition or supposition of the minor proposition. He that
says. All Believers shall be saved, says as much as that I shall be saved; it
being supposed that I am a Believer: And so you must understand our Divines in
this, Yet this speech is less proper: For to speak properly, it does not seal
to the conclusion at all; yet it is very useful to help us in raising that
conclusion, and to be persuaded, that we are justified, because it so
confirms our belief of that promise, which is one of the grounds of the
Conclusion.

For your inference in the last words of your objection then let all come that
will; If you mean All that will, though they come to mock or abuse the
ordinance, then it will no way follow from the doctrine which I have now
opened. But if you mean. Let all come that will seriously, really, or
apparently, enter or renew their Covenant with Christ. I think that to be no
dangerous or absurd consequence. If Christ when he offers himself, and the
thing signified, do say. Let him that is athirst, come; and whoever will, let
him take the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17. Why may not I say so of the
sign and seal, to those that seriously profess their thirst. Sure I shall
speak but as Christ has taught me, and that according to the very scope of the
Gospel, and the nature of the Covenant of free grace. And I wonder that those
men who cry up the nature of free grace so much, should yet so oppose this free
offer of it, and the sealing the free Covenant to them that lay claim to it
upon Christ's invitation.

To the tenth and eleventh Objections.
YOur 10. and 11. objections you raise upon my exceptions against the book,
called, The Marrow of Modern Divinity: And first you mention the Doctrine, and
then the Book.

1. You think, that Do this and live is the voice of the Law of works only, and
not of the Law or Covenant of Grace, and that we may not make the obtaining of
life and salvation the end of duty, but must obey in mere love, and from
thankfulness for the life we have received.

To all which I answer. 1. By way of explication; and 2. of probation of my
assertions.

1. Do this and live, in several senses, is the language of both Law and
Gospel. 1. When the Law speaks it, the sense is this; If thou perfectly keep
the Laws that I have given thee or shall give thee, so long thou shall continue
this life in the earthly Paradise which I have given thee: But if once thou
sin, thou shall dye.

2. When the Gospel speaks it, the sense is thus: Though thou have incurred
the penalty of the Law by thy sin, yet Christ has made satisfaction: Do but
accept him for Lord and Savior, and renouncing all other, deliver up thy self
unreservedly to him, and love him above all, and obey him sincerely, both in
doing and suffering, and overcome and persevere herein to the end; and thou
shall be justified from all that the Law can accuse of, and restored to the
favor and blessings which thou have lost, and to a far greater.

Thus the Gospel says, Do this and live. That the Gospel commands all this,
I know you will not question; and that this is doing, you must needs
acknowledge. But all the question is, whether we may do it that we may live? I
have fully explained to you in this Treatise already in what sense our doing is
required, and to what ends: viz. not to be any part of a legal Righteousness
nor any part of satisfaction for our unrighteousness; but to be our Gospel
righteousness, or the condition of our participation in Christ, who is our
legal Righteousness, and so of all the benefits that come with him,

In these several respects and senses following the Gospel commands us to
act for life.

1. A wicked man, or unbeliever, may, and must hear the Word, pray, enquire of
others, etc. that so he may obtain the first life of grace and faith. This I
now prove, Isa. 55. 3. 6, 7. Jonas 3. 8, 9. 10. Pro. 1. 23, 24. 25. Amos 5. 4.
Act. 2. 37. Isa. 1. 16. Mat. 11. 15. and 13. 43. Luke 16. 29. 31. Ioh. 5. 25.
Act. 10. 1, 2. 22. 23. Romans 10. 13. 14, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Heb. 3, 7. Rev. 3, 20.

Yet do not I affirm. that God never preventeth men's endeavors; he is sometime
found of them that sought him not. Nor do I say, that God has promised the
life of Grace to the endeavors of nature; But their duty is to seek life; and
half promises, and many encouragements God has given them; such as that in
Joel* 2. 12, 13, 14. who knows but God will, etc, So Zeph. 2. 3. Exodus 32.
30. And that in Act. 8. 7. 2. Pray therefore if perhaps the thoughts of thy
heart may be forgiven thee.

2. That a man may act for the increase of this spiritual life when he has
it, methinks you should not doubt if you do see, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. and 1. 22. and
2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. and 3. 18. And the Parable of the Talents Mat. 25, 26,
27. 28. 30.

3. That we may and must act for the life of Reconciliation, and Justification,
and Adoption, is beyond dispute: How often does Scripture call on men, to Repent,
to Believe, to Pray, to forgive others, and to reform, that their sins may be
forgiven them? I have quoted the Scriptures before, when I opened the
conditions of justification, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Isa. 55. 6, 7. Act. 8. 22.
Iam. 5. 15. And we are still said to be justified by faith, which is an act of
ours.

4. That we may act for to obtain assurance both of our justification and
sanctification is undeniable, 2 Pet. 1. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 5. etc,

5. That we may act for eternal life and salvation; methinks, he that bears
the face of a Christian, should not deny: and that both for, 1. Title to it, 2.
Assurance of our enjoying it: and 3. for possession it self. I shall but quote
the Scriptures for brevity sake, desiring you to read them, and save me the
labor of transcribing them, Rev. 22, 14. John 5. 39, 40. Mat. 11. 12. and 7.
13. Luke 13. 24. Phil. 2. 17. Romans 2. 7, 10. 1 Cor. 9. 24. 2 Timothy 2. 5, 12. 1 Timothy 6. 12, 18, 19. Phil. 3. 14, Mat. 25. 1 Cor. 15. last. 2 Cor. 4. 17. and 5.
10, 11. 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Luke 11. 28. Heb. 4. 1. Luke 12. 5. 1 Cor. 9. 17.
These last places show, that the escaping hell, and damnation, is a necessary
end of our actings and duties, as well as the obtaining of heaven.

If when you have read and weighed these Scriptures, you be not convinced, that
we may act or do for life and salvation, (and so that Do this and live is in
some sense the language of the Gospel) I shall question, whether you make the
Scripture the Rule of your faith, or be not rather one of them that can force
upon themselves a faith of one or others making.

Object, But it is not the most excellent and Gospel-like frame of spirit, to
do all out of mere love to God, and from Thankfulness for life obtained by
Christ, and given us.

Answ. 1. If it come not from love to God, it is not sincere.

2. Yet does not the Gospel any where set our love to God, and to our own
souls, in opposition; nor teach us to love God, and not our selves: but
contrarily joineth them both together, and commands us both, The love of our
selves, and desire of our preservation, would never have been planted so deeply
in our natures by the God of nature, if it had been unlawful.

I conclude therefore, that to love God, and not our selves, and so to do all
without respect to our own good, is no Gospel frame of spirit.

2. Thankfulness for what we have received, either in possession, title, or
promise, must be a singular spur to put us on duty. But I pray you tell me,
Have you received all the life and mercy you do expect? Are you in Heaven
already? Have you all the grace that you need or desire in degree? If not, why
may you not labor for that you have not, as well as be thankful for that you
have? Or have you as full a certainty of it hereafter, as you do desire? If
not, why may you not labor for it.

ANd to show you the vanity, and intolerable, damnable wickedness of this
doctrine, let me put to you a few more considerations.

1. Do you think you may act for your natural life, to preserve it, or recover
and repair any decayings in it? if not, why will you labor, and eat, and
drink, and sleep? why will you seek to the Physician when you are sick? Do you
all this in mere love, or thankfulness, or from obedience which has no
further end? Or if you do, why may you not do as much for your soul, as for
your body? Is it less worth, or does not God require it, or will he not give
you leave? Has not Christ redeemed your body also? and is it not his purchase,
and charge, and work to provide for it? And yet you know well enough, that this
excuses not you from your duty; and why then should it excuse you from using
means for your soul?

2. Nay, has not God put you upon far more for your soul, then for your
body? For this life, he has bid you be careful for nothing; cast all your
care on him, for he cares for you; Care not for to morrow: Why are ye careful
O ye of little faith? Labor not for the food that perishes: Lay not up for
your selves a treasure on earth, etc. But has he said so concerning the life
of your souls in immortallity, Care not, labor not, lay not up a treasure in
heaven? Or rather has he not commanded you the clean contrary, to care, to
fear, to labor, to strive, to fight, to run, and this withal your might and
strength? And yet do you think you may not act or work for life and salvation?

3. I pray you tell me, Do you ever use to pray or no? Do you think it
necessary or lawful to pray (pardon me for putting such gross interrogatories
to you; for the main question which you raise, is far more gross:) If you do
pray, what do you pray for? Is it only for your body, or also for your soul?
And is not earnest praying for life, pardon, and salvation, some proper kind of
doing? it may be you will say, you pray only for Gods glory, and for the
Church: But has not God as much care of his Church and his glory, as of your
soul? or may you pray for other men's souls, and not your own, when you are
bound to love them but as your self? Sure, if you may not make the obtaining of
life, the end of your labor and duty, you may not make it the end of your
Prayers, which are part of your labor and duty.

And indeed according to the opinion which I oppose, it must needs follow, that
Petition is to be laid aside, and no part of prayer lawful, but praise and
thanksgiving.

4. Do you not forget to make a difference betwixt earth and Heaven? I assure
you, if you do, it will prove a foul mistake; if you once begin to think you
are in Heaven, and as you would be, and all the work is done, and you have
nothing to do but return thanks, you shall ere long, I warrant you, be
convinced roundly of your error. And I pray you, what do you less by this
opinion, then say, Soul, take thy rest, I am well, I have enough: For if you
must not labor for life, and salvation, but only in thankfulness obey him
that has saved you: What is this, but the work of Heaven? Indeed there, and
only there we shall have nothing to do, but to love, and joy, and, praise, and
be thankful.

5. Methinks, if you do but consider what Heaven and Hell, reward and the
punishment are, you should easily come to your self and the truth. Heaven and
reward is nothing else but the enjoyment of God eternally in perfection: Hell
or the punishment is most in the loss of this enjoyment, and the
self-tormentings that will eternally follow the consideration thereof, and of
the folly that procured it.

Now is it such a legal slavish mercenary thing for a Christian to seek after
the fruition of God? Or to be careful that he may not be everlastingly
deprived of it? is it possible that any sober considering man can think so?

6, Do you not think that you may and must seek after the enjoyment of God in
those beginnings and fore-tasts which are here to be expected? May not that be
the end of your duties, care, fear, labor, watchfulness? May you not groan
after him, and enquire, and turn the stream of your endeavors this way? And
may you not be jealous, and careful, and watchful, lest you should loose what
of God you do enjoy; and lest any strangeness or displeasure should arise? I
dare not question, but that this is the very business which you mind, and the
usual frame of your spirit.

And is it possible, that you can think it our duty, to seek the fore-tasts,
and the first fruits of Heaven, and yet think it unlawful to labor for the
full everlasting possession? How can these hang together.

7, Consider seriously, I pray you, to what end God implanted such affections
and powers in your soul. Why did he create in you a power and propensity to
intend the ultimate end in all your endeavors, to value that end, to love it*
desire it, study and care how to obtain it; to fear the loss of it, and to
loath all that resists your fruition, to seek and labor after its enjoyment?
Why is the love of our selves, and desire of our preservation so natural?
Surely it is lawful for you to care and desire, and labor for God in Heaven,
or for nothing: And its our duty to fear the loss of this, or to fear no evil
at all: and I can hardly think that God would create such powers in the soul
which should be utterly useless. Then let us no more cry down the abuse of our
affections and powers, but the use of them; and so turn worse then Stoics:
this is such a making God the Author of sin, as few men durst ever before be
guilty of. And certainly, if the escaping of Hell and the obtaining of Heaven
may not be the end and work of all these affections, then much less may any
inferior thing.

8. Nay, consider whether you do not make the soul and life of man to be
useless as to the obtaining of any future happiness: And so you take down the
blessed order which God has established in nature by Creation, and maintained
in the constant course of providence; and this you undeniably do in taking down
from us the ultimate end: Take down that, and all inferior ends are nothing,
and all means do lose their nature, and become useless: and so the soul of
the most gracious man shall be no fitter to attain and prosecute its end, and
do no more thereto then a beast or a stone; This consequence is undeniable.

9. Nay, consider whether you do not make all the graces of the Spirit (except
love, joy, and thankfulness) to be almost vain, and the blessed supernatural
work of the spirit upon us, to be a useless labor? does not God only create
in nature, but also new create by grace in us such things as Desire, Care,
Fear, Zeal, Courage, Diligence, Watchfulness, etc. and may we not use them?
Surely, if we may not use them for Heaven, then for nothing. And I cannot
believe that God will at so dear a rate plant in us a heavenly nature, and
these heavenly Graces, and then make it our sin to use them for Heaven, and
that while we are here in the way where we have such need of them.

10. But especially, I would have you thoroughly consider to what end God did
fill his word so with Precepts, Prohibitions. Promises conditional* and
Threats? Does not almost all the Scripture for the doctrinall part consist of
these? And are not Precepts to put us on to duty? And has not every duty its
end even for our selves? And can it be any other then the obtaining of the
fruition of God in Heaven? so what end have the prohibition else? And what are
the conditional promises for, but to stir us up to believe and to perform
the conditions, that so we may enjoy the promised good? And why are the
Threatenings but with the fear of the evil threatened to deter us from the
sin, and to the duty? What think you is the reason that God does so commonly
Promise Heaven, and threaten Hell, if it be unlawful for us to labor for
Heaven, and to escape Hell? Do you not hereby insinuate an accusation of vanity
at least against God and his Laws? Nay, the very essence of the Covenants does
consist in all these parts conjunct: And will you also overthrow the very
essential parts of the Law or Covenant, by making it unlawful for us to admit
their proper use? To quote the particular places for this, would be needless
and endless.

11 Methinks you should be so far from questioning the lawfulness of
laboring for Heaven, that you should rather think you have almost nothing else
to labor for. Gods glory and your salvation, not disjunct, but conjunct, are
all the business you have to look after: What do you live for? Why have you
all the mercies of your life? Is it only that you may be thankful for life
and mercy? Or that you might also improve them to some further advantage? I
hope (for all your question) that you make it the greatest labor of your life
to seek for assurance and obtainment of your eternal happiness in God.

12. And once more let me entreat you to consider, whether there be any hope of
that man's salvation, who shall reduce this your doctrine into his practice? I
abhor censoriousnesse, but I desire it may be considered, because it is a
matter of such unspeakable importance: For surely, if this Doctrine practiced
will not stand with salvation, it is time for you and all men to abhor it:
And indeed, this is it that makes me say so much against it, because it has a
holy pretense, and is very plausible to the inconsiderate, but yet is no better
then damnable if it be practiced: I say, if practiced, because the opinion as
such is not so; for I believe many a godly man does err as foully as this. But
it is possible for a man by reading and argument, to be drawn to entertain some
opinions in his brain, (not only consequently, but) directly contrary to the
practice of his heart and life, and yet himself to continue that practice: Even
as a wicked man may entertain those truths into his brain in speculation, which
directly to contradict his continued practice. Now it being the practice here
that is of absolute necessity to salvation, and not the opinion, I doubt not
but such that err only in this opinion, not reducing it into practice, may be
saved.

But if practiced, I cannot see but it will certainly damn.

For search the Scriptures impartially and consider, whether seeking Heaven be
not necessary to the obtaining of it? And whether those that seek not, and
labor not for it, be not shut out? View over the places which I quoted you
before, and then judge. Must not all that will have life, come to Christ, that
they may have it? John 5. 39, 40, And must not they strive to enter in at the
straight gate, and lay violent hands on the Kingdom of Heaven? And lay up for
themselves a treasure in heaven, and seek the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness in the first place, Matthew. 6. 33. And press on that we may
attain the Resurrection, Philip. 3. 14. And lay up a good foundation against
the time to come, doing good works, and lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timoth. 6.
12, 18, 19. And work out our salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12.
And do his commandments, that we may have right to the Tree of Life, and enter
in by the gates into the City, Rev. 22. 14. And make friends of the unrighteous
Mammon, that they may receive us into everlasting habitations; See also Rev. 2.
7, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19. 23. 26, 27, 28, 29. and 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 8. 10,
11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22. See also Mat. 18. 8, 9. John 5. 29. Act, 2. 28,
1 Timothy 4 8. Iam. 1, 12. 1 Pet. 3. 10. Romans 2. 7. 1 Timothy 1. 2. 2 Timothy 4. 18.
Mat. 5. 12. and 6. 1. and 19. 21. Luke 10. 20. Phil. 1. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 9. Heb.
2. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 10. 1 These. 5. 8, 9. Act. 16. 17.

Yea, we are commanded to fear him that is able to destroy both soul and body
in Hell: even under that consideration to fear him, Luke 12. 5. And to fear,
lest a promise being left us of entering into rest, we should come short of it,
Heb. 4. 1. And what is that but to fear the loss of Heaven, or to fear Hell?
Prove. 15. 24. Mar. 3. 29, and 16. 16. Mat. 5. 25. Romans 11. 21, 44. 1 Cor. 10.
12. Heb. 12. 15, 16, James 5. 9, 12.

But I must stop; for if I should quote all Scriptures that prove this, I
should transcribe a great part of the Bible.

Consider then, if even many that seek to enter shall not be able, whether they
are like to enter that never seek? And if the righteous be scarcely saved, what
shall become of them that thought it unlawful to labor for salvation?

13. Lastly, how is it that you do not see, that by this Doctrine you condemn
not all the Saints only, but even the Lord himself? Did not Paul therefore
keep under his body, and bring it into subjection, lest when he had preached
to others, himself should be a castaway? 1 Cor. 9. 27. what can be plainer?
Did not Abraham obey because he looked for a City which had foundations? Heb.
11. 10. And Moses, because he had respect to the recompense of Reward? 26. And
all that cloud of witnesses obey and suffer, that they might attain a better
Resurrection? 35. and did they not seek a better Country that is, an
heavenly; and therefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he has
prepared for them a City, ver. 16. Do not all that confess themselves
strangers on earth, plainly declare that they seek another Country? ver. 13,
14. Whosoever therefore shall hereafter tell you, that you must not do good to
attain salvation or escape damnation* as being too mercenarie and slavish for a
Son of God; abhor his Doctrine, though he were an Angel from heaven: And if
this satisfy you not, look to Jesus the Author and Finisher of your Faith,
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of God; Heb. 12. 12. Romans 14, 9. And
as Adam fell to be liker the Devil when he needs would be as God: so take heed
whither you are falling when you will be better then Jesus Christ.

And do I after all this need to answer the Common objections, that it is
mercenarie and slavish, to labor for salvation? Must I be put to prove that
the Apostles and Christ himself were not mercenarie slaves? or that Gods Word
has not prescribed us a slavish task? Indeed if we did all for a reward
distant from God, and for that alone, without any conjunction of Filial love,
and expected this Reward for the worth of our work, then it might be well
called Mercenary and slavish. But who among us plead for such a working.

FRom all this you may gather part of the Answer to your next Question: why I
except against the book called, The Marrow of Modern Divinity? Because it is
guilty of this heinous Doctrine. Yet further let me tell you, that I much
value the greatest part of that Book, and commend the industry of the Author,
and judge him a man of godliness and Moderation by his writing: And had I
thought as meanly of it, as I do of Colyer, Sprigs, Hobsons, and many such
abominable Pamphlets that now fly abroad I should not have thought it worthy
the taking so much notice of. But because it is otherwise useful, I thought
meet to give you warning, that you drink not in the evil with the good. And
especially because the names that so applaud it, may be a probable snare to
entangle you herein. And I conjecture the Authors ingenuity to be such, that
he will be glad to know his own mistakes, and to correct them: Otherwise I am
unfeignedly tender of depraving or carping at any man's labors. Some of these
mistaking passages I will show you briefly. As page 174. Quest. Would you not
have believers to esc^ew evil and do good for fear of Hell, or for hope of
Heaven? Ans. No indeed, I would not have any beleiver do the one or the other:
for so far as they do so, their obedience is but slavish, etc. To which end
he alleges, Luke 1. 74. 75. But that speaks of Freedom from fear of our
Enemies, such as Christ forbids in Luke 12. 5. where yet he commands the
fearing of God: And consequently, even that fear of enemies is forbidden, as
they stand in opposition to God, and not as his instrnments in subordination.
Or if it be even a fear of God that is there meant; yet it cannot be all fear
of him or his displeasure: so far as we are in danger of sin or suffering, we
must fear it: and so far as our assurance is still imperfect: a jealousy of
our own hearts, and a dreadful reverence of God also are necessary. But not
the Legal terrors of our former bondage, such as arise from the apprehension
of sin unpardoned, and of God as being our Enemy.

In the 180 Page, he denies the plain sense of the Text. Mat. 10. 28.

In the 155 page, he makes this the difference between the two Covenants: One
says, Do this and Live: the other says, Live and do this, The one says, Do
this, for life, The other says, Do this from life.

But I have proved fully, that the Gospel also says, Do this for life.

So in his second part, page 190. His great note to know the voice of the Law
by, is this, [that when in Scripture there is any moral work commanded to be
done either for the eschuing of punishment, or upon promise of any reward
temporal or eternal; or else when any promise is made with the condition of
any work to be done, which is commanded in the Law; there is to be understood
the voice of the Law.

A notorious and dangerous mistake, which would make almost all the New
Testament, and the very Sermons of Christ himself to be nothing but the Law of
works, I have fully proved before, that moral duties as part of our sincere
obedience to Christ, are part of the condition of our Salvation; and for it to
be performed. And even Faith is a moral duty. It is pity that any Christian
should no better know the Law from the Gospel: especially one that pretends
to discover it to others.

So in the next page 191, he intolerably abuses the Scripture, in affirming
that of 2 These. 2. 12. 10. to be the voice of the Law, and so making Paul a
Legal Preacher.

And as shamefully does he abuse 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10., As if the Apostle when he
bids them, not to be decived, were deceiving them himself in telling them,
that no unrighteous person, fornicators adulterers, etc. shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. Is this Law? Then let me be a Preacher of the Law. If Paul be a
Legalist, I will be one too. But these men know not, that the Apostle speaks
of those that die such; and that these sins exclude men the Kingdom, as they
are Rebellion against Christ their Lord, and so a violation of the New Covenant.

So in part first page 189. He mentions a Preacher, that said, he durst not
exhort nor persuade sinners to believe their sins were pardoned, before he
saw their lives reformed, for fear they should take more liberty to sin. And he
censureth that Preacher to be ignorant in the Mystery of faith. I confess I am
such an ignorant Preacher my self; and therefore shall desire this knowing man
to resolve me in a few doubts. 1. Where he learned, or how he can prove, that
Justifying Faith is a believing that our sins are pardoned? when Scripture so
often tells us, that we are justified by Faith: and sure the Object must go
before the Act; and therefore that which follows the Act is not the Object,

If we must believe that we are pardoned, that so we may be pardoned; then we
must believe a lie to make it a truth. Also does not the Scripture bid us
Repent, believe, and be baptized for the remission of sins; but not first to
believe the Remission of our sins? I have proved already that justifying
Faith is another matter: and this which he calls Faith is properly no Faith
at all; but the knowledge of a conclusion, one of whose permises is afforded by
Faith, and the other by Sense.

If therefore the Preacher had said, that he would not have men accept Christ,
and so believe for Remission, before their lives be reformed, then I should
have subscribed to this man's censure of him. 2. I desire him to tell me,
whether he can prove that any man's sins are pardoned before they have
accepted Christ for their Lord? that is, before Faith. If not, 3. Whether this
be not the subjection of the soul to Christ to be governed by him; and so a
heart-reformation? 4. Whether the reformation of the life does not immediately
even the same moment follow the hearts reformation? And if all this be so, (as
I know it is) then the ignorant Preachers doctrine must stand good, that
Reformation of life must go before the belief or knowledge of pardon, though
not before justifying Faith.

Many other intolerable errors I could show you in that Book: as his making
the New Covenant to threaten nothing but present Afflictions, and loss of our
present communion with God, page, 208. and that we may pray for no other kind
of pardon. page 206, 210. contrary to Mar. 16. 16. Heb. 10, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31. Heb. 2. 3. Ioh. 15. 2, 6. and many other places: so his affirming that we
sin not against the Covenant of works; which I have confuted in the
Aphorisms.

So his making the Law of Christ and the Law of Faith to be two Laws or
Covenants: when that which he calls the Law of Christ is but part of the
matter of the New Covenant.

But this is not my business; only because you urged me, I have given you a
grain of salt wherewith to season some passages in your reading that and such
like Books.

And that passage in M. Shepherds Select cases page 96, 102. that no
unregenerate man is within the compass of any conditional promise had need of
a grain too.

To the twelfth Objection.
WHat you object concerning my making a necessity of public covenanting, I
wholly acknowledge: And I heartily wish, that instead of our large mixed
National Covenant; and instead of the Independants Political Church-making
Covenant, we had the Gospel or New Covenant conditions formally in public
rendered to all the people of this Land: and that the same being opened to
them, they might knowingly and seriously profess their consent, (and if they
subscribed their names, it would be more solemnly engaging: and this before
they receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

This, 1. would take off most Arguments which are brought for a necessity of
Re-baptizing: 2. And would tend much to engage men to their obedience to
Christ, when they have so solemnly promised it under their hands. 3. And I
think that as an unfeigned heart covenanting with Christ is true faith, and of
the Essence of our Christianity; so is this public covenanting of our visible
Christianity.

Though other men's promises on our behalf may be of use to infants; yet when
we come to age, we are bound of absolute necessity to a personal Faith and
covenanting.

This also would answer the ends of the ancient custom of Confirmation: And to
this end is it, that the Church has still used to rehearse the Greed, or
Articles of Faith, and to require the people to stand up to signify their
Assent and Consent; which, for my part, I think not only a laudable custom,
but for the substance of it, a matter of necessity; so we do but carefully keep
away that Customarinesse, ceremoniousnesse and formality, which spoileth the
most necessary and weighty duties.

I could wish therefore that this practice were established by Authority. And,
for my self, I do administer the Sacrament to none, that do not solemnly
profess their assent to every fundamental Article of Faith expressly mentioned
to them, and their consent that Christ shall be their Lord and Savior and that
they will faithfully and sincerely obey his Scripture Laws.

To the thirteenth and fourteenth Objections.
YOur 13. and 14. Objections, which charge me not with error, but only with
singularity, I will answer together. And I am the less careful to answer you
in this matter, because I resolve to stand or fall to the Judgment of
Scripture only. And to tell you the truth, while I busily read, what other men
say in these controversies, my mind was so prepossessed with their notions,
that I could not possibly see the truth, in its own nature and naked evidence:
and when I entered into public disputations concerning it, though I was truly
willing to know the truth, yet my mind was so forestalled with borrowed
notions, that I chiefly studied how to make good the opinions which I had
received, and ran further still from the truth: yea when I read the truth in
Doctor Preston and other means writings, I did not consider and understand it:
and when I heard it from them, whom I opposed in wrangling disputations, or
read it in books of controversy, I discerned it least of all, but only was
sharpened the more against it: till at last, being in my sickness cast far
from home, where I had no book but my Bible, I set to study the truth from
thence, and from the nature of the things, and naked evidence; and so by the
blessing of God, discovered more in one week, then I had done before in
seventeen years reading, hearing and wrangling. Not that I therefore repent of
reading other men's writings: for without that I had not been capable of those
latter studies.

So that as I fetched not this doctrine from man, So you must bear with me if I
give you the less of man to attest it.

Yet that you may see I am not singular, as you conceive, I will show you the
concurrent judgments of one or two.

Mr. Wallis (a man of singular worth, I am confident, by his own writing,
though I know him not) in his answer to the Lord Brook, page 94. says, That
Faith is an accepting of Christ offered, rather then a believing of a
Proposition affirmed.

But because I will not fill my pages with other men's words, I will allege but
one more; and that one who is beyond all exception for piety, Orthodoxnesse,
and Learning, even Dr. Preston.

1. That Faith contains several acts.

2. That it is both in the understanding and will.

3. That the principal act is accepting or consent.

4. That it is the accepting of Christ for Lord as well as Savior.

5. That the object is Christ himself, and not his benefits but in a remote
sense and secondarily.

6. That Faith consists in Covenanting or Marriage contract. All these he is
so plain and full in, that I find him speaking my own thoughts in my own words:
and begun to think when I read him, that men would think I borrowed all from
Dr. Preston. Read him in his Treatise of Faith. page 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49,
50, 51, 89, 97. Also Of Effectull Faith, page 40, 41. 87, And Treatise of
Faith, page 14, 15, 16, 20, 21. 56, 57, 58.

7. But especially, the chief point that I stand upon, and am like to be
opposed most in, he handles so fully and asserteth so frequently, as if it
were the choicest notion which he desired to divulge, viz. That justifying
faith, as such, is a taking of Christ for Lord as well as for Savior. Of so
many places I will transcribe two or three.

And first his definition of the active part of faith, is the very same with
mine. Of Faith, page 44. It is to Believe, not only that Christ is offered to
us, but also to take and receive him as a Lord and Savior, that is, both to be
saved by him, and to obey him. Mark it (says he) I put them together, to take
him as a Lord and Savior; for you shall find that in the ordinary phrase of
Scripture, they are put together, Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior; therefore
we must take heed of disjoyning those that God has joined together: We must
take Christ as well for a Lord as a Savior; let a man do this, and he may be
assured that his faith is a justifying faith; therefore mark it diligently; if
a man will take Christ for a Savior only, that will not serve the turn;
Christ gives not himself to any upon that condition only to save him, but we
must take him as a Lord too, to be subject to him, and obey him, and to square
our actions according to his will, etc. page 45.

So of Effectual Faith, page 92. Now faith is nothing but this: We come and
tell you that Christ is offered; if you will be content to let all these things
go, and to turn your hearts to him, then the whole bent of a man's mind is
turned the contrary way and set upon Christ; this is such Faith indeed, etc.
Now i^ we were not mistaken in it, there would be no question of this: We think
that faith is nothing but a persuasion that our sins are forgiven a persuasion
that the promises are true, and the Scripture true, a persuasion that Christ
died for my sins: And thence it is, that men are apt to be deceived in it. If
they took Faith as it is in its self, (a Marriage of our selves to Christ, with
all our heart and affections, when he has given himself to us as in Marriage
and we are given to him.) in doing this, we should never be deceived.

So in his Treatise of the New Covenant, page 458. you must know that the
Covenant is then dissolved, when that is dissolved that did make the Covenant:
Lock what it is that puts a man into the Covenant of Grace at the first; when
that is taken away, then the Covenant is disannulled between God and us; but
till then the Covenant remains sure. Now what is it that makes the Covenant?
Mark it: This is that which makes the Covenant; when Jesus Christ offers
himself to us, and makes known his consent, etc. when we again come and take
him, and give our consent to make him our Lord, and we subject our selves to
him to be his; when we say to the promised seed, He shall be my God and my
Governor, and I will be among his people, and be subject to him; I say, when
the heart gives a full consent to this, etc. now the Covenant and contract is
made between them. Now as long as this union continues between Christ and us,
the Covenant is not disannulled; So that in a word, the Covenant is never
nullified till thou have chosen to thy self another husband, till thou have
taken to thy self another Lord, etc. page 459.

So that here you see 8ly. that every infirmity breaks not the Covenant. See
also Treatise of Love, page 147.

9 That there is a Gospel curse following the breach of the Gospel Law, and
that it is unrepealable and more terrible then that of the Law page 19, 20.

10, What near conjunction love has with Faith in justifying. See Treatise of
Effectual Faith* 41, 42.

11, That the promise and offer of Christ is general, see Treatise of Faith,
page 9, 10. I will transcribe but one more, Treatise of the New Covenant, page
317, 318. You must know there is a twofold Covenant, one of works, another of
grace, etc, The Covenant of grace runs in these terms [Thou shall believe;
thou shall take my Son for thy Lord and thy Savior, and thou shall likewise
receive the gift of Righteousness, which was was wrought by him, for an
absolution for thy sins, for a reconciliation with me, and thereupon thou
shall grow up in love and obedience, toward me, Then I will be thy God, and
thou shall be my people.] This is the Covenant of grace, etc.

In this you see also, 12ly. That love and sincere obedience are parts of the
condition of the New Coveuant.

Thus you see I am not in these 12. points singular; and in more could I also
prove his context; though in some things I confess he differs; as in making
Faith an instrument in our justification, page 54. Of Faith. But as I take that
to be a small difference; so it is apparent by the forecited places, that he
took Faith to justify, as the condition of the Covenant; and so the difference
is but verbal; yet speaking in the common phrase put him upon that absurdity,
page 56. Treatise of Faith, viz. to say, That reconciling and justifying are
acts of Faith: If he had said, but that they are effects of Faith, it had been
more then (in proper strict sense taken) can be proved.

To the fifteenth Objections.
TO your fifteenth Objection I answer, 1. The Apostle in those places deals
with the Jews, who trusted to works without and against Christ: This is nothing
against them that set not up works in opposition nor coordination but only in
subordination to Christ.

2. If I affirmed that works are the least part of that Righteousness which
the Law requires, and which must be so pleaded to our justification, then I
should offend against the freeness of grace: But when I affirm, that all our
legal Righteousness is only in Christ, then do I not make the reward to be
of debt, or less free.

3. The Apostle in the same verse Romans 4. 5. says, that his Faith is counted
for Righteousness; and I have proved before that subjection is a part of Faith.

4. The Apostle plainly speaks of that Righteousness whereby we are formally
righteous, and which we must plead that we may be justified from the accusation
of the Law; and this is neither in Faith nor works, but in Christ: But he
nowhere speaks against that which is only the condition of our participation
of that, and whereby we must escape the condemnation of the Gospel, which is
Faith, as I have opened before.

5. If the Apostle should mean otherwise, it were as much against your
Doctrine as mine. For is not Faith a work or act of ours? But you will say,
That though Faith which is a work do justify, yet not as a work, but as an
instrument. I answer.

1. To be an actual apprehension of Christ (which you call its
instrumentality) is to be a work; Therefore, if it justify as it is such an
apprehension, it justifies as a work.

2. So also say I, that subjection and obedience justify, 1. Not as works
simply considered; 2. Nor as legal works; 3. Nor as meritorious works; 4. Nor
as Good works which God is pleased with; 5. But as the conditions to which the
free Lawgiver has promised justification and life.

Nay, your Doctrine ascribes far more of the work to man then mine; for you
make justification an effect of your own Faith, and your Faith the
isntrumental cause of it, and so make your self your own justifier. And you
say your Faith justifies, as it apprehends Christ, which is the most
intrinsecall; essential consideration of Faith, and so Faith has much of the
honor. But while I affirm that it justifies only as a condition, which is an
extrinsecall consideration, and aliene from its essence or nature, I give the
glory to him that freely gives me life, and that made so sweet a condition to
his Covenant, and that enableth me to perform the said condition.

And thus I have according to my measure of understanding answered your
Objections, as fully as necessitated brevity would permit.

And for that question which you propounded about Relaxation, Abrogation, etc.
of the Law, which you confess you do not well understand; I refer you to
Vossius Defens. Grotii de Satisf. cap. 27. where (among other things) he
tells you that Apud Romanos seu ferenda esset Lex, populus rogabatur an
ferrivellet? seu tollendae, rogabatur, an tolli eam placeret? Hinc rogari lex
dicebatur, quae ferrebatur, ut dicit Vlp. Tit. 1. Regal. Eademque de causa
abrogari dicebatur, cum antiquaretur, etc. And then he explaineth all those
phrases to you out of Vlpian. Lex rogatur, id est, fertur; vel abrogatur,
idest, prior lex tollitur; vel Derogatur, id est, pars primae tollitur: aut
subrogatur, id est adjicitur aliquid primae legi: aut Obrogatur, id est,
mutatur aliquid ex primalege. And so concludes, that the first Law was not
abrogated, but relaxed, dispensed with, and obrogate.

How far it was executed, I have showed you in the Treatise.

But the last task you set me, is of all the rest most ungrateful, endless,
and (in my judgment) unnecessary, viz. [To answer what other men have written
against some doctrines which I have here asserted.]

1. It is a work ungrateful to search into other men's weakness and mistakes;
to handle the truth in a way of contention or to speak in way of derogation of
the labors of the learned and godly.

2. And should I fall upon a confutation of every man that has written
contrary to any thing in my Book, the task would be endless, and I might
stuff a great deal of paper with words against words, and perhaps add little
matter to what is already written; which is a work unfit me for to undertake
who have so much better work to do, and am like to have so short a time to do
it in.

3. And it seems to me a needless task; partly because from the clearing and
confirmation of the positive truth, you may be enabled to answer opposers your
self.

2. The Authors which you mention do so easily and effectually assault the
doctrines mentioned, that I should think no judicious man can thereby be
staggered.

But at your request I will briefly consider them particularly.

The Authors which you refer me to, are two, D. Maccovius, and Mr. Owen. The
points which they contradict are three.

1. That our legal Righteousness which we have in Christ, consists not
formally in obedience to the Precept of the first Covenant, but only in
satisfaction for our Disobedience. This Maccovius opposes in Colleg. Theol.
par 1 Disp. 10. and par. 4. Disp. 9.

2. [That Christ paid not the same debt which was in the first obligation, but
the value; and so the Law was not properly and fully executed, but relaxed.]
This, you say, Mr. Owen confuteth in Grotius, in his late Treatise of
Universal Redemption, lib. 3 cap. 7. p. 140.

3. [That no man is actually and absolutely justified (no not so much as in
point of Right) either from eternity, or upon the mere payment of the bebt by
Christ, till themselves do believe.] This, you say, is confuted by both of
them, Maccov. par. 3. Disp. 16. and par. 1. Disp. 17. Et owen ubi supra.

If men's names did not more take with you then their Arguments, you might have
spared me this labor. But briefly to the first of these I answer.

1. Most passages in Maccovius do affirm but that Christ obeyed for us, as
well as suffered for us; and who denies that?

2. Of those passages which yet go further, there is few of them that say any
more then this, that Christ's active Righteousness did merit for us that life
and glory which is given by the New Covenant, more then we lost by breaking the
Old: But this is nothing to our Question which is only about justification.
For I have cleared to you before, that Justification is (properly and strictly
taken) one of those acts whereby we are recovered from the condemnation of the
Law, and set in statu quo prius; and not one of those acts which give us that
additionall glory which is Adoption, Union, Glorification.

3. Those few Arguments which yet do drive higher then this, are so fully
answered already by Mr. Gataker against Lucius, Gomarrus,, etc. and Mr. Goodwin
(notwithstanding Mr. Roboroughs Answer) and diverse others, that I am resolved
not to lose so much time and labor, as to do that which is better done
already, then can be expected from me.

4. Only one argument more then usual I find in part 1 Disput. 10. And which
I confess deserves a special consideration, And that is this. [If Christ
only suffered for us, then the righteousness of Adam, had he continued in
innocence, would have been more excellent then the righteousness of Christ:
For the law requires obedience principally and suffering but per accidens. But
the consequence is false, because else Christ has not set us in as good a
state as we fell from.]

To this I answer. 1. This righteousness may be termed excellent in several
respects. 1 In reference to its Rule: 2. Or in reference to its Ends. The 1.
denominateth it Good in it self: The second denominateth it good to us. Now the
Rules to measure it by, are two: 1. The nearest inferior Rule; which is the
Law: 2. The remote superior Rule; which is the good pleasure and will of the
Lawmakers.

2. The ends which may denominate our righteousness more excellent, are: 1 The
glory of Gods justice and mercy: 2. The glory of the Mediators love, and the
setting up of his kingdom: 3 And the good of the creature: Or rather all these
in one.

Now these things thus standing, I answer thus. 1 I acknowledge that the Law
made for mankind does primarily require obedience, and but secondarily
suffering, and upon supposition of disobedience.

2. But you must distinguish betwixt what the law requires of us, and what of
the Mediator: the law to the creature, and the law to the Mediator, are in
several things different: The will of his Father which he came to do,
consisted in many things which were never required of us: such are all the
works proper to the office of Mediatourship. Now though the Law required of us
mere creatures primarily Obedience active; Yet that which was principally
imposed upon the Mediator and undertaken by him, was to satisfy for our
disobedience: And so the principal part of his works was passive obedience,
and that in him was as excellent or more then Active obedience; though in us it
would not have been so; because the law did not require it of us in the first
place, as it did of Christ.

3. If you call that most excellent which is best pleasing to God the
Lawmakers; then certainly the satisfaction of Christ did please him better,
then Adams perseverance in innocence would have done. This needs no proof
but the consideration of the event.

4. And for the ends of righteousness, let us consider them distinctly; and
see whether Christ's satisfaction do not attain them all more eminently and
fully then Adams perseverance would have done.

1. The glory of Gods justice would not have been manifested so, if Adam had
stood, as it was by Christ's sufferings: 2 Nor the glory of his mercy and free
grace. 3 Nor the Mediators love: 4 Nor would the Kingdom of the Mediator have
been set up, nor his honor so advanced. 5. Nor the saints advanced to so high
a dignity and happiness, as now they are and shall be by Christ.

So that in what respect is our righteousness less excellent? or who is the
looser? Not the Father; Not the Mediator: All the question is of our selves:
But that is only in point of our honor: It is acknowledged, that to the
creature it would have been more honorable to have kept his innocence, then to
have his disobedience satisfied for by another. But here consider these things,
1 Gods honor is to be preferred to ours. 2 And the Mediators advancement
before our advancement. 3 It was the very design of God in the Gospel way of
our salvation to take down our honor, that the creature might not glory in it
self, but all might be acknowledged to free grace: And shall we think it a
wrong, if we have not a righteousness as honorable to our selves as that
which we lost? 4 Our happiness will be greater though our honor will be
less: For we shall have a far greater glory. And that is better then mere
honor. 5 Yea we shall have more honor then we lost: A real honor of being
the sons of God, and members of Christ, and heirs of glory: And this is greater
then the honor of our perseverance would have been. Only this being all
freely given redoundeth to the giver: but still the real honor and happiness
we enjoy therefore is it the everlasting work of Saints, to praise the Lamb who
has redeemed them out of a^l nations, and made them Kings and Priests to God;
which implies an acknowledgement of their former disobedience and misery, (and
so taking dishonor to themselves) and yet the greater glory to Christ, and
happiness to them.

6. Moreover we have now besides the righteousness of Christ's satisfaction a
personal evangelicall righteousness, consisting in the fulfilling of the
conditions of the law of grace.

So that our little loss of the honor of self-performance you see is in these
6. respects abundantly recompensed.

So that to our selves a righteousness of tisfaction, is better then a
righteousness of personal obedience. And as it is found in Christ, it is also
in it self more excellent.

Yet further; that it is not derogatory to Christ, does thus appear. 1 He had
in himself both sorts of righteousness; viz. Of obedience to the Precept, and
of satisfaction to the threatening. Though both could not be ours, retaining
their forms as such: because the (law requires but one sort of righteousness of
one person for himself: so that we derogate nothing from Christ's righteousness
or perfection.

2. Both these sorts in Christ, viz. his active and passive (as I conceive) do
concur to make up that one sort of righteousness necessary for us, viz. Or
satisfaction to the threatening: and so both conjunct are our righteousness,
though not as two sorts of righteousness, but as one. Yet I know that this is
somewhat dark and doubtful, because Obedience is a thing commanded and not
threatened: But yet seeing Christ paid not the Idem, but the Tantundem; not
the very same debt mentioned in the threatening, but the value. I think
therefore that his obedience as such may go in to his satisfaction.

3. I also freely acknowledge, that the additionall happiness which we have by
Christ, more then we lost in Adam, contained in our Adoption, Union with Christ
and Glorificacation, are procured by Christ's active obedience as such, as well
as by his satisfaction in suffering.

If yet besides all this, any will maintain that we fulfilled the precepts of
the law in Christ; or that his fulfilling of them as such, is our
righteousness, let them show me solidly what need we have of Christ's
sufferings, and let them answer what is said to the contrary by the
formentioned Authors; and I shall quickly yield.

To conclude, that God accepts this righteousness of satisfaction as being
equivalent to that of obedience (though obedience be first in the law, and the
precept the principal part) and so that he is as well pleased with us as if we
had obeyed: may appear from the end and nature of satisfactory punishment. For
the penalty of a perfect just law is supposed to be such, that it will make a
perfect compensation or satisfaction for all the wrong we have done, to the
lawmakers or the public: so that being paid or suffered, we must needs in
point of innocence be in statu quo prius. I know some object thus, If a thief
be burnt in the hand and so the law satisfied, yet he has lost his credit, and
will not be taken or trusted for an honest man.

Answ. You must distinguish 1. betwixt his breach of man's law, and his breach
of Gods law.

2. Betwixt his actual fault, and his habitual pravity. And then you will
see, that his burning in the hand was for the breach of man's law; but the
perpetual infamy is a part of the penalty inflicted by God for the breach of
his law, by the same fact. 2 That his suffering was only for his actual
fault: But our distrust and contempt of him is also for the pravity of his
heart by that fact discovered, of which man's Law takes not notice.

But if you instance in the breach of a mere penal law (as for keeping
Artillery, for forbearing to eat flesh in Lent, etc.) You will see that the
mere suffering or payment, does put the offendour in as good a condition as he
was before.

But the Disputant in Maccovius thinks to strike all dead, with this case. In
1 Samuel 11. 7. the penalty for them that would not go out with Saul to battle,
was, that their oxen should be hewed in pieces; yet (says he) they should
besides this have lost their part in the prey or spoils. To which I answer.

1. Then the loss of the spoil was employed as part of the penalty. 2 He all
along runs upon a false supposition; viz, That Adam besides the continuance
of the happiness which at first was freely given him, should moreover by his
obedience have merited or procured some further reward: Now (says he) this
reward must be procured us by Christ's active righteousness, though his
satisfaction put us into the state we fell from.

But all this is a mere fiction. For where does the scripture talk of Adams
meriting any more, or where does it promise him any more then the continuance
of that happiness which he then had?

So I have done with the first Question.

Your 2. is [whether Christ paid the same debt which was in the first
obligation?] And here you send me to Mr. Owen.

Answ. 1. I had far rather you had objected your self. For I cannot well
understand Mr. Owens mind. in page 137. He distinguishes betwixt paying the
very thing that is in the obligation; and paying of so much in another kind.
Now this is not our question, nor any thing to it; for we affirm that Christ's
suffering was of the same kind of punishment, (at least in the main;) but yet
not the very same in the obligation.

In page 140. He states the question far otherwise, (and yet supposes it the
same) viz, whether Christ paid the Idem, or the Tantundem? which he
interprets thus; that which is not the same, nor equivalent to it, but only
in the graous acceptance of the Creditour. Now what he means by not equivalent
I cannot tell.

1. If he mean not of equal value, then he fights with a shadow; he wrongeth
Grotius, (for ought I can find in him (who teaches no such doctrine:
How-ever, I do not so use to English solutio Tantidem. But if he mean that it
is not equivalent in procuring its ends, ipso facto, delivering the debtour,
without the intervention of a new confession or contract of the creditor, (as
solutio ejusdem does,) then I confess Grotius is against him; and so am I.

So also [Gods Gracious acceptance] is either his accepting less in value then
was due, and so remitting the rest without payment: (this I plead not for,) or
else it is his accepting of a refuseable payment, which though equal in value
yet he may choose to accept according to the tenor of the Obligation. This is
gracious acceptance, which Grotius maintains? and so do I; and so
distinguish betwixt solutio and satisfactio, payment: and satisfaction.

Yet here Mr. Owen enters the lists with Grotius; And.

1. He overlooketh his greatest Arguments.

2. He slightly answers only two.

And 3. when he has done, he says as Grotius does, and yields the whole
cause.

These three things I will make appear in order.

1. The chief Argument of Grotius and Vossius is drawn from the tenor of the
Obligation, and from the event: The Obligation charge punishment on the
offender himself. It says In the day thou eatest, thou shall dye. And Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things, etc. Now if the same in the
Obligation be paid then the Law is executed, and not relaxed; and then every
sinner must dye himself, for that is the Idem, and very thing threatened: So
that here, Dum alius solvit, simul aliud solvitur. The Law threatened not
Christ, but us. (Besides, that Christ suffered not the loss of Gods love, nor
his image and graces, nor eternity of torment, of which I have spoke in the
Treatise.) What says Mr. Owen to any of this?

2. The two Arguments he deals with, are these.

1. The payment of the very debt, does ipso facto, free the debtor To which he
answers, that Christ's death doct actually or ipso facto, free us. This Answer
I shall consider under your last question whereto it belongs.

To the second Argument that the payment of the same thing in the Obligation,
leaves no room for pardon he answers thus:

1. Gods pardoning comprizeth the whole dispensation of Grace in Christ: As 1.
The laying of our sin on Christ. 2. The imputation of his Righteousness to
us; which is no less of grace and mercy: However, God pardons all to us, but
nothing to Christ: So that the freedom of pardon has its foundation.

1. In Gods will freely appointing this satisfaction of Christ.

2. In a gracious acceptance of that decreed satisfaction in our stead.

3. In a free application of the death of Christ to us, etc. so far Mr. Owen.

To which I answer: 1. Pardon implies Christ's death as a cause; but I would he
had showed the Scripture, that makes pardon so large a thing, as to comprize
the whole dispensation of Grace; or that makes Christ's death to be part of it,
or comprised in it.

2. If such a word were in Scripture, will he not confess it to be figurative,
and not proper, and so not fit for this Dispute?

3. Else when he says, that Christ's death procured our pardon, he means that
it procured it self.

2. Neither is imputation of Righteousness any part of pardon but a necessary
antecedent; so that here is no part of pardon yet in all this.

3. The same may be said of Gods Acceptance.

4. Its Application is a large phrase, and may be meant of several acts; but
of which here, I know not.

5. How can he call it, A gracious Acceptance, a gracious imputation, a free
Application, if it were the same thing which the Law required that was paid? To
pay all according to the full exaction of the Obligation, needs no favor to
procure acceptance, imputation, or application. Can Justice refuse to accept of
such a payment? Or can it require any more?

Object. But it is of grace to us, though not to Christ.

Answ. Does not that clearly intimate, that Christ was not in the Obligation?
that the Law does threaten every man personally; Or else it had been no favor
to accept it from another.

3. That Mr. Owen gives up the cause at last, and says as Grotius (having it
seems not understood Grotius his meaning) appears p. 141, 142, 143.

For 1. he acknowledges that the payment is not made by the party to whom
remission is granted, (and so says every man that is a Christian.)

2. He says, It was a full valuable compensation, (therefore not of the same.)

3. That by reason of the Obligation upon us, we our selves were bound to
undergo the punishment, (therefore Christ's punishment was not in the
Obligation, but only ours, and so the Law was not fully executed, but relaxed.)

4. He says he means not that Christ bore the same punishment due to us, in
all accidents, of duration and the like; but the same in weight and pressure,
(therefore not the same in the Obligation, because not fully the same: Not the
same numerically; nor perhaps specifically in all respects, if the loss of
Gods Love and Image, and incurring his hatred, the corruption of the body, the
loss of right to, and use of all the creatures and the loss of all comforts
corporal or spiritual, etc. were any part of the curse.) yet that it was in
the greatest respects of the same kind, I doubt not.

5. He says, God had power so far to relax his own Law, as to have the name
of a surety put into the Obligation, which before was not there; and then to
require the whole debt of that surety.

And what says Grotius more then this? If the same thing in the Obligation be
paid, then the Law is executed; and if executed (properly and fully) then not
relaxed. Here he confesses that the sureties name was not in the Obligation;
and that God relaxed the Law to put it in. Now the maine business that Grotius
there drives at, is but to prove this relaxation of the Law, and the
non-execution of it on the offenders threatened.

I Judge that Mr. Owen has no better success in his next assault of Grotius,
on that question, [whether God manage this work of relaxing the Law, punishing
Christ for us, etc. as a Creditor, or as an absolute Master, or as a Judge
under Laws, or as the supreme Rector? the last of which Grotius maintains?
He that reads Grotius and Vossius own words, does need no further defensative
against the force of Mr. Owens Answers.

But this is nothing to me.

Only I would not have any truth to fare the worse for Grotius his defection.
It was himself that deserved the discredit, and not the Truth of God.

The third and last contradicted Article is, That no man is actually and
absolutely justified upon the mere payment of the debt by Christ, till they
become Believers.

Against this, you send me to both the forementioned Authors.

Answ. 1. When I first cast my eye upon the two forecited Disputations in
Maccowski, I had thought he had spoke only of the universal conditional
Justification of men, when he says, that active Justification was at the
beginning of the first promise; But my charitable thoughts I soon saw were
mistaken.

But I find, as his Doctrine is very strange, so are his proofs as slender, as
any man's you could have sent me to.

1. Is it not strange that Active justification should be perfected 5000.
years before Passive justification is in being? I thought Passive
justification had been the mediate effect of the Active; And that God had
justified no man, who is not thereby justified.

2. And as strange and abhorred to me, is the other part of his doctrine, viz.
That Faith only takes knowledge of justification formerly wrought.

And his Arguments are as weak as the doctrine erroneous.

1. The first is Because the Object must needs go before the Act.

Answ. But is it not pity that so excellent a Doctor should think that
justification (and that not only in offer, but in actual being) should be the
object of justifying Faith? I am ashamed to confute so senseless an assertion.
Sure it is Christ, and not actual justification that is the object. When the
Scripture says, that Whosoever believes shall be justified is it a learned
Exposition which thus interprets it? [You that are elect, are already
justified, and if you will believe it, you shall know it;]

2. He cites Paraeus, saying, that Faith does not effect justification, but
accept it.

Answ. 1. They that say, Faith is the isntrumental cause of justification,
must needs say, that Faith effectth it.

2. Faith accepts Christ for justification.

3. It accepts not justification as being actually and absolutely our own
before the acceptance: But it accepts a conditional justification offered to
me, that by the acceptance it may become absolutely mine.

His citing of Tossanus words is nothing for him: For when he says, that All
the Elect are justified in Christ, in respect of the merit thereof it is no
more then to say that Christ has merited their justification: which who
denies?

But the great Argument which he and all of his judgment do trust to, is this:
If the surety so undertake or discharge the debt, that the creditor rest
satisfied with that undertaking or discharge; then is the debtor free from the
debt. But Christ has so undertaken and discharged the particular debts of the
Elect; therefore the Elect are freed.

Answ. 1. Payment is refusable, or not refusable: That payment which is of the
same thing in the Obligation, either by our selves or our Delegate, is not by
the Creditor refusable; so that if we had paid it, or Christ had been our
Delegate, appointed by us to pay the same that was due, then God could not have
refused to take that payment: But Christ being appointed to this by the Father,
and not by us; and also paying not the very same, but the value, God might have
refused the payment.

2. Where the payment is not refusable, there the discharge of the debtor is
not refusable, but does follow ipse facto: But where the payment is refusable,
(as here it was) the Creditor may accept it upon what terms he pleases, and
choose to give the Debtor an absolute discharge; so that it being the full
agreement and pleasure both of the Creditor and the Surety, the father and the
son, that the Debtor should have no discharge by the payment but upon a
certain condition by him to be performed, no doubt he shall have none till he
have performed it.

3. So that Gods accepting the payment and being satisfied with it, may be
understood.

1. In respect to the Surety, and the value of his payment; and so God was well
pleased and fully satisfied in Christ's payment, as bein the full value that his
justice did require, and beyond which he expected no more at his hands.

2. Or it may be spoken in reference to the debtor, the sinner, and the
effecting of his freedom: And so God was not immediately upon Christ's payment,
so satisfied or well pleased with the particular offenders, as to deliver and
discharge them without requiring any thing at their hands.

1. For he will first have them perform the imposed condition of taking Christ
who has bought them, for their only Savior, Husband, and Lord.

To these of Maccovius, Mr. Owen in the place (against Grotius) which you
refer me to, adds some more.

As 1. By death he deliver us from death:

Answ. Not immediately nor absolutely, nor by his Death alone; but by that as
the price, supposing other causes on his part, and conditions on ours to
concur before the actual deliverance.

2. He says The Elect are said to dye and rise with him.

Answ. Not in respect of time, as if we dyed and rose at the same time, either
really or in Gods esteem: Nor that we dyed in his dying, and rose in his
rising. But it is spoken of the distant mediate effects of his death, and the
immediate effects of his Spirit on us, rising by regeneration to union and
Communion with Christ.

3. He says, Christ has redeemed us from the curse, being made a curse for
us, Gal. 3. 13.

Answ. I explained before how far we are freed by Redemption; He has
redeemed us, that is, paid the price; but with no intent that we should by that
Redemption be immediately or absolutely freed.

Yet when we are freed, it is to be ascribed to his death as the meritorious
cause; but not as the only cause.

4. He says The handwriting that was against us, even the whole obligation is
taken out of the way and nailed to his Cross.

Answ. 1. By the handwriting of Ordinances, is especially meant the Law of
Ceremonies.

2. If it be meant also of the curse of the Old Covenant, then it cannot be so
understood, as if the Covenant it self were abrogate for the reasons I have
before given in the Treatise.

3. Nor yet that any are absolutely discharged from the curse, till they
perform the condition required for their discharge.

4. But thus far the Law is taken down, that our Redeemer has bought us from
that necessity of perishing that lay upon us for our transgressing that Law; so
that no man is now condemned for the mere violation of that first Covenant; and
so he has taken the Law into his own hands, to charge only upon those that
break the conditions of the New Covenant.

5. And so he has taken down the condemning power of the Law as it stands
by it self, and not as it is under the Covenant of grace: And he has freed
us from the curse conditionally, and the condition is easy and reasonable.

6. So that quoad meritum, the work is done. All the satisfaction is made, and
price paid; and therefore in Heb. 1. 3. it is said to be done. If a man where a
1000 l. in debt, and had tried all means, and had no hope left to procure his
discharge: And if a stranger to him go to the Creditor, and buy the Debtor who
is in prison into his own hands, by paying all the debt, yet resolving, that
if he refuse his kindness, he shall have no benefit by it, but lie and rot
there; May it not be fitly said, that the debtor is delivered? because the
great difficulty which hindered, is removed; and the condition of his freedom
is so reasonable, that common reason supposes he will not stick at it; and if
he do, it is utterly against reason and humanity, for he may be freed if he
will.

Therefore it is no unfit phrase, to say the man is freed as soon as his debt
is paid: But yet he is not absolutely freed, nor actually neither in point of
personal right, nor of possession. And for his humane refusal of the
kindness of his Redeemer, may lie and perish there, and be never the better,
but the worse for all this.

7. Yet it being the absolute purpose both of the Father and Mediator, to cause
all the Elect to perform this condition of their discharge; therefore
Redemption is a cause of their certain future discharge, and a link in the
inviolable chain of the causes of their salvation: But to the rest of the
world it is not so.

But I do not well understand the meaning of the Author you refer me to: For
he says, [That Christ did actually and ipso facto, deliver us from the curse
and obligation; yet we do not instantly apprehend and perceive it, nor yet
possess it; but only we have actual right to all the fruits of his death: As
a prisoner in a far Country who is ransomed, but knows it not, nor can
enjoy liberty till a Warrant be produced, etc.

But 1. Whether a man may fitly be said actually, and ipso facto, to be
delivered and discharged, who is not at all delivered, but only has right to
deliverance, I doubt.

2. Knowledge and posiession of a deliverance are far different things: A man
may have possession and no knowledge in some cases; or if he have both, yet the
procuring of knowledge is a small matter, in comparison of possession.

3. Our knowledge therefore does not give us possession; so that the similitude
fails, for it is the Creditors knowledge and satisfaction that is requisite to
deliverance. And our Creditour was not in a far and strange country, but
knew immediately, and could either have made us quickly know, or turned us free
before we had known the cause.

4. Nor can it easily be understood, how God can so long deny us the possession
of Heaven, if we had such absolute actual Right (as he speaks) so long ago;
which seems to express a jus ad rem and in re.

If it be said, we are yet in our minority, and not fit for present possession.

I answer, That this fitness and our maturity is part of the deliverance, or
benefit (which he says, de facto, we had right to:) And so we should have had
that also in present possession.

4. But if he do mean only a right to future possession (for such there is,)
yet I confess it is beyond my conceiving, how in regard of the relative part
of our deliverance, that right and the possession should stand at so many
years distance. To have right to Gods favor and acceptance, and to have
possession of that favor; to have right to the remission of sin, and
adoption, and to have possession of these, do seem to me to be of nearer kin.
Except he should think that possession of favor is nothing but the knowledge
or feeling of it; and that possession of pardon is the like; and that Faith
justifies us but in foro conscientiae: But I will not censure so hardly till I
know it.

Indeed there is a justification by public declaration at the great judgment,
which much differs from a mere Right. But our justification by faith here is
but a justifying in the sense of the Law, or giving us right to that full
justification: So that To have right to it, and to have possession of it in
point of Law or Right; is to me all one: For what does Faith give us possession
of in its justifying Act, but this legal right?

5. And indeed, it seems to me a full definition of all pardon and
justification which is here to be expected, which he lays down; He says,
Christ did deliver us from the curse, and take away the Obligation which was
against us ipso facto. And I think to be justified, is but to be freed from the
curse or condemnation; and to be pardoned, is nothing else but to be freed from
the obligation to punishment. And is remission and justification the immediate
effect of Christ's death?

What ever this Writer thinks in this, is nothing to us: But because I would
not have you so palpably and dangerously err, let me say a little more
against this mistake. You may remember I have often told you, of how great moment
it is in Divinity, to be able soundly to distinguish betwixt immediate and
Mediate Effects of Christ's Death. (I think Tho. Moore meant the Immediate and
Mediate Effects, which he calls Ends which has caused a great many pages
about the Ends of Christ's Death, to be written by his Antagonists to little
purpose.) Now I would have you know, that this actual Remission and
Justification, are no Immediate, but Mediate effects of Christ's Death; no, nor
a personal right thereto if there be any such thing distinct from actual
freedom.

And to this end I pray you weigh these Arguments.

1. What Right soever God gives to men to things supernatural such as
justification, remission, adoption) he gives by his written Laws. But by
these Laws he has given no such thing to any Believer, (such as are the
Elect before conversion, (therefore, etc.

The major is evident: Gods Decree gives no man a personal right to the mercy
intended him. And for the minor, no man can produce any Scripture giving to
unbeleevers such a right.

2. If God hate all the workers of iniquity, and we are all by nature the
children of wrath, and without faith it is impossible to please God, and he
that believes not is condemned already; then certainly the Elect while they
are unbeleevers are not actually, de facto, no nor in personal Right,
delivered from this hatred, wrath, displeasure and condemnation. But the major
is the very words of Scripture; therefore, etc.

3. If we are justified only by Faith, then certainly not before Faith: But we
are justified only by Faith; therefore, etc.

I do in charity suppose that you will not answer so groslely, as to say, we
are justified in foro Dei, before Faith, and only in foro conscientiae, by
Faith, till you can find one word in Scripture which says, that an unbeleever
is justified, If I thought you were of this opinion, I should think it an easy
task to manifest its falsehood.

And if you say that we are justified in Gods Decree before Faith:

I answer, 1. It is no justification; show me the Scripture that calls it so.

2. Nay, it clearly, implies the contrary. For Decreeing is a term of
Diminution, as to justifying. He that says he is purposed to free you from
prison, etc. implies that as yet it is not done. To be justified or saved in
Decree, is no more but that God decrees to justify and save us; and therefore
sure it is yet undone.

4. If we are exhorted while we are unbeleevers, to be reconciled to God, and
to believe for remissions of sins; then sure we are not yet reconciled nor
remitted; But the former is evident in Scripture; therefore, etc.

5. No man dare affirm, that we are immediately upon Christ's death, delivered
actually, and ipso facto, from the power or presence of sin, nor from
afflictions and death, which are the fruits of it; nor yet that we are freed
from the distance and separation from God which sin procured. And why then
should we think that we were immediately delivered from the guilt and
condemnation?

I know the common answer is, that justification is an immanent act, and
therefore from eternity; but Sanctification is a transient act. But I have
disproved this in the Treatise, and cleared to you, that justification is also
a transient Act: Otherwise Socinianisme were the soundest doctrine, that Christ
never needed to satisfy, if we were justified from eternity. Yet (to confess
the truth) I was long deceived with this Argument my self, taking it upon trust
from Dr. Twisse and Mr. Pemble, (whom I valued above most other men; and so
continued of that same judgment with these Authors you allege, and remained
long in the borders of Antinomianisme, which I very narrowly escaped: And it
grieveth me to see many of our Divines to fight against Jesuits and Arminians
with the Antinomian weapons, as if our cause afforded no better; and so they
run into the far worse extreme.

I undertake to manifest to you, that this Doctrine of Christ's immediate
Actual delivering us from guilt, wrath, and condemnation,] is the very pillar
and foundation of the whole frame and fabric of Antinomianisme.

But these things which you draw out of me here unseasonably; I am handling in
a fitter place, (in a small Tract of Universal Redemption:) But the last week
I have received Amiraldus against Spanhemius exercitations, who has opened my
very heart, almost in my own words; and has so fully said the very same things
which I intended, for the greater part, that I am now unresolved whether to
hold my hand, or to proceed.

The Lord give you to search after the truth in love, with a humble, unbyassed,
submissive soul; neither losing it through negligence and undervaluing, nor yet
diverted from it by inferior controversies, nor preverted by self-confidence,
nor forestalled by prejudice, nor blinded by passion, nor lost in contentions,
nor subverted by the now-ruling spirit of giddiness and levity, nor yet
obscured by the confounding of things that differ; that so by the conduct of
the Word and Spirit, you may attain the sight of amiable naked truth, and your
understanding may be enlightened, and your soul beautified by the reflection and
participation of her light and beauty, that your heart being ravished with the
sense of her goodness, and awed by her Authority, you may live here in the
constant embracements of her, and cordial obedience to her, till you are taken
up to the prime eternal Truth and Goodness.

Romans 14. 9. For to this end Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and living.

Ephesians. 1. 22. And (God) has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be
the head over all things to the Church.

Heb. 5. 9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation
to all them that obey him.

Revel. 20. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in by the gate into the City.

Sayings of excellent Divines; added to satisfy you who charge me with
Singularity.
D. Twisse his Discovery of Dr. Iacksons vanity, p. 528.
WHat one of our Church will maintain, that any one obtaines actual Redemption
by Christ without Faith? especially considering that Redemption by the Blood of
Christ, and forgiveness of sins are all one, Ephesians. 1. 17. Col. 1. 14.

Bishop Hooper cited by Doctor Jackson.
(Christ] only received our infirmities and Original Disease, and not the
contempt of him and his Law.

Expounded by Dr. Twisse against Dr. Iackson, page 584.
His meaning in my judgment is only this, that Christ has made satisfaction
for the imperfections of our Faith and holiness, although we continue therein
until death: But he has not made satisfaction for the contempt and hatred of
his Word, etc. in case men do continue therein unto death.

Alstedius Distinct. Theol. c. 17. page 73
The condition of the Covenant of Grace, is partly Faith, and partly
Evangelicali obedience or holiness of life proceeding from Faith in Christ.

Idem ibid. cap. 23.
Christ is our Righteousness in a causall sense, but not in a formal sense.

Sadeel. advers. human. satisfact. page 213.
Christ's satisfaction is to them profitable to whom it is truly applied. The
way of application is this, that the merits of Christ be imputed to us: This
imputation is done when the Holy Ghost begets in us a true faith, which
receiving the benefit of Christ, does at once also produce in us the true
fruits of our Regeneration.

Rivetus in Disput. de Satisfactione.
God was not bound to accept the satisfaction performed by another, although
sufficient; unless (which he could not) man had satisfied himself, and had
born the punishment due to his sin; therefore there was a necessity that a
Covenant should intercede, and God himself propound a Mediator.

That there must an agreement intercede on his part who was satisfied, I have
proved, without which the satisfaction had been in vain, Ibidem.

Ibidem. ibid. These. 4, 5, 6.
The Act which in satisfaction God performs, it is of a supreme Judge, freely
relaxing his own Law, and transferring the penalty on another: So that in this
relaxation Gods supreme dominion may be observed: For how could God have
relaxed his Law, if he had not been the supreme Rector, or had been under a Law
himself? And by the transferring the penalty from the sinner, and exacting it
of the surety, the relation of a party offended, as such, is removed from God,
etc. Iam. 4. 12.

So he proceeds to prove, that God could and did relax his Law, as being
positive, and so relaxable; that it is abrogate, not expounded (...). And what
of it was relaxable, and what not, etc.

Bellarmine confesses (l. de just. cap. 7.) that our opinion is right, if we
mean, that Christ merits are imputed us, because they are given us, and we may
offer them to God the Father for our sins, because Christ undertook the burden
of satisfying for us, and reconciling us to God. Which Rivet approves, Disp.
de justific.

Dr. Twisse Vindic. Great. l. 2. par. 2. crim. 3.. 6.
I confess salvation, and so pardon and adoption, are offered to all and
singular men on condition they believe etc. And so I deny not, that Redemption
is so far obtained for all and every man.

Dr. Twisse against Cotton, page 74.
Still you prove that which no man denies, viz. That God purposed life to the
world upon condition of obedience and repentance; provided that you understand
it right, viz. that obedience and repentance is ordained of God, as a condition
of life, not of Gods purpose.

Dr. Twisse Consid. of Tilenus Synod dort and Arles reduced to prac. page 61.
Ger. Vossius interprets the will of God touching the salvation of all of a
conditional will, thus; God will have all to be saved, to wit, in case they
believe; which conditional will in this sense, neither Austin did, nor do we
deny.

Idem page 143, 144.
I willingly profess that Christ dyed for all in respect of procuring the
benefit (of pardon and salvation) conditionally, on condition of their faith.

So also, page 154, 161, 165, 170, 194. And Discovery of Doctor Iacksons
vanity, p. 527. 551.

Iunius Parallel. l. 3. Heb. 5. 9.
For the promise of salvation is made to obedience, and be queathed to it in
the Testament of Christ himself dying.

Paraeus in Hebr. 5. 9.
To obey Christ is not only to profess his Name, but to acknowledge him the
only perfect Redeemer, to cleave to him in true affiance, and to live worthy
the Gospel. This condition in the whole Gospel is required in those that
shall be saved. Universal Grace belongs only to the obedient.

Piscator in Heb. 5. 9.
Christ is not the Author of salvation to all men, but only to those that obey
him, that is, who believe his Promises, and obey his Precepts.

Aretius in Heb. 5. 9.
The benefit of Redemption is universal, and indeed belongs to all in
general, so be it we obey him.

Calvin in Luke 1. 6.
We must so expound whatsoever the Scripture speaks of the Righteousness of
men, that it overthrow not the forgiveness of sins, whereon it rests as a
building on its foundation. They who simply expound it, that Zachary and
Elizabeth were righteous by Faith, because they were freely accepted of God for
the Mediators sake, do wrest the words of Luke to a strange sense: And as to
the matter it self, they say something, but not the whole. I confess indeed,
that the righteousness which is ascribed to them, ought to be acknowledged as
received from the Grace of Christ, and not to the merit of works; yet the Lord,
because he imputed not to them their sins, does dignifie their holy life, with
the title of Righteousness. The folly of the Papists is easily refelled, who
oppose this Righteousness to the Righteousness of Faith; when as it flows from
it, so it ought to be placed in subordination to it, that so there be no
disagreement between them.

Perkins Vol. 1. p. 662. The true Gain.
And lest any should imagine, that the very act of Faith in apprehending
Christ, justifies, we are to understand, that Faith does not apprehend by
power from it self, but by virtue of the Covenant. If a man believe the
Kingdom of France to be his, it is not therefore his; yet if he believe Christ
and the Kingdom of Heaven by Christ, to be his, it is his indeed; Not simply,
because he believes, but because he believes upon commandment and promise: For
in the tenor of the Covenant, God promises to impute the obedience of Christ
to us, for our righteousness, if we believe.

Perkins Vol. 1. p. 476. on Hab. 2. 4.
Justice mentioned in the word is twofold, the justice of the Law, and the
justice of the Gospel: The justice of the Law has in it all points and parts
of justice, and all the perfection of all parts; and it was never found in any
upon earth except Adam and Christ. The justice of the Gospel has all the
parts of true justice, but it wants the full perfection of parts. And this
kind of justice is nothing else but the conversion of a sinner, with a
purpose, will, and endeavor to please God, according to all the Commandments
of the Law. Thus was Noah just, Job, Zachary, Elizabeth; and thus must the just
man be taken in this place, Hab. 2. 4.

Sop. 649. in the true Gain.
God does as it were keep a double Court, one of justice, the other of Mercy.
In the Court of justice he gives judgment by the Law, and accuses every man
that continues not in all things, etc. In this Court nothing can stand but the
Passion and Righteousness of Christ; and for the best works that we can do,
we may not look for any acceptance or reward, but use the plea of David, Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh shall be justified in
thy sight. Now in the Court of Grace and Mercy God has to deall with his own
children, that stand before him justified and reconciled by Christ, and the
obedience of such he accepts in this Court, and mercifully regards, though
imperfect -- for christ.

Perkins, Vol. 1. page 124. On the Creed.
Christ as he is set forth in Word and Sacraments is the object of Faith. --
Faith apprehends whole Christ. -- page 125. First, it apprehends the very
body and blood of Christ; and then in the second place the virtue and benefits.
-- Whereas some are of an opinion that faith is an affiance or confidence, that
seems to be otherwise; for it is a fruit of Faith.

That Faith is so large as to contain very many acts, see Zanchy on Ephesians. 1. in
loco communi de fide.

That Word and Sacraments are the instruments of Justification on Gods part,
Zanchy affirms on Ephesians. 1. loco communi de justificatione,

That the form of Righteousness is conformity to the Law, he teaches on Phil.
1. 11.

That there is a necessity of a twofold Righteousness, one imputed, the other
inherent. Zanchy ibid, and freq.

Dr. Willet on Romans 2. contr. 3. 7.
Good works are required as a condition in those which are to be saved, not as
a meritorious cause of their salvation.

The meaning of this sentence the doors of the law shall be justified, is the
same: God will approve, justify, reward them that do the works of the Law,
whether Jew or Gentile: Yet it follows not that a man is therefore justified
by the works of the Law: But God approves and rewards the workers, not the
hearers and professors: So here the Apostle treats not of the cause of
justification, which is faith without the works of the law; But of the
difference between such as shall be justified, and such as are not. Faius. They
only which have a lively Faith, which works and keeps the Law in part, and
supplyeth the rest which is wanting in themselves by the perfect obedience of
Christ, they shall be justified; not those which only profess the Law, and
keep it not. The Apostle then here shows who shall be justified, not for what.

By these words it is evident that Dr. Willet and Faius acknowledge sincere
obedience to be a condition of justification, or of those that shall be
justified, though not a cause, as they say (I think mistakingly) Faith is.

Dr. Davenant Animadversions on Gods love to mankind, p. 385. 386.
The Doctrine of Predestination permits no man to persuade himself that his
salvation is certain, before he find that he is truly converted, truly
faithful, truly sanctified.

Because you will perhaps hear Mr. Owen before Grotius, see Mr. Ball on
Covenant. p 290.

There is a twofold payment of debt, one of the thing altogether the same
which was in the Obligation; and this ipso facto freeth from punishment,
whether it be paid by the debtor himself, or by his surety. Another of a thing
not altogether the same which is in the Obligation, so that some act of the
Creditor or Governor must come unto it, which is called remission; in which
case deliverance does not follow ipso facto upon the satisfaction; and of this
kind is the satisfaction of Christ. -- Thus this great learned, holy Divine as
almost England ever bred, does go on (even in Grotius his own words translated)
betwixt whom (had he been living) and Mr. Owen would have been but impar
congressus.

Ball on Covenant, p. 240.
As these false Teachers 2 Pet. 2. 1. were called into the Covenant, accepted
the condition, believed in Christ, for a time rejoiced in him, and brought
forth some fruit, so we confess they were bought by the blood of Christ,
because all these were fruits of Christ's Death, whereof they were made
partakers.

As in the Parable, Mat. 18. 25. the Lord is said to remit to his servant a
1000* talents when he desired him, viz. Inchoately, or upon condition, which
was not confirmed, because he did not forgive his fellow servants: So the false
Prophets are bought by the blood of Christ, in a sort, as they believed in
Christ. We read of Apostates who had bin enlightened, etc. Heb. 6. 5, 6, 7. and
did revolt from the Faith; To these men their sins were remitted in a sort in
this world, and in a sort they were bought with the blood of Christ, but
inchoately only, and as they tasted the word of life. Had they eaten the word
of life, had they soundly and truly believed in Christ, they had received
perfect and consummate remission of sins, both in this world, and in the world
to come; they had been perfectly redeemed and reconciled to God; But because
they did not eat, but tasted only, they received not perfect Remission, they
were not perfectly redeemed.

Idem. page 225.
There is this mutual respect betwixt the promise and stipulation; that the
promise is as an argument which God uses, that he might obtain of man what he
requires; and the performance of the thing required, is a condition without
which man cannot obtain the promise of God.

Idem, page 43.
Of this Covenant be two parts, 1. a Promise: 2. a stipulation. The Promise is,
that God will pardon the sins of them that repent unfeignedly, and believe in
his mercy.

2. The Stipulation is, that they believe in him that justifies the ungodly,
and walk before him in all well-pleasing.

See him also delivering the most of Amiraldus doctrine, p. 244, 245.

Molinaeus de elect. ex fide, p. 316.
We know remission is not obtained before Prayers (for it.) But I say that it
was decreed before Prayers* and that it is sought by Prayers, although it be
decreed.

Scarpius symphonia. p. 93.
The substance of the Covenant lies in the promise of grace made in Christ,
and the Restipulation of Faith and Gratitude.

Paraeus in Genes. 17. p. 1130.
The substance of the Covenant lies in the promise of free Reconciliation,
Righteousness, and life eternal, by and for Christ freely to be given, and in
the restipulation of our Moral Obedience and Gratitude.

Bullinger. Decad. 1. Sermon. 6. page 44.
We say, Faith justifies for it self, not as it is a quality in our mind, or
our own work: but as Faith is a gift of Gods grace having the promise of
Righteousness and life, etc. Therefore Faith justifies for Christ, and from
the grace and Covenant of God.

Mr. Ant. Burgess of Iustif. Lect. 14. p. 117.
Scripture makes no pardon of sin to be but where the subject has such
qualifications as this of forgiving others. It is not indeed put as a cause, or
merit, but yet it is as a qualification of the subject; therefore our Savior
repeateth, Except ye forgive others, etc. So Act. 10. 43. Romans 3. 15. So 1 Ioh.
1. 9. If we confess, etc. By these and the like Scriptures it is plain, That
remission of sin is given us only in the use of these Graces.

Mr. Burges of Iustif. Lect. 18. page 148, 149.
Prop. 2. Although the Scripture attributes pardon of sin to many
qualifications in a man, yet repentance is the most express and proper duty.
-- If we speak of the express formal qualification, it is repentance of our
sins, etc.

Prop. 3. None may believe, or conclude that their sins are pardoned before
they have repented, Mat. 3. 2. Luk, 13. 3.

Prop. 4. There is a necessity of repentance if we would have pardon, both by
necessity of Precept, and of means. The Spirit of God works this in a man to
qualify him for this pardon, page 150.

You see then that Faith is not the only condition of remission, and
consequently nor of justification.

Not as an appeal to men, but to fill up the vacant pages, and satisfy you who
charge me with singularity, have I added these promiscuous Testimonies,
supposing you can apply them to their intended uses.

FINIS.

