ROYAL POEMS Presented to His Sacred MAJESTY Charles the II.

By J. G. B.

1. On the Kings most excellent Majesty's happy Return to his Kingdoms. 2.
Annagramma in Principem, Carolus Stuartus i. e. Arthur, Laus, Custos. 3. On the
Lord Monck, Generalissimo of all his Majesty's Forces. 4. An Elegy on the
Martyrdom of King Charles the First. 5. On the Regicides. 6. On the Tribe of
Fortune, the Rump of the Long-Parliament. 7. In verba Caroli Regis dum fuit
Hispaniae in illud Nasonis: Nunc notis adversa praelia front gerit.
LONDON, Printed for R. Wood. 1660.

Royal Poems.
On the KINGS most Excellent Majesty's happy Return to His Kingdoms.
COme Noble Phoebus and in our Horizon
Shine, it is long since, that in confusion
We darkly grop'd, for want of thee, the Sky
Is now cleared by the Heavens Deity
Of opposing Clouds, and now our greatest Jove
With Mercury expect, that thou should move
With thy resplendant Rays, to irradiate
Our long-afflicted and distressed State:
Come; We expect thee long, with hearty groans,
We can no longer brook vain Phaetons.
Now all Malignant stars are dimn'd save some few
Ill bodying Comets, and a little Crew
Of the Galaxia's stars, all which away
Shall soon hence fall, by virtue of thy Ray;
Then, I pray hither, now, And properate,
Being invited by the course of Fate.
Anagramma In Principeus Brittannorum Carolus Stuartus, id est. Arthur, Laus,
Custos.
O Rex, ecce tuo quae sunt sub nomine clausa,
Arthur, Laus, Custos, quae meliora, precor
Arthur es ut patriam re^imas, adjunctaque laus est
Quod tu Brittannis sis decus omne tuis,
Custos es quod Regna tuo tutabere Nutu
Quam faustum fato, nomen hoc omen habet,
Id circo quid stas O Princeps fortis Eremo,
Patres te invitant et bona fata, veni.
(...).
Vatem hunc prehibeto optimum qui been conjicis Euripid.
On the Lord MONCK Generalissimo of all His Majesty's Forces.
LEt much famed Egypt and the Eastern Coast
Give over hereafter proudly for to boast
Of their Noble Pini, their Ptolemyes,
Their Warlike Joabs and stout Machabees;
For now England to us brave Monck has bred,
Who does surpass each man that ere did tread
Over conquered Foes, for sure, no Age did see
The like for Valor and State-policie;
For as in Field be never did retreat,
So by his wit he now does such a feat,
That never was known, yet settling without Blood
Three great Nations, that in confusion stood:
All after Ages will confess with awe,
They never so stout a Politician saw;
Wit and Valor in him have made their seat,
Both conjoined for to make him great:
Nor is he only Politic and Wise,
But also Pious; for his Noble Eyes
Look on the Widows Cause and the Orphans all,
That were long wronged; by this brave General
Are considered; for which, he shall be
The greatest starr, save Phoebus in the Sky;
And this admire in him, 'bove each Conquering man,
That after all Conquest, himself he Conquer can.
Fortius est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit m^^nia.
An Elegy on the Murder of His Gracious Majesty Charles the first, January
the 30th. 1648.
Quid sine Pectore Corpus
Coelum sine sole, regnum sine rege.

O What is this? How is bright Phoebus gone,
Our Joy and Glory from our Horizon?
He, He, by whom, we were made most splendant,
With splendor bright, full and abundant
See, by thy fall, now all the World is grown
To a disordered Chaos and Confusion,
Without Head or Tail; all in Obscurity
Are involved, none knowing where to stay,
Nor what way to move, some Retrograde
Like Cancer go, others away do fade:
Those greatest stars, are grown exorbitant,
Crossing each other; nor is here extant
Any order, now, or rule, but in this State
Each as high as other does (O! strange Fate)
His own will, nay, here after Phoebus loss,
(...).
Thus by the enormous, and excentrique
Course of the Galaxia stars, our politic
State is turned unto the Cyclops mode,
But at this let none admire abroad;
For this Land bread Monsters, to whom in ire
Breathed from their mouths against us fatal fire:
O Heavens high, how long shall these thus deal,
And make such havoc of the Commonweal?
On the Regicides.
'TWas strange, 'twas strange, and could nothing suffice
These Canibals but that they must surprise
The Head it self, and it amputate
With such unnatural and deadly hate.
Was It not enough for your base Guts, for food
To suck of some Prime members Noble Blood:
No, no, these Hell Hounds must chop off the Head,
That on each part they may at once be fed.
O greedy Guts, O Cormandizng crew
Of ne're-fill'd Appetites, behold and view
This Tragic Act, shall you hot Burning Coals
Escape? believe there are no lurking holes
That can defend you from the Noble hand
That shortly comes here from bold Neptunes sand:
Make have to fly, O! Lap-Wings, this my best advice,
From the Eagles force, or else submit most wise,
On the Tribe of Fortune, the RUMP of the Long-Parliament.
COme well-vers'd Augurs and Astrologers,
That by Beasts Entrails, and the rolling Spheres
Do seek for new Portents, run here and see
A strange, fatal, and monstrous prodigy:
For now against Nature, O sad Destiny,
All is hurled most preposterously;
The World is turned upside down, the Head now
Is become Tail, the Tail to Head does grow;
The Worlds scum, Earths sons of Nativity,
(Then Nile's head more obscure) are raised on high,
The Nobles now depressed, every Slave
Sprung from the Dunghill does the Heavens braive;
The Shrubs and Underwoods on high are grown,
The tall Elms and great Cedars tumbled down:
Now the Tailor is made a bouncing Dux,
The Country Idiot as an Orthodox
Though no Clerk, is unto the Pulpit gone,
And for Pence and Groats does blaterate thereon:
Nay, the poor Footboy is become a Knight,
Thus, thus, our Pedes is made an Eques right.
O absurd accidents, saddle henceforth the Ass,
Dephalerate the Horse, seeing it came thus to pass:
Oh, What grief of greifs is it for to see
A Plebeian Crew over men of Majesty
To domineer, it is intolerable
To see Batts and Owls rule thus over an Eagle
And glorious Birds; I am all on fire,
Not all the Thames can quench my raging ire;
Give strength to us, give strength, O Heavens high,
To rid our selves from such a slavery,
O Tribe of Fortune, whose turn did evene
To walk a while proudly on Fortunes Scene:
Your turn comes now, and you with all be brought
On the same Stage, shag-ragg'd as you ought.
In Verba Caroli Regis dum fuit Hispaniae in illud Nasonis: Nunc notus adversa
praelia front gerit.
IPse notum contra, oppositum pugnare videbas,
Quondam temporibus Naso Poeta tuis:
O Vtinam contra opponens nunc robore mecum
Hic notus adversa praeliae front gerat.
Nota quod notus a Nasone pro vento qui perstabatur noto figurate sumebatur, ab
Authore sumitur natus pro populo qui in Nota habitant eadem figura, Contimens
pro Contento.

Henry Vaughan, Cambro Britt.

FINIS.

