THE JUDGMENT OF Mr. BAXTER CONCERNING CEREMONIES AND CONFORMITY.

WITH A SHORT REFLECTION upon a Scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, A Proposition
for the Safety and Happiness of the KING and KINGDOM.

IN A LETTER to a GENTLEMAN of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed for R. Jenaway, in the Year 1667

SIR,
I Suppose the Pamphlet which you sent me, was designed rather to let me see
the Impudence of this Licentious Age, than to draw me into the Impertinence of
Answering it. The Lameness of the Style, the Sense, and the Coherence, but
especially the Weakness of what he calls Arguments, make me ashamed to deal
with such an Adversary. Yet in running it over, I could not but observe this
one Confession: It is not the Dignity P. 18, 19.
of the Bishops, their Lordships and Revenues; It is not their Cathedrals,
Organs, and their Divine Service in what State and Magnificence they please; It
is not Common Prayer, no nor any Ceremony of the Church whatsoever for all its
significancy, if it be but a circumstance of Worship, and no more, that could
hinder most of the Sober Nonconformists to come over to you; but it is these
Declarations, Subscriptions, and Oaths which you impose on them in your Acts.

Now, though I think it no hard matter to make it appear, that these
Declarations, Subscriptions, and Oaths, contain nothing in them but what is
absolutely necessary to the Safety of the Church and State; and that those men
who refuse to make such Acknowledgments and Engagements, are utterly unfit to
be entrusted with the Cure of Souls, and the office of Preaching to the People;
which, like other good things, as it is excellent in the Use, so is it no less
dangerous in the Abuse: Yet supposing, for once, that these Oaths and
Subscriptions were as unlawful, as they would have the World believe; What is
this to those that are not required to Subscribe or Swear? Is not this a plain
Acknowledgement, that notwithstanding all these Clamors against the Governors,
and the Ceremonies of the Church, yet there is indeed no just ground of
separating from either, since no Swearing or Subscription is required of the
Multitude, of which they so much boast, and whose Cause they pretend to plead?
Of these, by their own Confession, as many as are Judicious and Sober, may come
over and Conform: So that we have only a few Factious Men (that call themselves
Ministers) that make all this Noise; as if for their sakes, the KING and
PARLIAMENT must undo all that they have done, for the Restoring of Religion
and good Order in the Church, and preserving Peace in the State: and because
the City and the Ships have been lately burnt, these Men that are well P. 6.
skilled in blowing Coals, must have leave to set the whole Kingdom in a Flame.

The Worthy Gentlemen of your House, will, I hope, consider this: Which that
you may not look upon only as an unwary word dropped from a loose Pen, I shall
add, for Confirmation, what I long since observed in a Book written by a great
Rabbie of that Tribe, under the Title of Five Disputations of Church
Government, and Worship: Printed at London, 1659. A time, when he could have
but small encouragement to say more than be thought in this matter.

THE JUDGMENT OF Mr. BAXTER CONCERNING CEREMONIES AND CONFORMITY.
THose Modes or Circumstances of Worship Disp. 4. P. 361.
which are Necessary in Genere, but left undetermined by God in Specie, are
left by God to humane Prudential Determination: (else an Impossibility should
be necessary.) But many such there are, that are Necessary in Genere, but left
undetermined of God in Specie; therefore many such are left to humane
Prudential Determination.

. 5. Yet it is in the Power of man to determine of Disp 5. P. 400*
such Modes and Circumstances as are necessary to the performance of that
Worship which God has instituted in his Word: and therefore lawful Governors
may in such Cases bind us by their Commands.

1. It is left to humane Determination, what Place the P. 400.
Public Assemblies shall be held in.

2. It is left to man to determine of the Time of Holy P. 401.
Duties, except only where God has determined of it already.

3. It is left to the Determination of humane Prudence, Ibid.
what Utensils to employ about the Public Worship of God.

Here therefore we must thus conclude,

1. That every misordering of such great affairs, is P. 423.
the sin of them that do it.

2. But yet that the Subject is not exempted from Obedience by every such
mistake of the Governor: but by some, he is.

. 67. If the mischoosing of such Circumstances, by Church-Governors, be but an
Inconvenience, and do not destroy the Ordinance it self, or frustrate the Ends
of it, we are to obey: 1. For he is the Judge of his own work, and not we: 2.
The thing is not sinful, though inconvenient: 3. Obedience is commanded to our
lawful Governors.

We must obey in all things lawful. P. 424.

And when we do obey in a Case of Miscommanding, it is not a doing evil, that
good may come of it, as some do misconceive: but it is only a submitting to
that which is ill commanded, but not evil in him that does submit. It is the
Determiner that is the cause of the Inconvenience, and not the Obeyer. Nor is
it inconvenient for me to Obey, though it be worse perhaps to him that
Commands. While he sins in Commanding, he may make it my Duty to Obey.

. 6. Did. 4. We must distinguish between Ceremonies P. 396.
imposed by a Lawful Magistrate, or Church-Governors; and such as are imposed
by Usurpers, or Men without Authority.

. 25. Prop. 12. It may be very sinful to command some Ceremonies, which may
lawfully, yea, must in Duty be used by P. 398.
the Subject when they are commanded.

. 27. Prop. 14. Yet certain things that are commonly called Ceremonies, may
lawfully be used in the Church upon Humane Imposition; and when it is not
against the Law of God, no person should disobey the Commands of their Lawful
Governors in such things.

Of Set-Forms, and the Book of Common Prayer.
Prop. 1. A Stinted Liturgy is in it self Lawful. Disp. 4. P. 358.


2. A Stinted Liturgy in some parts of Public Service, is ordinarily necessary.

3. In the parts where it is not of Necessity, it may not only be submitted
to, but desired, when the Peace of the Church requires it.

7. The safest way of Composing such a Public P. 359.
Form, is, to take it all, for Matter and Words, out of the Holy Scriptures.

8. Yet is not this of such Necessity, but that we may join in it, or use it,
if the Form of Words be not from Scripture.

Prop. 1. A Stinted Liturgy is in it self Lawful.
This is thus proved:

Argument 1. That which is not directly, or consequentially forbidden by God,
remains lawful: A stinted Liturgy is not directly, or consequentially
forbidden by God: therefore it remains lawful.

The Major is undoubted, because nothing but a Prohibition can make a thing
unlawful. Sin is a transgression of a Law: where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression: And yet I have heard very Reverend men answer this, That it is
enough that it is not commanded, though not forbidden* Which is plainly to deny
both Scripture and Civil Principles.

Now for the Minor, That a stinted Liturgy is not forbidden, we need no other
proof, than that no Prohibition P. 361.
can be produced.

Argument 6. If it be lawful for the People to use a stinted P. 364.
Form of words in Public Prayer, then is it in it self lawful for the Pastors:
but it is lawful for the People: for the Pastors prayer (which they must pray
over with him, and not only hear it) is a stinted Form to them, even as much
as if he had learnt it out of a Book. They are to follow him in his Method and
Words, as if it were a Book-Prayer.

Argument 7. It is lawful to use a Form in Preaching: therefore a stinted
Liturgy is lawful.

1. Because Preaching is a part of that Liturgy. 2. Because the reason is the
same for Prayer, as for that, in the main.
Argument 8. That which has been the practice of the Church in
Scripture-times, and down to this day, and is yet the practice of almost all
the Churches of Christ on earth, is not like to be unlawful: but such is the
use of some stinted forms of Public Service: therefore, etc. That it was so in
the Jews Church, and approved by Christ, I have showed. That it has been of
ancient use in the Church since Christ, and is at this day in use in Africa,
Asia, Europe, even among the Reformed Churches in France, Holland, Geneva, etc.
is so well known, that I think I need not stand to prove it: yea, those few
that seem to disuse it, do yet use it, in Psalms, and other parts of Worship.

As for the Common Prayer it self, I never rejected it P. 421.
because it was a Form, nor thought it simply unlawful because it was such a
Form; but have made use of it, and would do again in the like case.

Of Ceremonies.
The Ceremonies controverted among us, were especially, The Surplice, the
Gesture of Kneeling in receiving the P. 409.
Lords Supper, the Ring in Marriage, Laying the hand on the Book in taking an
Oath, the Organs and Church-Musick, Holy Days, Altars, Rails, and the Cross in
Baptism.

Of the Surplice.
Some decent Habit is necessary; either the Magistrate, P. 409.
or the Minister himself, or the Associated Pastors must determine what. I
think neither Magistrate nor Synod should do any more than hinder Undecency:
But yet if they do more, and tie all to One Habit (and suppose it were an
undecent Habit) yet this is but an imprudent use of Power. It is a thing within
the Magistrates reach; he does not an aliene work, but his own work amiss: and
therefore the thing in it self being lawful; I would obey him, and use that
garment, if I could not be dispensed with. Yea, though Secondarily the
Whiteness be to signify Purity, and so it be made a teaching sign, yet would I
obey.

Of Kneeling at the Sacrament.
But yet, as sinfully as this Gesture was imposed, for P. 411.
my part I did obey the Imposers, and would do, if it were to do again, rather
than disturb the Peace of the Church, or be deprived of its Communion. For God
having made some Gesture necessary, and confined me to none, but left it to
Humane Determination, I shall submit to Magistrates in their proper work, even
when they miss it in the manner. I am not sure that Christ intended the example
of himself and his Apostles, as obligatory to us that shall succeed. I am sure
it proves sitting lawful; but I am not sure that it proves it necessary:
(though very convenient.) But I am sure, he has commanded me Obedience and
Peace.

Of the Ring in Marriage.
And for the Ring in Marriage, I see no reason to P. 411.
scruple the lawfulness of it: For though the Papists make a Sacrament of
Marriage, yet we have no reason to take it for any Ordinance of Divine Worship;
any more than the solemnizing of a Contract between a Prince and People. All
things are sanctified and pure to the pure.

Of Organs and Church Music.
And for Organs, or other Instruments of Music in Gods Worship, they being a
Help partly Natural, and P. 412:
partly Artificial, to the exhilerating of the spirits, for the praise of God,
I know no argument to prove them simply unlawful, but what would prove a Cup of
wine unlawful, or the tune and meeter, and melody of singing unlawful.

Of Holy Days.
Nor for my part do I make any scruple In point of Lawfulness; For Convenience
is according to several accidents.
to keep a P. 412, 413.
Day in Remembrance of any Eminent Servant of Christ, or Martyr, to praise God
for their Doctrine or Example, and honor their Memorial.

But the hardest part of the Question is, whether it be lawful to keep Days, in
celebrating the Memorial of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Fasting;
Transfiguration, Ascension, and such like?

And yet for all this I am resolved, if I live where such P. 416.
Holy Days as these are observed, to censure no man for observing them; nor
would I deny them Liberty to follow their judgments, if I had the power of
their liberties; provided they use not reproach and violence to others; and
seek not to deprive them of their Liberties.

Yea more, I would not only give men their Liberty P. 417.
in this, but if I lived under a Government that peremptorily commanded it, I
would observe the outward rest of such a Holi-day, and I would preach on it,
and join with the Assemblies in Gods Worship on it. Yea, I would thus observe
the Day, rather than offend a weak Brother, or hinder any man's salvation, much
more rather than I would make any division in the Church.

Of Altars, and Rails.
And for the next Ceremony, the Name and form of an Altar; no doubt it is a
thing indifferent, whether the Ibid.
Table stand this way, or that way: and the Primitive Churches used commonly
the names of Sacrifice, and Altar, and Priest, and I think, lawfully: for my
part I shall not be he that shall condemn them.

I conceive that the dislike of these things in England Ibid.
(the form and name of an Altar, and the Rails about it) was not as if they
were simply evil.

Whether we shall receive the Lords Supper at a Table, or in our seats; and
whether the Table shall be of P. 401, 402.
wood or stone? whether it shall be round, or long, or square? whether it shall
stand in the East or West End of the Temple, or in the middle? whether it shall
have Rails, or no Rails? All these are left to Humane Prudence.

Of the Cross in Baptism.
But of all our Ceremonies, there is none that I have P. 417.
more suspected to be simply unlawful, than the Cross in Baptism.

Yet I dare not peremptorily say, that it is unlawful: nor P. 418.
will I condemn either Ancients or Moderns that use it: nor will I make any
disturbance in the Church about it, more than my own forbearance will make.

I presume not to censure them that judge it lawful; but only give the Reasons
that make me doubt, and rather think it to be unlawful, though still with a
suspicion of my own understanding.

Ambros. contr. Symmach. Unus quis que patienter ferat, si non extor que atur
Imperatori, quod moleste ferret, si ei extor quere cuperet Imperator.
FINIS.

