POETICAL FRAGMENTS: Heart-Imployment WITH GOD and IT SELF.

THE Concordant Discord of a Brokenhealed Heart. Sorrowing-rejoycing,
fearing-hoping, dying-living Written Partly for himself, and partly for near
Friends in Sickness, and other deep Affliction.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, singing and making Melody in your hearts to the Lord.

2 Corinthians. 5. 4. For we that are in this Tabernacle do GROAN, being burdened.

Laeta fere laetus cecini: Cano tristia tristis.

Published for the use of the Afflicted.

LONDON, Printed by T. Snowden for B. Simmons at the a Golden Cocks at the West
end of St. Paul's. 1681.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THese Poetical Fragments, (except Three heretofore Printed) were so far from
being intended for the Press, that they were not allowed the sight of many
Private Friends, nor thought worthy of it: Only had I had time and heart to
have finished the first (which it self according to the Matter and designed
Method, would have made a Volume far bigger than all this, being intended as a
thankful, Historical Commemoration of all the notable passages of my Life,) I
should have published it as the most self-pleasing part of my Writings. But as
they were mostly written in various Passions, so Passion has now thrust them
out into the World. God having taken away the Dear Companion of the last
Nineteen Years of my Life, as her sorrows and sufferings long ago gave Being to
some of these Poems (for reasons which the World is not concerned to know) so
my grief for her Removal, and the Revived Sense of former things, have
prevailed with me to be passionate in the open sight of all.

I confess that Passion is often such a hinderance of Judgment, that a man should
be very suspicious of himself till it be laid: But I am assured that God made
it not in vain; and that Reason is a sleepy half-useless thing, till some
Passion excite it; and Learning to a man asleep is no better for that time than
Ignorance. And God usually begins the awakening of Reason, and the
conversion of Sinners, by the awakening of their useful Passions, their Fear,
their Grief, Repentance, Desire, etc. I confess, when God awakeneth in me those
Passions which I account rational and holy, I am so far from condemning them,
that I think I was half a Fool before, and have small comfort in sleepy Reason.
Lay by all the passionate part of Love and Joy, and it will be hard to have any
pleasant thoughts of Heaven.

In short, I am an Adversary to their Philosophy, that vilify Sense, because
it is in Brutes, and am past doubt that the noble spirits of Sensitives are
debased ignorantly, by pretending Wits, that know not what they say or glory
in. And humane Souls are not less sensitive for being rational, but are
eminently sensitive: Yea, Reason has in it more of eminent internal Sensation,
than those men think that debase Sense. The Scripture, that says of God, That
he is Life and Light, says also, That he is Love, and Love is Complacence, and
Complacence is Joy; and to say God is Infinite, Essential Love and Joy, is a
better notion, than with Cartesians and Cocceians. to say that God and Angels,
and Spirits, are but a Thought, or an Idea. What is Heaven to us if there be no
Love and Joy?

I will do my wise Friends, whose Counsel I have much followed, that Right as
to acquit them from all the guilt of the Publication of these Fragments. Some
of them say, that such Work is below me; and those that I think speak wiselier
say, I am below such Work. These I unfeignedly believe. I have long thought,
that a Painter, a Musician and a Poet, are contemptible, if they be not
Excellent: And that I am not Excellent, I am satisfied: But I am more patient
of contempt than many are. Common Painters serve for poor men's work: And a
Fiddler may serve at a Country-Wedding: Such cannot aspire to the Seize of
the higher sort: And the Vulgar are the greater number. Dr. Stillingfleet
says, I seldom follow my Friend's Advice: In this I justify him: Though in
other things my Advisers contradict him.

I know that natural temper makes Poetry savor to several Wise and Learned
men, as differently as Meats do to various Appetites. I know such Learned
discreet men, that know not what a Tune is, nor can difference one from
another. I wonder at them, and often doubt whether it be an Accident or an
Integral of Humanity which they want. Annatus the Jesuit in his Answer to Dr.
Twisse De Scientia Media commends his Poetry (for a Poem added in the end) in
scorn, as if it were a disgrace to a School Divine. I take one sign of an
Acumen of Wit to make it likely that the man has the same Wit for other work.

For my self, I confess that Harmony and Melody are the pleasure and elevation
of my Soul, and have made a Psalm of Praise in the holy Assembly the chief
delightful Exercise of my Religion and my Life; and has helped to bear down
all the Objections which I have heard against Church-Musick, and against the
149, 150 Psalms. It was not the least comfort that I had in the converse of my
late Dear Wife, that our first in the morning, and last in Bed at night was a
Psalm of Praise (till the hearing of others interrupted it.) ^et those that
savor not Melody, leave others to their different Appetites, and be content to
be so far strangers to their delights.

These Times have produced many Excellent Poets: Among whom for strength of
Wit, Dr. Abraham Cooley justly bears the Bell. I much value Mr. Woodford's
Paraphrase on the Psalms, though his Genius (or somewhat else) expound some
Psalms, so as the next Age will confute. A Woman's Poems, the Lady Katherine
Philip's are far above contetmp. But that is bestto me which is most holy.

I have known good men that were skilled in Music, and much delighted in it,
and yet had a conceit that it was unlawful in a Psalm, or holy Exercise: I so
much differed from them, that I scarce cared for it any where else; and if it
might not be holily used, it should never have been used for me.

Honest George Withers, though a Rustic Poet, has been very acceptable as to
some for his Prophecies, so to others for his plain Country-honesty: The Vulgar
were the more pleased with him for being so little Courtly as to say,

"If I should have been hung, I knew not how
"To teach my Body how to cringe and how,
"And to embrace a fellows, hinder quarters,
"As if I meant to steal away his Garters.
"When any bowed to me with Congees trim,
"All I could do, was stand and laugh at him.
"Bless me thought I, what will this coxcomb do?
"When I perceived one reaching at my shoe.
Quarles yet out went him, mixing competent Wit with Piety (especially in his
Poem against Rest on Earth.)

Silvester on Du Bartas seems to me to out go them both.

Sir Fulk Grevil, Lord Brook (a man of great note in his Age) has a Poem
lately Printed for Subjects Liberty, which I greatly wonder this Age would
bear. There are no Books that have been Printed these twenty Years, that I more
wonder at (that ever they were endured) than Richard Hookers eight Books of
Ecclesiastic Policy, dedicated by Bishop Gauden to our present King, and
vindicated by him; and these Poems of Sir Fulk Grevill Lord Brook. Davie's
Nosce Teipsum is an Excellent Poem in opening the nature, Faculties, and
certain Immortality of Man's Soul. But I must confess, after all that next the
Scripture Poems, there are none so savoury to me, as Mr. George Herbert's, and
Mr. George Sandys's. I know that Cooly and others far excel Herbert in Wit and
accurate composure. But (as Sencca takes with me above all his Contemporaries,
because he speaks Things by words, feeling and seriously, like a man that is
pa^^ jest, so) Herbert speaks to God like on that really believes a God, and
whose business in the world is most with God Heart-work and Heaven-work make up
his Books. And Du Bartas is seriously Divine. And George Sandy's

Omne tulit punctum, dum miscuit utile dulci.

His Scripture Poems are an elegant and excellent Paraphrase: But especially
his Job, whom he has restored to the original glory. O that he had turned the
Psalms into Meter fitted to the usual Tunes! It did me good when Mrs. Wyat
invited me to see Boxley Abbey in Kent; to see upon the old Stone Wall in the
Garden a Summer House with this inscription in great golden Letters, that In
that place Mr. G. Sandys after his Travels over the World, retired himself for
his Poetry and Contemplations. And none are fitter to retire to God then such
as a retired with seeing all the vanities on Earth.

Sure there is somewhat of Heaven ^^ Holy Poetry. It charmeth Souls into ^oving
Harmony and Concord: We ^^we two Brothers in this City, of whom one has
written a Book called ^ friendly debate, to make those seem ^ious or
contemptible who were a^^inst his way: It had too much suc^^ss, and so far
destroyed Love and ^oncord, as will not easily be recove^^d in this age. His
Brother (Mr. Pa^ike of the Charter House) has with ^^ous skill and seriousness
turned into ^new Meter many of David's Psalms; ^^d the advantage for holy
affections ^^d harmony, has so far reconciled ^^e Non-Conformists, that diverse
of ^^em use his Psalms in their Congre^^tions, though they have the old ^^es,
Rouses, Bishop Kings, Mr. Whites, ^^e New Englands, Davisons, the Scots ^^
agreed on by two Nations) in ^^mpetition with it. But I digress too ^^r.

All that I have to say for these Fragments is, 1. That being fitted to Women,
and vulgar wits, which are the far greatest number, they may be useful to such,
though contemptible to those of higher elevation and expectation. 2 And being
suited to afflicted, sick, dying, troubled, sad and doubting persons, the
number of such is so great in these calamitous times, as may render them useful
to more than I desire. 3. And if my present grief may but excuse the
Publication, he that needs them not may let them alone.

Some of them need an Exposition, which I must not give the world. I have added
two or three Printed heretofore, that they may be altogether. The Lord by his
merciful providence and his Grace, tune up our dull and drooping Souls to such
joyful praises, as may prepare us for his everlasting praise in Heaven.

Amen.
London, At the Door of Eternity. Aug. 7. 1681. Rich. Baxter

LOVE Breathing THANKS and PRAISE.
The First Part.
ETernal God, this Worm lifts up the head,
And looks to Thee, by Thee encouraged.
Cheered by thy Bounty, it would speak thy praise,
Whose wondrous Love has measured all my days:
If thou vouchsafe to make a Worm rejoice,
Give him a thankful praising heart and voice.
Thy shining Glory blessed Angels see:
Angels must sing thy Highest praise, not we:
But if thy warming beams cause Worms to speak,
Their baser part will not the Consort break.
When Time was yet no measure; when the Sun
Its rapid motion had not yet begun;
When Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, were yet unfram'd,
Angels and Men, and all things else unnam'd;
When there did nothing else exist but Thee,
Thou wast the same, and still the same wilt be:
When there was none to know or praise thy Name,
Thou wast in perfect Blessedness the same.
The Father, Word and Spirit, One in Three,
Trinity does with Unity agree.
The Eternal Life, that quickens all that lives;
The soul of souls; the Light which all Light gives
Immense and boundless, present every where:
Beyond all place and creatures, thou art there,
Uncomprehended, comprehending all:
Foreknowing whatsoever shall befall.
Uncaus'd, thou causest all that has a Being:
Unknown, thou know; unseen, thou art all-seeing.
Though necessary, yet without constraint;
Unmoved, yet moving all, do never faint.
All things depend on Thee; and Thou on none;
And changing all things, art unchanged alone.
One in the innumerable multitude;
Perfectly ordering things which seem most rude.
Infinite Power, one accent of whose breath,
Can sentence Heaven and Earth to life or death.
Yea, by one act of efficacious Will
Can make and unmake worlds; give life, and kill.
Reason transcending all created Reason;
Not only knowing all things in their season,
But with a Knowledge perfect, infinite,
Knowing Thy self in Thine Eternal Light.
A knowledge which does utterly excel,
The Knowledge of the Earth, the Heavens and Hell;
To know ten thousand worlds, were but to know
The finite streams which from thy Will do flow:
Existents, Futures, all Contingencies
Concealed from man, are naked to thine eyes:
Of every thing thou know the Form and Cause;
As giving all their Nature and their Laws.
Nature's whole frame is but one piece to thee.
The Place and Use of all things thou do see.
The Globes of Heaven and Earth are in thy span;
Thou see not things by parcels, like poor Man.
Our narrow minds see here and there a letter,
Not rightly placed, and therefore read no better:
We make the Events of this day our sorrow,
Because we know not what will be to morrow.
Things present, past and future; old and new,
Thou see entirely with one single view.
Thou see all at home that is understood:
Loving thy self, thou love all that is Good.
Goodness it self, and perfect Excellence,
Transcending humane Reason, Will and Sense:
Good in thy self, and to thy self alone,
Before thou wast to any creature known.
Blessed in thy own Eternal pleasing sight;
Thy own Eternal Love, Thy own Delight.
Those that can find in Thee no greater Good,
Than that thou giv'st them life, and health, and food,
And bountifully from thy ample Treasure
Blessest thy creatures with desired pleasure,
Set up themselves, and do the worst they can,
To make themselves the Gods, and Thee the Man.
They that can love thee but for loving them,
Make thee the casket, and themselves the gem.
To love thy self is infinitely better,
Than if Love made a world of worlds its debtor.
Thy own Perfections by Attraction move,
As the chief formal Object of Man's Love.
Though our own Good we may, and must intend;
Thy simple Goodness is Man's chiefest End.
They that deny this, never knew Love's force,
Which to mere Excellence has its recourse:
Or never well considered Love's End,
Which unto Good, for Goodness sake does tend.
To be Man's End, is but to be most Loved:
And Good's the Loadstone by which Love is moved.
What though to Thee the creature nothing add?
That proves Thee perfect; neither weak nor bad;
And therefore fit to be the Final Cause,
Which all hearts by attractive Goodness draws:
Love is the Final and Enjoying act;
Closing with Thee by thy Magnetic tract:
Not as it mourns for the Good we want;
Nor as it after distant Good does pant;
(...) as it reaches its desires:
And more as it with Pleasure Thee admires.
This Love, besides its Object, has no End:
It does not to some Higher Virtue tend:
But from a seed, grows up to higher stature,
Of Divine Complacence, which is its nature.
All other Grace is but the means to it:
They draw the bow; but Love the mark does hit.
But sinners lost in SELF rise not above
The lower Region of their own SELF-LOVE.
Experience assures me that I can
Love a most learned, wise and holy man
Unseen, my very heart is to him knit,
Without respect to any benefit.
Reason convinces me, that I should err,
If the known BEST, my Love should not prefer:
Should I not rather choose my self alone
To be annihilated, or undone,
Than the whole world should bear the same distress,
Or Towns, or Countries; seeing I am less?
Or the Creator should take down the Sun?
Destroy the Earth? or Rivers cease to run?
Reason taught Heathens that their Country's good,
Was worth the shedding of their vital blood:
A faithful Subject thinks his Life a thing
Meet to be cast away to save his King.
True Soldiers would choose death, if so they may
But save their Captains lives, or win the day.
Many have chose to dye through love of friends;
Preferring them above all selfish Ends.
It is not Reason, but blind selfish Passion,
If One refuse to dye to save a Nation.
A silly useless Wretch should not refuse
His Death, before a useful man's, to choose.
My Neighbor as my self I must respect,
And for my Brethren must my Life reject. (1 John 3. 16.)
O doleful proof of Man's unhappy fall!
That loves not GOD above Himself and All!
And if I love him most, He is my End:
Man's Love above the Lover must ascend.
But O how wisely have thou made the twist!
To Love Thee and My Self do well consist.
Love is the closure of Connaturals;
The Soul's return to its Originals:
As every Brook is toward the Ocean bent;
And all things to their proper Element:
And as the inclination of the Sight,
How small soever, is unto the Light:
As the touched Needle points toward the Pole:
Thus unto Thee inclines the Holy Soul;
It trembles and is restless till it come
Unto thy Bosom, where it is at home.
Yet no such Union dare the Soul desire,
As Parts have with the Whole, and sparks to fire;
But as dependant, low, subordinate,
Such as thy Will of nothing did create:
As tends to the Sun, the smallest Eye
Of silly vermin, or the poorest Fly.
My own Salvation when I make my End;
Full Mutual Love is all that I intend.
And in this closure though I happy be,
It Is by Intending and Admiring Thee.
O happy Grace! which feeds above the Skies!
And causest Man above Himself to rise!
And saves what it denis! when worldlings lose
What they despised, and what they loved and chose!
The more I do my self in Love neglect,
And only to thy Goodness have respect,
When most my self I from my self abstract,
This is the sweetest, and self-pleasing act!
Even when I seem to leave my self behind,
Coming to Thee, with Thee my self I find.
When I am least the Object of my Love,
And unto Thee do most entirely move,
My Soul, the willing Agent, drawn by Grace,
Will Rest in Love, and Vision of thy Face.
But, in this wilderness and vale of Tears,
How is Love dampt by ignorance and fears!
For no Man's Love his knowledge can exceed:
And guilty Terrors disaffection breed.
Mortals can know thee but as in a glass.
True formal Knowledge does man's mind surpass.
No Thoughts or Names are adequate to Thee:
They are but Metaphors from what we see;
Which first thy Works and Image signify;
And thence to Thee men's rising Minds apply.
As far as Faith comes short of perfect Sight,
And this dark Prison of the Glorious Light;
So far this distant mediate Love's below
The heavenly Love which mortals cannot know.
What will it be to love Thee face to face,
When thou appear'st so lovely in this Glass?
Thy Goodness is not to that world confined:
To worthless, sinful mortals thou art kind:
Thy mercies to the smallest are not small:
To some more wonderful, but great to all.
Thy matchless Power does it self express,
Upon the smallest Worm, or pile of Grass.
The Methods of thy Wisdom are profound:
All must admire the depths which none can sound.
When Man from Holy Love, turned to a Lie,
Thy Image lost, became thine Enemy;
O what a Seal did Love and Wisdom find
To reimprint thine Image on Man's Mind?
Thou sentst the Signet from thine own right hand,
Made man for them that had themselves unmanned.
The Eternal Son, who in thy bosom dwelt;
Essential burning Love, men's hearts to melt:
Thy lively Image; he that knew thy mind:
Fit to illuminate and heal the blind.
With Love's great Office, thou did him adorn:
Redeemer of the helpless and forlorn:
On Love's chief work and message he was sent:
Our Flesh he took; our pain he underwent:
Thy pardoning, saving Love to Man did preach:
The Reconciler stood up in the breach:
The uncreated Image of thy Love,
By his Assumption, and the Holy Dove,
On his Own Flesh thy Image first impressed;
And by that stamp renews it on the rest.
Love was his Nature, Doctrine, Life and Breath:
Love flamed in his Sufferings and Death:
Thus Love thine Image, Love on Man does print:
This Coin, thy Son, thy Word and Spirit mint.
He that will have it True, must have it here;
Though Love prepare its way by Grief and Fear:
Yea often by these expresses its Desire;
They are sincere when kindled by its fire.
These are LOVE's Methods, passing tongue and pen:
Wonders and Joys, to Angels, and to Men.
The Second Part.
LOVE, which can make its Object, did produce
This Worm, in season, for his proper use:
In the Earth's Garden, the most happy Land,
Where Christians dwell, and Christian Kings command:
Where plenteous streams of living waters flow;
Where the first fruits of Paradise do grow:
Whence Proud, Dark, Bloody Popery was driven:
To whom the opened Book of God was given.
Where sacred guides, and books, and helps abound;
And all that will may hear the joyful sound.
My Parents here thy skilful hand did plant,
Free from the snares of Riches and of Want.
Their tender care was used for me alone,
Because thy providence gave them but One:
Their early Precepts so possessed my heart,
That taking root, they did not thence depart.
Thy Wisdom so contrived my Education,
As might expose me to the least temptation.
Much of that guilt thy Mercy did prevent,
In which my springtime I should else have spent.
Yet Sin sprung up, and early did appear;
^n love of play, and lies produced by fear:
An appetite pleased with forbidden fruit,
A proud delight in literate repute;
Excess of pleasure in vain Tales, Romances;
Time spent in feigned Histories and Fancies:
In idle talk, conform to company;
Childhood and Youth had too much vanity.
Conscience was often resisted when it checked,
And holy duty I did much neglect.
Yet patience bore; thy Spirit still did strive:
Restless Convictions still were kept alive.
Thou would not give me over, till thy Grace
Revived thy Image which sin did deface.
Thou strangely putst such Books into my hand,
As caused me my case to understand:
As touched my conscience, wakened my heart,
And laid it under careful fears and sinart.
And made me question with a deeper sense,
Whither my soul must go when it goes hence.
Then did thy Light detect the vanity
Of all the Joys and Hopes below the Sky.
The fruitless bussle which the Worldling makes;
The madness of the course the Sinner takes;
The wicked world I thought a Bedlam was:
And senseless Sinners hearts were stone or brass:
I wondered men could live so carelessly,
Ready to pass into Eternity!
And O how easily could I confute
All that against a holy life dispute?
I wondered at my self that staid so long,
So little touched with Arguments so strong!
Laughing and playing, as if all were well,
For ought I knew, near to the brink of Hell.
I marvell'd at my former senslesness!
My sin and misery I did confess.
And now what horrid darkness on my mind,
Never before lamented did I find?
Sin was like sickness in my flesh and bone,
Which only by the Book before was known.
Christ's Office now I better understood,
The need my Soul had of his cleansing Blood:
How insufficient of my self I was,
To bring my own deliverance to pass:
Now I began to feel as well as see,
How near the Word of Grace concerned me:
That all means else in Heaven and Earth were vain;
My Peace with God, and pardon to obtain!
To whom else should my sinful Soul have gone?
But for my Savior, I had been undone.
Oh my dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Thus thou prepar'st us for the Life above.
The heavenly Powers which made my heart to quake,
My Prison bonds and doors did open shake:
Sin now was folly, villainy and shame:
God, Heaven, Christ, Holiness, seem not the same:
How thou would use me, yet I did not know,
Whether my sin thou would forgive, or no:
But well I saw there was no turning back:
Nature is loath to go to Hell awake:
Thy Gospel told me, I might mercy find:
Nothing but Hell and Darkness was behind:
At last thy Grace brought me to this conclusion,
To HOPE and SEEK I fixed my resolution.
O my dear God! How precious is thy Love?
Thy Griefs prepare us for the Joys above.
Yet these my wounds and smart were not so great,
As many's who sat long in scorners seat:
Nor did the change so suddenly begin,
As to make known when special Grace came in:
In my young years thou had convinced my Soul:
Conscience did childish vanity control:
I liked thy ways as best: I honored those,
That Folly shunned, and Holy Wisdom chose:
Thou had prevented Oaths and horrid crimes;
And the enormous vices of the times:
Preserving me from youthful lusts and rage:
The thoughts of Thee increasing with my Age.
This greatest Change began when I was green,
Having not much above three lustres seen:
Therefore I doubted whether it were true,
Because its entrance I no better knew:
Long was I sadly questioning thy Grace,
Because thy Spirits steps I could not trace.
The difference is so great 'twixt Heaven and Hell
That those must differ much who there must dwell
I feared the change which raised my soul no higher
Would not suffice to save me from Hell fire.
But above all, I thought so Hard a heart,
Could not among the living have a part.
I thought thy Son would never heal my sore,
Unless my tears and sorrow had been more.
I wondered at my great stupidity!
That could not weep when I deserved to dye.
I wondered, things so great as Heaven and Hell,
Did on my heart with no more feeling dwell!
That words which such amazing things import,
Did not sink deeper, and my soul transport!
That things of Everlasting consequence,
Did not affect me with a deeper sense.
And that a soul so near its final doom,
Could give these worldly trifles any room.
That on these shadows I could cast an eye,
While Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell stood by.
I wondered when my odious sin was named,
I was no more confounded and ashamed!
Many a time I begged a tender heart,
And never prayed so much for joy, as smart.
I could have kissed the place where I did kneel,
If what my tongue had spoke, my heart could feel.
These were my cries when I to Thee did speak,
O that this heart of stone might melt or break!
These were my groans; this was my daily breath;
^ save me from Hard-heartedness and Death!
This was the title which I used to take,
Senseless Hard-hearted wretch, that cannot wake.]
But as thy Wisdom gives in fittest measure;
Not all at once: It Is meet we wait thy leisure.
^ thought that things unseen should pierce and melt,
With as great Passion as things seen and felt.
But now I find it is their proper part,
To be most valued, to be next the Heart;
To be the highest Interest of the soul;
There to command, and all things else control.
Thus must the little spark of fire be blown,
Or else it will not flame, nor scarce be known;
New-lighted Candles, darkened by the snuff,
Are ready to go out with every puff:
So it was long before the heavenly spark
Conquered my snuff, and shined in the dark:
My feeble newborn soul began with crying:
My Infant-life did seem to be still dying:
Betwixt supporting Hope, and sinking Fears,
My doubting soul did languish many years.
O my dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Thy troubling Motions tend to Rest above.
Thus GRACE like NATURE enters in a seed;
Which with man's labor, heavenly dews must feed:
Whose Virtue and first Motions no eye sees;
But after comes to ripeness by degrees:
Our Father's tender Love does much appear,
When he with useless crying Babes can bear:
When we the Houshold's grief and trouble are;
He shows the more his patient nursing care.
At first I wished that I could pray and weep:
Thus when I could not go, I learned to creep:
Then thou beganst to loose my Infant tongue;
And taught'st me Abba, Father, when but young
First by the Book, and some unworded groans;
After by heart-indited words and moans.
Thy diet first was Milk, then stronger food:
But always that which wholesome was and good.
Though Preachers were too often dry and dull,
Thy holy Word was quick and powerful:
The many precious Books of holy men,
Thy Spirit used on me as his Pen:
Perkins, Sibbs, Bolton, Whateley, holy Dod,
Hildersham, Preston, other men of God,
How pertinently spoke they to my case?
They opened Heaven and Hell before my face:
They did unfold the Gospel-Mysteries,
And set Christ crucified before my eyes:
They shamed sin; they showed me the snare;
Opened the danger; charged me to beware.
In every duty they did me direct;
Told me the sin, and danger of neglect:
They searched my heart; helped me to try my state
My earthly Mind they helped to elevate:
What strong and quickening motives did they bring
To raise my heart, and wind the slackned spring
These happy Counselors wero still at hand;
The Maps, and Landskips of the Holy Land.
This food was not locked from me; but I could
Go read a holy Sermon when I would.
How cheaply kept I many Rare Divines?
And for a little purchased Golden Mines?
My griefs they eased; my many doubts resolved;
With great delight I daily then revolved:
O my dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Are these thy Candles? What Is the Sun above?
At last my Fears became my greatest Faar,
Lest that my whole Religion should lie there:
No man has more of Holiness than Love:
Which does free souls by complacency move
Common Grace goes as far as Fear alone:
This eats not the meat, but gnaws the bone.
A slavish fear desires leave to sin:
It does but tie the hands, and wash the skin.
Hypocrites act a forced affected part:
Where Love is absent, God has not the heart.
He Will not accept what is done against men's will,
That if they durst, had rather have done ill.
Oh my dear God! shall not my Heart be thine?
Then I shall wish it never had been mine.
Objects of Sense do soonest move the Passion:
But sure Thou have my highest Estimation;
My Will's Resolved Choice is to be Thine:
My Soul and Body I to Thee resign:
To Thee the motions of my Soul do bend:
Thou art the Scope to which my Life does tend.
The Motions of the higher Faculties,
The Ruling Powers are chiefest in thine eyes:
Thou take the Love and Homage which they pay;
Though Rebel Passion does not them obey,
What makes me laugh most, makes me not most glad
What made me weep most, made me not most sad:
My Love to one choice friend has often more passion,
Than my much greater Love to Church and Nation.
O had I all my Powers at command!
As readily as tongue, or foot, or hand!
My eyes should empty first the serous store,
Because I love so good a God no more:
And next some of the florid Blood should spend,
Because the God of Love I did offend.
The rest should serve for Oil unto Love's Fire,
Wasting in restless vehement Desire:
At every mention of thy Blessed Name,
My ravished Soul should mount up in Love's flame:
Each Sermon should Elias Chariot be,
To carry up my longing heart to Thee.
The Saints Assemblies I would make more bright,
Where many Heav'n-aspiring flames unite.
And when my Lord's Love-sufferings I read,
My pierced and Love-wounded heart should bleed.
Love should enforce each word when I do pray;
A Flaming Heart I Would on thy Altar lay:
When halving Hypocrites give Thee a part,
Love should present my Whole, though Broken heart.
When in thy Word I read Love's Mysteries;
There I would sweetly feed my greedy eyes.
Each Sacrament should be an Eucharist:
There Heart with Heart, and Love with Love should twist.
My friends and I would in our daily walk
Of Love's Delights and Entertainments talk:
My working Love should others Love excite:
In Love I Would be a Burning Shining Light.
Love through the Lanthorn of my flesh should shine:
Who heard me speak, should hear that I am Thine:
Remembering that in Love I must be made
Equal to Angels; I would learn their Trade:
Yea I would reach up to a higher shelf;
And as my Copy, look to Christ himself:
Love's work I Would do with all my diligence, Mar. 3. 20. 21.

Though men should think I were beside my sense. 2. Cor. 5. 13.

My daily Love should rise before the Sun,
And it in speed and constancy out run:
Love as my Life should fill up all my days;
Desire should be my Pulse; my Breath thy Praise.
And I would wind up all the strings as high,
As Blessed Paul was in his Ecstasy.
Heavenly Love should all my words indite,
And be the soul and sense of all I write:
My heart of Love's Delights should sweetly think,
I Would write with flaming fire instead of Ink:
And yet thy holy Day should be my Best,
In it my thirsty Soul should taste of Rest;
My daily food should increase to a Feast.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
O could I mount thus to the Flames above?
These are Love's pantings after thee, my God!
Though, with my Soul, imprisoned in a clod!
My Soul and Love shall shortly be set free;
And then my Soul, my Love shall feast on Thee.
If thou would grant the very thing I crave,
And give me leave to choose what I would have;
Should it be lusts, or Sports, or Fleshly pleasure?
Sold it be Lordly Rule, or Earthly Treasure?
No; I could gladly leave this Dirt to Swine,
And let the World be theirs, if Thou be mine!
I would not thirst to taste of their Delight.
If lively Faith might see the blessed Sight!
I would not be ambitious of a Throne!
I could have full content in God alone.
For men's Esteem and Praise I would not care:
All other Wit and Knowledge I could spare:
To Know and Love my God should be my choice:
Give me but This, and how shall I rejoice?
Under my hand, Lord, This is it I choose:
O give me this, whatever else I lose!
Is there no spark of Love in this Desire?
When a poor Soul does unto Thee aspire?
To Know and Love thee is my thirst and strife:
Nothing more makes me weary of my life,
Than that I feel no more the heavenly Fire,
But look and reach, and yet can reach no higher.
Here lies my pain! This is my daily sore:
^ hate my Heart for loving God no more.
Do I not Love Thee, when I Love to Love Thee?
And when I set up nothing else above Thee?
Next GOD himself, who is my END and REST,
Love which stands next Thee, I esteem my Best,
And Loving God shall be my Endless Feast.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
These are thy Earnests of the Life above.
Fear is to Love, as was the Law to Grace:
And as John Baptist goes before Christ's face,
Preaching Repentance: it prepares his way:
It is the first appearing of the Day:
The dawning Light which comes before the Sun:
As he that to Christ's Scpulchre first run,
Excites the LOVED Disciple to do better;
The certain news of Life comes by the later.
Fear is Love's Harbinger: It is the womb,
Where Love does breed till time of ripeness come!
No wonder if it be not seen till then:
The Seed and Embrio are hid from men.
Though Thou come in by Love, Fear draws the latch:
Fear makes the motion, tho Love makes the match:
Fear is the soil that cherishes the feed;
The Nursery in which Heavens Plants do breed.
God first in Nature finds Self-Love, and there
He takes advantage to implant his Fear.
With some the time is long before the Earth
Disclose her young one by a springy Birth:
When Heaven does make our Winter sharp and long,
The seed of Love lies hid, or seems but young:
But when God makes it Springtime, his approach
Takes from the barren Soul its great reproach;
When Heavens reviving Smiles and Rays appear,
Then Love begins to spring up above Fear:
And if sin hinder not by cursed shade,
It quickly shoots up to a youthful blade:
And when Heavens warmer beams and dews succeed,
That Is ripened fruit which even now was but seed:
Yet does not flowring, fruitful Love forget
Her Nursing Fear; there still her Root is set:
In Humble Self-denial under-trod,
While Flower and Fruit are growing up to God
After Love's Birthday, holy Fear and Care
The outward Part of the New Creature are.
As mortal man consists of Flesh and Soul,
So Fear and Love, on Earth, do make one Whole.
Love, as the Soul, unseen, yet bears the sway:
Fear, as the Flesh, more felt, must it obey.
By Fear, Love does the daring Flesh restrain,
And keeps men awake by threatened pain.
This frame is mortal: Not that Love can dye;
But leaving Fears, will dwell alone on high:
Yet will retain a Reverent Fear of God;
But not the terror of his Wrath or Rod.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
How wise thy Methods to the Life above?
Thou first appear'dst in Lightning, as to Paul:
My heat abated, at thy feet I fall.
The voice with which thy Call thou did begin,
Was to convince me, and reprove my sin:
I first enquired of thee, who thou art?
And then, what duty thou had made my part?
Thus Fear and Care began; but the sweet Name
Of Jesus did reviving Hope proclaim.
And though long time it scarcely did appear,
Yet sure some hidden spark of Love was there.
I loved thy Holy Word; Good Books were sweet,
Those that did with my own condition meet:
Heart-searching Ministers were my delight,
Those that did most my drowsy Soul excite.
I dearly loved all in whom I saw
A Love to Thee, and Care to keep thy Law:
The speech and sight of Holy men was sweet;
I honored them, and could have kissed their feet.
I felt their living words go to the quick,
When common idle prating made me sick.
I dearly loved my serious bosom friend,
Who did in Love my failings reprehend;
That could my doubting troubled mind condole,
And help to keep awake my sleepy Soul:
Who could unfold the Mysteries of Grace,
And speak particularly to my case;
Sweetly disclosing his experience;
Extolling Mercy from his own deep sense;
One that had been instructed by the Rod,
And boiled over in the Praise of God:
Who early (and often in the night) would rise,
To offer Thee a Thankful Sacrifice:
Who warmed me with his Zeal when I was cold;
And my remissness lovingly controlled;
Who stirred me up, and taught me how to pray;
And friendly watched and warned me every day.
And yet his Piety did not exceed
His Charity, to those that were in need.
For such a friend I had; though after all,
Himself became my warning by his fall;
As more than One or Two have done since then;
Showing, when Grace withdraws, we are but Men.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
These are the seeds: what are the fruits above?
Yet did I scarce discern that it was Thee,
Whom in the Glass my pleased Mind did see:
But though thine Image more incur my sense,
I love it for the pourtrayd excellence:
It Is not because the Workmanship is fine,
But Good and Holy; and because it is Thine.
I better know the Map that is in my hand:
But yet, by it, I better Love the Land.
Sure when I loved thy Books, and every letter;
I loved the Sense, and End, and Author better.
He loves Wisdom sure, who loves the Wise:
It Is like he loves the Light, who loves his Eyes.
If one in Prison had his life begun,
Where he had never seen the shining Sun;
Yet if he dearly love the Candlelight,
He Would urely love the Sun, which is more bright.
Or if the Sun had always clouded been,
And men its scattered Light alone had seen;
^'s true, our Thoughts and Love of that we see,
Would more exact and satisfying be:
But to the unseen Cause, as it is Better,
Our Love of Estimation would be Greater.
And even a Knowledge general and dark,
Would be the Chooser of our End and Mark.
That Love's most sensible, which Sense does breed;
But that Commands, which Faith and Reason feed:
The Country than the Map, I must confess,
^s much less known; but is not known as less.
A Creat and Certain Object should do more,
Though darkly known, than trifles at my door:
An Unseen Kingdom would with men prevail,
To leave their Native place, and hoise up sail,
And venture over stormy boisterous Seas:
Which shows that great things, tho unseen, most please.
No wonder if the Knowledge be most clear,
Or little things which to the sense are near;
These narrow parcels we can comprehend,
When unseen Greatness, does the mind transcend:
But yet This moves the Wheels, and is the Spring,
Before the nearest sight of some small thing.
That is most Loved, which I make my End;
To which my great designs and actions tend;
For which I can all other Treasure spend,
Although I do it darkly apprehend.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Unveiled fully to thy Saints above?
As fire first kindles on the nearest Wood,
My sense thus fixed on the nearest good:
And where sense fixed, there with greatest sense
The mind did exercise its Complacence.
It seemed more cold to that which distant was;
Yet still looks further as I forward pass:
And toward my End, the nearer Heaven I go,
My Love abstracteth more from things below.
Love seems to get ground, and Fear decaies;
Doubting and Grief give place to Thanks and Prais^
And tho Fear wrought with greatest sense before,
And was in bulk and violence much more;
Yet the least spark of Love which is sincere,
Will save the Soul, tho mixed with greater Fear:
Who loves God somewhat, and the world above him
Loving not God as God, he does not love him:
Love must be so far tried by the measure,
That God be Loved above all earthly Treasure:
But that supposed the least degree of Love,
With greater Doubts and Fears will saving prove
Great Bodies with small souls are animate:
Great Heads with little Eyes, are oculate.
Small Candles lighten Rooms that are more large
A Steward may have spacious Lands in charge.
The Kingdom may be bigger than the King:
The Diamond may be smaller than the Ring:
The House may bigger than the dweller be:
Great Fear and little Love, consistent be.
But still true Love to God and Man are known,
More by the Fruits, than by the Sense alone.
^ must be such a Love, as when there is need,
Will venture, suffer, visit, cloth and feed.
^ my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Which gently leads us to the Joys above?
Love still went on, and lined out my way,
Hedging me in, lest I should go astray:
Yet after this how often did I transgress?
By light discourse, and wanton play fullness;
^ating to fullness: Yea, even Cards and Dice,
Began my mind with pleasure to entice.
But Providence did quickly interpose,
And by a wonder take me off from those.
Sin most ensnared by pleading lawfulness;
Though Conscience often did the sin confess:
That wounded deepest which by seeming small,
Drew me to venture, and resist thy Call;
And knowingly the same often to commit,
Thinking all Christians had as great as it.
Let all that would not be undone by sin,
Fly the occasions where it does begin.
At first it is safe and pleasant to resist.
But O how doleful is it to persist?
Sin does not open its design at first:
Its first appearance shows not the worst:
Flattering the sense, it seems to be a friend;
But it proves pain and poison in the end.
Pray from Temptation that you may be free,
If from the evil you would saved be.
Repentance must convince you that it is gall,
Which first appeared innocent or small.
O how it fills the Soul with guilty fears!
Our filial Evidences blasts and tears?
Disturbs our Peace, and feeds the gnawing Worm
Turns our Tranquillity into a storm?
It puts a piercing sting into the Cross,
And makes Death dreadful as the greatest loss.
Yet all my folly Mercy did forgive,
And did my guilty wounded soul relieve.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Heal me, and fit me for the Joys above.
Thy Love in order to its well known Ends,
Showed me great mercy in meet Guides and Friends:
Ancient and grave Divines, solid and staid,
Who from Experience both preached and prayed:
Learned, yet counting Christianity
The chiefest Learning and Philosophy.
These as the Fathers of my untaught Youth,
Were willing to communicate the Truth.
Their help and fruitful converse was my stay,
And great encouragement in all my way;
More pleasant to me than my youthful games:
My love does grudgingly suppress their names.
The company thou gav'st me was not vain,
^ot proud or factious, sensual or profane:
^^t serious, sober, and obedient,
Those time was in their peaceful labors spent:
^umble and meek, who made it their discourse,
^o stir up Faith, and penitent remorse.
^inding the Lowest, and the Highest things;
^ot meddling busily with States and Kings.
Making thy holy Word their chief delight,
and meditating in it day and night:
^ending thy day in works of holiness;
^ating profaneness, lewdness and excess:
Content with little, yet aspiring high;
^paring no pains for immortality:
Low in the world; but for salvation wise;
Though scorned by faithless fools as too precise.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Such thou will take to dwell with Thee above.
Thy Mercy did my younger Studies guide:
Sweet leisure and meet Books thou did provide;
And that I might thy Love the better see,
My Tutor thou thy self wast pleased to be:
As Honey-combs are made by patient Bees,
Who fetch the matter home by slow degrees,
In many days, and from a thousand Flowers,
Not perfecting their work in a few hours:
So taughtst thou me to wait the Learning time,
Not reaching first at matters too sublime;
Few to maturity of Knowledge grow,
Who think they know, before indeed they know.
Thou did improve the thirsty love of Truth,
Which thou had given me even in my youth.
My Labors thou made easy by delight:
Each days success, did to the next invite.
But O the happy Method of thy Grace!
Which gave my own Salvation the first place!
And first resolved me of the utmost end,
Which all my after Studies must intend:
Showing me first, Why, and For What I must
Lay out my Studies, that they be not lost:
Unhappy men! who follow base designs,
And are not Christians, when they are Divines!
O that an Impious Divine were rare!
Although the terms a contradiction are.
Alas in what a blind or trembling State,
Should I all day have at my Studies sat,
And with how little joy, or hope of gains,
If I had studied still in Satan's chains?
O foolish Studies! to consider how
The Earth is fixed, and the Plants do grow?
What is each creatures specifying cause?
And what are all their Orders and their Laws?
When thy own saving Change is to begin!
And thou have yet no pardon of thy sin?
When all the while thou art a Son of Wrath,
Who to Eternal Life no title has?
When in thy flow'ring Studies thou may dye,
And be undone to all Eternity?
Who would be playing at a childish game,
While his own House is in a burning flame?
What if I knew whether the Earth or Sun
So swift and unperceived a course does run?
Or knew the course and order of the spears?
Or were best skilled in numbering past years?
Knew all the Houses of the starry Sky?
And things that are for common wits too high?
What if I knew all these never so well?
And knew not how to escape the flames of Hell?
What gain or pleasure would my knowledge be?
If I the face of God must never see?
Or what if I could fool away my time,
In smooth and well composed idle Rhyme?
Or dreaming Lovers Fancies could rehearse,
In the most lofty and adorned verse?
While my unholy Soul, in fleshly thrall,
Should be lamenting its own Funeral?
But when my Soul had fixed on God her End,
Then all my Studies unto him did tend.
They all were ordered in due place and season,
Guided by Faith, allowed by sound Reason:
Thou taughtst me first the Only Needful Thing;
And all my Studies harp'd still on that string:
Judging the greatest Knowledge to be vain,
Which tends not to the Immortal gain.
There is a Knowledge which increases sorrow,
And such whose fruit will die before to morrow:
Yea, there is a knowledge which occasions sin:
Desire of Knowing did Man's woe begin:
All means are to be judged of by their End:
That Is good which does good, or does good portend
Its End and Objects which ennoble acts:
Those that do glorious things are glorious facts.
Who calls a self-condemning sinner, Wise,
That on a syllable can criticize;
That can in mode and figure talk in vain;
Or learnedly his pride and sin maintain?
That Is best at the resolving of a Riddle,
Or playing on a Bag-pipe, or a Fiddle:
But has not learned how to Live and Die,
Nor where his Soul must dwell eternally?
God and all wise men judge him but a fool,
Who is not wise enough to save his Soul.
When Heaven's made sure, all Knowledge then is good
For Faith and Love can turn it into food:
It Is pleasant then to study any Book,
When we see GOD the sense, where ere we look:
When as the way to Heaven we know each place:
And see God's beauty in each creature's face:
And when we stick not in the form and letter,
But all our Knowledge tends to make us better.
When still the more we Know, the more we Love,
And draw more with us to the Joys above.
Fine Fancies are not like clear minds; nor those
Like Love, by which the Soul with God does close.
Wisdom it self will make the Mind most wise.
He that ascends to God, does Highest rise.
Sure Pisgah was Parnassus, or the Mount,
Where three Apostles did three Glories count:
Christ's living streams are the true Helicon:
None make true Poets but Heavens springs alone.
What poor, low, toyish work make frothy wits?
Like Bacchus Scholars in their Pot-wise fits.
Like Childrens Poppets dressed with Lace and Pin;
Like handsome Pictures; something wants within:
A painted Feast, carved with a painted Knife:
A Living Soul can feel it wants Life.
Without a Holy Subject, End and Spirit,
True Wisdom's sacred Titles none can merit.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
These are the drops; what are the streams above?
Immortal thanks my Soul does owe my God,
For his well-ordered needful healing Rod:
The Book and Rod do well befit thy School;
Correction is the portion of the Fool:
The Rod it self will make the Sluggard rise:
The Rod and Book make foolish Children wise.
I felt or feared no evil at the first,
But my Soul's misery, which is the worst:
Whilst for a Soul-remedy I did look,
Thy angry storm my Body overtook:
Languishing weakness shortens strength and breath;
Consumes my flesh, and threatens speedy death:
And what I felt revived the fears of more:
For now my Judgment seemed at the door:
I knew not but it might be a foretast
Of greater woe which I might feel at last:
My new awakened Soul amazed was,
To think that unto Judgment it must pass,
And see the unseen World; and stand before
The dreadful God, whom Heaven and Earth adore!
I was unready to behold thy face,
Having no more assurance of thy Grace!
Having but lately too familiar been,
With my seducing flesh and hateful sin:
My Thoughts of Thee were terrible and strange!
And of so great and an untimely change!
The threatened Ruin I did thus condole;
O must my scarce-born, unprepared Soul
Before my dreadful Judge so soon appear!
And the decisive final Sentence hear!
And all my Reckonings so soon bring in!
And give account to God for every sin!
Before I do my Soul's condition know,
Or any scaled Pardon have to show.
What if I prove an unconverted Wretch?
And Justice should my Soul to torments fetch?
How know I but the endless flames of Hell,
May be the place where next my Soul shall dwell?
Mercy would save me; but I did reject it:
Christ's Blood would cleanse it; but I did neglect it.
And though I am not hopeless, who can bear
To die uncertain under so great fear I:
O that my Tunes had all been better spent!
And that my ca^^y Thoughts had all been bent
In preparation for the Life to come:
That now I might have gone as to my home!
And taken up my dwelling with the blessed!
And past to everlasting Joy and Rest!
O that the pleasures of my sports and toys,
Had all been turned to man-like holy Joys!
And those Delights which Vanities engrost,
And spent on fleshly Lusts, were worse than lost,
Had all been sweet Rejoycings in the Lord!
And in his holy Service and his Word!
O that I could my wasted Time call back,
Which now my Soul for greater works does lack;
What would I give now for those precious days,
Which once run out in pleasures and delays?
O had I lived a strict and holy Life,
Though under hatred and malicious strife!
Though Men's and Devil's fury I had born,
And been the world's reproach, contempt and scorn!
Then welcome Death would but have quenched my thirst,
And bid the envious world now do their worst.
Their malice would but to my Joys accrue,
And well-spent Time be sweet to my review.
O happy men whose portion is above!
Whose hearts to God and to his Service clove!
Who made him and his Word their chief delight,
And walked in uprightness, as in his sight!
Approved their Hearts and Ways to him alone!
As ready to appear before his Throne!
Now I had rather far be one of them,
Than one of worldly Wealth, or Princely Stem
O now my undrest Soul is passing forth,
I see both what the World and Christ are worth.
Thus did the face of Death my Soul awake;
The bonds of dead stupidity it brake!
Strict, holy Truth I easily confessed:
I saw that Godliness is not a jest.
My late besotted mind is now past doubt,
That Folly's careless, Wisdom is devout:
I saw more clearly than I did before,
What lies on an ungodly Sinners score?
For what man's powers were made, what is their use*
To what all means and mercies do conduce?
What is man's business while he is here below?
How much his creatures to their Maker owe?
Whether the Saint or Brute be in the right?
Whether it is best to live by Faith or Sight?
What is true Wit? what Learning's most sublime?
How I and all should value precious Time?
I saw it is not a thing indifferent,
Whether my Soul to Heaven or Hell be sent.
Death also further taught me how to pray,
And made me cry unto thee every day;
It set me on the trying of my state,
Lest I should prove deceived when 'twas too late.
Often and carefully I searched my heart,
Whether in Christ by Faith I had a part?
It showed me so much work to do at home,
That alien needless matters found small room.
It curbed my Pride, and buried my Ambition;
Made me, not only bear a low condition,
But choose it; and all things to estimate,
As God, my Soul, and Heaven should set the rate.
For now, as clearly as I saw the Sun,
I saw in lines which they may read that run,
That Endless things are All, when we compare,
And transitory trifles Nothing are:
That Worldlings in their sleep do talk and go,
And all their lives are but a dreaming show:
Only the true Believer lives awake,
And does not spend his days in mere mistake:
That all who are not Saints, are worse than Brutes.
These, O my Father! were thy Rod's first fruits.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Thus we rebound up to the Joys above.
Long thus before my God I lay prostrate,
Begging for healing mercy at his gate!
And for some longer time, to know his Truth,
And not unripe to wither in my Youth!
I begged that hasty Death he would delay,
And would not snatch me unprepared away.
I promised his mercies to rehearse,
If he the dreadful Sentence would reverse.
Could I have hoped for Hezekiah's years,
I should no more than he, have spared tears.
Yet has thy Mercy granted me since then,
More than thrice five, yea more than four times ten
My moan thou pity'dst, and my cries did hear
Delaying Death; not taking off my fear:
The threatening malady thou did abate;
And into many others did translate;
Which gave me hope of some preparing space;
But none that Earth would prove a Resting place.
Appointing me to serve in gentle Chains,
In wholesome sickness, and in healing pains!
So great as might my headstrong thoughts restrain
From running after things terrene and vain:
Yet were they not so great as to make less,
My Service, or my sober cheerfulness:
O what a happy mixture did thou make!
How meet a course did thy wise Mercy take?
This was the pregnant blessing, kept for store,
Which multiplied into a thousand more!
Which has run parallel with all my days;
For which I owe thee everlasting praise:
Too great for Volumes; too high for a Verse:
And therefore endless Life must them rehearse.
1.
A Life still near to Death, did me possess
With a deep sense of Time's great preciousness.
To lose an hour I thought a greater loss,
Than much of sordid worldlings golden dross.
I thought them mad that cast their time away,
Being uncertain of another day.
That idly prate, and play, and feast, and drink,
So near Eternity's most dreadful brink!
With filthy, guilty Souls, unjustifi'd;
Undone for evermore if thus they died.
O! thought I, where is these men's brains and sense,
Who care no more whither they go from hence?
Pastime I thought worse than a Bediam word:
The Name and Thing my very Soul abhorred.
2.
This methodiz'd my Studies to my gain;
Shamed the contending, jingling, formal vein:
The greatest matters it did first impose:
Necessity my Book and Lesson chose:
I studied first to save my self and others;
What edifi'd my own Soul and my Brothers:
Thence to the Branches I in order clime;
First Few and Great, next Many, Small, Sublime.
I nere preferred to Talk, before, to Eat,
Words, before Things, the Dish before the Meat:
And yet I love and value all the rest:
My curious mind would fain have known the least:
But knowing Life's too short to reach to all,
I left till last the needless things and small.
3.
The frequent sight of Death's most awful face,
Rebuked my sloth, and bid me mend my pace!
Thou knew'st my dullness needed such a spur;
So prone was I to trifle and demur.
Who dare his Soul for gain or pleasure sell,
That lives as in the sight of Heaven and Hell?
4. This called me out to work while it was day;
And warn poor Souls to Turn without delay:
Resolving speedily thy Word to Preach;
With Ambrose, I at once did Learn and Teach.
Still thinking I had little time to live,
My fervent heart to win men's Souls did strive.
I Preached, as never sure to Preach again,
And as a dying man to dying men!
O how should Preachers Men's Repenting crave,
Who see how near the Church is to the Grave?
And see that while we Preach and Hear, we Die,
Rapt by swift Time to vast Eternity!
What Statues, or what Hypocrites are they,
Who between sleep and wake do Preach and Pray?
As if they feared wakening the Dead!
Or were but lighting sinners to their Bed!
Who speak of Heaven and Hell as on a Stage!
And make the Pulpit but a Parrot's Cage?
Who teach as men that care not much who learns;
And Preach in jest to men that sin in earns.
Surely God's Messenger, if any man,
Should speak with all the seriousness he can;
Who treats in the Name of the Most High,
About the Matters of Eternity!
Who must prevail with sinners Now or Never,
As those that must be saved Now, if Ever:
When sinners endless Joy or Misery,
On the success of his endeavors lie!
Though God be free, he works by Instruments,
And wisely fitteth them to his intents.
A proud unhumbled Preacher is unmeet
To lay proud sinners humbled at Christ's feet:
So are the Blind to tell men what God says,
And faithless men to propagate the Faith.
The Dead are unfit means to raise the Dead;
And Enemies to give the Children Bread:
And utter strangers to the Life to come,
Are not the best Conductors to our home:
They that yet never learned to Live and Die,
Will scarcely teach it others feelingly:
Or if they should Preach others to Salvation,
Unhappy men that Preach their own Damnation.
How often did I come down with shame and grief!
Not that I was so homely, or so brief;
But that my own Soul was no more awake,
And felt no more the things of which I spoke!
That God was named with no more Reverence;
Nor sinners pitty'd with a deeper sense:
That closer warnings did not pierce men's Ears,
Set home by greater fervency and tears:
And that my speeches were so cold and slight,
About things of unutterable weight;
And that I spoke with no more seriousness,
When Heaven or Hell attended the success:
As one that sees by Faith the Joys and Woes,
To which the godly and the wicked goes.
O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
How should we prize and seek the Joys above?
Thy Methods crossed my ways: my young desire
To Academick Glory did aspire:
Fain I Would have sat in such a Nurses Lap,
Where I might long have had a sluggard's nap
Or have been dandled on her Reverend Knees;
And known by honored Titles and Degrees;
And there have spent the flower of my days,
In soaring in the Air of humane praise:
Yea and I thought it needful to thy Ends,
To make the prejudiced world my friends;
That so my praise might go before thy grace,
Preparing men the Message to embrace;
Also my work and Office to adorn,
And to avoid profane contempt and scorn.
But these were not thy thoughts; thou did foresee
That such a course would not be best for me:
Thou made me know that men's contempt and scorn
Is such a Cross as must be daily born:
Thy Mercy would not have me splendid dross;
A Minister of Pomp; but of the Cross:
That Cross which Hypocrites may Preach and Hear,
But all that follow Christ must also bear.
No Honor must I have to bring to thee,
But what thou first communicat'st to me
In founding of thy Church, thou did declare
How well all worldly Honors thou could spare!
Both in the Chief most blessed Corner Stone,
And in the most of those that built thereon:
And what great swelling Names have done since then,
Church-Rents and Ruins write without a Pen:
High Titles as the first enchanting Cup,
Cast down the Church by lifting of it up.
Titles reflect on Minds. These must be low:
By humble Love all must thy Servants know:
Yet I deny not but a perfect mind,
May more advantage here than danger find:
Thy Soil is often manured by such dung.
I Will Honor give to whom it does belong:
It may be safe to others; but to me
'Twas best from such Temptations to be free:
Let my preferment lie in serving all:
While I sit low, I have not far to fall.
Keep me from the Temptations of the Devil!
For so thou do deliver us from Evil.
My youthful Pride and Folly now I see,
That grudged for want of Titles and Degree.
That blushed with shame when this defect was known,
And an inglorious Name could hardly own,
Attempting to have hid it twice or thrice,
With vile equivocations next to lies.
And to thy Methods was unreconcil'd,
Because I was not Rabbi, Doctor, styled.
Forgive this Pride; and break the Serpent's brain;
Pluck up the poisonous Root, till none remain.
Give me the Wisdom; I Will not beg the Fame:
Grant me the thing; let others take the name.
Give me the Learning, and it is no harm,
If thou shall place me in the lowest Form.
Honors are shadows, which from seekers fly;
But follow after those who them deny.
I brought none with me to thy work; but there
I found more than I easily could bear:
Although thou would not give me what I would, Matthew. 20. v. 21.

Thou gave me the promised hundredfold. Matthew. 19. v. 29.

O my Dear God! how precious is thy Love?
Thy ways, not ours, lead to the Joys above.
The Third Part.
THE wondrous Mercy of my bounteous Lord,
Which sent me forth to Preach his sacred Word.
Prepared my way, and called me to the place,
Where I must first proclaim his Saving Grace:
All things thou suitedst fitly to my need,
Giving me freedom, season, ground and seed:
Poor thirsty Souls, attend with greedy Ear,
Crowding in multitudes thy Word to hear:
Thy Mercy opening so wide a door,
Gave some first fruits betimes, and hopes of more.
The various places where my Lot did fall,
Were all appointed to me by thy Call.
I never was to any of them brought,
By the Direction of my own forethought:
Much less was ever any by me sought;
And least of all, by price or bargain bought.
I nere found cause of one place to repent;
(Although my sins in all I must lament.)
None were foreseen; yet after seen to reason,
To be the fittest for the work and season.
But among all, none did so much abound,
With fruitful mercies, as that barren ground,
Where I did make my best and longest stay,
And bore the heat and burden of the day;
Mercies grew thicker there than Summer flowers:
They over-numbered my days and hours:
There was my dearest Flock, and special Charge.
Our hearts in mutual love thou did enlarge:
'Twas there that mercy did my Labors bless;
With the most great and wonderful success.
Yet there were Sons of Belial, whose rage
Reason with Truth and Love could not assuage:
Who Loved and Hated, just as Satan bid them;
Ruled by the Reins of Lust by him that rid them:
In swinish drunkenness they drowned their wits:
Most furious in their rude tumultuous fits.
As Boars or Stags, at other times more tame;
When lustful heats their blood and brains inflame;
Fiercely assault such as stand in their way;
None's safe before them till their heats decay:
So does the love of revellings and sport,
Poor brutish fleshly sinners so transport,
That ragingly they fly in that man's face,
Who does by sacred Truth their sin disgrace:
And as in Armies Drums and Trumpets sound,
The frightful cries of wounded men to drowned;
And even the fearful in the furious crowd,
Are carried on to death through streams of blood:
So those ensnared Youths, who formerly,
Out of the Rout, retained some modesty,
Conjoined with the Rabble did as they;
The common fury and their lusts obey:
Run with the Herd: Mirth and the Rables noise,
Drown Reasons Plea, and God's reclaiming voice:
Death is forgot: Conscience cannot be heard:
Hell and Damnation now are little feared:
They have their curse, and their own sentence pass:
Away with Jesus! give us Bar abas!
Away with Preachers, who disturb our game!
Talk not of Judgment: Let us bear the blame!
Whilst grieved Preachers can but wish and groan,
O that your day of mercy you had known!
O my Dear God! how precious is they Love?
Which looks on such with pity from above?
Now England's horrid Civil Wars began,
When God a sinful Nation meant to fan.
When sin grown high and bold, out-fac'd the Light;
When Pride and Faction pleaded Divine Right.
When most their Love, and some their Patience lost;
When proud malicious men must not be crossed:
When wise men seemed fools, and fools seemed wise;
And when the worst were best in their own eyes?
When Piety with Lazarus was loathed;
And Sin with Purple and fine Linen clothed:
And when the sacred Tribe, despising Souls,
Through love of wealth and honor blowed the coals!
When Demas for the World deserted Paul;
And their own matters were first sought by all:
When they that sought their good things in this life
Had banished Love, and filled the Church with strife
Where striving factions Charity defied,
And carnal Counsels did the Church divide!
When swinish Gadarens did Christ refuse,
And the profane his servants did abuse.
When Holiness the common Foe was deemed,
And nothing more intolerable seemed.
When holy Truth and Preachers were despised;
And wicked means to cast them out devised!
When sin presumed to make a mock of grace,
And folly spit reproaches in Christ's face!
When vulgar rage had found this common vent;
And impious scorn on Godliness was spent:
When sin was not so much opposed as God,
Then were we ready for the bloody Rod.
When those sins reigned that must not now be named
But by Heavens Justice shall at last be shamed.
When old condemned vanities and crimes,
Became the Reverend Virtues of the Times,
Then God in Judgment sat to plead his Cause,
And judge the proud despisers of his Laws.
Banished Love does feaster'd hearts forsake:
Blindness, suspicions, wrath possession take:
Each man unto the fire his Faggot brought,
And each against another quarrels sought.
The whirlwind in the North did first arise,
And raise the dust which troubled English Eyes.
And though Heavens mercy there prevented blood,
The Irish fury shed a crimson flood.
The French blood showed the temper of the Nation,
Their Faith and Faithlesness keep Moderation,
Their Bartholomews hot dog-daies thirst had cost,
Thuanus, Davila.
Thirty or forty thousand lives at most.
But Ireland's Romish Zeal was hotter far,
And in their preparation to a War,
The Earl of Orery's Answer to a Petition.
Two hundred thousand they surpised and slew,
Not that their Will so small a measure knew.
But here God checked their Power, and heard the cries
Of dying Innocents, which pierced the Skies:
England affrighted by her neighbors harm,
Threatened to be the next, takes the Allarm,
As Citizens that see a raging flame
Threaten the Neighhours houses with the same,
Do leave their Trades, and all together run,
Trying to quench the Fire where it begun;
And then pull down the houses which adjoyn;
Some seek to save the goods, some to purloin;
The well built Piles, and curious Rooms must down,
To buy the Safety of the fearful Town,
A Neighbor's house is used like a Foe's,
Because the Fire, the Hook, no difference knows,
Fear pulls down the next, to save the most,
And ruins more than needs, lest all be lost.
Smoke and confused crowds do blind men's eyes,
All are amazed, with hideous flames and cries;
So England, too combustible before,
Seeing so great a flame so near her door,
Was frighted into such Convulsion Fits,
As first did break her Peace, and next her Wits.
Dangers breed fears, and fears more dangers bring:
The Bees to save their Honey use their Sting;
Rowz'd in an angry Swarm they seek their Foe,
The next they meet must feel the smarting blow.
Caetera desunt, praesunt, adsunt.
I purposed to have recited the most notable mercies of my Life, in continuing
this Hymn of Thanksgiving to my gracious God; but the quality of the Subject,
and the Ages Impatience stopped me here, and I could go no further, and my
painful and spiritless Age is now unfit for Poetry: And the matter is so large,
as would have made the Volume big.

3. The Resolution.
PSALM. 119. 96. Written when I was Silenced and cast out, etc.
LORD, I have cast up the Account
What it will cost to come to thee:
I find to what it will amount
A serious Christian to be.
When Flesh was weighing, thou put'st in
Thy Love, and the Eternal Crown,
Against a Feather, and a Sin:
And yet it thought these weighed thee down.
Fool, as I was, I took its word,
And chose what Flesh did recommend:
How could I more have wronged my Lord?
Or more his Love and Name offend?
It had been wiser to have thought,
The Earth is weighed down by a Fly:
Than to prefer a thing of naught,
Before the Love of the Most High.
I see now what false Scales can do,
In a deceitful partial hand:
I will no more believe a Foe;
But to the holy Covenant stand.
1.
Will Friends turn Foes? That cannot be:
They were my greatest Foes before,
That would have kept my Soul from thee,
Their Malice now can do no more.
I Will bid these cruel Friends farewell:
Even Satan would be such a Friend;
He Would please and flatter me to Hell:
And thither does their friendship tend.
He wants not Friends that has thy Love,
And may converse, and walk with thee:
And with thy Saints here and above;
With whom for ever I must be.
In the Communion of Saints,
Is Wisdom, Safety and Delight:
And when my heart declines and faints,
It Is raised by their Heat and Light.
Thy Spirit in them speaks and prays:
Their speech is holy, clean and quick:
Dead hearted fools talk but of toys:
Their speech and mirth even makes me sick.
2.
Must Lies and slanders me defame?
That Innocence may not be known?
Must proud men's malice blot my Name,
With Epithets that are their own?
Thou justifi'st when Men accuse,
Thou Wilt answer all the spite of tongues;
And do them right whom men abuse,
And plenteously repair their wrongs.
It Is no great matter what Men deem,
Whether they count me good or bad!
In their applause and best esteem,
There Is no contentment to be had.
I stand not to the Bar of Man;
It Is thy displeasure makes me sad:
My thoughts and actions thou will scan:
If thou approve me I am glad.
3.
Must I before the Ruling Power,
Be called with shame to plead my Cause?
And judged as an evil doer,
And as a breaker of their Laws?
So was the Lord of Life accused,
Slandered and scorned with cruel spite:
And as a Malefactor used,
And one that claimed Caesar's right.
False witness cloudeth Innocence:
Truth seems conquered by a Lie.
Patience for bears a just defense;
And Life it self is judged to die.
Methinks I see thee clothed with scorn;
And spit upon, and buffeted;
And crowned with the piercing Thorn;
Away to Execution led.
It most amazeth me to think,
Thou barest the repute of Sin!
The bitter Cup which thou did drink,
Had nothing bitterer therein.
The Sun did well to hide his face,
When Sin did Righteousness eclipse:
And the most Just is with disgrace
A Sinner judged by sinners lips.
Thy steps, Lord, in this dirt I see;
And lost my Soul from God should stray,
I Will bear my Cross and follow thee;
Let others choose the fairer way.
My face is meeter for the Spit;
I am more suitable to shame;
And to the taunts of scornful wit:
It Is no great matter for my Name.
4.
Must I be driven from my Books?
From House, and Goods, and dearest Friends?
One of thy sweet and gracious looks,
For more than this will make amends.
The World's thy Book: There I can read,
Thy Power, Wisdom, and thy Love:
And thence ascend by Faith, and feed
Upon the better things above.
I Will read thy works of Providence:
Thy Spirit, Conscience, and thy Rod
Can teach without book all the sense,
To know the World, my Self, and God.
Few Books may serve, when Thou will teach:
Many have stolen my precious time:
I Will leave my Books to hear thee Preach:
Church-work is best when thou do chime.
As for my House, it was my Tent,
While there I waited on thy Flock:
That work is done; that time is spent:
There neither was my Home nor Stock.
Would I in all my Journey have
Still the same Inn and Furniture?
Or ease and pleasant dwellings crave,
Forgetting what thy Saints endure?
My Lord has taught me how to want
A place wherein to put my head:
While he is mine, I Will be content,
To beg or lack my daily bread.
Heaven is my roof, Earth is my floor:
Thy Love can keep me dry and warm:
Christ and thy Bounty are my store:
Thy Angels guard me from all harm.
As for my Friends, they are not lost:
The several Vessels of thy Fleet,
Though parted now by Tempests tossed,
Shall safely in the Haven meet.
Still we are centred all in thee;
Members though distant, of one Head:
In the same Family we be
By the same Faith and Spirit led.
Before thy Throne we daily meet,
As Joynt-Petitioners to thee:
In spirit we each other greet,
And shall again each other see.
The Heavenly Hosts world without end
Shall be my company above:
And thou my Best and Surest Friend:
Who shall divide me from thy Love?
5.
Must I forsake the Soil and Air,
Where first I drew my vital breath?
That way may be as near and fair:
Thence I may come to thee by death.
All Countries are my Father's Lands:
Thy Sun, thy Love does shine on all:
We may in all lift up pure hands,
And with acceptance on thee call.
Those banished are that go from thee,
Strange to thy Service, Love and Grace:
And, lost in sin, do never see
Thy Kingdom, and thy pleased face.
May but my Soul dwell near my God,
And walk with him in Faith and Love,
No matter where be my abode,
Till to his Glory I remove.
6.
What if in Prison I must dwell?
May I not there converse with thee?
Save me from sin, thy wrath, and Hell,
Call me thy Child; and I am free.
No walls or bars can keep thee out:
None can confine a holy Soul:
The Streets of Heaven it walks about;
None can its Liberty control.
Alas, my darkened mind is chained
To Earth and Flesh through unbelief!
It looks and longs by distance pained:
When will thou hear and send relief?
O loose these Chains of Sin and Flesh!
Enlarge my heart in thy Commands:
Could I but love thee as I wish,
How light would be all other bands?
7.
Must I feel Sicknesses and smart,
And spend my days and nights in pain?
Yet if thy Love refresh my heart,
I need not overmuch complain.
This Flesh has drawn my Soul to sin;
If it must smart, Thy Will be done!
O fill me with thy Joys within,
And then I Will let it grieve alone.
Then to its sufferings I Will consent
To be avenged on my Foe,
That pain may help me to repent,
And sin may be consumed by woe.
Pain will be short; Joys will be long.
Yet, Lord, remember man is weak!
Drop in thy Cordials: make me strong,
Lest heart and hope, with Flesh should break.
8.
I know my Flesh must turn to dust,
My parted Soul must come to thee,
And undergo thy Judgment just,
And in the endless world must be.
In this there is most of Fear and Joy,
Because there is most of Sin and Grace,
Sin will this mortal frame destroy,
But Christ will bring me to thy face.
Here Is Faith's great Trial: Pain may force;
And Pride may willingness pretend;
A stupid Fool die like his Horse,
And Heathens make a Beast-like end.
Frail sinful Flesh is loath to die:
Sense to the unseen world is strange:
The doubting Soul dreads the Most High,
And trembles at so great a change.
Yet Faith can see beyond the Skies,
Where now our Head in Glory is:
And above Flesh and Sense can rise,
Unto the World of Saints in bliss.
Cleansing the Soul from Flesh and Sin,
Abstracting it from things below;
It draws the Veil, and entering in,
Love's glorious Mysteries can know.
Put forth thy Beams and Hand of Grace:
Open mine Eyes: Take up my Heart:
Acquaint it with the Holy Place,
The Joys and Glory where thou art.
O let me not be strange at home!
Strange to the Sun, and Life of Souls:
Choosing this low and darkened Room;
Familiar with Worms and Moles!
Shall I be strange unto my Head?
The World of Knowledge, Love and Joys?
Conversing here among the Dead,
And taken up with Dreams and Toys?
And strange to Angels, who attend
On Man, and in his good delight;
And, though unseen, do us defend;
Ministering for us day and night?
Am I the first that go this way?
How many Saints are gone before?
How many enter every day
Into thy Kingdom by this door?
Christ was once dead, and in a Grave:
Yet conquered Death, and rose again:
And by this Method he will save
His Servants that with him shall Reign.
Shall I draw back and fear the End
Of all my Sorrows, Tears and Pain?
To which my Life and Labors tend,!
Without which all had been in vain?
Can I for ever be content
Without true Happiness and Rest?
Is Earth become so excellent,
That I should take it for my best?
Or can I think of finding here
That which my Soul so long has sought?
Should I refuse those Joys through fear,
Which bounteous Love so dearly bought?
All that does taste of Heaven is good:
When Heavenly Light does me inform;
When Heavenly Life stirs in my Blood;
When Heavenly Love my Heart does warm.
No wonder if Time's womb be straight,
And Souls through pain and strangeness go
Into the glorious World of Light,
Which Death translateth them unto.
This strangeness will be quickly over,
When once the Heaven-born Soul is there:
One sight of God will it recover
From all this backwardness and fear.
To us, Christ's lowest parts; his feet,
Union and Faith must yet suffice,
To guide and comfort us: It Is meet
We trust our Head who has our Eyes.
Christ sees all that I would see:
The Way and End to Him are known:
He has prepared the Place for me:
He Will Love and Use me as his Own.
How many guiltless creatures die,
To be a feast or food for me?
Who love their Lives as well as I?
And has not God more right to me?
Must I be priviledg'd alone?
Or no man Die until he please?
And God deposed from his Throne,
And humane generation cease?
Though all these Reasons I can see,
Why I should willingly submit,
And comfortably come to thee;
My God, thou must accomplish it.
The Love which filled up all my days,
Will not forsake me to the end:
This broken Body thou will raise:
My Spirit I to thee commend.
December. 3. 1663.
4. Divine Love's Rest. (Written on Herbet's Poems.)
THe amorous Needle knows no other REST,
But at its dear attractive Loadstone's breast.
Though lying dead before the Potent touch,
Its Object and Affection were not such.
The Oily Body married to a Spark,
Which some cold Flint had locked up in the dark,
By the unseen Hot Soul is made so bright,
As if in it that Soul appeared to sight;
Which in revenge for its restraint and toil,
Still working up wards, wastes the loving Oil;
Having a higher Love, is not content,
Until it reach its proper Element.
Thus Heaven-born Souls, but lately dead in sin;
By Faith and Love the heavenly Life begin:
And daily mounting upwards, take their flight,
From Flesh and Earth unto the World of Light:
Where Darkness, Sin or Grief shall never enter:
Where all the Saints are one in God their Center.
Where Love reveals it self with open face,
Ravishing Souls prepared by Saving Grace.
Love is their Kingdom: it is a world of Love,
Which they were hatched for by the holy Dove.
Here he is kindling the celestial fire,
Which knows its rise, and does to God aspire;
God who is all, shall there have all my store;
And yet my Friends have not the less, but more:
Love is now panting, groaning in my breast:
Love will be then my Soul's Eternal Feast.
Love now salutes us in the Gospel story:
But then Eternal Love will be our Glory.
Up then, my Soul, and swiftly Heavenward tend,
Where Love shall have no check, no bounds, no end.
5. On David's Psalms.
MY God! since first thy Love this heart did touch;
It says, I cannot love my God too much.
It looks up, and pants for that Grace,
Which may exalt it, and unveil thy face.
Darkness and Distance are its grievous Chains;
Sad doubts and fears do feed its griping pains.
It sighs, and wonders thou can be so strange;
Where thou have freely made so great a change.
Long it has searched in hope to find the Art,
To raise and warm a dull and heavy Heart:
And now I find it practiced by One,
That now is praising thee before thy Throne.
Here are the sacred words: Here Is David's Lyre:
But where is the quickening celestial fire?
I know the Eye of Heaven is on my Heart:
God looks my Soul should bear the chiefest part.
It Is winged Faith, and flaming Love within,
That must the pleasant Melody begin:
The holy Spirit must tune and touch each string;
Else smoothest Verse will be a harsh dull thing;
Display thy Love; shoot down thy vital Rays!
Teach this cold heart the works of Love and Praise!
O then, what Life and Joy these Psalms will bring,
When it is thy Spirit, and my Soul that sing!
And though low streins with stops, are here my best,
Yet Perfect Love and Praise shall be my REST.
6. The Threefold Nativity.
Prima dies hominem peperit, sanctumque secunda
Natalis: pariet Mors tertia glorificatum.

MY first Birthday brought forth a Man, in sin:
But one that could not work, nor go, nor speak.
My second did a Life of Grace begin,
But such, alas, as yet's diseased and weak.
The third from fleshly bonds will me release,
And bring me to the world of glorious Light:
Where all my sins and vexing griefs shall cease;
And Faith shall end in perfect Love and Sight:
This Death begins; but it is the Resurrection,
That fully shall obliterate sins story;
And state both Soul and Body in perfection,
Where Grace and Nature shall be crowned with Glory.
As Nature taught me first complaining cries,
Before it did acquaint me with Delight:
So Grace with grief first filled my Heart and Eyes,
Before it showed me the joyful sight.
Why should not Death then be a straiter Door,
Than either that of Nature or of Grace?
Which brings us unto the Eternal Store,
Of Joy and Glory in God's shining face?
7. Self-Denial.
A Dialogue between the Flesh and the Spirit. Flesh: WHat! become Nothing!
never persuade me to it.
God made me Something: and I Will not undo it.

Spirit. Thy Something is not thine, but his that gave it.
Resign it to him, if thou mean to save it.

Flesh. God gave me Life: and shall I choose to die
Before my time? or pine in misery?

Spirit. God is thy Life: If then thou fear death;
Let him be all thy soul, thy pulse, and breath.

Flesh. What! must I hate my self? when as my brot her
Must love me? and I may not hate another?

Spirit. Loath what is loathsome: Love God in the rest;
He truly love's himself, that love's God best.

Flesh. Does God our ease and pleasure to us grudge?
Or does Religion make a man a drudge?

Spirit. That is thy Poison which thou call Pleasure:
And that thy drudgery which thou count'st thy treasure.

Flesh. Who can endure to be thus mewed up?
And under Laws for every bit and cup?

Spirit. God's Cage is better than the Wilderness.
When Winter comes, Liberty brings distress

Flesh. Pleasure's man's Happiness: The Will's not free
To choose our misery: This cannot be.

Spirit. God is man's End: with him are highest joys:
Sensual pleasures are but dreams and toys.
Should sin seem sweet! Is Satan turned thy friend?
Will not thy sweet prove bitter in the end?
Have thou found sweeter pleasures than Gods Love
Is a fools laughter like the Joys above?
Beauty surpasses all deceitful paints:
What Is empty mirth to the delights of Saints?
God would not have thee have less joy, but more:
And therefore shows thee the eternal store.

Flesh. Who can love baseness, poverty and want?
And under pining sickness be content?

Spirit. He that has laid his treasure up above
And placed his portion only in Gods love:
That waits for Glory when his life is done:
This man will be content with God alone.

Flesh. What good will sorrow do us? Is not mirth
Fitter to warm a cold heart here on earth?
Troubles will come whether we will or no:
I Will never banish pleasure, and choose we.

Spirit. Then choose not sin: touch not forbidden things:
Taste not the sweet that endless sorrow brings.
If thou love pleasure, take in God thy fill:
Look not for lasting joys in doing ill.

Flesh. Affliction's bitter: life will soon be done:
Pleasure shall be my part ere all be gone.

Spirit. Prosperity is barren: all men say
The soil is best where there is the deepest way.
Life is for work, and not to spend in play.
Now sow thy seed: labor while it is day.
The Huntsman seeks his game in barren plains.
Dirty land answers best the Plowmans pains.
Passengers care not so the way be fair;
Husbandmen would have the best ground and air
First think what is safe and fruitful: There Is no pleasure
Like the beholding of thy chiefest Treasure.

Flesh. Nature made me a Man, and gave me sense:
Changing of Nature is a vain pretense:
It taught me to love women, honor, ease,
And every thing that does my senses please.

Spirit. Nature has made thee Rational; and Reason
Must rule the sense, in ends, degrees and season.
Reason's the Rider; Sense is but the Horse:
Which then is fittest to direct thy course?
Give up the reins, and thou becom'st a beast;
Thy fall at death will sadly end thy feast.

Flesh. Religion is a dull and heavy thing,
Whereas a merry Cup will make me sing.
Love's entertainments warm both heart and brain:
And wind my fancy to the highest strain.

Spirit. Cupid has stuck a Feather in thy Cap;
And lulled thee dead asleep on Venu's lap:
Thy brains are tipled with some wantons eyes:
Thy Reason is become Lust's sacrifice.
Playing a game at Folly, thou have lost
Thy wit, and soul, and winnest to thy cost.
Thy Soul now in a filthy channel lies,
While fancy seems to soar above the Skies.
Beauty will soon be stinking loathsome Earth:
Sickness and Death mar all the wanton's mirth.
It is not all the pleasure thou can find.
Will countervail the sting that is left behind.
Blind, brutish Souls! that cannot love their God!
And yet can dote on a defiled clod!
Why should I think of what will be to morrow?
An ounce of mirth is worth a pound of sorrow.

Spirit. But where is that mirth when sorrows overtake thee?
Will it then hold when Life and God forsake thee?
Forgetting Death or Hell will not prevent it:
Now lose thy day, thou wilt then too late repent it.

Flesh. Must I be pained and wronged, and not feel?
As if my heart were made of flint or steel?

Spirit. Do thou delight to feel thy hurt and smart?
Would not an Antidote preserve thy heart?
Impatience is but self-tormenting folly:
Patience is cordial, easy, sweet and holy.
Is not that better which turns grief to peace,
Than that which does thy misery increase?

Flesh. When sport, and wine, and beauty do invite,
Who is it whom such baits will not incite?

Spirit. He that perceives the hook and sees the end,
Whither it is that fleshly Pleasures tend.
He that by faith has seen both Heaven and Hell,
And what sin costeth at the last can tell:
He that has tried and tasted better things,
And felt that love from which all pleasure springs.
They that still watch, and for Christ's coming wait,
Can turn away from, or despise the bait.

Flesh. Must I be made the football of disdain?
And called a precise fool or Puritan?

Spirit. Remember him that did despise the shame,
And for thy sake bore undeserved blame.
Thy journey's of small moment if thou stay
Because dogs bark, or stones lie in the way.
If life lay on it, would thou turn again,
For the winds blowing or a little rain?
Is this thy greatest love to thy dear Lord?
That can not for his sake bear a foul word?
Will thou not bear for him a scorners breath,
That underwent for thee a cursed death?
Is not Heaven worth the bearing of a flout?
Then blame not Justice when it shuts thee out.
Will these deriders stand to what they say,
And own their words at the great dreadful day?
Then they would be glad, when wrath shall overtake them,
To eat their words, and say they never spoke them.

Flesh. How? Forsake all! Never mention it more to me
I Will be of no Religion to undo me.

Spirit. Is it not thine more in thy Fathers hand,
Then when it is laid out at sins command?
And is that saved that is spent upon thy lust
Or which must be a prey to thieves or rust?
And would thou have thy riches in thy way,
Where thou art passing on and can not stay?
And is that lost that is sent to Heaven before?
Had thou not rather have thy friends and store,
Where thou may dwell for ever, in the light
Of that long glorious day that fears no night?

Flesh. But who can willingly submit to Death,
Which will bereave us of our life and breath;
That lays our flesh to rot in loathsome graves,
Where brains and eyes were, leaves but ugly caves?

Spirit. So nature breaks and casts away the shell,
Where the now beauteous singing bird did dwell:
The secundine that once the infant clothed,
After the birth, is cast away and loathed.
Thus Roses drop there sweet leaves under-foot;
But the Spring shows that life was in the root.
Souls are the Roots of Bodies: Christ the Head
Is Root of both, and will revive the dead.
Our Sun still shines when with us it is night:
When he return's, we shall shine in his light.
Souls that behold and praise God with the Just,
Mourn not because their bodies are but dust.
Graves are but beds where flesh till morning sleep's:
Or Chests where God a while our garments keeps.
Our folly thinks he spoils them in the keeping;
Which causes our excessive fears and weeping:
But God that does our rising day foresee:
Pitties not rotting flesh so much as we.
The birth of Nature was deformed by sin:
The birth of Grace did our repair begin.
The birth of Glory at the Resurrection
Finisheth all, and brings both to perfection.
Why should not fruit when it is mellow fall?
Why would we linger here when God does call?

Flesh. The things and persons in this world I see,
But after death I know not what will be.

Spirit. Know thou not that which God himself has spoken?
Thou have his promise which was never broken.
Reason proclaims that noble heaven-born Souls,
Are made for higher things than Worms and Moles.
God has not made such faculties in vain,
Nor made his Service a deluding pain.
But Faith resolves all doubts, and hears the Lord
Telling us plainly by his holy Word,
That unclothed Souls shall with their Savior dwell,
Triumphing over Sin, and Death, and Hell.
And by the Power of Almighty Love,
Stars shall arise from graves to shine above.
There we shall see the glorious face of God:
His blessed presence shall be our abode:
The face that banisheth all doubts and fears,
Shuts out all sins, and dries up all tears.
That face which darkeneth the Sun's bright rays,
Shall shine us into everlasting joys.
Where Saints and Angels shall make up one Chore,
To praise the Great Jehovah evermore.

Flesh. Reason not with me against sight and sense:
I doubt all this is but a ^ain pretense.
Words against Nature are not worth a rush:
One Bird in hand is worth two in the bush.
If God will give me Heaven at last, I Will take it:
But for my Pleasure here I Will not forsake it.

Spirit. And will thou keep it? brutish flesh how long?
Will thou not shortly sing another Song?
When Conscience is awakened, keep thy mirth!
When sickness and death comes, hold fast this earth:
Live if thou can when God says, Come away:
Try whether all thy friends can cause thy stay.
Will thou tell Death and God, thou will not die?
And will thou the consuming fire defy?
Art thou not sure to let go what thou have?
And does not Reason bid thee then forecast,
And value the least hope of endless Joys,
Before known vanities, and dying toys?
And can the Lord that is most just and wise,
Found all man's duty in deceit and lies?
Get thee behind me Satan; thou do savor,
The things of Flesh, and not his dearest favor,
Who is my Life, and Light, and Love, and All,
And so shall be whatever shall befall.
It is not thou, but I that must discern,
And must Resolve: It Is I that hold the stern:
Be silent Flesh; speak not against my God;
Or else he will teach thee better by the rod.
I am resolved thou shall live and die,
A servant, or a conquered enemy.

Lord charge not on me what this rebel says,
That always was against me and thy ways!
Now stop its mouth by Grace, that shortly must
Through just but gainful death, be stopped with dust.
The thoughts and words of Flesh are none of mine:
Let Flesh say what it will, I will be thine.
Whatever this rebellious Flesh shall prate,
Let me but serve thee Lord, at any rate.
Use me on earth as seems good to thee,
So I in Heaven thy Glorious face may see.
Take down my Pride; let me dwell at thy feet:
The humble are for earth and heaven most meet
Renouncing Flesh, I Vow my self to thee,
With all the Talents thou have lent to me.
Let me not stick at honor, wealth or blood:
Let all my days be spent in doing good.
Let me not trifle out more precious hours;
But serve thee now with all my strength and powers.
If Flesh should tempt me to deny my hand;
Lord these are the Resolves to which I stand,
October. 29. 1659. Richard Baxter.

8. The Prayer of the Sick, in a Case like Hezekiahs.
To the Tune of the 51 Psalm.

The First Part.
1.
ETernal God, whose name is Love;
Whose mercy is my hope and stay:
O hear and help me from above,
That in distress to thee do pray.
Ashamed to lift up my face,
Hence from the dust to thee I cry:
Though I have sinned against thy Grace,
Yet unto it alone I fly.
2.
I was at first in sin conceived,
Then lived a vain and sinful life:
Rebellious flesh which I received
Is still against thy Grace in strife.
Long it was Lord, alas too long,
Before I knew my self or thee:
Vanity ruled my heart and tongue:
And O that yet my Soul were free!
3.
But while I sinned thou wast kind,
And sent'st thy Word and Spirit of Grace;
Thy Light did change my darkened mind,
And showed me my wretched case.
Though I drew back, thou did prevail;
And I gave up my self to thee.
Thou undertook'st for wind and sail;
Both Ship and Pilot thou would be.
4.
I turned my back on worldly toys;
And set my face toward Glory's Shore;
Where thou have promised highest Joys,
And Blessedness for evermore.
I took my leave of Sin and Earth;
What I had loved, I now did hate;
Ashamed of my former birth,
I gave my Life a newer date.
5.
But since that time how am I tossed?
Afraid of every storm and wave:
Almost concluding I am lost,
As if thou would not help and save.
If I look out beyond thine Ark,
Nothing but raging Seas I see:
On this side Heavens all is deep and dark:
But I look further unto thee.
6.
Censures and scorns, and frowns I hear:
Storms which before I never found;
And yet all these I should not fear,
If all at home were safe and sound.
But thy displeasure wounds my heart:
I have but two parts Flesh and Soul:
Both of thy wrath do bear their part;
And thou have left me neither whole.
The Second Part.
7.
All this is just, Lord, I confess;
I staid too long ere I came in:
And how should healing grace do less,
When I brought with me so much sin?
Much Pride and Vanity I kept:
Too often my heart was looking back:
Though God stood by me, yet I slept:
Heaven was at hand; yet I grew slack.
Spare Lord, and pity thy poor dust!
That fled into thy Ark for Peace!
O cause my Soul on thee to trust!
And do not my distress increase.
O keep up life and peace within!
If I must feel thy chastening Rod;
Yet kill not me, but kill my sin;
And let me know, thou art My God.
9.
Folly dwelt in my childish breast;
Sin robbed me of my youthful days:
Let not thy wrath cut off the rest,
And stifle thine intended praise.
Whilst I forgot thee, thou did bear:
Thy kindness did invite me home:
O rack me not with grief and fear!
Kill me not Lord, now I am come.
10.
The silent Dust speaks not thy fame:
Nor in dark Graves art thou renowned:
The living Saints declare thy Name,
And in thy Church thy Praises sound.
Yet let me with thy household dwell;
Though I be numbered with thy Poor:
And with thy Saints thy Wonders tell,
Although I sit behind thy door.
11.
Set not thy strength against frail man:
O turn not yet this flesh to Clay!
My life, thou know, is but a span,
If I should see the longest day.
Break me not all to pieces Lord;
Or else, let each piece have a tongue,
To cry, till thou relief afford;
But not to say, Thou do me wrong.
12.
Pity this poor unworthy Soul,
That here devotes it self to thee:
Resolve my doubts; my fears control;
And let me thy Salvation see.
O let that Love which gave me groans,
And taught my needy Soul to pray,
Remove my fears, and hear the moans
Which sorrow breaths forth night and day.
The Third Part.
13.
Why art thou, fainting Soul, cast down?
And thus disquieted with fears?
Art thou not passing to thy Crown,
Through storms of pain, and floods of tears?
Fear not, O thou of little Faith!
Art thou not in thy Savior's hand?
Remember what his promise says:
Life and Death are at his command.
14.
To him I did my self entrust,
When first I did for Heaven imbark:
And he has proved kind and just:
Still I am with him in his Ark.
Could thou expect to see no Seas?
Nor feel no tossing wind or wave?
It is enough that from all these
Thy faithful Pilot will thee save.
15.
Lord let me not my Covenant break:
Once I did all to thee resign:
Only the words of comfort speak,
And tell my Soul that I am thine.
It Is no Death when Souls hence depart,
If thou depart not from the Soul:
Fill with thy Love my fainting heart,
And I Will not fading flesh condole.
16.
Health is but Sickness with thy frowns:
Life with thy wrath is worse than Death:
My comforts thy displeasure drowns,
And into groans tunes all my breath.
Where is that Faith, and Hope, and Love,
By which thou markest all thy Saints?
Thy Joys would all my griefs remove,
And raise this heart that daily faints.
17.
Am I the Jonas? do thou mean
To cast me out into the deep?
It shall not drown, but make me clean:
Until thou raise me, there I Will sleep.
O Death! where is thy poisonous sting?
O Grave! where is thy Victory?
Thy dust shall shortly rise, and sing
God's Praise above the Starry Sky.
18.
My God, my Love, my Hope, my Life!
Shall I be loath to see thy face?
As if this world of sin and strife,
Were for my Soul a better place?
O give my Soul some sweet foretast
Of that which I shall shortly see!
Let Faith and Love cry to the last,
Come Lord, I trust my self with thee.
John 11. 14. or 16. O let not unbelieving Thomas words
Be now my answer: But my dearest Lord's.

Amen.
9. The Covenant and Confidence of Faith.
To the common Tunes.

1.
My whole, though broken heart, O Lord!
From henceforth shall be thine:
And here I do my Vow record:
This hand, these words are mine.
All that I have, without reserve,
I offer here to thee:
Thy Will and Honor all shall serve,
That thou bestow'dst on me.
2.
All that exceptions save I lose:
All that I lose I save:
The treasure of thy Love I choose;
And Thou art All I crave.
My God, thou have my heart and hand:
I all to thee resign.
I Will ever to this Covenant stand,
Though flesh hereat repine.
3.
I know that thou wast willing first;
And then made me consent:
Having thus loved meat the worst,
Thou will not now repent.
Now I have quit all Self-pretence,
Take charge of what is thine own!
My Life, my Health, and my Defense,
Now lie on thee alone.
4.
Now it belongs not to my care,
Whether I die or live:
To love and serve thee is my share:
And this thy grace must give.
If life be long, I will be glad,
That I may long obey:
If short; yet why should I be sad.
That shall have the same pay.
5.
If Death shall bruise this springing seed,
Before it come to fruit;
The Will with thee goes for the Deed;
Thy life was in the root.
Long life is a long grief and toil,
And multiplieth faults:
In long wars he may have the foil,
That scapes in short assaults.
6.
Would I long bear my heavy load?
And keep my sorrows long?
Would I long sin against my God?
And his dear mercy wrong?
How much is sinful Flesh my Foe,
That does my soul pervert,
To linger here in sin and woe,
And steals from God my heart?
7.
Christ leads me through no darker rooms,
Than he went through before:
He that into God's Kingdom comes,
Must enter by this Door.
Come Lord, when Grace has made me meet,
Thy blessed Face to see:
For if thy work on Earth be sweet,
What will thy Glory be?
8.
Then I shall end my sad complaints,
And weary sinful days;
And join with the triumphant Saints,
That sing Jehovah's Praise.
My Knowledge of that Life is small;
The Eye of Faith is dim:
But it is enough that Christ knows all;
And I shall be with him.
This Covenant my Dear Wife in her former Sickness subscribed with a cheerful
will. Joh. 12. 26.
10. A Psalm of Praise.
To the Tune of the 148 Psalm.

1.
YE holy Angels bright,
Which stand before God's Throne,
And dwell in glorious Light,
Praise ye the Lord each one.
You there so nigh
Are much more meet
Than we the feet,
For things so high.
2.
You blessed Souls at Rest,
That see your Savior's face,
Whose Glory, even the least
Is far above our Grace;
God's Praises sound,
As in his sight,
With sweet delight,
You do abound.
3.
All Nations of the Earth,
Extol the World's Great King:
With Melody and Mirth.
His glorious Praises sing.
For he still reigns;
And will bring low,
The proudest Foe,
That him disdains.
4.
Sing forth Jehovah's Praise,
Ye Saints that on him call:
Magnify him always,
His holy Churches all:
In him rejoice;
And there proclaim
His Holy Name,
With sounding voice.
5.
My Soul, bear thou thy part:
Triumph in God above:
With a well-tuned heart,
Sing thou the Songs of Love.
Thou art his own,
Whose precious Blood
Shed for thy good,
His Love made known.
6.
He did in Loves begin,
Renewing thee by Grace;
Forgiving all thy sin,
Showed thee his pleased face,
He did thee heal,
By his Son's Merit,
And by his Spirit,
For Glory Seal.
7.
In saddest thoughts and grief,
In sickness, fears and pain,
I cried for his relief,
And it was not in vain.
He heard with speed;
And still I found
Mercy abound,
In time of need.
8.
Let not his Praises grow,
On prosperous heights alone:
But in the Vales below,
Let his great Love be known.
Let no distress,
Curb and control,
My winged Soul,
And praise suppress.
9.
Let not the fear or smart,
Of his chastizing Rod,
Take off my fervent heart,
From praising my Dear God.
What ere I feel,
Still let me bring
This Offering,
And to him kneel.
10.
Though I lose friends and wealth,
And bear reproach and shame;
Though I lose ease and health,
Still let me praise God's Name.
That fear and pain,
Which would destroy
My Thanks and Joy,
Do thou restrain.
11.
Though humane help depart,
And flesh draw near to dust;
Let Faith keep up my heart,
To love God true and just:
And all my days,
Let no disease
Cause me to cease
His joyful Praise.
12.
Though sin would make me doubt,
And fill my Soul with fears:
Though God seem to shut out,
My daily cries and tears:
By no such frost
Of sad delays,
Let thy sweet Praise
Be nipt and lost.
13.
Away distrustful care!
I have thy Promise Lord.
To banish all Despair,
I have thy Oath and Word.
And therefore I
Shall see thy face,
And there thy grace,
Shall magnify.
14.
Though Sin and Death conspire,
To rob thee of thy Praise.
Still toward thee I Will aspire,
And thou dull hearts can raise.
Open thy Door;
And when grim Death
Shall stop this Breath,
I Will praise thee more.
15.
With thy Triumphant Flock;
Then I shall numbered be,
Built on the Eternal Rock,
His Glory we shall see.
The Heavens so high,
With Praise shall ring,
And all shall sing
In Harmony.
16.
The Sun is but a Spark,
From the Eternal Light:
Its brightest beams are dark,
To that most glorious sight:
There the whole Chore,
With one accord,
Shall praise the Lord
For evermore.
11. The Complaint.
WHat mean impatient men to call it Pain?
That do the creatures wrath alone sustain?
But, alas! how much greater is my woe,
That must God's sharp displeasure undergo?
If a Worm's fury seems hard to bear,
Who dare before an angry God appear?
I thought my God had blotted out my sin;
And it no more remembered should have bin!
And will thou now call up what is past and gone?
And charge upon me all that I have done?
Why then, where is my Saviour' where is his blood?
Shall not thy Promises be all made good?
Where are thy tender bowels? where is that grace?
That showed me once thy reconciled face?
Do thou repent? or can God changed be?
O no! it is I that falsely turned from thee.
Yet be not angry with me, O my God!
If thy Child cry, and plead against the Rod;
Not daring to accuse thy narrow path;
But humbly bold to deprecate thy wrath.
Is it thy pleasure to behold my grief?
When thou can with a word send full relief?
Do thou delight to see me drencht in tears?
And overwhelmed with doubts and horrid fears?
Will thou stand by and see my Soul thus sink?
While wasting flesh does stand at the pits brink?
Shall grief and sickness leave but skin and bones?
And shall I know no breath but sighs and groans?
Have I no passions left but griefs and fears?
Are groans the only music for thine ears?
And have I sense only to feel my woe?
And reason only misery to know?
And will thou suffer sinful unbelief,
To banish Joy, and keep out all Relief?
How can that gracious Lord my woe desire?
That did so much to save me from the fire?
How can that Savior be against my good,
That died in love, and washed me by his blood?
Can the same voice now pass so sad a doom,
That from my sin so lately called me home?
Will thou now frown me down to fears and death?
That lately gav'st me a new life and breath?
Or can that hand that snatched me from the flame,
Tear me, and cast me back into the same?
Pity, my God, this sinking trembling Soul,
And let the hand that wounds me, make me whole:
Friends would, but cannot; all their help is vain.
But thou can quickly give me joy for pain.
What can friends do, but make my grief their own?
And will not give me leave to die alone.
They can but add their fruitless tears and moans,
To join in a sad consort with my groans.
Their pity does but make my wounds more deep:
While in compassion they stand by and weep.
Through me, thou woundest them: my pains are theirs:
And every tender friend a portion bears.
They can but pray for that which thou must give:
They strive in vain if thou will not relieve.
O spare me Lord! and press me not too low:
Lest I should pievish and impatient grow!
Lest I should have unworthy thoughts of thee,
Forgetting what thy Love has done for me.
Lest blind distrust get ground against my faith,
And I grow mindless what thy Promise says.
Lest griefs consume the soul which thou have made,
And lest thy Praises with my Comforts fade.
Lest I thine ancient Loves no more rehearse,
But all my Thanks as a mistake reverse.
And lest unruly grief should make me break
Thy holy Laws, and things unseemly speak.
And lest the Tempter should advantage take,
The heav'n-built structure of my Hopes to shake.
Lest I be drawn with Job to curse the day,
In which my Soul was married to Clay!
Lest this rash tongue thy precious Loves deny,
And in distress, should call thee Enemy.
Break not the heart on which thou wrot'st thy Name,
Lest those blessed Letters perish with the frame.
Thy Word commands us always to rejoice:
Fain I would do it, but thou stop'st my voice.
Can I rejoice, when as thine angry Dart,
Is piercing night and day my wounded heart?
Can I rejoice and bleed? Rejoice and die?
Can I rejoice, when thou do Joy deny?
Can I mix night and day? or death and life?
Or heat and cold? or quietness and strife?
Or twist the highest joy with deepest sorrow?
Dwelling near Hell to day, and Heaven to morrow?
Will joys agree with heavy sighs and groans?
And sweetest comforts dwell with broken bones?
When I would rise and sing thy Love's renown,
Then comes another wave and strikes me down.
Brimstone and flames methinks upon me rain,
As if I were adjudg'd to Sodom's pain.
O my Dear God! why do thou me forsake?
And all my bones and heart in pieces shake?
I took thee for my only Life and Joy:
O do not now this trembling Soul destroy!
The Answer.
WEak Child! why do thou make all this ado?
Do thou remember whom thou speak to?
Do thou consider what thy passion says?
Is this the language of a stable Faith?
Is this thy Patience, and thy Self-denial?
Will thou thus shrink and shake in time of trial?
May I not with my own do what I list?
And use my creature as to me seems best?
Am I not wise enough to use the Rod?
Will thou prefer thy self before thy God?
Who Is fittest to be Ruler? thou or I?
Whose Wisdom's best? and whose Fidelity?
When proved I false unto thee? or unkind?
When did thou seek aright, and did not find?
Look homeward, Man; there dwells thine Enemy*
It is thy Self and Sin: It is not l.
The thing thou should complain of, is within:
Turn all thy charge against thy Self and Sin.
Sin is so bad, that it can do no better.
God cannot fail thee, and remain thy debtor.
Such intimations should not pass thy tongue,
As if the Righteous God could do thee wrong.
Were Conscience but as tender as thy flesh,
And Sin as grievous to thee as the lash;
Had thou but lived as beseems a Saint,
I might have spared my Rod, and thou thy Plaint.
Can thou suspect I am against thy good,
When I have proved my Love by streams of blood?
Have I not loved thee from Eternity?
And caused my only Son for thee to die?
Have I not called thee from a life of sin,
When thousands round about thee live therein?
Remember how I used thee at the first,
When in thy blood I found thee at the worst:
Who gave thee notice of thy sinful state,
Wakening thy Soul before it was too late?
Who did convince thee of the worldlings folly?
And show thee that it is better to be holy?
Who saved thee from the world's deceits and lies?
And weaned thee from thy former vanities?
Who taught thee to bewail thy heavy load?
And made thee long to know and love thy God?
If thou art willing that I should be thine,
It is because at first I called thee Mine.
I offered Christ: I made thee to consent:
And in the terms of grace to rest content.
When thou wast ignorant, who did thee teach?
And made thee long a higher state to reach?
Who made thee love and choose the scorned way?
And cleave to Christ, whatever flesh could say?
Who made thee pray? and who thy prayer heard?
And saved thee from the Plagues thy Conscience feared?
Who made thy sinful heart long to be better?
Art thou not for all this to me a debtor?
That thou do miss me, and my pleased face,
That thou do mourn and groan, is from my grace:
Freely I did forgive thee what was past,
And all thy deadly sins behind me cast.
And yet must I be taken for thy Foe?
And all these accusations undergo?
After all this, can thou my love suspect?
And all my comforts peevishly reject?
Dare thou deny my Love and Grace, as none,
Because that all the work is not yet done?
Who wrought that grace? whose should the honor be?
While thou condemn'st thy self, thou wrongest me.
Watch and reform, and cheerfully. obey:
For what thou want, wait, and strive, and pray.
Thy Love and cheerful duty I require:
It Is not thy self-tormenting I desire.
Humbly look back: remember what thou wast:
Be not unthankful for the grace thou have.
Deny it not, but wait at mercy's door:
Thankfulness is the way to get thee more.
If thou art weak, look upto Christ thy strength:
He Will perfect what he has begun at length:
Is not his grace sufficient for thee still?
He Will give the rest, that freely gave the Will:
If thou stand still, or loyter in thy Race;
And if my Spur do bid thee, mend thy pace;
Let not the smart make thee lie down and whine,
And at the needful quickening Rod repine:
But, Up; Repent; cheerfully do thy best:
The day's at hand, when thou shall have the Rest.
The Submission.
FAther, forgive my passion and rash words:
Yet I Will be thine: I Will own no other Lords.
Seeing thou will accept so frail a Worm,
That can without thee no good thing perform;
Still I Will be thine, and stand to what I said,
When I my Covenant and Resignment made.
I Will rather groan within, and suffer more,
Than laugh with them that stand without thy door.
O let thy Will attract and perfect mine!
Hereafter not My Will be done, but Thine.
And let the roughest way seem fair and eaven,
That has thy presence, and does lead to Heaven.
And as thou bidst me, Evermore Rejoice,
Give me a joyful heart, and praising voice.
Suffer not sin to soil thy grace and me;
But make me such as thou would have me be.
Let streams of Love flow from thy open breast:
And let me wait, and long to feel the REST.
12. The Return.
To the Tune of Pas. Mes. Galliard:

OR,

The common Psalm Tunes.

1.
WHO was it that I left behind,
When I went last from home?
That now I all disordered find,
When to my self I come?
2.
I thought I had the door fast locked,
When I went last away:
And long might strangers there have knocked,
If none had found my Key.
3.
When I was here the fire did burn,
That now is almost out:
Half dead with cold I sit and mourn,
Perplexed with many a doubt.
4.
I left it light, but now all is dark,
And I am fain to grope:
Were it not for one little spark,
I should be out of hope.
5.
The Rooms I carefully did sweep;
But now I find all foul:
Serpents do crawl, and Vermin creep,
In my polluted Soul.
6.
My Gospel-Book I open left,
Where I the Promise saw:
But now I doubt it is lost by theft,
I find none but the Law.
7.
And when my Soul I had undrest,
And thought some ease to find:
I found distress instead of rest,
Through anguish of my mind.
8.
For Thorns were put into my Bed,
Where I was wont to sleep:
Grief is the pillow for my head,
On which I lie and weep.
9.
And if I slumber, up I start:
My dreams awake my fears:
The thorns have pierced head and heart;
And drawn forth more than tears.
10.
The stormy Rain an entrance has,
Through the uncovered top:
How should I rest when showers of wrath
Upon my conscience drop?
11.
My goods I fear are gone to waste:
The best I cannot find:
The rest are in disorder cast:
Which yet are left behind.
12.
I locked my Jewel in my Chest:
I Will search lest that be gone:
If this one Guest had quit my breast,
I had been quite undone.
13.
I know it is Sin that did all this:
For nothing else could do it:
I Will charge upon it all I miss,
And with the Law pursue it.
14.
My treacherous flesh has played its part,
And opened Sin the Door:
And they have spoiled and robbed my heart,
And left it sad and poor.
15.
How shall I see my Landlord's face?
How shall I pay his Rent?
When I have thus abused his grace;
And have his Treasure spent?
16.
Yet have I one great trusty friend,
That will procure my Peace;
And all this loss and ruin mend,
And purchase my release.
17.
When I the Prodigal had played,
And all my Portion spent;
He told me he my Debts had paid,
And bade me but Repent.
18.
Yea this by his supply was done:
Whose Covenant bade me do it.
Because I had not of my own,
So much as would serve to it.
19.
And after this when my false heart,
Forgot my Dearest Lord;
He did perform a Savior's part,
And still my Soul restored.
20.
I feared lest as but once he died,
He would but once forgive:
But still when in distress I tried,
He did my Soul relieve.
21.
Still when He took me by the hand,
My Father on me smiled:
Often have I broken his Command,
And yet he called me Child.
22.
I know his Power: And for his Love,
It spoke by pains and blood:
Largely does he his kindness prove,
And make his Promise good.
23.
Therefore I Will never more despair,
Nor take my self for lost:
For he will all my loss repair,
Though at the dearest cost.
24.
Yea more, I have his hand to show,
That when my Lease is out,
A Kingdom he will on me bestow;
He chides me if I doubt.
25.
I Will trust on him, and use his Name,
Whatever be my need:
And I shall escape the wrath and shame,
And shall be sure to speed.
26.
And for that sin that played the Thief,
I Will stop its poisonous breath;
Or pine it with consuming grief,
And famish it to death.
27.
And I Will take heed for time to come,
Of wandering abroad,
With my best constant friend at home,
I Will settle mine abode.
28.
The Bellows I Will yet take in hand:
Till this small spark shall flame.
Love shall my heart and tongue command,
To praise God's holy Name.
29.
Once more I mean to sweep all clean,
And cast out filthy sin:
And Christ again I Will entertain,
And wait on him within.
30.
I Will mend the Roof: I Will watch the Door,
And better keep the Key:
I Will trust my treacherous Flesh no more,
But force it to obey.
31.
I Will make a Covenant with my eyes;
My tongue shall know its Law:
I Will all the baits of sin despise,
And keep my heart in awe.
32.
My Bed shall be made soft by Love;
And there I Will take my rest:
Or else I Will wake till I remove,
Where none dwell but the Blessed.
33.
What have I said? That I Will do this?
That am so false and weak?
And have so often done amiss,
And did my Covenants break?
34.
I mean, Lord, All this shall be done,
If thou my heart wilt raise.
And as the work must be thine own;
So also shall the Praise.
12. The Lamentation Jan. 18. 1660/1.
For Sin afflicting the Sinner; especially by the grievous sufferings of
Friends.

With the Relief of the Self-condemning Soul.

O Mercy, Mercy, Mercy! O my God!
Must I feel nothing but thy smarting Rod?
Must I be daily on the rack of sears?
And have no drink to quench my thirst but tears?
Where is the Spring that feeds this bitter stream?
That stops not, either when I wake or dream?
These Worms of Fear and Grief, whose food I am,
Into the world as brethren with me came:
Youthful diversions cast them once asleep,
But Light awakened them to bite more deep.
Since then, I lived between thy Book and Rod;
And in thy School of Discipline abode:
Sometimes thy gentle twigs touched but the skin:
Sometimes thy sharper strokes did enter in:
Most of them fell but on my outward part:
But now they pierce, they wound, they kill my heart.
Spare Lord! I sigh, I groan, I weep, I cry!
O spare! before I bleed, I sink, I die!
O spare the Heart! or wound none but mine own!
And let me sigh, and weep, and mourn alone!
It Is I that sinned: these Sheep what have they done?
I sinned but with One Heart: O break but One!
Shall I that have extolled thy peoples Joys,
And told men of the sweetness of thy ways;
Now by my plaints and dolor make them think,
Thou giv'st us Gall and Vinegar to drink.
Set me not as a spectacle of wrath,
To frighten comers from the holy path.
Be silent flesh! my God is Wise and Just;
Have thou not sinned? stoop and kiss the dust.
If Passion did not blind thee, thou might see,
Justice is good, even when it falls on thee.
It is not causless, if he pierce the Heart:
He does but choose the foul, the guilty part.
Had not the door been opened first to sin,
Terror and sorrows could not have got in:
If it have room for thoughts of Pride and Just;
That trouble should dwell with them, is but just.
Where should the tent be put, but in the wound?
We cleanse the ulcerous part, and not the sound.
Where should Jehovah's battering Cannons play,
But at the Fortress where his Enemy lay?
Thence came the viperous brood; there was the root
Of all the bitter, poisonous, deadly fruit.
There God should have been entertained in Love.
His Will as End and Spring each wheel should move.
But how unkindly was he there abused?
His tender Love and healing Grace refused?
Often have I shut the door when he has come;
I played, or slept, or would not be at home.
Should God be slighted by a stubborn Heart,
And not rebuke its folly by its smart?
I sinned and laughed; I lightly passed it over:
Should God do so, and not his wrath discover?
Just is the Lord: My sin has found me out.
I find his threatenings true beyond all doubt:
What have I done! All Is now to Conscience known:
Its deep remorse, tells me, What I have done.
What have I done! It Is graven all in Stone:
This heart of flint, feels now, What I have done.
What have I done! my pained flesh and bone,
Cry out with anguish, O what have I done!
What have I done! I see, I feel, I groan!
The sad effects proclaim, What I have done.
What have I done! My friends distress and moan,
Cry to me night and day, This thou have done.
Melt sinful heart, and spare not! welcome grief!
Away delights! I Will none of your relief.
Show me the Wilderness, the secret Cell,
Where grief and I may still together dwell!
Where Hills and Woods may echo all my groans,
And hearers may not interrupt my moans!
Where mortal Eyes may see no more the face,
Which folly has confounded with disgrace.
Where I may Die alive, and Live in Death;
And spend in Lamentation all my breath.
Seeing deceitful heart-tormenting sin
So cunningly is crept and woven in:
Break it in pieces, turn this Heart to dust;
Melt out the dross; purge out the filth and rust.
Spare not the Lance: Or if that will do good,
Drench it in tears: Stop not this brinish flood!
Jesus.

Peace troubled Soul! I Will wash it in my blood.
Woman, why weepest thou? was the first word,
After his Rising, spoken by our Lord,
To which his Angels Preface did accord.
John 20. 13. 15.

The Relief.
Jesus. PEace troubled Soul! It Is not thy brinish flood,
Nor troubling Passions that must do thee good:
Come! freely drank, and bathe thee in this Blood.

Sinner. What I? so vile a wretch! it cannot be!
Alas! I fear it was not shed for me!

Jesus. Yea even for thee: So far 'twas shed for all,
That they may come and welcome, at my Call.

Sinner. Alas Lord! I have trampled on thy Blood,
And thy Reproofs, and Calls of Grace withstood.

Jesus. And yet I call thee: Take my Mercy yet:
I Will answer for thee: I have paid thy debt.

Sinner. What mine! that have provoked thee so long?
And done thy Blood and Spirit so much wrong?

Jesus. I died for Enemies: It is my Glory,
To wash foul hearts, and blot out all their story.

Sinner. What! one so long! so terrible! so sad!
Love one so hateful! pardon one so bad!

Jesus. Have thou such sins as I cannot forgive?
Or any wants which I cannot relieve?

Sinner. I know thy Blood can wash away my guilt:
I doubt not, thou can heal me, if thou will.

Jesus. How has my Will deserved thy suspicion,
When I have made Acceptance the condition?
Consent, and all is thine: My Gift is free:
The purchase is not to be made by thee.

Sinner. ^ know what thou will do, shall sure be done:
^ut some God hates: I fear that I am one.

Jesus. And must the Love declared at such a rate,
So veiled by the suspicion of Hate?
For this I came to Men from God above,
To manifest his great abundant Love:
Mark what my Doctrine, Life and Death intend:
This is their principal design and end:
Not only to reveal God's Power and Skill,
But chiefly his Great Mercy and Good Will.

Sinner. Yet he will save none but his own Elect:
Not those that his Salvation neglect.

Jesus. My Promise, and thy Duty, thou may see;
But can not search the depth of God's Decree.
Mercy entreats thee: here it is brought unto thee:
Take it, and God's Decree shall not undo thee.
All are Elect that do not to the last
Refuse me, and my Grace behind them cast.

Sinner. This I have done, and fear I shall do still,
Till I the measure of my sins fulfill.
Though God be Love it self, I shall have none:
I fear my Day of Grace is past and gone.
Methinks I feel, Grace does my Soul forsake:
Thy Holy Spirit thou do from me take.

Jesus. Here thou art yet alive; my Grace attends thee;
And from the jaws of Death and Hell defends thee.
Satan would fain at once thy Soul devour:
What dangers do thou walk in every hour?
Yet thou art safe, and hear'st the Preacher's voice
Come, close with Mercy, and Heaven will rejoice.
Do thou not feel my Spirit still contend?
And tell thee what it is that thou must mend?
If yet thou wilt be but willing to be mine;
I and my Benefits will sure be thine.
I seek; I knock; thou find'st I have not done:
Yet do thou say, thy Day of Grace is gone?

Sinner. O but I have a Heart as hard as Steel!
I see my misery, but cannot feel!

Jesus. Fully to feel what thou deserve, is Hell.
What measure's best, it is I that best can tell.

Sinner. I can scarce weep a tear for sin: This Heart
Was never melted yet by all thine Art!
Sure it is a sign my Day of Grace is gone,
When this unhumbled Heart remains a Stone.

Jesus. Consent but to my Covenant, and be sure,
The remnant of thy Hardness I will cure.
I Will put a tender heart into thy breast:
Believe in me, and I Will forgive the rest.
It is no Mortal Hardness, if thou choose
My Covenant; and do not me refuse.
Should thou but fully feel thy sin, thou would die:
None could sustain so great a load but I.
I felt it for thee: Leave it to my care,
To wound or heal; to break, afflict or spare.

Sinner. My sin, my wants my misery is such.
That I can never feel and grieve too much.

Jesus. Such breaking's good as breaks the heart of sin:
And makes way for Love to enter in.
But not the grief that only breaks ease,
Weakening the Soul, and strengthening the Disease.
Hinder not Love and Joy; but grieve in measure:
My Blood, and not thy Tears, must be thy Treasure.

Sinner. Indeed my purest streams are too impure:
And cannot thy severity endure.
The grief of an impatient selfish spirit,
Cannot thy Pardon or Acceptance merit.
But if this hardened Heart do not relent,
And so great sin and misery lament,
How can thou smile on such a brazen face,
As never felt the want and worth of grace?

Jesus. Whence (...) I this complaining language hear,
If neither want nor worth of grace appear?
I Will save thee, if but so far thou Repent,
As to my Gospel Covenant to consent.
Will thou be healed? Truly say, I will,
And trust the cure on thy Physicians skill.

Sinner. O there is my sin and woe! though Grace be free
I cannot take thy Grace, or come to thee.
My heart is hardened; I cannot repent:
My Will's enthralled; I cannot consent.
This will condemn me at the dreadful day:
I may have Life, but will not when I may.

Jesus. Art thou not willing? why then do thou crave it?
Do thou complain for grace, and would not have it?
If thou had rather be ungodly still,
It seems thou speak all this against thy will.

Sinner. Would not the worst of men be saved from Hell?
And in delight and endless pleasure dwell?
But to be Holy I have no desire,
But as a means to keep me from Hell fire.
When I seem to do good, or ill forbear,
It is not out of Love, but slavish fear.
All my Religion is but from Self-love:
I find no pleasure in the things above.

Jesus. Natural Love of Self is the foundation
Which Grace builds on, and uses for Salvation.
He that loves not himself, loves not another:
It Is as thy Self that thou must love thy Brother.
Thy own Salvation is the lawful end,
Which Grace and Nature bind thee to intend.
Why was I made man, but for man's Salvation?
I suffered Death to hinder thy Damnation.
These are the ends for which thou must believe:
Life through a Savior's that thou must receive.
^t's Carnal Self that wicked men do love:
The Lawful Love of Self they will not improve.
They all prefer sin's pleasure for a season;
Their fleshly appetite does rule their Reason.
Me and my healing Grace they will not have;
They Will not endure that Mercy should them save.
They hate the Light that would their sin display,
And would direct them in the holy way:
Though they fear Hell, they always fear much more
The loss of honor, pleasure, health or store.
No fear of Hell will take their Idol down,
And make them seek first the Eternal Crown.
The Fear of God is Wisdom's true beginning:
It calls to Duty, and preserves from sinning:
God must be feared, as one that can destroy
The Soul, and shut it out of endless Joy.
The Fear of God's the Just man's Character:
They fear not God indeed that wished are.
God would be feared as a consuming fire:
This is no sin but what he does require.
Love may lie hidden as a covered seed;
When Fear in troubling Passion does exceed.
If angry Parents make the Child afraid,
He feels not Love, till Passion be allaid.
Excessive Fear may hinder active Love,
And yet the (...) not (...):
When God's rebukes and frowns the Soul affright,
It may dispose his Children unto flight.
Where Love is true, some Hatred may arise,
When terrors and despair the Soul surprise.
A loving Child will not his Father own,
When through mistake or distance he is unknown.
The pleasing part of Love cannot appear,
Under prevailing Grief, and too much Fear:
Until the Soul be calmed, and these abate,
Love is oppressed, and seems turned to hate.
But does not Love appear in thy Desire?
Would thou not Love God more? and fain get higher?
Would it not please thee more if thou could find
His Image clearly printed on thy mind,
His Love and Spirit dwelling in thy heart,
Then of this World to have the choicest part?
Would thou not have a heart that can Repent,
And hate sin more, and tenderly relent?
A heart more fit to Meditate and Pray?
And walk exactly, and God's Laws obey?
A clearer Light, which may God's mind reveal?
More life and feeling? greater heat of Zeal?
A stronger Faith to live on things above,
Where endless Praise shall be the breath of Love?

Sinner. Whether I should desire these I doubt,
If possibly I could be saved without.

Jesus. What Is Grace for, but to bring thee to Salvation?
To heal thy Soul, and keep thee from Damnation?
Will thou its Nature and its Use destroy,
And then conceit thou do it not enjoy?
Think on it, as that which does Salvation bring,
Or else thou make it quite another thing.
Grace were not Grace if it did not intend
Thy Happiness and Glory as its End.
The means is nullifi'd by separation
From the just End to which it has relation.
What do men trade for but their lawful wealth?
And what is Food and Physic for but Health?
Look not on Grace in one divided notion:
But the concordant perfect frame and motion:
Take not one single part, but view the whole,
As it is the Health and Beauty of the Soul;
The Life, the Strength, the Glory, the Delight,
And that which makes it lovely in God's sight;
The honor, safety, gain, and true content;
And that which must the pains of Hell prevent:
Take these as undivided; all in one;
And view not one disjoynted part alone:
If all together seem a choicer treasure
Than worldly gain, and sinful fading pleasure,
And turn the scales in thy deliberation;
Then doubt not of thy Title to Salvation.
But do thou not desire that God would love thee?
And make thee just and lovely, and approve thee?
Would thou not see his face in Glorious Light,
And there sing Allelujah 's in his sight?
And love him perfectly world without end,
More deerly than thou love thy dearest friend?
Where thou shall be replenished with joy,
And no disturbance shall thy Soul annoy?
Where no temptation, sin or grief shall come:
Where my own Love and Joy shall be thy home,
Abiding with the Host of Heaven always,
In the sweet Music of Jehovah 's Praise.
This Glorious Life with God, thou must love best:
Yet as thy own Felicity and Rest:
In Union and Fruition of a Friend,
Not one, but both the Lovers are the End.
And have thou no Desire or Will to this?
Would thou not live with God in endless bliss?

Sinner. Some cold Desires of Heaven the worst may have:
But dreaming lazy Wishes will not save.

Jesus. Judge by these three for ending all the strife:
Thy Estimation, Choice, and Bent of Life.
These fleshly pleasures stand in competition:
Know which thou Chusest as thy best Condition.
If thou the Everlasting sure Reward,
More than sins fading pleasures do regard;
If GOD and thy Salvation be the part,
Whose Interest stands highest in thy Heart;
If thus his Kingdom thou first seek and crave;
Both it, and all things needful thou shall have.

Sinner. I fear I do not these thy terms fulfill;
And have not truly a Consenting Will:
Because so great averseness I still find,
To God and Holiness upon my mind;
Such deadness to Believe, Love, and Repent,
That there seems more of Hatred than Consent.
Necessity and Reason use a force
Against my Will and Nature's bent and sourse.

Jesus. No man can conquer and obtain Salvation,
But by resisting carnal inclination.
Fleshly desires run with speedy course,
And need not Faith's or Reason's help and force.
Earthward you sink propensly as a cold;
But not so easily ascend to God.
One motion's downward; the other's all uphill;
Against the byas of the carnal will.
Too much of flesh remains in the best:
Some enmity to good sticks in their breast:
Something of Hatred, even to God and Grace,
Contends with Love, and troubles your race.
In the most mortified, the flesh yet lives,
And constantly against the Spirit striveth:
You cannot hear, read, meditate, or pray,
Or any thing that is good, think, do, or say;
But Flesh makes war, and stiffly does resist,
And would prevail, did not my Grace assist.
Conflict and Conquest of this inbred Foe,
Must be the way of all the good you do.
The Question is not, Whether Flesh do strive?
But, Whether after Flesh or Spirit you live?
It is not opposition that will prove
That thou art void of Faith, or Hope, or Love.
The Law that is in thy Members will still find
Weapons against the Law that is in thy Mind:
The Flesh will so rebel, and put thee to it,
That when thou would do good, thou can not do it.
There Is in one breast a twofold Will and Heart,
Actingreach of them a contrary part:
There is a Will to Good, and Will to evil:
One's Ruled by God, the other by the Devil.
A Will to read, and pray, and meditate;
A Will that does all this oppose and hate.
Do not now stand and whine, nor yield, nor fly;
But use thy weapons: thou must fight or die.
Now live by Faith: Be glad thou have a Christ,
Whose Spirit fortifies thee to resist:
Making the greatest things thy chiefest scope;
Keeping alive a secret spark of Hope;
Which will not only strive, but overcome;
And through all Foes will safely bring thee home.

Sinner. But how can I find favor in thy sight,
That have sinned wilfully even in the Light?

Jesus. Though they that wholly to the last reject
My Sacrifice, no other can expect;
All kind of sin is pardoned by my Merit,
Save the grand blasphemy against the Spirit.

Sinner. Alas! this is the thing that I fear most,
Lest I have thus blasphemed the Holy Ghost!

Jesus. No man that fears, or thinks he has this sin,
Has ever truly guilty of it been.
For they deny me all to be the Lord,
Think it no sin to violate my Word.
They set themselves against me with despite,
And justify the sin which they commit.

Sinner. But will thou take this, Lord, for true Consent,
From a hard heart that can no more relent?
From one that loves thee no more than I?
That is constrained by Necessity?
And while he thus subscribeth to thy Will,
Knowingly crosses it, and sins still?

Jesus. If thou Consent, it is Good that does thee move:
And to Consent to Good, is truly Love.
Believe if thou would Love: And in my face,
Behold the Fullness of God's Love and Grace.
If His abounding Love thou did but know,
Thy heart with Love to him would everflow.
Love kindles Love; but Faith must hold the Glass!
This sight would win thy heart before thou pass.
He that will Love God, must not think him Evil;
Nor paint him in his fancy like the Devil.
Satan will make thee fly from God with hate,
If he can make thee thoroughly desperate.
Think thou to find thy Love, before by Faith
Thou Wilt come to Me? and hear what Mercy says?
Thou may as wisely search for marks to prove
Thou love God, before thou will him love.
Believe, Consent, Give up Thy Self to Me;
And I will give my Self and Spirit to thee;
I will enable thee to do the rest;
And take the stony heart out of thy breast:
I Will put God's Fear and Love into thy heart,
That thou may never more from him depart.
I Will quench the flames of thy corrupt desire,
And save thee from God's wrath, and from Hell fire.

Sinner. And will thou pardon all the crimson sin,
Of which my wilful heart has guilty been?

Jesus. Have I not told thee I will pardon all?
Have thou sinned more than raging bloody Soul?
Or than Manasseh 's long and matchless flood
Of Witchcraft, Rage, Idolatry and Blood?
That yet was pardoned when he did return,
And in his Prison-Irons pray and mourn.
Trust Me, Subscribe My Covenant and be Mine,
And I and All My Benefits are Thine.

Sinner. O wondrous Love! where this is kindly felt,
The heart must needs with Love and Sorrow melt!
Will thou accept so vile a wretch as I?
I Will cast my self upon thee, live or die.
My Soul and Body here to Thee I tender:
All that I called Mine, I Here Surrender.
To this Consent here I subscribe my Hand,
Whatever Changes come, to this I stand:
Not by my strength: I trust on Thee, My Lord!
That for performance, thou will Grace afford.

January 26. 1660/1.
13. Upon the sight of Mr. VINES His Posthumous TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENT,
October 18. 1656. Who Dyed a little before.
WHile thou grew'st here, thy fruit made glad
The hearts that sin and death made sad:
Lest we should surfeit of thy fruit,
Thy Life retired to the Root.
Desiring with us first to keep,
A Passover before thy sleep He dyed suddenly on the Lord's Day at night, after
he had Preached and Administered the Sacrament.
;
Weary of Earth, thou took'st thine Ease,
Passing into the Land of Peace:
The threatened Evil we foresee,
But hope to hide our selves with Thee.
Though thou art gone, while we must fight,
We Will call it Victory, not Flight.
When God has taken up this VINE,
We thought no more to taste its Wine,
Till in the Land of Salem's King,
We drink it new, even from the Spring:
But unexpectedly we find,
Some Clusters which are left behind:
This Mantle from thy Chariot fell;
We know it by the pleasant smell:
Who knows but from this little seed,
Some more such fruitful Vines may breed?
The Tree of Death bears precious Fruit,
Though in the Earth it have no Root.
Dear Brother! thou art gone before,
And I a wretch wait at the door!
Sin does not only keep me thence,
But makes me loath to go from hence:
When Christ has healed me of this sin,
And made me fit; he will let me in:
Till then, may I but in a Glass,
See what you see with open face;
Sure it will raise my heavy Soul,
And these distrustful fears control!
And make me willing to be gone,
As knowing Whither, and to Whom:
If Time be Nothing, as some say,
You that were with us yesterday,
Are with us still; or we with you;
Which is the better of the two.
The Soul imbodied in those lines,
Does make us say, that, This is VINES:
And if our hearts with you could be;
Our Lord would say, that there are we.
But as acccording to desert,
The Heavens have got thy better part;
And left us but some of the Wine,
Whilst they have taken up the Vine:
So we look up, and wait, and pray,
And yet still feel, we live in Clay.
Here we are keeping sin's account,
While some small sparks do upward mount,
Crying [How long, Holy and True!]
Till we are taken up to you.
Thus also we must follow LOVE Mr. Anthony Burgess was Minister at Lawrence
Church: Mr. Love succeeded him, and was beheaded by the Remnant of the Long
Parliament, which cut off the King, for sending Money to some about the present
King Mr. Vines succeeded him.
,
To find our HEAD and LIFE above.
He that is made by the New Birth,
A BURGESS of the Church on Earth,
And then by Faith can rise so high,
In Divine LOVE to Live and Die,
Shall be translated to your soil,
Removed from sin, and fear, and toil;
And from this House of Worms and Moles,
Unto that Element of Souls.
Where every Branch becomes a VINE;
And where these Clods like Stars will shine:
God is not there known by the Book:
You need not there the Pruning Hook:
There you have Wine without the Press;
And God his Praise without Distress.
There we shall find our Eyes and Sight,
When we come to our Head and Light.
The Kernel is where you now dwell,
And we here strive about the Shell:
You have the Reconciling Light,
Who are past Faith, and live by Sight:
No wonder then if you are One,
When Peace from Earth is almost gone:
We crowd about a little Spark,
Learnedly striving in the Dark;
Never so bold as when most Blind;
Run fastest when the Truth's behind.
No Heresies with you are sown:
There Is not a Truth but all will own:
A mixture we get here by rote;
And Error keeps the major Vote.
There Pride and Faction cannot enter.
There Is no Division in the Center.
The Saints there play not Satan's part;
They use not any Carnal Art,
Their Righteous Brethren to Defame;
And by untruths to blot their Name.
There you are Comely, and not Black:
Each One has All, yet None do lack.
What sin or smart can you befall,
Where SELF's put off, and God is All.
Look up and see, now VINES is gone;
Are not the Stars the more by One?
No: but One fewer in our sight;
For we have forfeited his Light.
And such an One, as all do miss,
Save those whose pleasure darkness is.
And who can Number Stars above;
When Saints so fast to Heaven remove?
If but three such in all our times,
As USHER, GATAKER and VINES,
Were taken hence by fatal sleep;
Three Nations should consent to weep.
And if an Age this loss repair;
The Church will think it very fair.
They shine in Glory now to God,
Who shined and burned here to a Clod.
May such a sinful Worm as I,
Aspire and ascend so high!
That Kingdom's mine in Hope and Right,
Which you possess by Love and Sight.
That God, that Christ has loved me,
Whose Glory blessed VINES does see:
We were both washed in one stream:
And both enlightened by one beam:
One Garment also did us cloth:
At once One Pulpit held us both Those that saw me stand in his Pulpit at
Lawrence Church between his Legs, when I Preached for him, because he could get
no other Room in the Church, understand this.
;
Much more One Church: for we agreed,
Both in One Method, and one Creed.
One Evil we did both condole See his Letter in the end of my Confession.
,
As animated by One Soul:
Methinks where thou art, I should be;
Although the lowest in degree.
Though thou art gone, and I am here;
Yet is my Passing-hour near:
Time is at work both Night and Day,
Even when it seems to delay:
My Grave and Coffin are at hand:
My Glass has but a little Sand:
Now I am writing; and anon
They Will also say of me, He Is gone.
Then I shall see the shining face,
Which is the Glory of your Place.
But lest in vain I hope and run,
Lord perfect what thou have begun.
14. A Dialogue between Death and the Believer.
A Rustic Song, set to a pleasant Tune.
Death. COme with me poor Mortal,
Quickly come away:
My Name is Dreadful Death.
Through this narrow Portal.
Come without delay;
For here I Will stop thy Breath.
Presently my Dart
Shall pierce thee to the Heart,
And away thy Life I Will have:
It is in vain to fly,
Or any Friend to try:
For there is none that can thee save.

Believer. 2.
Welcome friendly Death;
What can thou do to me,
'That I have cause to fear?
Though thou shall stop my breath,
Yet I in Life shall be,
When thou shall not be there.
And though the Gate be straight,
It leads unto that height,
Where I shall defy thy Dart:
Willingly I yield,
As armed by that Shield,
That will save my nobler part.

Death. Come away frail Man,
And open now thy Breast,
And take thy mortal wound:
Let Friends do what they can,
And Physic do its best,
They Will all too weak be found.
Lay now aside thy mirth,
And turn unto thy Earth:
I will give thee the fatal blow:
It is in vain to wish;
Thou can not save thy Flesh:
For my Power thou shall know.

Believer. 4.
Readily I come,
As being not the first,
That has past through thy door:
Thou shall but help me home,
When thou have done thy worst;
And thou shall be no more:
By drawing out my blood,
Thou shall but do me good;
And ease me of my grief:
And though thou look so grim,
Thou shall bring me to him,
That will give me full relief.

Death. 5.
Thy Flesh I Will turn to Clay,
And all thy Bones to Dust;
And leave thee in the Grave.
Make no longer stay,
For come away thou must;
It is in vain to crave:
Clothed from head to feet,
But with a Winding Sheet,
My Prisoner thou shall be;
Bearing my loathsome Mark,
Thou shall lie in the dark,
And the face of no man see.

Believer. 6.
Thou shall but dig the ground,
Where God his Seed will sow,
And raise it at the Spring:
And there I shall be found,
And Christ his own will know,
And unto Glory bring:
When here I cease to live,
A better Life he will give,
Which thou shall not destroy:
And though This Life thou spill,
My Soul thou can not kill,
Nor again with fears anoy.
7.
When thou put'st out these Eyes,
I shall receive my sight:
My Day will all be Noon:
Above the spangled Skies,
Where never shall be Night,
Nor need of Sun or Moon:
The Grave also shall keep
My Dust in quiet Sleep,
Till the Coming of my Lord:
That Flesh shall shine with God,
That now is but a Clod;
And must lie as a thing abhorred.

Death. 8.
Thy merry Days are gone;
Thou shall no longer stay:
Thy Life shall end in pain:
Thy Time and work is done,
And all thy Sport and Play;
And never shall come again.
Here take thy leave of Health,
And of thy Goods and Wealth;
And of every pleasant Friend:
Bid farewell to them all,
For here thy Corpse shall fall;
And the World to thee shall end.

Believer. 9.
Boast not, O conquered Foe:
For thou could have no strength,
But what comes from my sin:
My Lord will overthrow
Thy Power at the length;
And will thy Prisoners win:
Thou could not keep my head,
When he lay in thy Bed;
But he rose, and now does Reign:
He Will take away thy sting,
And endless Life will bring,
And with him shall I remain.
10.
How often have I undrest me,
And laid my Garments by,
And dyed till the next day?
I do but go to rest me,
And shall rise speedily;
My Lord will not delay.
When thou have broke this shell,
My Soul with Christ shall dwell,
And with Saints and Angels bright.
This World is but the Womb,
From which my Soul must come,
Into the Eternal Light.
11.
And what though Death be painful?
The pain is quickly past;
My Soul shall soon be freed:
My Lord shall make it gainful:
The gain shall ever last;
And Joy shall Grief succeed.
And though the Place seem strange,
And Nature fear a change;
Yet I with Christ shall be.
And when with him I dwell,
I know I shall be well,
And his glorious Light shall see.
12.
Thou shall but kill my sin,
And crown my painful Race,
And end my Grief and Fear:
Thou shall but let me in
To see the blessed face
Of my Redeemer dear.
And is it any loss
To follow with my Cross,
Till I attain the Crown?
It Is he that truly dies,
That Mercy does despise,
And at last God will disown.
13.
I knew that from my Birth
I was a mortal man:
My frailty, is confessed.
I knew my Flesh was Earth;
My Life was but a span.
And here is not my Rest.
If thou can say no more,
All this I knew before,
And yet thy threats defy.
Have I long sought in pain,
And would I not obtain,
Joyful Eternity?
14.
O feeble thing!
How can thou conquer Christ,
And make his Promise void?
First overcome my King,
And his Command resist,
By whom thou art employed:
First win the World above,
And conquer endless Love;
And then I Will be thy slave:
Kill an immortal Soul,
And we will all condole,
And fear a darksome grave.
15.
It Is Christ that does thee send,
To bring about his end;
And him thou must obey.
He is my dearest Friend,
And does no harm intend,
In calling me away.
And why should he fear ill,
Whom Love it self does kill?
And numbreth with the Blessed?
Why should not Death fulfill,
His good All-ruling WILL,
My SPRING, my GUIDE, my REST.

Hoc migraturus scripsi sub imagine Carmen.
Farewell vain World: As thou have been to me
Dust and a shadow, such I leave to thee.
The unseen Life and Substance I commit
To him that is Substance, Life, Light, Love to it.
Some Leaves and Fruit are dropped for soil and seed;
Heaven's Heirs to generate; to heal and feed:
Them also thou will flatter and molest,
But shall not keep from Everlasting Rest.
Vel,
Munde dolose vale: mihi vera palestra fuisti:
Perficitur Cursus; certa corona manet.
Vita fugax cessat: Praestant aeterna caducis:
Men's superos visit: Pulvere pulvis erit.
Excipe Christ tuum: Tibi vixi: Errata remitte;
Spe tibi commissum perfice Christ tuum.
Tu mortis mors es: Vitae tu vita perennis.
Gloria nostra Tua est Gloria, Lumen, Amor.
Non loca, non coetus, non hinc sperata videntur.
Optimus, Omnividens, Maximus illa videt.
THE English Verses written on a fair Marble over the Grave where my Wife and
her Mother are buried, in the upper end of Christ's-Church Chancel (broken and
lost by the fall of the Church when burnt) were these.

Thus must thy Flesh to silent Dust descend.
Thy mirth and worldly pleasure thus will end:
Then happy holy Souls: but woe to those,
Who Heaven forgot, and earthly pleasures chose.
Hear now this Preaching Grave: without delay,
Believe, Repent, and work while it is day.
FINIS.

