SEVERAL PETITIONS Presented to the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT now
ASSEMBLED.

1 The humble Petition of many thousands of Courtiers, Citizens, Gentlemen, and
Trades-mens wives, inhabiting within the Cities of London and West-minster,
concerning the staying of the Queens intended voyage into Holland; with many
serious causes and weighty reasons, (which they desire) may induce the
honorable House to detain her Majesty.

Presented and read in the House by the Lord Mandevill, the tenth of February,
1641.

2. An other of the Gentry, Ministers, and Communalty of Cleveland in the
County of York, subscribed to by 1400 of the best rank and quality.

3. The humble Petition of the Gentlemen, and other Inhabitants in the County
of CORNWALL.

London, Printed by a true Copy for John Wright. 1641.

SEVERAL PETITIONS Presented to the Honorable Houses of Parliament now
Assembled. The humble Petition of many thousands of Courtiers, Citizens,
Gentlemen, and Trades-mens wives, inhabiting within the Cities of London and
Westminster, etc.
Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioners, their husbands, their children, and their families,
amounting to many thousand souls have lived in plentiful and good fashion, by
the exercise of several Trades and venting of diverse works: for learning
whereof, many of them have served Apprentiships, others taken houses and shops
both in the City and Suburbs, and also in the Exchanges at very great rents:
all depending wholly for the sail of their Commodities, (which is the
maintenance and very existence and being of themselves, their husbands, and
families) upon the splendor and glory of the English Court and principally
upon that of the Queens Majesty; by occasion of whose Royal presence we have
hitherto had ready utterance for our Commodities and were thereby enabled to
pay our rents, and live in good repute: but upon late notice that her Majesty
is resolved instantly to depart the Kingdom, we cannot but thereby foresee an
utter cessation and decay of all our trading, so shall we become utterly
disabled to pay our rents, support our selves, or our families; and can
apprehend nothing but distraction, penury, and ruin: or that our eminent and
inevitable necessities will produce some violent effect. And your Petitioners
have cause to fear that this sudden resolution in her Majesty is occasioned by
some just distaste taken at diverse unusual and tumultuous assemblies, to the
affright of her Royal Person, and at the unpunisht printing of many licentious
and scandalous Pamphelets; some covertly, some plainly, wounding her sacred
Majesty in the opinion of the vulgar, as an Abbettor or Counselor of such
designs, which are pretended to disturb the peaceable government both of this
Kidgdome and Ireland; whereas your Petitioners are confident she was not only
a solicitous mediator for the assembling of this gracious Parliament, but that
since Her coming into this Kingdom she never did ill office to any particular
Subject, but has often been an instrument of many Acts of mercy and grace, to
multitudes of distressed people.

And your Petitioners likewise considering the great happiness brought to this
Nation in her Princely Issue, of which native comfort this Nation has been
barren now almost a hundred years; are the more encouraged,

Humbly to pray, That this Honorable Assembly would give some speedy assurance
to her Majesty, that the Authors and Instigators of such seditious tumults and
scandalls, shall be strictly enquired after, and punished; and that she may
receive such public vindication by Parliament, against all such calumners of
her sacred Majesty; and give her that due honor and reverence we are sure she
merits, and join with us in Petition for her continual residence amongst us:
whereby she receiving full assurance of the love and fidelity of her Subjects
in this Kingdom; your Petitioners may with some comfort redress themselves to
her Majesty's compassion of her affectionate people, humbly to pray her stay.

So shall they have cause to pray for your Honors prosperity in all your
actions: And ever remain the true and faithful Protestants to the Church of
England, till death.
To the Right HONORABLE THE LORDS Assembled in Parliament, The humble Petition
of the Gentry, Ministry, and Commonalty of Cleveland, in the County of YORK:
WHereas we know no other means under God, to divert the just Judgments which
he has executed against the Church of the Laodiceans, for the luke-warmenesse
in Rebellion, or against the Church of Thyatira, for keeping Seducers, nor to
prevent our eminent dangers, but by a most necessary and speedy executing of
the Laws of God and the King. We do therefore desire to certify, that we are
resolved to live and dye in the Faith of the Protestant Religion; (knowing no
other means of Salvation) and that we will defend it with our Lives and Goods,
which that we may with our abilities, be encouraged in performing.

We humbly above all things desire, that we may be secured, a happy
Reformation aforded, and the Laws of God and the King without favor or delay,
justly put in execution against Papists.

To the most Honorable and high Court of Parliament. The humble Petition of
the Gentlemen, and other of the Inhabitants of the County of Cornuwall.
HAving seen and heard the many (though scarce diverse) Petitions to this
Honorable Assembly by the Inhabitants of diverse Counties and Cities of this
Land, as also Corporations, Companies, and Trades, some against Bishops, some
against the Common prayer, and all against such judicial and things
super-elementary to the Region of their capacity of judging, and matters only
belonging to the Judicature of this grave Synot, which seems either to
distrust, or direct, or both, your great wisdoms; We therefore the Gentlemen
and other the Inhabitants of Cornwall, with as many hearts, though not hands,
with as wany good wills, though not persons, not in imitation, but rather by
provocation, and necessity in these times, to show our good minded affections,
do humbly prostrate the utmost of our service to your feet. In which (or
rather after which) we take leave humbly to beg.

That you will be pleased to bend your auxiliary and good affections to the
redress of the distress of the misertble Protestants in Ireland. To gain
whose good, prosperity, peace, and tranquillity, to perserve the Sovereignty of
that Land to our Royal King, and to maintain his and this Kingdoms honor,
We shall willingly lay down our lives and fortunes.

That you will be pleased to continue your great respect, dutiful love, and
true obedience to our Royal Sovereign, by maintaining his just, and no way
antelegall Prerogative.

That you will be pleased to put the Laws in due execution against all
Jesuits, Seminaries, Papists and Recusants.

That you will be pleased to look upon the otherside, and duly weighing the
actions (or rather factious) of some, (whom most men call Citizens) to scourge
their irregular and disorderly schism and heretical Sects, into tight paths
of serving God, to frequent his House, and to pray as well as hear, to allow
order, and obey conformity, to reverence learning, and bow to authority, to be
under a discipline, and live in order.

That you will be pleased to maintain and establish the ancient fundamental
and most venerable Laws, order and discipline, both of our Church and
Commonwealth, to continue the revence'd Office, and punish the offending
persons of Bishops, to have in high account, and ^ternize as far as in you
lies) the Divine and excellent form of Common prayer, to correct brain forged
doctrine, by your examplary precepts strike a reverence of Gods House into
every man's breast.

That you will be pleased to intimate to the people your honorable and wise
intentions concerning Divine Service, least while you hold your peace, some
rejecting it in part, others altogether, they vainly conceive you countenance
them.

Lastly, (not to trouble your great affairs any longer) That you will be
pleased to take into your sage consideration, those scandalous and ill affected
Pamphlets, which fly abroad in such swarms, as are able to cloud the pure
air of truth, and present a dark ignorance to those who have not the two
wings of Justice and knowledge to fly above them.

Now to polish this our work with a smooth demonstration of our modest
intents, that the tinctures which in introduction fell on the forementioned
presents, may slide without a stain from this; We do in all humility
declare, that neither distrust of your intentions, nor opinion of any of our
councels worthy your ears ever tainted our thoughts, but that we have still
been and are confident, that this most wise Synod has ever thought fit,
resolved and will confirm into action, what we now humbly request, therefore
this our present, not so much a Petition as a prayer of willing and thankful
hearts for the hoped sequel, is only to show our true intentions and goodwill
toward his gracious Majesty, and this high Court, as Instruments of the peace
of our souls and bodies, for which we are unanimously and immutably resolved
to spend our dearest blood.

Published by I. B. Gent.

FINIS.

