A PARAPHRASE ON THE New Testament, With NOTES, DOCTRINAL and PRACTICAL. By
PLAINNESS and BREVITY fitted to the Use of Religious FAMILIES, in their daily
Reading of the Scriptures; and of the younger and poorer sort of Scholars and
Ministers, who want fuller helps. With an Advertisement of Difficulties in the
REVELATIONS.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

1. Tim. 3.16. Great is the mystery of Godliness. God was manifested in the
flesh, Justified in the Spirit; Seen of Angels: Preached to the Gentiles:
Believed on in the World. Recieved up into Glory.

1. Joh. 4.16. God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God: And
God in him.

Joh. 1.4. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men.

Joh. 20.17. Go to my Brethren, and say to them, I ascend unto my Father and
your Father, and unto my God and your God.

2. Pet. 3.11. Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness: Looking for, and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God. 13. We, according to his promise,
look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

Luke 23.43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Josh. 24.15. Choose you this day whom you will serve, But as for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for B. Simmons, at the Three Cocks, and Tho. Simmons, at the
Princes Arms, in Ludgate Street. M DC LXXXV.

An Account of the Reason and Use of this Paraphrase.
READER,
THis Paraphrase, written for my own use, being published for yours, in order
to that end I owe you this account of it. A Friend long urging me to write a
Paraphrase on the Epistle to the Romans, as being hard to (...) understood;
when I had done that, I found so much profit by that Attempt, that it drew me
to go on till I had finished what I offer you. It was like almost all my other
public works, done by the unexpected conduct of Gods urgent Providence, not
only without, but contrary to my former purposes. God has blessed his Church
with many Men's excellent Commentaries on the Scriptures; and I never thought my
self fit to do it better than they have done: But that is best for some persons
and uses which is not best to others. I long wished that some abler Man would
furnish vulgar Families with such a brief exposition, as might be fitted to the
use of their daily course in reading the Scriptures and instructing their
Households. I found that many who have done it better than I can do, are too
large and costly for this use: some (like De^date) very sound, are
unsatisfactorily brief; some have parcelled their Annotations into so numerous
shreds, that Readers (specially in a Family course) will not stay to search and
set them together, to make up the sense. I like Dr. Hammends order best, but 1.
I differ from him in so much of the matter; 2. and took his style to be too
lax; 3. and his Criticisms not useful to the vulgar, 4. and his Volumn too big,
and costly: And therefore I chose more plainly* and yet more briefly and
practically, by the way of Paraphrase, to suit it to my intended end.

But I must give the Readers notice, 1. That where I seem, but in few words to
vary from the Text, those words answer the large Criticisms of diverse
expositors, as the Learned may find by searching them and the Greek-Text;
though I must not stay to give the reason of them as I go on. 2. That tho I
have studied plainness, yet brevity is unavoidably obscure to unexercised
persons, who as Learners cannot understand things without many words. 3. That
where the Evangelists often repeat the same things, to avoid tediousness, I
repeat not the whole Exposition; and yet thought not meet wholly to pass it by.
4. That where the Text is plain of it self, instead of an Exposition, I fill up
the space by Doctrinal, or Practical Observations, seeing Practice is the end
of all, and to Learners, this part is of great necessity. 5. That where great
Doctrinal Controversies depend on the Exposition of any Text, I have handled
those more largely than the rest, and I hope with Pacificatory and Satisfactory
Evidence.

^y great desire and care is, that ^ may hereby p^omote Christian Piety in
Families. To which special end I also wrote my Poor Man's Family-book, and The
Catechizing of Householders. And had I not done it in many Books so often already,
I should here set my self with greatest Earnestness to urge and entreat all
Christian Parents, to the more faithful Practice of Family Religion, especially
in the wise and diligent Instruction and Education of their Children. Sure no
good Christians should come behind the Jews, who had far less light and help
that we have, who yet are twice Commanded by God, Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. [ Hear O
Israel, the Lord God is one Lord. Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words which I
command thee this day, shall be in thy heart: And thou shall teach them
diligently to thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou fittest in thy
House, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up: And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thy Hand, and they
shall be as Frontlets between thine Eyes: And thou shall write them on the
Posts of thy House and on thy Gates.] Yet now many thousand Families called
Christians, account this much Puritanism, and needless preciseness; as if the
Scripture, (even the Gospel of Salvation) were only for the use of Priests, yea
some that disown the Papists restraint of the Laity-unlicensed, from reading it
translated in a known Tongue, do worse than Popishly refrain themselves. And
those that in Baptism vowed to bring up their Children as Christians in the
knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, persidiously break that solemn vow, as they
Hypocritically made it; and by ungodly negligence betray to Satan the Souls of
their Children (and themselves) which they devoted to God.

Reader, I beg of you as from Christ, for his sake, for your Souls sake, for
your Childrens sake, for the sake of Church and Kingdom, that you will
conscionably and seriously set up Family-Religion, calling upon God, Singing
his Praises, and instructing your Children and Servants in the Scripture and
Catechism, and in a wise and diligent Education of Youth. Hear me, as if I
begged it of you, with tears on my knees? Alas, what does the World suffer by
the neglect of this. It is out of ungodly Families that the World has ungodly
Rulers, ungodly Ministers, and a swarm of Serpentine Enemies of Holiness and
Peace, and their own Salvation. What Country groaneth not under the Confusions,
Miseries and horrid Wickedness, which are all the Fruits of Family neglects,
and the careless and ill Education of Youth. It is a work of great skill and
constant care to instruct and Educate your Children, and to keep them from
tempting Company and snares. To cry out of dumb or unfaithful Ministers, while
you are worse at home your selves, is but self-condemnation: Are M^n^st^rs more
obliged to care for your Childrens Souls, by Nature, or by Vow and Covenant,
than you are. Can they do that for whole Parishes, which you will not do for
for one Household or your own Children. The first Charge and part is yours: If
Families treacherously neglect their part, and then look that all should be
done at the Church you may as wisely send Boys to the Universities, before they
are taught to Read or Write, in lower Schools. If there be any hope of the
amendment of a Wicked, Miserable distracted World, it must be mostly done by
Family-Religion, and the Christian Education of youth. Godliness is profitable
to all things; but the Curse of God is in the house of the wicked. And the
ungodly betrayers of Souls, of themselves, Children and Servants, will very
quickly be Summoned to a terrible account: Especially those that should as
Rulers be Exemplary to the vulgar, and are ashamed to own serious
Family-Religion, as if all beyond some formal Hypocrisy and lip labor, were a
dishonor to their houses, or a needless thing.

These helps which I offer them that need it, is, that when they Read the New
Testament daily in their Houses, they may (not read all the Paraphrase to their
Families, but) such particulars of Exposition and Doctrinal Notes, as they find
most suitable to their case.

And I think it will not be unuseful, to the Younger and Weaker sort of
Ministers, and the Poor ones, that cannot buy larger Commentaries. And if Rich
Men will give their Tenants and Neighbors such Books as are suitable to the
instruction of Families, and the People will diligently use them, it may do
much to keep up saving Knowledge and Practice, where the public Ministry
fails most. The God of Mercy Teach Foolish Men to have Mercy on their
Families and themselves.

The Farewell, Ne vacua sit pagina.
TIme and Work end, Blessed Souls are gone before:
Consumed Lights may serve to kindle more,
The dead can speak: God can his Lamps restore.
The Winds that blow them out, will quickly cease:
H^gh Pride, rough Passion, God can soon appease;
TRUTH, LOVE and CONCORD raise with great increase:
The WISE, PURE, PEACEABLE, for this he will choose,
PROUD-WOLDLINGS, RAGING-FOOLS he will refuse,
And Snuffers, not Extinguishers, will use.
Yet Satan will not cease: Tares will be sown,
RULERS and GUIDES he will strive to make his own,
By STORMS and SCANDALS some will be overthrown.
Diotrephes must Rule, Judas be Rich,
The Ignorant will err, young Ears will itch:
The blind will lead the blind into the Ditch.
Lord, convert Saul; Check Jewish rage,
And Sects, which sad Church-Wars do wage,
Let LIGHT and LOVE PROUD WRATH assuage.
But those blessed Souls who dwell with thee
Better things see
And better be,
Than Adam, or the Golden Age.
ERRATA.
Reader, I cannot gather all the Errata: These few I note for thy correction.

INtrod. p. 1. l. 23. r. (...): Mat. c. 19. v. 19. Par. for ninth r. tenth: and
for If r. self: Luke for c. 7. r. 4. Joh. c. 5. v. 5. Par. for ^8. r. 50. c. 6.
v. 38. Par. l. 11. r. that the: l. 12. for or r. of: v. 40. Par. l. 1. r. one
w^^^ by: c. 17. v. 5. Par. l. 12. add The Divine nature, uniting, etc. v. 9.
Par. l. 12. put out of: c. 18. v. 1. r. the b^ook: c. 1^. v. 34. Par. put out
since: Act. 8. v. 22. Par. r. Prayer of a: c. 17. contents r. contemn: Romans 13.
Annot. l. 3^. for. ^ha^ shall r. 10: c. 47. r. no^isie: 1. Tim. c. 6. Annot. l.
5. r. bad bin better: l. 7. for answering r. (...): Rev. c. 19. v. 10. Par. l.
6. put out we: v. 17. Par. l. 6. r. is the: ib. for fable is r. fables: l. 10.
for ^r. of: Advertisem. p. 1. l. 27. r. purposed: p. 3. l. ult. for in r. is:
p. 5. l. 35. for here is r. her: p. 6. l. 24. r. say: p. 9. l. 41. r. Terret: l.
42. ^. let him: p. 13. l. 35. r. Infelicity.

The New Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
THO it be not known when or by whom all the Books of the New Testament, were
gathered and made up into one, nor when or by whom this Title was set before
them, and tho for a time some Churches received not the Epistle to the Hebrews,
nor that of James; the 2 of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John, that of Jude, or the
Revelation. Yet it has never the less satisfactory evidence of its Truth, for
this uncertainty and delay.

I. For As long as we know it is all the word of the Spirit of God, it
satisfies our Faith; whether all be bound up in one Book or in many. And John
the Apostle living long after all the rest, it is more than probable that none
were received in his time, but by his approbation and consent: and even in the
days of the Apostles they gave Testimony to the Writings of one another; so
Peter does of Paul's, and Jude transcribeth much of 2 Peter 2. (telling us that
even inspired Apostles disdained not to use and repeat each others Writings;
without any guilt of vain repetition or being plagiaries.)

II. And that the few books doubted of by some were commonly afterward
received, tends more to the confirming than the shaking of our belief of their
Authority: certainty after doubt is the most confirmed certainty. It must needs
be some time before all the Churches to whom the several Epistles were written,
could produce and Communicate them by convincing proof to all the rest And yet
we must know, that the Epistles to particular Churches were sent to them as to
members of the Church Universal, and they were obliged to communicate them to
others: so that we must not take them as private Letters.

III. Whoever first gave this title to the whole Book ( The New Testament, or
Covenant, etc.) it is of no great moment to know: It was [ The New Testament]
before it was so entitled as one Volume; But the Church has by continual
owning this Title, showed that they have received all these Books as Gods word
and the whole New Testament, and that no more are to be received as such.

The Word (...) (of which Grotius in his preface has spoken at large)
signifies indeed, Gods statute Law concerning Man's Duty and Salvation, or Gods
constituted and proposed terms of Life. And tho (...) more strictly signify
usually a Mutual Covenant; this does but imply the consent of Man to the Law or
terms of God. It is the same thing that is called a Law and a Covenant in
several respects. As God enacts it, and promulgated it, before man's Consent, it
is a Law, and a conditional deed of Gift, and Testament; and an offered
Covenant in several respects. When man consents it is a Law accepted, a gift
and Testament accepted, and a mutual actual Covenant, the Law has its
introductive History and Doctrine, its precepts prohibitions, promises, and
threats; And the Covenant has the same parts only denominated from mutual
consent. But because there are Laws of more or less rigor, and of various
tenours; it is the Law of Faith or Grace which is the Covenant, Testament, and
Gospel, which is now before us denominated from the Donative and Promissory
parts, though precept and threatening be included.

IV. It is of great importance that we err not by giving too little or too much
to the sacred Scriptures, from both which extremes many dangerous errors How.
1. On the left hand, those err that deny it to be Gods word, of infallible
truth, intelligible, and perfect as to its proper use, without humane
supplements written or orall, Doctrinal or Canon Laws: and those that deny it
to have infallible ascertaining evidences of its truth. These be-friend
infidelity, heresies, profaneness, Church Tyranny (leaving it to Clergymen to
make us a new Faith, New Sacraments, and a new Religion at their Pleasure; and
to persecute good men that dare not renounce the Scripture sufficiency and
Christ's perfection, by obeying their dictates and Cannons as Coordinate with
Christ's if not coequal: These make Church-concord utterly impossible, while
they deny the sufficiency not only of the essentials, but of all the Bible to
be the terms of Concord, without their supplements or additions: as if Christ
that is the Author and finisher of our Faith, and the maker of his own Church,
had not so much as told us what a Church or a Christian is, or whom we must
take for such into our love and Communion, nor fixed the necessary terms of
Union; but left them to none knows whom, even fallible men, liable to error
and Tyranny that can but get uppermost, and say then that they are the true
Church and the Masters that must be obeyed, while they are themselves of as
many minds, as they are of different Countries, interests and degrees of
knowledge and sincerity.

2. On the other side those overdo in ascribing to the Scripture, who say that
God had no Church, or the Church no infallable rule of Faith and life, before
the writing of i^: and who say that men converted by the Creed, Catechismes
preaching, or tradition without knowing the Scripture can have no saving faith;
and that think none can be saved that doubt of any Canonical Books, text or
matter whether it be Gods word; or that say Scripture is so perfect that there
is no humane imperfection of the Penmen foun^ in phrase, word or method, and
that God could not have made it better, or that every Book may be known to be
Canonical, and every reading to be right when copies vary, without Historical
tradition by its own evident light, and that we have no more cause to doubt of
any word or matter, than of the truth of the Gospel; and that Reason is of
small use either for the proof or exposition of the Scripture, but the most
illiterate if he found a Bible that he had never heard of, may by its own light
know its truth, and sense as well as studious learned Men, and that no other
Books need to be read^ and that the Scripture is a sufficient teacher of
Physic, Logic, Grammar, etc. and that nothing is to be used or done in the
External Forms, Modes, and Accidents, of Gods Worship, but what is particularly
commanded in Scripture, and that it tells every man whether he be sincere and
justified or not, and not only tells him ^ow to know it by inward evidence;
with many other such mistakes, proceeding from mistaking the use of the
Scripture, by which its perfection must be measured. Which all tend to
confusion, and at last to infidelity, or doubting of the whole, when these
errour^ are discerned.

V. And tho all the Scripture be of equal truth, as it is Gods word, yet many
untruths are in it as uttered by Men and Devils; which God truly records. And
all parts are not of equal necessity or weight: And as many err by casting off
the Old Testament, so others err by equalling it to us with the New: It is Gods
word, left to acquaint us what was heretofore, and to show us how Christ was
prophesied of and expected, and how the Church was governed in the darker and
more servile state and times. But we have great cause to take heed of
overvaluing its use to us; lest we contradict Paul that says that even that
which was written in stone is done away, and the Law Changed with the
Priesthood, and the old and faulty Covenant for a Better; of which see the nine
first Chapters to the Hebrews, etc. Judaizers are they that most of Paul's
Epistles are writt^n against; And as John Baptist wa^ greater than the
Prophets, so the least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he. Ev^n the holy
Patriarks, and David had a far more obscure Revelation of Christ, and grace and
the love of God, and the glory to come, then we have: And accordingly we should
have much more faith, holiness and comfort than they. It is dangerous making
the best of them our Examples in points of faith or duty, wherein they came far
short of Gospel light and grace. God does not now bear with Poligamy as lie did
then, nor with such divorces; nor does the Gospel countenance such streams of
blood as the Israelites ordinarily shed, nor such lies as David was often guilty
of; nor such a strange life as Solomon lived: I mean, that such faults will not
now consist with true grace under our fuller light and mercy, as would do then
to men in a darker infant Age; and therefore let us take heed of presuming on
their Examples: Christ and his Apostles are far fitter for our imitation. David
fills most of his Psalms with such complaints of his Enemies, and curses
against them as show a far deeper sense of the suffering of the flesh, and the
concerns of this life, than Peter and Paul showed, who suffered far more, and
for a holier cause, and rejoiced in tribulation; and then is suitable either to
the precepts or examples of Christ. All was not well said and done by good men
which is recited in the New Testament, much less in the old.

So far are they mistaken, that say, the Jews and Gentiles were bound to
believe the Apostles in no more than they proved out of the Scripture, that
most of the Creed was to be believed by other evidences, And Christ and his
Apostles gave us so full proof of the truth of the Gospel, as that their
attestation of the Old Testament is to us a more convincing proof of its Divine
Authority, than any others.

Therefore Christians must read and honor the Old Testament, and study it, but
the New far more; to which it is that the Heart and Life must be conformed.
There Heavenly glory shines far more clearly, and the wonders of Divine Love
are more abundantly manifested; and far greater power of the Spirit is given to
make all effectual in faith, hope, and Patience, humility, obedience, and love,
which now are become the very nature of a true believer.

The Gospel according to St. MATTHEW.
That is, The History of Christ's Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension,
Doctrine, Covenant, Example and Mission of his Apostles to Preach Salvation
through him to the World. Written by St. Matthew, a Converted Publican, one of
the Twelve Apostles, as Tradition says, eight years after Christ's Ascension;
whether in Greek, or in Hebrew after translated into Greek, is uncertain.

CHAP. I.
1. THE Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of
Abraham.

1. I begin this History of Christ, with the Genealogy or Catalogue of his
Ancestors according to the line of Joseph his reputed Legal Father after the
flesh, so far as to evince that he was the Son of David and Abraham, the
rightful King of the Jews and the promised seed, by their own supputation.

2. Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and his
brethren, 2. And Judas begat Pharez and Zara of Thamar, and Pharez begat Ezrom,
and Ezrom begat Aram, 4. and Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Naason,
and Naason begat Salmon, 5. and Salmon begat Booz of Rachab, and Booz begat
Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse, 6. and Jesse begat David the King, and
David the King begat Solomon, of her that had been the Wi^e of Urias, 7. and
Solomon begat Roboam, and Roboam begat Abia, and Abia begat Asa, 8. and Asa
begat Josaphat, and Josaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Ozias.

8. Ahaziah, Joash and Amaziah are here passed by, perhaps as being by the
Mother of Ahaziah of Om^i's cursed Line, or for other unknown cause: Note that
the Lawful Succession, much more the Grandchild or distant issue, it with the
Hebrews called the Son or Begotten, though not immediately.

9. And Ozias begat Joatham, and Joatham begat Achas, and Achas begat Ezekias,
10. and Ezekias begat Manasses, and Manasses begat Amon, and Amon begat Josias,
11. and Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were
carried away to Babylon.

9. They were often carried away: But this was a little before the most notable
Captivity.

12. And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel, and
Salathiel begat Zorobabel, 13. and Zorobabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat
Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor.

12. One old Copy has before [ Josias begat Jechim; and Jechim begat
Jechoniah; Dr. H. says, in a very ancient Hebrew Copy of this Gospel, this
verse goes [and Eliakim begat Abner, and Abner begat Azor; By either of which
the number of fourteen Generations is kept entire.

14. And Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud, 15.
and Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob,
16. and Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus who is
called Christ: 17. So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen
generations, and from David till the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen
generations, and from the carrying away into Babylon to Christ are fourteen
generations.

14. I reduce them to fourteen in the recitation, for memory sake and other
reasons; This suffices to my intended end.

18. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: when as his Mother Mary
was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with Child of
the Holy Ghost.

18. Note the Holy Ghost did miraculously cause Her Conception, without a
humane Father.

19. Then her husband Jo^eph, being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away privily.

19. Joseph being a good man, averse to hurtfulness, thought rather to hide all
by putting her privily away, than to expose her to the shame and punishment due
by the Law, to such as he thought her to be.

20. But while he thought on these things behold, the Angel of the Lord
appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take
to thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost:
21. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he
shall save his people from their sins.

20, 21. Note, It was a dream that had its convincing evidence; for ordinary
dreams give no such certainty, 2. The name Jesus, a Savior signified his
office which is to save his people from their sins, and deserved punishment.

22, 23. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of
the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall
bring forth a ^on and they shall call his name Emanuel, which being interpreted
is God with us.

22, 23. In all this the Prophecy of Isa. 7.14. to Ahaz, in how short time God
would then deliver them, was fulfilled in a farther sense intended by the Holy
Ghost, than that nearest foretold event: Note, God with us, is God taking our
Nature, appearing to us, and reconciling and bringing us to himself.

24. Then Joseph being raised from sleep, did as the Angel of the Lord had
bidden him, and took unto him his wife: 25. And knew her not, till she had
brought forth her first born son, and he called his name Jesus.

24, 25. Note, Tho these words are no full proof that Mary had any other
Children after, yet at least they make it utterly uncertain; and as it is no
Article of faith as to the moment of it, so neither as to the certainty: Yet
the Papal Sect have pretended Tradition for it, that Mary lived and died a
virgin, as of so much weight as to hereticate the deniers of it: And so they
make all the Scripture insufficient, not only as to matters of orders,
discipline and worship, but to articles of Faith; that they may on pretense of
Faith and Orthodoxness destroy Christian unity and Love, and exercise
domination by excommunicating and damning men on pretended tradition or
authority at their pleasure.

CHAP. II.
1. NOw when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the
King, behold there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem; 2. saying, Where
is he that is born King of the Jews, for we have seen his Star in the East, and
are come to worship him.

1, 2. Some time after Christ's birth, Astronomers of great note came from the
East-country ( Chaldea or Arabia) saying, We have seen an extraordinary Star,
which signifies the birth of the King of the Jews, the Messiah whom they
expected, and are come to do our homage and honor to him.

3, 4. When Herod the King had heard these things he was troubled, and all
Jeru^alem with him: And when he had gathered all the chief Priests and Scribes
of the people together, he demanded of them, where Christ should be born.

3, 4. Note, 1. When Christ comes to save men, it casts the world into
disturbance. 2. The first that was troubled and rose up against Christ, was the
King, because his cross interest was greatest. 3. All Jerusalem is troubled
with the King.

5. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it is written by
the Prophet; And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah art not the least among
the Princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my
people Israel.

5, 6. Note, Bethlehem was the City of David's birth and of Christ's: The
Prophecy is in Mic. 5.2. a clear Prophecy of Christ, but thou Bethlehem,
Ephratah, tho thou be little among the thousands of Judah, (Thousands had their
proper rulers) yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler
in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from the days of Eternity.

7. Then Herod when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them
diligently what time the Star appeared. 8. And he sent them to Bethlehem, and
said, Go and seek diligently for the young child, and when ye have found him,
bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.

7, 8. N. His malice contrived to have made use of the wise men to further his
cruelty, cloaking it with hypocrisy.

9. When they heard the King, they departed, and ^o, the Star which they saw in
the East, went before them till it came and stood over where the young child
was.

9. Note, How this differed from other Stars, and how it moved and directed
them, is not to be clearly apprehended by us at this distance of time and
place, who saw it not.

10. When they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

10. They greatly rejoiced that God thus renewed their direction. N. Some
ancient Fathers thought that this Star was an Angel; He makes his Angels
Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire.

11. And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary
his mother, and fell down and worshipped him; and when they had opened their
treasures, they presented to him gifts, gold and frankincense, and myrrh. 12.
And being warned of God in a dream, that they should not return to Herod, they
departed into their own country another way.

11, 12. They did their homage as sent by God: And then God defeated the malice
of Herod.

13. And when they were departed, behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared to
Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and flee into Egypt,
and be thou there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek the young child
to destroy him. 14. And when he arose, he took the young child and his mother
by night, and departed into Egypt.

13, 14. N. God could have cut off Herod, or secured Christ by other ways or
miracles: But to show that he will not make miracles ordinary, but work by
usual means, Christ must fly into Egypt, a land of Heathen Enemies, to be saved
from the King and People of Israel; such flight was not unlawful.

15. And was there till the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled that was
spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son.

15. Note, Whether the Prophet Hos. 11.1. understood this of any more than
Isreal's first deliverance from Egypt, the Holy Ghost looked further and meant
more, even the case of Christ.

16. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and all
the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which
he had diligently enquired of the wise men.

16. Note, Interest and malignity conjoined, made this King stick at no
inhumane bloody cruelty: Innocence was no defense against him.

17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying,
18. In Ramah was there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping and great
mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted because
they are not.

17, 18. Tho it was another case that the Prophet meant, God's Spirit might
look to this: Or the words may signify, [ This case was much like to that
mentioned, Jer. 31, 15. and so speak but an allusion.

19. But when Herod was dead, behold, an Angel of the Lord appeared in a dream
to Joseph in Egypt; 20. saying, Arise and take the young child and his mother,
and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead who sought the young child's
life. 21. And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into
the land of Israel. 22. but when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in
the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding
being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee. 23.
And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the Prophets, he shall be called a Nazarene.

19, etc. Note, 1. Still Christ is preserved by avoiding men's rage. 2. The Jews
called Christ a Nazarite, from that place of his dwelling; but he was truly
Netser the branch and a Nazarene devoted to absolute purity, of Whom Sampson's
Order was a Type, described also Numb. 6. Lam. 4.7. Amos 2.11, 12. This seems
the sense, by allusion.

CHAP. III.
1. IN those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the Wilderness of Judea.
2. And saying, Repent ye for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

1, 2. In those days John as a Prophet inspired by God, Baptized upon
preaching in the Wilderness of Judea; that the Kingdom of the Messiah long
looked for, was now just at hand: and therefore they should by true Repentance
be prepared for its Entertainment

N. 1. Its called the Kingdom of Heaven, because, it is a Theocracy, a Special
Government of God by a savior sent from Heaven to lead men to Heaven: as
distinct from the profane Kingdoms of the World, who look but to humane power
and Laws and bodily prosperity. 2. That of Mal. 3.7.2, 3. Was here fulfilled,
The Jews longed for Christ's coming supposing it would have exalted their
Nations in temporal prosperity, but could not endure him when he was for
humility; spirituality, and a heavenly Kingdom.

3. Tho repentance be always a duty, its specially necessary to our special and
great mercies; and our assurance of pardon by a savior. A purified mind and
life are suitable to the consolation of Christ and the indwelling of the
comforting Spirit.

3. For this is he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice
of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of Lord, make his paths
straight.

3. It was John that Isaiah prophesied of, and foretold what his preaching
should be. Tho it be grace that prepares for further grace, man's duty must be
used thereunto, and the exalting works of grace presupposes the humbling work
of repentance as a necessary preparation.

4. And the same John had his raiment of Camels hair, and a leathern girdle
about his loins, and his meat was locusts and wild honey.

4. He was clothed with Haircloth, bound to him with a leather girdle, and fed
on what the wilderness afforded, which was Locusts (which some think were an
Herb so called, but most a sort of flies like great Grasshoppers that devour all
green things,) and wild Honey.

Note, Tho the Friars and Hermits by superstitious overvaluing such austerity,
have tempted others to despise them, yet God approved of John's signification of
his contempt of the world and fleshly pleasures by such abasing of the flesh.
And other men's superstition or Hypocrisy, will not excuse men's superfluity, or
accuse mortification.

5. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round
Jordan. 6. And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.

5. So glad were the People to hear that the Kingdom of the Messiah was at
hand, that they all flockt to him to be baptized, professing repentance, that
they might be prepared for the Kingdom.

Note, 1. We grant that Baptism then was by washing the whole Body: And did not
the differences of our cold country as to that hot one, teach us to remember (I
will have mercy and not sacrifice) it should be so here. 2. Tho many say John's
baptism and Christ's were all one, its easy to prove that were any now baptized
but with John's baptism, he ought to be baptized again, in the name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, on the profession of many Articles of the Creed
which John required not.

7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his Baptism, he
said to them, O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the
wrath to come. 8. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance.

7. Knowing what these Pharisees and Saducees were, he said [O generation of
Vipers.] Are you aware indeed that wrath is coming upon you? And do you think
that the Messiah will indulge your sin, and come to promote your carnal
interest? If you profess repentance and would have part in the Kingdom of the
Messiah, resolve against your sins, and live in that righteousness and holiness
which is the fruit of true repentance.

9. And think not to say in your selves, we have Abraham to our Father: For I
say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.

9. Think not that the Messiah will advance you for being the Carnal seed of
Abraham: If you have not the Faith and Holiness of Abraham: If you be wicked
unbelievers, God will cast you off tho Abraham was your Father, and can of the
Gentiles (or the very stones) raise up such as shall be blessed as Abraham's
believing seed.

10. And now also the Ax is laid to the root of the tree: therefore every tree
that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

10. The Messiah comes with salvation to some, and judgment to others: He
lays the Ax to the root to cut down all of you that bring not forth the fruit
of true faith and repentance, and will cast such into the fire, of temporal and
eternal punishment.

11. I indeed baptize you with water to repentance: But he that comes after
me, is mighter then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.

11. I do but baptize you preparatorily with water to repentance: But he that
is coming after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he
shall baptize not only with Water, but with the pouring out of his Spirit on
believers, and with that fiery trial, which shall refine the gold, the
faithful, but separate the dross, and destroy the rebellious unbelievers.

12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
gather his wheat into the garner: but will burn up the chaff with unquenchable
fire.

12. He will winnow and thoroughly separate the wheat from the Chaff, the
Faithful from the Rebellious, and will gather the faithful into his heavenly
Kingdom, and into his Church in order hereto, but he will burn the unbelievers
and unperswadable as Chaff, and that with destruction here and unquenchable
fire hereafter.

13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him.
14. But John forbad him saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and come
thou to me?

13, 14. Note, Christ was not baptized to the same ends as other men. He had no
sins to repent of, nor savior to receive, but as the General will wear the
same colors with his soldiers, Christ received baptism for the ends he was
capable, as to profess that the Kingdom of God was at hand.

15. And Jesus answering, said unto him, (Suffer it to be so now: for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness.) Then he suffered him.

15. I must fulfill the Law of Moses, and thy prophetic mission, and be thus
entered on my proper work.

16. And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and
lo, the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending
like a Dove, and lighting upon him.

16. As Jesus went up out of the water, John saw the Heavens open to Christ,
and the Spirit of God, in some resemblance of a dove (or as a dove does light
on any place) descending on him, (its like in a lucid appearance) and resting
on him.

17. And lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased.

17. And with the apparition came a voice from heaven, saying, This is etc.
This is my beloved Son the Messiah, sent from Heaven as the Mediator to reveal
my will, and to fulfill it, and by his perfect righteousness and sacrifice to
reconcile the world to me, and be the propitiation for their sins.

CHAP. IV.
THen was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the
Devil.

Note, 1. That tho Christ was God, his humane nature was acted by the Holy
Ghost, to whom in Scripture is ascribed Divine perfection of operation on
creatures. 2. Man was overcome by the temptation of Satan, and so sin and death
and all evil did invade mankind; Therefore our Redeemer must deliver us from
sin and Satan, and Misery, by conquering the tempter in his way of Temptation,
by which he conquered: To give us also notice that the warfare preparatory to
our future state, is managed by overcoming temptations, or being overcome by
them. And therefore the study of temptations and the resistance is a great part
of the Christian life. 3. Christ cast not himself on temptations, but was led
to it by the Spirit. 4. To be temped is no sin.

2. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungered.

Note, 1. In this Moses was a type of Christ. 2. Fast^^g and trial by
temptation were great preparatives to Christ's exercise of his prophetic
office: And his Ministers should not be strangers to it; The sensual are never
true to Christ. To serve the flesh by the Ministry, by seeking preferment,
honor and fleshly ease, and fullness more than men's Salvation, is to serve the
Devil, as conquered by his temptations. 3. Hunger and bodily suffering give
Satan advantage for many temptations, tho not so dangerously as prosperity, and
fleshly pleasures do.

3. And when the Tempter came to him, he said, if thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

3. The Son of God can do what he will: feed thy self now by miracle.

Note, 1. Whether the Devil thought by this to tempt him to doubt, whether he
were the son of God, or only as supposing it to draw him to sin, by obeying
him, is uncertain. 2. Satan cannot tempt us when he will, but when God
permits him. 3. His design was to obscure Christ's Godhead and glory.

4. But he answered and said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by ever word which proceeds out of the mouth of God.

4. Note, 1. Christ himself was not above making use of Gods written word. 2.
It is by this word that the tempter must be confuted and overcome. 3. It is by
Gods will that our food does nourish us, and his will and Love is more
necessary to us than our food.

5. Then the Devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a
Pinnacle of the Temple. 6. And says to him, if thou be the Son of God, cast
they self down: for it is written, he shall give his Angels charge concerning
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash
they foot against a stone.

5.6. Then the Devil permitted by God, carried the body of Christ through the
air, and set him on the battlements or some high place on the Temple; and said,
cast they self down. etc.

Note, 1. God may give Satan power, even to carry our bodies about, and yet not
overcome our Souls. 2. The Devil would tempt us to think that we may do any
thing that has no danger to us, tho it be out of the way of our Obedience. 3.
He that will have Gods protection must keep in the way of his duty to God, and
not presume that God shall save him out of his way in our own.

7. Jesus says to him, it is writt^n again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God.

7. Note, 1. Tho the Devil use Scripture for temptation, this is no dishonor
to Scripture; but we must confute misapplication of Scripture, by Scripture
rightly expounded and applied. Papists and all heretics, and the Devil himself
may use Scripture (and therefore all must not be believed that use it.) But that
is an honor to it, signifying that it is Gods word, or else it would not serve
the Hypocrites turn. As all contenders pretend to Reason, and yet Reason must
decide their controversies.

2. Tempting God is distrusting his ordinary care, and providence, and
prescribing to him our own ways.

8. Again, the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, and shows
him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them: 9. And says to him,
All these things will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me.

8, 9. Note, 1. Satan took advantage of Christ's voluntary poverty and fasting,
to tempt his flesh to the desire of earthly prosperity, and dominion. 2. By [
all Kingdoms] is meant, many that were within prospect. 3. How far God has
given the power of Earthly Kingdoms and glory to the Devil, is not fully
certain. But we see he has given him power to tempt men by them; and its like
much to dispose of them as far as those temptations prevail. That he uses
almost all the Empires of the world against Christ and holiness, by Malignity
and worldy interests, to keep up ignorance and ungodliness, is notorious by sad
experience. 4. The Devil thinks not Kingdoms and Glory too great a price to
win and undo Souls. 5. Christ himself was tempted to the most odious sin, even
to worship the Devil. Therefore mere Temptation, even to Blasphemy, should not
discourage melancholy persons, who hate and resist it.

10. Then Jesus says to him, Get thee hence Satan; for it is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

10.1. Note, When it comes to Blasphemous and Atheistical temptations, Satan
should be driven away, and no longer disputed with and endured: 2. Yet even
then Scripture must be given for confuting his Blasphemies. 3. Whether Satan do
all this, in pride as desiring to be worshipped, or in hatred to God, and Souls
is doubtful: but its like to be from all these. 4. [ Only] excludes other
Gods, and all Competitors and Opposites, but not Parents, Masters, Princes, as
subordinate to God.

11. Then the Devil leaves him, And behold, Angels came and ministered to him.

11. Note, 1. Satan can stay no longer than God will. 2. Angels are Gods
servants for Christ and for his Church. 3. As Christ had the Ministry of
Angels, we need it much more.

12. Now when Jesus heard that John was cast into Prison, he departed into
Galilee.

12. Note, Christ avoided Persecution, till his hour was come: And so may we.

13, 14, 15, 16. An leaving Nazareth he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is
upon the Sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim [That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of Isaias the Prophet, saying, The Land of Zibulon
and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the Sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the
Gentiles, The people which sat in darkness saw great light, and to them which
sat in the region and shadow of death Light is sprung up.

13, etc. Of which I may use the words of Isa. 9. tho then spoken to another
purpose, as now fulfilled Literally as they seem to sound, and as perhaps the
Holy Ghost might farther mean them, etc.

17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand.

17. From that time Jesus exercised his Prophetic Office, Preaching to them,
1. That the time of the Kingdom of the Messiah was now at hand; and 2.
therefore that they should repent that they might be fit Subjects for his
Kingdom, and might believe and receive remission of sins.

18. And Jesus walking by the Sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called
Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the Sea, for they were
fishers.

19. And he said to them follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.

20. And they straitway left their nets and followed him.

18, 19, 20. It being part of Christ's Office to appoin^ Teachers under him, as
he walked by the Lake of Genesareth, he saw Simon and Andrew, etc. And he
called them to be Teachers to save Souls: And that so powerfully, as prevailed
with them to leave all and follow him.

21. And going from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of Zebedee
and John his brother in a ship with Zebedee their father mending their nets,
and he called them: 22. And they immediately left the ship and their father and
followed him.

21, 22. Note, His call no doubt did reach the heart: what perswasives he
before used is not mentioned.

23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness, and
all manner of disease amongst the people.

23. And from that time he went about in that Country of Galilee, teaching,
and preaching the joyful tidings that the Messiahs Kingdom was at hand, and
that his Miracles might confirm his Doctrine; he miraculously healed all manner
of diseases where he came.

24. And his fame went throughout all Syria, and they brought to him all sick
people, that were taken with diverse diseases and torments, and those that were
possessed with Devils, and those that were Lunaticks, and those that had the
Palsy, and he healed them. 25. And there followed him great numbers of people
from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from
beyond Jordan.

24, 25. Note, 1. Christ began his great Prophetic and miraculous Works among
the poorest contemned part, and not in Jerusalem among the greatest. 2. The
multitude of the miraculous cures and that of old diseases, such as Palsies,
Leprosies, etc. left no place for suspicion of deceit.

CHAP. V.
1. ANd seeing the multitudes he went up into a Mountain, and when he was set
his Disciples came to him. 2. And he opened his mouth and taught them, saying,

1. And seeing the multitude that followed him as admirers and learner^ (not
yet made full baptized Christians) he went for convenience of hearing, into a
Mountain, and there being set, he taught them as follows.

N. Phrases follow the custom of Countries. And so [ he opened his mouth] by
that custom was no such absurd phrase as it would be now.

3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Blessed are ye my true Disciples, though you be poor in the world, if you
have Spirits suited to your poverty, for you shall have the Kingdom of Heaven
for riches.

N. Poor in Spirit signifies a mind that is above the love of worldly Riches,
and the sins that Riches use to breed and feed, (that is, Sodoms sins, Pride,
Fullness, and Idleness, and unmercifulness to the poor;) and such as are
contented with food and raiment, having mortified the lusts of the flesh, which
thirsts after worldly plenty and delight.

4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

4. Though you are under sorrows now, you are blessed if you are godly and have
godly sorrow, for your comfort will be time enough and full enough hereafter.

N. There are many sorts of sinful sorrow, which have none of this promise;
such as are the common fruits of overloving some creature and distrusting God.
But it is holy mourning that is here meant, that is, for our own or other men's
sins, and Gods dishonor, and displeasure, and our want of more grace, and for
the miseries of the wicked, and suffering world.

5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

5. Though lowly meekness and quiet patience seem a depressed miserable state
with men, indeed those that are such are the most happy sort of men even in
this world; and their way is the most probable for escaping of outward
suffering; while the contrary minded vex themselves with their own impatience
and pride, and provoke others to hurt them, and suffer much because they cannot
suffer a little; and raising Seditions and Wars, do ruin themselves by revenge
and ruining others, and perish by the sword to which they trust.

6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall
be filled.

6. Blessed are you, though now you hunger for want of bread, if you hunger and
thirst after righteousness of heart and life toward God and man, as those that
would fain be perfect in holiness, and doing good to all; and that not with a
sluggish wish, but a desire that uses effectual endeavor: For you shall have
full satisfaction of all such desires, and more than you can desire now, when
the full are sent empty away.

7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

7. Tho God's grace and mercy be free, yet men must be fit receivers, and not
reject it: And it is the merciful that are thus blessed, as qualified for
saving mercy from God: while the cruel and oppressors, and persecutors, and
unmerciful, reject mercy by their forfeiture and incapacity, and undo
themselves by hurting others.

8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

8. God will not bless impure unholy souls with the light of his Countenance,
and the comfort of his Love; nor dwell with the filthy workers of Iniquity;
without holiness none shall see God. But you whose hearts, his grace has
purified from the filth of fleshly worldly lusts, and the love of sin, are a
blessed people, for Grace has fitted you for begun Communion with God here,
and you shall see him in heavenly glory hereafter. He has not purified your
hearts in vain.

9. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

9. Tho peacemakers use to be hated by both extremes and sides of the
contentious whom they would reconcile, yet they are blessed that do it
sincerely from the predominant love of God and Man and Peace; for as Children
are like the Father, so are they to the God of Love and peace, who has
reconciled his Enemies to him by Christ.

10. Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake; for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven.

10. Tho men think them miserable that are oppressed and ruined in the World:
they are blessed if they are persecuted for righteousness sake: For its Gods
cause who will reward them with the Kingdom of Heaven, and never let any be a
loser by his obedience to him.

11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.

11. Think not that I come to advance you to worldly honor: but look to be
reviled and persecuted, not only by Heathens but by Jews, and to have all
manner of evil charged on you, and reported of you falsely, for my sake, because
you believe me and obey me: But in all this you are blessed, while your false
accusers and persecutors are miserable.

12. Rejoice ye and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in Heaven; for
so persecuted they the Prophets who were before you.

12. Though such usage would break the hearts of worldly men and Hypocrites, do
not you only bear it patiently, but joyfully with exceeding gladness, because
your reward in Heaven will be so much the surer and greater: for you do but
follow the Prophets that are gone this way to heaven before you, whom the
carnal Church persecuted and murdered, tho their posterity honor their names
when they are dead, but go on and imitate them in hating and persecuting the
living.

13. Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the salt have lost its savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast
out and trodden underfoot of men.

13. The World is putrified with the corruption of all sin; and you that follow
me must be as salt to it, to recover it from this corruption. But if you prove
filthy and corrupt your selves, what or who shall be salt to you, for your
recovery? Corrupt professors of Christianity are more miserable, hopeless and
forlorn than Heathens.

14. Ye are the light of the world: A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid.

15. Neither do men light a Candle and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick; and it gives light to all that are in the house.

14, 15. God has honored you to be the lights to a dark world: It is not
therefore an obscure and hidden sort of goodness that beseems you: You are
called out to be conspicuous in the world, like a City on a hill that cannot be
hid; by your difference from them in doctrine and life: Men do not light a
candle to hide it, but to to set it up to be a light to the house; And so does
God call you to be open lights in Doctrine and life.

16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

16. Note, That 1. the good works of Christians are the due appointed means to
win others to the glorifying of God: and they that do not this are guilty of
perfidiousness to God and man, as dumb Ministers are by omitting their work. 2.
Therefore our good works must not be so few and small as to be undiscernable:
They must not be done in hypocrisy to be seen of men for our praise: But they
must shine forth in sincerity to God's praise. 3. By good works is meant
Holiness to God, sobriety to our selves, and justice and works of love to
others.

17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets: I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfill them.

17. Take me not for an enemy to the Law and the Prophets, as if I came to
blame and destroy them. As to the Ceremonial part, it was but a Typifying
prediction of me, and is to be fulfilled in me: and it is the honor of Types
and Prophesies to be fulfilled. And as to the Natural part I own and establish
it, and am so far from evacuating it, that I teach the fullest keeping of it.

18. For verily I say to you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.

18. I tell you, the Law is so true as being God's own word, that one letter or
tittle of it shall not be frustrate or fail of its performance to the end of
the world, but shall be all fulfilled.

19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called Great in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

19. If any shall presume to break the least of these commands because it is a
little one, and teach men so to do, he shall be vilified as he vilified God's
Law, and not thought fit for a place in the Kingdom of the Messiah: But he
shall be there Greatest that is most exact in Doing and Teaching all the Law of
God.

Note, Are not those Preachers and Prelates then the Least and basest, that
preach and tread down Christian love of all that dissent from any of their
presumptions, and so preach down not the Least, but the Great command.

20. For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

20. So far am I from Preaching looseness, or favoring sin, that I tell you,
tho the Scribes and Pharisees pretend to the strictest keeping of the Law; if
you keep it not better than they do, and be not a better and a more righteous
sort of men, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Note, That
besides Christ's Righteousness, there is necessary to all (at age) that will be
saved, a righteousness consisting in more careful exact obedience to God, than
any formal Hypocrite has. And this God's Spirit works them unto.

21. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old times, Thou shall not kill;
and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of judgment. 22. But I say to you,
that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother Raca, shall be in danger
of the Council: But whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
Hellfire.

21. Moses's Law was that Murder shall be punished with death (by the lesser
Sanhedrim) And the carnal Jews have taken this to be all that the Sixth
Commandment condemned: But God's Law is perfect however carnal men
misunderstand it; and I tell you, that 1. whoever lets out his passion of
hurtful and uncharitable anger against any man without or beyond just cause,
does in some degree break the Sixth Commandment, and therefore deserves
answerable punishment: And 2. Whoever shall causlesly scorn or revile his
Brother; breaks the Command yet more, and deserves greater punishment: But
whosoever shall utterly despise him causlesly, with an uncharitable conclusion
that he is a fool or a wicked man, or a Schismatic, or an Heretic, when it is
not so, shall have yet far greater punishment, even H^ll-fire, answering that
in the valley of Hinnom.

23. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee; 24. Leave thy gift before the altar, and
go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift.

23. Therefore see that you prefer not Sacrifice before Love and Mercy, but if
thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and be just ready to offer it, and remembrest
that thou have wronged thy Brother, or given him occasion of uncharitable
thoughts of thee; lay more upon love than on thy offering: Leave it there, and
go presently and make testitution, confession, or whatever is necessary to
reconciliation, and then come and offer thy gift.

N. 1. O Christians, lay this deeply to heart, that your Savior was so great a
teacher of Love, that lie prefers it before all things, even acts of outward
Worship, and will take him for no Christian that is not so minded. 2. O what a
dreadful aggravation of wickedness is it to turn the very Sacraments
themselves into snares of wrath and cruelty, and to curse and damn and tear
from the Church all that dare not subscribe and swear to all the inventions of
Popes and Councils. And for the preachers of Love and Peace, to say more than [
Thou fool] even to Silence and Ruin or Burn all as Heretics or Schismatics,
that dare not justify all this.

25. Agree with thy adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with him, lest
at any time thy adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee
to the Officer, and thou be cast into prison. 26. Verily I say to thee, Thou
shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing.

25, 26. If thou have wronged any man, delay not reparation of his wrong, and
reconciliation. Lest he extort his reparation from thee by Law, and put thee to
extremity, when thou might have compounded or appeased him by submission.
And so obey God in thy duty of Love and Restitution and submission to men, l^st
he enter into judgment with thee, and make thy utmost punishment answer the
Debt.

27. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery But I say to you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her,
has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

27. So Moses said in the Seventh Commandment, Thou shall not commit Adultery:
And the carnal Jews looked but little deeper: But I tell you, that whoever
casts on a woman a wanton eye, stirring up lust, and unlawful carnal
imaginations and pleasure, or uses his other senses to stir up such lusts, as
defile the mind* or tend toward Fornication, he has in his heart broken the
Seventh Commandment in some deg^ee.

29. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for
it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that
thy whole body should be cast into Hell. 30. And if thy right hand offend thee,
cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of
thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell.

29, 30. It may be some will say, My eye is so inclined to enticing looks, and
my hand to some forbidden touches or acts, that they offend when I know they
should not, and if it go no further, I hope it is safe: But I tell you, this is
so poor an excuse, that if you had not the command of Eye and Hand, and had no
other way to avoid the sin, it were less hurt to you to pluck out that Eye and
cut off that Hand, than to sin and be damned with it. Not that I bid you do so,
for you have power otherwise to avoid the sin; but if you had not, it were your
wisest way: much more to deny your Eye or Hand all forbidden pleasure.

31. It has been said, whoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a
writing of divorcement. 32. But I say to you, that whoever shall put away his
wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery, and
whosoever shall marry her that is divorced commits adultery.

31, 32. Moses bade you give your wife a Bill of Divorcement if you put her
away: And so you have been taught that this is lawful: But I say to you, that
you must not put away a wife save for Fornication, and if you do, you are
guilty of making her commit Adultery, and he will live in Adultery that shall
marry her.

Note, That Christ here supposes such other causes as Nature it self allows:
As if Husband or Wife should resolvedly seek the others death, or be infected
with a mortal contagious disease, self preservation allows avoidance till the
danger is over: And if any other cause make their cohabitation utterly
inconsistent with safety or the ends of Marriage, they may by consent live
asunder while that cause continues.

33. Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform to the Lord thine oaths: 34. But
I say to you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is God's throne: 35.
Nor by the earth for it is his footstool, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
city of the great King; 36. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou
can not make one hair white or black. 37. But let you communication be Yea,
yea, Nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil.

33, etc. You have been told that Perjury is a heinous sin, and our Oaths must
be kept: This is past doubt; but I tell you more; that you must not needlessly
swear at all, or make any Oaths a part of your discourse: Think not that it is a
small matter to Swear by Creatures, while you profane not the name of God: For
all that you can swear by is related to God, and his law is broken by it: If it
be by Heaven, it is his Throne; if by the Earth, it is his Footstool; if by
Jerusalem, it is his holy City; if by the Head, it is his work, of which thou
make not so much as the color of one hair. Therefore content your selves in
your discourse with a sober Yea or Nay: For your Oaths and needless vehement
protestations, are but the expressions of Passion, or some other vice, and are
sti^red up by Satan.

Note, That the common definition (that an Oath is always an appeal to another
as a knower and avenger of falsehood) is not good: It is the pawning of the
verity or honor of one thing known, to verify another unknown. As to say,
This is as true as that the Heaven is over me: Or if this be not true, the
Earth is not under my feet; It Is as true as that I have a Head; or as that
there is a God, who knows all things, etc. Tho it is tr^e that Swearing by
God, includes an appeal to him.

38. Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth. 39. But I say to you, that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite
thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. 40. And if any man will
sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. 41.
And whoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him two.

38. etc. You have heard that injuries must be repaid but with equal hurt: an
Eye for an Eye: It Is true that Magistrates having the charge of the
Common-welfare, and the execution of God's Laws, they must punish injuries, and
not suffer all men to do as much mischief as they will: But you that are
private persons, must prefer LOVE and Patience before Reparation of your
Losses, preservation of your Rights, or personal Revenge: And therefore when it
is not the public good that requires it, but your own right, resist not
injuries, by any means which violateth Love or Patience. If when you are
stricken you strike again, you do but stir up the person to more wrath, to hurt
you more, when as Love and Patience may make him ashamed that he has wronged
you: Revenge will but enrage him, and you will suffer more, when Love and
Patience may win him. Yea if he abuse the Law to injure you, prefer not the
righting of your selves before the winning of him by Love: And Patience may
cost you less than a Lawsuit, or Revenge: If he injuriously force you to any
service, bear that and more, rather than by striving to violate Charity.

Note, that the Rule here intended by Christ is, that we prefer the winning of
a man's Soul by Love, and the exercise of Patience before our Right, and that
we bear tolerable wrongs rather than alienate men by exasperation, and increase
our own sufferings by revenge; usually the Patient suffer least; and win
enemies most. But 1. this extends not to Magistrates strengthening sin by
impunity. 2. Nor to private men's pardoning sins against God, which is not in
our power. 3. Nor to neglect the safety of the Commonwealth by favoring evil.
4. Nor by the forbearing necessary defense of our own or others lives or
welfare against insufferable assaults: nor may we give away that which is due
to Wives and Children, or the poor, which is not in our power.

42. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn
thou not away.

42. Note, The sense is, Be not unwilling to give wh^re ever thou ought, but
as willing to give as men are to ask; And Asking is one part of thy direction
to whom to give. But this excludes not the use of prudent reason in our
giving. 1. We must not give that to one person which we should rather give to
others; not to the unworhty or unfit, because they ask, when we should seek
after the more needy and worthy that ask not: nor must we give that to one that
is due to many; nor give to do a lesser good when by it we might do a greater;
nor give that which is not in our power. As to the question, How much we must
give, 1. A thousand come far short, for one that charitably gives too much. 2.
Every man should study to do God the greatest service he can with his estate,
and prudently discern the way. 3. The necessities of others must be preferred
before our pleasure and unnecessaries.

43. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor and
hate thy enemy: 44. But I say to you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despite^ully use you
and persecute you, 45. That you may be the children of your father which is in
heaven; for he makes his sun to rise on the evil, and the good, and sends
^ain on the just and unjust.

43.44. God did let out the Israelites to execute so great slaughters on their
Heathen enemies, that occasioned many of old to restrain Love to too narrow an
object, and to incline to hatred and hurtfulness to enemies, too much: But I
tell you, that you must Love all your enemies according to the degree of
amiableness in them; that is, All men as men; All sober moral men as such; all
visible members of the Church as such: And all notably sincere, eminent,
excellent and useful Christians as such; And let not enmity to you, suspend
this Love; (Tho you be not bound to love all alike, nor to trust any mortal man
too far.) And it is not enough that you do your enemies no hurt; nor will their
hating, cursing, or spightfull usage and persecution of you, excuse you from
your duty: But notwithstanding all this, you must love them that hate you, and
pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you, speak well of them
and bless them that speak ill of you and curse you; for you are not God's
children if you be not like him, and imitate him, who maintains the life,
health and natural comforts of the just and unjust.

N. O how little Conscience do most Christians, even the Religious make of this
command of Christ? How freely do they speak evil of their enemies, and think
themselves excused by saying, It is as they are Christ's enemies and not as
ours: Hate the sin, and dislike the sinner as such; so you will but love all
that is lovely in him, and remember, that it is Love that must overcome evil,
and make bad men lovely.

46. For if ye love them that love you, what reward have you? do not even the
Publicans the same? 47. And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more
than others? do not even the Publicans so? 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as
your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

46, 47, 48. If you look for any reward from God, it must be for obeying and
serving him: but to love men for loving you, is but to serve your selves and
your self-love, and then you must reward your selves, what bad man will not
love men for loving him. And if as Jews you be kind to Jews, or praise, honor
and love those of your own Sect or Party or Opinion, what bad men or Heathens
do not the like? All out of self-esteem love and honor their party, and those
of their own opinion. But if you will approve your selves the children of God,
and have his reward, Love men for his sake, even all men impartially, whether
they be for you or against you, so far as any thing of God is in them, whether
it be Nature or Grace, common grace or special; yea for their capacity of being
good and doing good hereafter. The most full universal Love is that perfection
in which you must be like to God. Judge of your selves by it; and reckon that
you have no more Goodness than you have Love.

CHAP. VI.
1. TAke heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise you have no reward of your Father which is in heaven.

1. Be careful to avoid hypocrisy, and a proud desire of praise in your works
of Charity: You may do it when men see you; but not to be seen: If you take
men's esteem and praise for your reward, you forfeit and lose God's heavenly
reward.

2. Therefore when thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as
the hypocrites do in the Synagogues and in the streets, that they may have
glory of men: Verily I say to you, They have their reward.

2. Make not ostentation of your Charity, as Hypocrites: They shall have no
better reward than the vainglory which they choose: (Alas what a pitiful
reward.)

3. But when thou do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
does. 4. That thine alms may be in secret: And thy Father which sees in
secret, himself shall reward thee openly.

3, 4. But (tho your good works must shine before men to God's glory, yet) be
so carefully afraid of all affectation of vainglory to your selves, as
purposely to conceal all, when nothing but your own praise requires openness;
yea, do not note it too much in your selves, to puff you up; and then as your
hearts and lives are all known to God, he will openly reward them to the full.

5. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are; for they
love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men: Verily I say to you, they have their reward.

5. So let not your Prayer be like the Hypocrites, all done in public as on a
Stage, to be seen of men: I tell you men's praise is all the reward they shall
have.

N. Not but that public Church-Prayer, and Family Prayer are as great duties
as secret Prayer: But they must not be done for to be thought Religious, nor
secret Prayer made open or neglected. 2. Standing is a lawful praying gesture
in it self: But where Kneeling signifies more reverence, it must be preferred
in humbling duties.

6. But when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which sees in
secret shall reward thee openly.

6. But do thou pray secretly where only God is witness of thy Prayers (and
therefore approve to him thy secret desires and heart, as well as thy words,)
and believe that God will openly reward thee.

N. 1. Both public and secret prayer are our duty. 2. Praying only before men
is gross hypocrisy: But all secret prayer will not prove sincerity. 3. They
that say, We must not serve God for reward, oppose Christ, and Scripture, and
all Religion. It is not a reward in Commutative Justice as if we profited God:
But in Fatherly love and justice, as pleasing God through Christ, as Fathers
reward good children and not bad ones.

7. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do, for they
think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. 8. Be not ye therefore
like unto them; for your Father knows what things you have need of before you
ask him.

7. When you pray do not so repeat over the same words, or lengthen your
Prayers with unmeet repetitions, as the Heathens do, that think canting over
certain words, or spinning out Prayers to such a length, is acceptable to God:
or as if God were moved by terms or length. For God is your Father, and knows
what you need before you speak, and pityeth you according to your needs: And
your Prayers are not to move and change him, but by exercising your own
desires, and faith and repentance and thankfulness, to make you fit to receive
his further gifts.

9. After this manner therefore pray ye.

9. I will give a perfect directory for the matter and order of your desires
and prayers, and in words fit for your use, when you pray but summarily.

9, 10, etc. Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy name, Thy kingdom
come, Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread, And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors; And lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, the power,
and the glory, for ever. Amen.

9, etc. We come not to thee as our unreconciled avenging Judge, but as to our
merciful Father reconciled to us by Christ; The only God, whose Glory is
eminently in Heaven, infinite in perfection of Being, and of Power, Knowledge
and Goodness, our absolute owner, our Supreme Ruler, and our most loving Father
by Creation, Redemption and Regeneration, whose we are, and whom we must serve,
and whom we must Love and Trust; we are sinful, needy, miserable and unworthy,
in our selves, but thy Children by Christ our Intercessor, who is worthy; whose
hearts are by desire toward thee as our God, and to the good of others as our
brethren, as well as by necessity to our own felicity: We know that as all
things are Of Thee, and Through Thee, and To thee, so Thou art our Ultimate
end: And therefore we first humbly beg that Thy Great, Wise, and Good and Holy
name may be known, and shine forth and be glorified and holily regarded upon
earth, and not blasphemed or be unknown and disregarded by Atheists, Infidels,
or wicked hypocrites; nor the honor of men be set up against thee: But that
the Nations of the earth, and all Societies and our own selves, may be wholly
devoted and live to thy Glory.

And our next Petition is, that the world, or its Societies, or our own and our
brethrens Souls, may not be given up to the wicked Tyrannical Kingdom of Satan,
or men that are his Ministers and governed by him, nor to the Wars, blood and
cruelty of such: But that thy Divine Government, even the Kingdom of Messiah
may come on Earth in that fullness as may destroy the Kingdom of Satan, that
Faith, Love and Righteousness may be the constitution of Societies and Souls;
and the Reign of Grace may prepare us for Glory; which we specially pray for.

And our third Petition is, that in this thy Kingdom, Societies and Souls, our
own and others, may in disposition be conformed to thy Governing Will, and in
practice obey it, and in Faith, Hope and Love, with joyful Trust expect the
promised reward, and patiently submit to thy Fatherly corrections and
disposals. And that in all these aforesaid three requests, this Earth that is
grown so near to Hell, may be made more like to them in heaven, who Know, Love,
and Obey, and Glorify thee, with Perfection, Unity and full delight.

And because thou have made our natures such as cannot but love our selves, and
have bound us to seek our own and others welfare, and Grace presupposes
Nature, and our Being is necessary first to our Well-being. Therefore our
fourth Petition is, that thou will support our natures, and maintain them by
necessary food and sustenance, and make us content with thy allowance, and save
us from covetousness and overmuch love to worldly fullness, prosperity and
wealth, and cause us to subserve thy providence by our wise and diligent
labors, and not to forfeit thy maintenance by our self confidence, idleness or
vicious sensuality, nor turn our strength to serve our sinful lust.

And knowing that Holiness and Justice require the punishment of Sin, we next
beseech thee to look on us in Christ whom thy Love and Mercy sent into the
world to be a Sacrifice and Propitiation for sin; whose perfect Righteousness
and Sacrifice have merited that pardon and grace, which he has given in his
Covenant, and proclaimed and offered to us all in the Gospel: Forgive all the
sins of our former life, and the remaining corruption of our hearts, and the
daily faults that we are guilty of in our state of imperfection. And knowing
that thou forgivest none but penitent believers; and bindest us to love and
forgive others as ever we would be forgiven, we confess and lament our manifold
sins, of corrupt nature and practice, of ignorance and of knowledge, of
negligence, rashness and presumptuous wilfulness; The remembrance of them is
our grief and shame, we loath our selves for them, and earnestly beg to be
healed of them: we cast our selves by believing Trust (tho alas too weak) on
Jesus our Savior his Merits and Intercession, and thy Love and Mercy and
promises in him, desiring henceforth to be roled by him and sanctified by his
Spirit and Grace; And we unfeignedly love and forgive all those that have
wronged us: we beseech thee therefore charge not our sins upon us, but acquit
us from the everlasting punishment, and all vindictive penalties in this life,
on Soul or Body: And grant the same to all our brethren for whom we pray.

And because if thou keep us not, we shall run on in guilt by new temptations,
and lose all that thou have given us: We lastly beseech thee, to save us from
all dangerous temptations, either by Satan's inward suggestions, or outward
snares, by our own ill inclinations, or worldly al^urements, or by such
sufferings as may be too strong for our faith, hope and patience, or would
suppress our holy love, and thankfulness and joyful praise: And save us from
Satan, from our selves, our enemies and our friends that would tempt us to any
evil, and from the sin and misery and thy deserved judgments, of which we are
in danger. And fortify us with thy confirming comforting spirit.

And we beg all these mercies of thee to this end, that we may employ them with
all thy Saints, in joyful praises of thy blessed Kingdom and Government in
Heaven and Earth, and in holy admiration of thy Power, and all perfections, and
in glorifying thy Infinite Goodness and Blessedness, with the glorified Society
for evermore. These are the desires of our Souls, and the requests of our lips,
which we humbly, and earnestly in Faith and Hope do present to thee our
Heavenly Father, by the motion of thy Spirit, through Jesus Christ, our
Intercessor, Lord and Savior, Amen.

Note, Reader, So perfect is the Method of the Lords Prayer, that I had thought
to have Anatomized it and set it before thee in a Scheme. But I now write for
the less learned that cannot well comprehend accurateness: They that can may
find it done already in my Latin Method of Theology; and the lower sort may
find such a brief and plain Exposition as such are capable of, in my Family
Catechism: And in both the controversies hereabout resolved.

14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you. 15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses.

14. Lest you should think that no qualification for pardon and other gifts are
necessary in you, I again repeat what selfish nature is loath to observe, that
tho God be your heavenly Father, yet your love and forgiveness of your Brother
is so necessary to his forgiving you, that without it you shall not be
forgiven: For if you have not this in sincerity, you are not God's children,
and he is called your Heavenly Father but as offering you his grace: But if you
have sincere Love, with notable defects in your forgiving others, God will
correct you as Children, and will not forgive you some sharp chastisements; but
make you know that you must love others, if you will have the comfort of his
love.

16. Moreover when ye fast, be not as the hypocri^es of a sad countenance; for
they disfigure their faces that they may appear to men to fast: Verily I say to
you, they have their reward.

16. Do not for to be thought godly seem to be more humbled than you are; nor
show that outwardly, which should be a concealed secret fast: such hypocrites
shall have no better reward, than the esteem and praise of men which they thus
seek.

17, 18. But thou when thou fastest, anoint thy head and wash thy face, that
thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father which is in secret: And thy
Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

17, 18. But look thou for thine approbation and reward from God, and hide from
the notice of the world thy private humiliations (tho public humiliations of
Churches and Nations, and for open wrongs, must be publicly shown) and God
will openly reward thee.

19. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.

19. Note, 1. By Treasure is meant that which a man most loves and trusts to
for his supply and comfort, and practically places his chief welfare in. 2. By
laying up, is meant, over valuing, eagerly desiring and seeking and caring for.
That which rust, moths, and thieves can soon bereave you of, is unfit to be
your beloved trusted treasure.

20. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor
rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.

20. But by Faith place your happiness in heaven and on that lay out your care
and love and labor; and so use your wealth as God has promised to reward in
Heaven: For that treasure is incorruptible, inviolable and everlasting.

Note, That tho it be our God and Savior that lays up our treasure in
Heaven, and saves us freely by Grace, yet it is we that are commanded to lay
it up, and save our selves, subordinately, by faith, hope, love, and labor,
which qualify us as fit receivers of it.

21. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

21. And by this you may know whether you truly place your Treasure in Heaven
or on earth (Not by your speculative opinion or words: for what Hypocrite will
not say that Heaven is better than Earth?) But by the bent of your hearts: Your
Love, Care, Trust, and hope will be where your Treasure is. That which you 1.
highliest value practically, 2. and most desire and choose, 3. and labor for,
tho with the greatest care and cost, that is it that is indeed your Treasure.

22. The light of the body is the eye: If therefore thy eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light: 23. But if thy eye be evil, thy whole body
shall be full of darkness: If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness?

22, 23. As the eye sees not for it self alone, but for the whole body, to
guide its action; so thy understanding or practical judgment is that superior
visive faculty that must guide all thy love, and choice and life: If therefore
thy judgment be sound, and thou know the difference between laying up a
treasure in Heaven and on Earth, it will rightly guide all the actions of thy
heart and life: but if thy judgment be blinded in this great affair, it will
misguide thy love, thy choice, and all the tenor of thy life: If thy judgment
then be blind which must guide thee, what a miserable erroneous wretch will thou be; and how dismal will that error prove.

24. No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one and love the
other; or he will hold to the one and despise the other: ye cannot serve God
and mammon.

24. And take heed of the self deceit of Hypocrites, who flatter themselves
with the hope of having a treasure both on Earth and in Heaven; resolving to
keep and prefer this world while they can keep it, and hope that Heaven will be
a reserve when they can keep the world no longer; and so they will be as
Religious as will stand with their fleshly wordly interest: But I tell you, no
man can serve two such contrary Masters: He will love one better than the
other, or obey and serve one to the neglect and injury of the other. You cannot
love and serve God as God, and yet love and seek worldly wealth and prosperity,
as your most beloved trusted treasure. God will not stoop to the world:
therefore the world must in your esteem and choice, stoop to God, and be used
for him.

25. Therefore I say to you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body what ye shall put on. Is not the
life more than meat, and the body than raiment.

25. Therefore take this as my special warning, Wholly trust God for life and
all the concerns of life, and show not your selfishness and worldly love, by
being distrustfully anxious or sollicitous, for meat, and drink, and clothes:
If you know not which way to get them, God knows which way to give them. Your
Lives and Bodies are his gift, and in his power; and did he give you these, and
cannot you trust him for food and clothing:

26. Behold the fowls of the air; for they sow not, neither do they reap nor
gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much
better than they?

26. You see that God feeds the many sort of Fowls that make no storehouses
or provision for time to come: And God that made you better than they, will not
neglect you.

27. But which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to his stature?

27. Study your duty and use just means while you trust on God: But your
self-troubling distrustful care and thoughtfulness, is but unprofitable
self-vexation. All your care cannot make you any taller of stature, nor keep
your bodies from decay or death.

28. And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field how
they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: 29. And yet I say to you, that
even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. 30. Wherefore
if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast
into the oven, shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of little faith?

28, 29, 30. And why do you distrustfully care for clothing? You see the
Lilies of the field that neither sow nor spin, have yet a more beautiful
flower than Solomon's most splendid Ornaments could match. And does God so cloth
these and other Plants with beauty, and sweetness, and are you so distrustful
and weak in Faith, as to fear that he will neglect you?

Note, That Christ here neither blames Sowing, Spinning or other meet labor,
nor would have it done imprudently and carelessly; much less does he approve on
a^ idle slothful life on pretense of trusting God. Six days must we labor, and
not eat the bread of idle^e Paul says, He that will not work (when he can)
(...) him not eat. Idleness corrupts Body and Soul. Such Care as we must take
to feed and cloth the Poor, such at least we may take for our selves: But,

31. Take no thought therefore, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we
drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed?

31. Therefore when you have done your duty, trust God, and do not with
murmuring or self-troubling distrustfully say, whence shall I have food and
raiment?

32. For after all these things do the Gentiles seek: For your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of all these things.

32. This is the practice of the Heathens, who fear and complement their Idol
Gods, but cannot trust them for what they want, but by self-trusting and
self-seeking are drowned in worldly love and care: But your Heavenly Father is
far better acquainted with all your wants than you are, and does not disregard
them.

33. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you.

33. But I make this promise which you may boldly trust; see that you seek
first Gods Kingdom of grace and glory, and that Righteousness, (Relative,
habitual and actual) to which through Christ he has promised acceptance and
salvation, seek these I say before all worldly prosperity and fleshly interest,
with your chief and predominant Esteem, Choice, and Endeavor; and then all
bodily things shall be given in as additions to the greater blessings, so far
as God sees them fit for you, and you for them (for Godliness has the promise
of this life and of that to come.)

34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

34. Therefore (Beg of God your daily bread in says, and in the use of honest
labor; but) take no distrustful troubling careful thoughts for the time to
come; It will be care enough to morrow to take notice of to morrows wants, and
to do to morrows work: Every day has its own duty and difficulty, and
sufferings must be expected: Do not anticipate them, and take to day the
trouble on your self by care and fear, which belongs to the time to come: The
burden and troubling part by such sufferings as you must expect, will come time
enough, and a days sense of the suffering, is enough for one days evil or
burden. Preparatory notice of death and suffering is useful: but should we
foreknow all the particular sufferings that are to come on us, it would but
overwhelm us, by an untimely suffering every day by fear and care of all that
which we should suffer but by little tolerable parcels, while every day has
its own proportion.

CHAP. VII.
JUdge not, that ye be not judged: 2. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall
be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

1, 2. Make not your selves judges of other men and their actions without a
just call, and be not censorious medlers, nor hold severe condemners of others
without proof, and beyond cause. For otherwise you must look for severe
judgment from God, and to be repaid by man, and used as you used others.

3. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? 4. Or how will thou say to
thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and behold a beam is in
thine own eye?

3, 4. So censorious are hypocrites of others, that the mote of a small
infirmity or dissent is seen in their eyes, as if it were some intolerable
thing, which they must pluck out (as the Pharisees censured Christ and his
Disciples for not observing their ceremonies and traditions) But if thou know
thy self, may thou not find worse than this in thy self? (Has a Pharisee
nothing worse than Nonconformity to his ceremonies and traditions? How can
thou think his mote of ceremonial or small difference intolerable, while thou
easily bear thy own formality, magisterial pride and worldly mind, and other
great and deadly sins?

5. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam that is in thine own eye, and then
shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

5. Thou Hypocrite, first see that thou have no greater fault thy self; cast
away the beam of pride, worldliness, formality, malignity, and fleshly vice out
of thy self, and then thou will be more capable to judge of thy brothers
sailings, and sitter to reprove him.

6. Give not that which is holy to the dogs, neither case ye your pearls before
swine, lest they trample them under feet, and turn again and rent you.

6. And as it is not every one that is fit to reprove, so it is not every one
that is fit to be reproved. Tho to seek men's salvation by teaching and reproof,
be a work of great moment, when it is used in season, to them that are capable
of it; yet take this rule; pretend not duty to teach and reprove when its
clearly like to do more hurt than good: some men are hardened soorners, and
some senseless neglecters, and some hateful, persecutors: To such as those, holy
counsel, doctrine and reproof, is but like casting Sacramental or consecrated
bread to the dogs, or pearls before swine. To be thus wise and righteous over
much, is but the way to perish and be rent, or at least made a scorn to beastly
men. It is no duty where it is no means to good, yea to greater good than hurt.

Note, Yet if a slothful hypocrite shall rashly censure others to be Dogs and
Swine, and desperate, to excuse himself from duty and trouble, this is but a
doubling of his sin.

7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened to you. 8. For every one that asks receives, and he that
seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened.

7. And to obtain grace and mercy to your selves, true Prayer is Gods appointed
means, Ask of God and he will give it you, seek diligently and you shall find,
etc. For every one that asks in sincerity, and seeks with diligence and
constancy shall obtain.

Note, That is, if he pray to God believing his power, and goodness, in the
name of Christ, and trusting in his merits and intercession, and this first and
chiefly for God's glory and for things spiritual and everlasting, and for
earthly things as means to these, and if he be earnest, diligent and constant
in such askings, seeking and knocking, he shall certainly have grace and Glory,
and all outward things so far as they are sit for him, and he for them.

9. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a
stone? 10. Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? 11. If ye then
being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall
your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him.

9, 10, 11. Do not distrust Gods goodness and willingness to do good: All the
love that is good in you, is but a spark from the God of infinite goodness.
Therefore if you would not give a stone to your Children that ask bread of you,
nor a Serpent to that Child that asks a Fish; and if you that are so bad men,
will give good things and not evil, to your Children, O how much more
abundantly should you believe your heavenly Father ready and willing to do good
to his children who ask it of him, being fitted to receive it.

12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

12. And as you may gather by your own love to your children what love God has
to you; so if you would have God overruled the hearts and actions of men to
love you and do you good, see that you first love them and do them good, and
that is the most probable way to obtain it: It is desirable, that all men do
use you with Justice and Charity: Do you therefore be sure so to use all men:
(Not that a man who hurts himself, or would have another hurt him by
temptation or sin, may therefore hurt another. But) be more forward to do good,
than to expect it from others: and put your self in their case, and do to them,
whatever (prudently and justly) you would have them do to you, supposing their
case and yours were exchanged.

13. Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way
which leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. 14.
Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and
few there be that find it.

13, 14. And let not the strictness of the gate and way of life discourage you:
The gate is wide, and the way is broad that leads to destruction: It is easy
to please the flesh, and to neglect a holy life, and great is the multitude
that go this way: But do not you follow the multitude in sin unto damnation.
The entrance into a life of Faith and Holiness is strait, and the way is
narrow, requiring self-denial, mortification, holy diligence, and patient
suffering; and it is but few that find this way and the life to which it
leads. But life eternal cannot be too dearly obtained: Therefore let no
difficulties stop you or turn you off.

N. 1. It is because of our corrupt averseness, (such as sick men have to a
feast) and the restraints and sufferings of the flesh, that Godliness or Faith
is called difficult or strait. But in it self and to a sound understanding and
will, it is the only pleasant life. To believe God's love and our everlasting
glory, must needs be sweeter than to live in guilt and terror, and in despair
of any future happiness. 2. The Gate is the entrance by conversion into a life
of Faith and Holiness as the way: and the Devil, the World and the Flesh will
strive hard against both: But Grace will conquer and make all a delight. 3.
Fewer turned Christians then, than did after Christ's ascension. But if most on
earth perish, how little is the earth, to the vast and glorious regions of the
blessed.

15. Beware of false Prophets who come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves: 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

15, 16. And you must expect the temptation, of Teachers falsely pretending
Divine inspiration and authority, they will come to you with enticing
pretenses, as speaking for God, for truth, for godliness, for your salvation,
for order, peace, etc. but mischief and hurtfulness is in their heart and
design: And if you think their pretenses too hard for you to confute, look to
the tendency and effects: Thorns and thistles prick and hurt, and Grapes and
Figs are sweet and nourishing. If their Counsel and their practice be hurtful
and destroying, they are Wolves, and not of God. Their bloody jaws and teeth
will bewray them tho in sheeps clothing: If they would draw you to wickedness,
or turn you from a sober, just and holy life, or if instead of Love and Peace
and doing good, they are for hatred, contention, cruelty, oppression, unjust
silencing, excommunicating and persecuting, by these fruits you may know them.

N. Tho every cruel wicked man is not a false teacher, nor every man is to
believed in all his Doctrines who is loving and godly; Yet 1. that doctrine
that tends to do more hurt than good, is naught. 2. And usually God teaches
the meek and loving, and holy persons all necessary truth, and forsakes most,
the understanding of the wicked, proud and worldly: And tho not mere ornamental
accomplishments, yet the saving gifts of the Spirit go together; that is,
Illumination, and holy, love, and obedience and peace; And who can be confident
that Gods Spirit teaches those men the truth above others, whom he never
taught the knows necessary duties of love, peace, justice, holiness and
temperance. When their lives tell us that they serve the Devil, its hard to
believe that they are inspired of God as extraordinary men, tho they may preach
the truth for reputation and advantage.

1. Even so every good tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree
brings forth evil fruit: 18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 19. Every tree that brings
not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. 20. Wherefore by
their fruits ye shall know them.

17, 18, 19, 20. As the man is, so will he do. Therefore by the badness of
their fruit you may know that they speak not from the Spirit of God.

Note, That Christ gives us not this Rule to know ordinary Priests and
Preachers Doctrine by: For when Rulers and Countries own sound Doctrine, wic^ed
worldly men will own it for preferment and worldly ends: But it is to try
Prophets by, who pretend to the Spirits inspiration: He that is not ruled by
the Spirit is not like to be inspired by the Spirit. 2. And tho this hold true
as to all wickedness, yet the fruit that Christ specially means, is
hurtfulness: As the names of Wolves, Thorns and Thistles show. 3. If a good man
speak or do ill, it is because he is not perfectly good, but partly bad. For
instance, The Papal Church pretends to the infallible guidance of the Spirit
when Pope and Councils agree, which is, To Prophetical Inspiration, beyond the
mere improvement of their own knowledge: How shall we know whether their
pretense be true? 1. We find that they cherish ignorance, by forbidding the
reading of the Scripture in a known Tongue without a License, and praying in a
Tongue not understood: 2. We find that they divide the Christian world by
laying its Unity and Peace on impossible terms, even a multitude of their own
Canons. 3. We find they are adversaries to Catholic love, by damning all the
Christian world save their own Sect, and keeping up their Church and Religion
by bloody Doctrines, Inquisitions, and Massacres. 4. And that it is a worldly
interest that is thus managed. These being all Wol^ish Thorny hurtful fruits,
disprove their pretense to the Spirits infallibility. But it being their
interest to be for the Deity, Christianity, and Immortality of Souls, in that
they may own the truth. And if the Reformed Churches have had some errors, it
is because they are but of imperfect knowledge and reformation.

21. Not every one that says to me, Lord* Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.

21. It is not verbal professions, and pretending to the Spirit, or to be
Orthodox, or to be better than others, nor is it formal worshipping God as the
Hypocrites do, nor honoring me with the lips and knee alone, that will save
any one: but it is only the holy obedient beliver that shall be saved.

22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name done many wonderful
works: 23. And then I will profess to them, I never knew you: depart from me ye
that work iniquity.

22, 23. Many will then plead, not only that they were Bishops or Preachers in
the Church, but even that they Prophesied, and wrought miracles in my name: to
whom I will say, Depart from me all you that lived wickedly, whatever you said
or did in my name, I never owned you, nor will I save you.

24. Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will
liken him to a wise man who built his house upon a rock. 25. And the rain
descended and and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat on that house,
and it self not, for it was founded on a rock.

24, 25. He that hears, believes and obeys that which I have now taught
you, is like a wise man, etc.

Note, The obedient believer is the only wise man, that builds the hopes of
his salvation on a sure foundation.

26. And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall
be like ^ed to a foolish man who built his house on the sand: 27. And the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house,
and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

26, 27. Note, 1. Ungodly men, that hear Christ's Gospel and obey it not, are
fools, and build their hopes of Salvation as on the sands, 2. All men's Religion
and hopes shall be tried, as a house by Storms, whether it be well founded and
built or not. 3. Grievous will be the overthrow of the religious hopes of all
hypocrites and ungodly livers.

28, 29. And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people
were astonished at his doctrine. For he taught them as one having authority,
and not as the Scribes.

28, 29. The hearers admired his Doctrine; for he spoke not as the Scribes and
ordinary Teachers, but as by Prophetic authority and the Majestic power of
the Spirit.

CHAP. VIII.
1. WHen he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him. 2.
And behold, there came a Leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will
thou can make me clean.

1, 2. N. 1. A Leprosy is so long and so visible a disease, as that there
could be no fraud in the cure. 2. The belief of Christ's power showed that he
believed him to be sent of God; and therefore was an acceptable faith, tho he
doubted of Christ's will.

3. And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him, saying, I will, be thou
clean: And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.

3. Note, Christ showed both Power and Will, to cure him miraculously that
believed his power.

4. And Jesus says to him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way, show thy self
to the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a testimony to them.

4. Do not thy self divulge this cure, but go show the Priest that thou art
cleansed, and let him enquire if he will, how it was done; perform thou thy
Offering according to the Law; and let it stand as a testimony of me, whether
they will use it or not.

N. 1. Christ would have his miracles divulged but by degrees, and so himself
made known; not all at first, but in due season, when it would do more good
than hurt: not to encourage men against him before the time; but when his
greatest works all done, might, set together, make a complete evidence.

2. Tho the high Priest was no due successor of Aarons line, but yearly brought
in by Heathen powers to him that purchased the place, and the office much
corrupted, yet Christ bids the Leper do his duty according to the Law, to such
as had possession.

5. And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came a Centurion beseeching
him, 6. And saying, Lord, my servant lies at home sick of the Passie,
grievously tormented. 7. And Jesus says to him, I will come and heal him.

5, 6, 7. N. This Captain (of an hundred Soldiers) showed his Faith by asking,
and Christ presently promises a cure.

8. The Centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should
come under my roof, but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. 9.
For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this
man, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant,
Do this, and he does it.

8, 9. The Captain said, etc. And if my Soldiers and Servants obey my words,
its easy with thee to command deliverance.

10. When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, Verily
I say to you, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.

10. At this Christ expressed admiration by way of praise, saying, I have not
found so great faith in any Israelites that waited for the Messiah, as in this
Roman Captain.

11. And I say to you, that many shall come from the east and west, and shall
sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. 12. But
the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness, there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

11. I tell you that many of the Gentiles shall be converted, and from East and
West shall be gathered into the Church, and into the Heavenly Kindom, to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whose faithful (though not natural) children they
are reputed; when the Jews that are the natural seed, and thought that the
promise had been only theirs) shall be cast out from Heavenly felicity into
outer darkness, and utmost misery; where shall be crying, and weeping, and
gnashing of teeth (as men do with cold, or with rage.)

13. And Jesus said to the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have believed so
be it done to thee, and his servant was healed the very same hour.

13. And Jesus gave him presently the reward of his faith, promising and
performing the cure of his servant.

14. And when Jesus came into Peter's house, he saw his wives mother laid, and
sick of a fever. 15. And he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she
rose and ministered to them.

14. Note, the speed of the cure: she presently went about her business, and
served them.

16. When the even was come, they brought to him many that were possessed with
devils, and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all that were
sick.

16. Note, 1. The Scripture does not separate Diseases and Devils so much as
they that think there is no Devil in a disease that has natural causes. For
Devils are often Gods executioners, even when there are natural causes of the
disease; and do add many extraordinary symptoms by their own operation. 2.
Christ healed Bodies to win Souls, by such gifts as all are capable of valuing:
and to show his mercy to Body and Soul.

17. That it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by Esaias the prophet,
saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.

17. And as in Isa. 53. he is said to take our Infirmities by suffering for our
sins, the words may also be verified in another sense, even of his compassion
and his cure of men's diseases.

18. Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to
depart unto the other side. 19. and a certain Scribe came and said to him,
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. 20. And Jesus says to
him, the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of
man has not where to lay his head.

18, 19, 20. N. That when Christ saw a man desirous to follow him, either for
worldly ends, and with a mind not loosed from worldly interest, he tries him,
and turns him off by undeceiving him.

21. And another of his disciples faith to him, Lord, suffer me first to go and
bury my father. 22. But Jesus said to him, Follow me, and let the dead bury
their dead.

21, 22. Another whom Christ saw better resolved and qualified, he would not
permit so much as to go home to bury his Father, but using a proverbial speech,
says, Let the dead bury their dead; that is, If thou be devoted to me, follow
me, and my service, for this is now thy greatest business, to which burying thy
Father must not be preferred: Others that are not engaged as thou art, may bury
thy Father: If they would not, it were better he were unburied, than thou
should desert or neglect me and my service.

23, 24. And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him: And
behold there arose a great tempest in the sea; insomuch that the ship was
covered with the waves; but he was asleep: 25. And his disciples came unto him
and awoke him, saying, Lord save us, we perish.

23, 24, 25. N. The Ship is safe where Christ is, tho he seem asleep. 2. Yet
dangers cast weak believers into fear.

26. And he says to them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he
arose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.

26. Great fears are the ordinary effects of sinful distrust, and the symptoms
of but little Faith. 2. Get Christ on our side, and he can command all the
world to be for us, or not to hurt us.

27. But the men marvelled, saying, what manner of man is this, that even the
winds and the sea obey him.

27. Note, 1. Christ's works proved that he was a Savior fully to be trusted:
2. Do but obey Christ, and he will make all creatures obey him for your good
and safety.

28. And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the
Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils coming out of the tombs,
exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.

28. That is, two that were mad and possessed, and acted by devils in their
madness.

29. And behold they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus
thou Son of God? Art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

29. And the Devils in them by the men's voice cried out, saying, Meddle not
with us Jesus thou Son of God. Increase not our torments before the appointed
time of their increase.

30. And there was a good way off from them a herd of many swine feeding: 31.
So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away
into the herd of swine.

30, 31. And (many Gentiles dwelling there who kept Swine, and perhaps some
Jews, to sell, tho they eat not Swines flesh) there was a great herd of Swine;
and the Devils being a base sort of Spirits, and bent to all mischief, craved
leave, if they must be cast out, to go into the Swine, partly to mischief them,
and partly to discontent their owners.

32. And he said to them, Go; And when they were come out, they went into the
herd of swine: and behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep
place into the sea, and perished in the waters.

32. That is, They were mad, and in madness ran into the sea and were drowned.

33. And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told
every thing, and what was befaln the possessed of the devils. 34. And behold
the whole city came out to meet Jesus: And when they saw him, they besought him
that he would depart out of their coasts.

33, 34. When they heard all this, the whole City was moved with a desire to
see so strange a man: But the loss of their Swine made them entreat him to be
gone and leave their coasts.

CHAP. IX.
1. ANd he entered into a ship and passed over, and came into his own city. 2.
And behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed: And
Jesus seeing their faith, said to the sick of the palsy, Son be of good cheer,
thy sins be forgiven thee.

1, 2, That is, this disease which is the punishment of thy sin is remitted,
and thou shall be healed.

3. And behold, certain of the Scribes said within themselves, This man
blasphemeth. 4. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore think ye evil
in your hearts? 5. For whether is it easier to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee,
or to say, Arise and walk.

3, 4, 5. That is, What is Forgiving the sin but forgiving the punishment of
it? And is one any harder than the other when it is the same thing.

6. But that ye may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive
sins, Then says he to the sick of the palsy, Arise, take up thy bed, and go
unto thy house. 7. And he arose and departed to his house.

6, 7. But your own senses shall tell you that I can forgive sin, that is, the
punishment of sin on Earth -- Arise, etc. so he was healed before them, and
took up his bed and went home.

8. And when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God which had
given such power unto men.

8. It made them wonder and glorify God, that had sent a man with so great
power into the world.

9. And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man named Matthew, sitting
at the receipt of custom, and he says to him, Follow me. And he arose, and
followed him.

9. Matthew that wrote this, a Toll-gatherer; and at Christ's call he
immediately left all and followed him.

10. And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many
publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his Disciples. 11. And
when the Pharisees saw it, they said to his Disciples, Why eats your master
with publicans and sinners.

10, 11. N. The Pharisees pretended greater strictness than Christ, in flying
from other men as sinners: But the^ were not so strict in reforming themselves,
nor zealous of love, and doing good.

12. But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need not
a physician, but they that are sick.

12. My work is to save Souls; and who but Sinners have need of a Savior.

13. But go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

13. O ye that take on you to be the Teachers of the ignorant, what great need
have you to be taught and to study what that saying means, I will have mercy
and not Sacrifice. Mercy is a far greater and more pleasing work, than
Sacrifice, Ceremonies or outward Rites. And the greatest good is still to be
preferred. N. O how little do the Roman persecuting Clergy regard this.

14. Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples fast not.

14. We and the Pharisees are stricter than thy Disciples: We fast often, and ye
do not.

15. And Jesus said to them, Can the children of the bride-chamber mourn as
long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and h^^ shall they fast.

15. The Messiah is the mess^^ger of the greatest joy: It is a most joyful
Marriage feast that I call them to; and that is not the season of ^^^ng and
mourning: But when I am taken from them, then fasting and patience in a
malicious world, will be more seasonable.

16. No man puts a piece of new cloth into an old garment; for that which
is put in to fill it up, takes from the garment, and the rent is made worse.
17. Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else the bottles break, and
the wine runs out, and the bottles perish: but they put new wine into new
bottles, and both are preserved.

16, 17. As a piece of new cloth put on a breach in an old worn garment, will
but make it wider; and new wine put into old bottles will but break them and be
spilt: so if young Disciples should be put upon Religious exercises unsuitable
to their condition, and unseasonable, it would do them hurt: And that which
would hurt them by reason of their incapacity, is not to be put upon them.

N. What their bottles were then made of that would not hold new wine when they
were old, is uncertain. But its likely they were made of the skins of Goats, or
such creatures.

18. While he spoke these things to them, behold, there came a certain Ruler
and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead; but come and lay thy
hand on her, and she shall live.

18. A Ruler of one of their lesser Judicatures or Consistories came, etc.

N. This man did believe the power of Christ, because he had experience of his
success: but whether he believed him to be the Christ is uncertain. But it was
notable faith, to believe that he could raise the dead.

19. And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did his disciples.

19. They were all desirous to go see whether he could raise the dead.

20. And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his Garment, 21. For she said
within her self, if I may but touch his Garment, I shall be whole, 22. And
Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good
comfort; thy faith has made thee whole: And the woman was made whole from that
hour.

Note, A belief of Christ's power was necessary to their receiving the effects
of his power, as a belief of his love and good will, is needful to our
receiving the special fruits of his Love; and the belief of his wisdom and
authority is needful to our obeying him, and receiving his rewards.

23, 24. And when Jesus came into the rulers house, and saw the minstrels and
the people making a noise, He said to them, Give place, for the maid is not
dead but sleeps: And they laughed him to scorn.

23, 24. When he saw the Music and stir that was made according to the custom
about the dead, he said, Give place; for the death of the Maid shall be but as
a sleep from which I will presently awake her, but they derided him, seeing
that she was dead indeed.

25. But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand,
and the maid arose. 26. And the same thereof went abroad into all that land.

25. Qu. Where was the Soul of this maid (and Lazarus) after death? Answ. When
God will tell us we shall know.

27. And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and
saying, Thou son of David, have mercy on us. 28. And when he was come into the
House, the blind men came to him: and Jesus says to them, Believe ye that I am
able to do this? they said to him, Yea, Lord. 29. Then touched he their eyes,
saying, According to your faith, be it unto you. 30. And their eyes were opened.

27. etc. Note, These believed Christ to be the Messiah, tho its like they knew
little of the nature of his Office. Their Faith was their capacity of a cure.

30, 31. And Jesus straightly charged them, saying, See that no man know it. But
they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that Country.

30, 31. Note, Christ's command of silence, was partly to give us an example of
avoiding ostentaion, and hypocrisy, and to be content with the approbation of
God alone.

32. As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a
devil. 33. And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spoke: and the multitudes
marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.

32, 33. Note, His dumbness was caused by the Devils possession: And it is like
he was mad also.

34. But the Pharisees said, He casts out devils through the Prince of the
Devils.

34. Note, This was the blaspheming of the Holy Ghost: what can convince men
who when they see all this done, will say, The Devil does it? As if Power, and
Love, and Government were the Devils work. 2. This verse is out of some Copies:
but the same is in Matthew. 12. The Devils, it seems have one Monarch.

35. And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in the
synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness
and every disease among the people.

35. Note, 1. The Gospel of the Kingdom, is the glad news that the Kingdom of
the Messiah was at hand, and what it was. 2. Had he separated from the
Synagogue manner of worship, they had not permitted him ordinarily to preach
among them. 3. Christ that taught us to know false Prophets by their hurtful
fruits, (their malice, cruelty, persecuting and hurtful doctrines) does
accordingly justify his own mission and doctrine, by speaking and doing good,
all that he did being for men's own benefit; healing and saving Souls and
Bodies. And the world will judge of men's pretenses by their fruits, when
persecutors have done their worst.

36. But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them,
because they fainted, and were scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd.
37. Then says he to his disciples, The harvest is plenteous, but the laborers
are few. 38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he will send forth
laborers into his harvest.

36. Note, Christ's Example teaches Preachers to compassionate a willing
multitude* when they want sufficient teachers: and to pray God to send forth
more laborers, when there are too few: and not to give over laboring for them
themselves, without being utterly disabled, tho men forbid them. Some Parishes
in London have about 70000 Souls, some 60000, some 30000, and all the City and
County and much more, have but one Bishop (or Pastor as some speak) And the
Curates or Preachers cannot be heard by above 3000 at once or thereabouts.

CHAP. X.
1. ANd when he called to him his twelve disciples, he gave them power against
unclean spirits to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness, and all
manner of disease.

1. And as he bid them pray for more laborers, accordingly he chose twelve,
and gave them power to Preach and to work Miracles, and do good against Devils
and Diseases to confirm their words.

2. Now the names of the twelve apostles are these, the first Simon who is
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother, 3. Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the Publican, James the
son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus surnamed Thaddeus. 4. Simon the Canaanite, and
Judas Iscariot who also betrayed him. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and
commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city
of the Samaritans enter ye not: 6. But go rather to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel.

Note, 1. Peter had a priority, though no Government over the rest: 2. Lebbeus
is Judas that wrote the Epistle extant. 3. Simon is not called a Canaanite as
to Nation, but his name signifies, the Zealot, Luke 6.15. Act. 1, 13. 4.
Christ chose twelve in respect to the twelve Tribes of Israel, to whose service
they were first confined: But when the Jews rejected him, and the Gentiles were
to be called, he added Paul, to show that he confined not the Gospel to the
Jews, but the Church now must be Catholic.

5. By the Samaritans is meant those that were not of Abraham's Seed, but were
sent thither at the translation in King Hosea's time: And by the Israelites is
meant all Abraham's seed that were chiefly in Judea, but scattered also where
the twelve Tribes had lived.

7. And as ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

7. As ye go, Proclaim to them, that the Kingdom of the Messiah whom God
promised to send from Heaven, is now at hand: You may see the Christ so long
expected.

8. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils; freely
ye have received, freely give.

8. I give you power to heal, etc. Doing good is your work: Do it freely, as
freely I give it you.

9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses; 10. nor scrip
for your journey, nor two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves; for the workman
is worthy of his meat.

9. You go not on your own work but mine: Provide neither Money nor victuals
for your Journey, nor clothing as for long time to come, nor a defensive
weapon or staff: But look for your maintenance for your work.

11. And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is
worthy, and there abide till ye go thence. 12. And when ye come into any house,
salute it. 13. And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: But if
it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.

11, etc. Enquire who is a godly person, willingest to entertain the Gospel:
And when you come to any house say, Peace be to this house; that is, Gods
blessing be here. And if the persons be godly, and truly qualified for his
blessing, it shall come upon them, else not, but you shall be clear. Note, 1.
There is a worthiness consistent with free grace. 2. And a worthiness before
their receiving of the Gospel. This had two degrees, 1. The highest degree was
true says and godliness suited to that knowledge that the faithful had before
Christ's incarnation: who were in a state of Salvation, but yet had not the
knowledge of the Gospel, (fully so called) and that Jesus was the Christ. Such
was Zachary and Elizabeth, and Nathanael, and the Centurion, Act. 10, etc. 2.
And those that had but preparatory grace, or a teachable tractable willing
disposition, were more worthy, (or less unworthy) than the refractory.

2. Ministers being not heart-searchers, must pronounce Gods blessing on men,
on uncertainties and mere probability of the event: 3. This benediction has
ever a condition employed, if the person be worthy or capable of it. 4. If that
person be unworthy and unblest, the Minister is blameless, if he went according
to probable profession: The fault was his own. 5. No Ministerial blessing,
(Baptizing, the Lords Supper, Absolution, etc.) will save an unworthy person,
that is, one not qualified for Salvation according to Gods promise.

14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart
out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.

14. And seeing you come not for any gain of your own, but to bring them the
joyful tidings of Salvation, so heinous is the sin of unthankful churlish
refusal, that you shall shake off the dust of your feet, as signifying the
labor you used in vain for their Salvation, as a witness against them in time
to come.

15. Verily I say to you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom and of Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

15. Note, 1. There are different degrees of punishment hereafter: some are
more tolerable than others. 2. Sodomes punishment shall be less than the
refusers of the Gospel, because they sinned against less means, light and
mercies. False Christians then will have a heavy doom.

16. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be ye therefore
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

16. It is not a life or ease and worldly preferment, or man-pleasing that I
send you on; but as sheep in the midst of many Wolves, such enmity against the
Gospel and godliness is in the corrupt nature and interest of man, and
specially of the obdurate, that instead of thankful entertaining you and your
message, they will tear and devour you, if God do not restrain them. Therefore
be wise to carry your selves inoffensively and cautelously, preserving your
selves by lawful means; but be ye harmless and innocent that they may have no
just accusation against you; and use no unlawful means: Sheep and Doves are no
good fighters against Wolves and Hawks.

17. But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they
will scourge you in their Synagogues. 18. And ye shall be brought before
governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.

17, 18. But keep out of their hands, (as I do) by just means; For the Jews
will deliver you up to their Councils of Priest and Elders, and they will
scourge you as malefactors in their Synagogues; and if they can make your
crimes seem capital, they will deliver you up to the Roman power; that both
Jews and Gentiles while you are accused, may hear from you what the Gospelis,
and be unexcutable in their sin.

19. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak,
for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. 20. For it is
not ye that speak* but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you.

19, 20. And let not your own slowness of Speech put you on anxiety (as it did
Moses and Isaiah) For Gods Spirit in you, will help you and teach you what and
how to speak in season.

21. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the
child, and the children shall rise up against the parents, and cause them to be
put to death. 22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake.

21, 22. So great is the enmity of the Flesh against the Spirit, and against
Faith and Holiness, that it will overcome even natural affection of brethren
and parents, and children, so that they shall bring their nearest relations to
Martyrdom and other sufferings. And the world will hate you for my sake.

But he that endures to the end shall be saved.

22. But he that overcomes all these trials, and holds out in faith and
patience to the end, shall be saved.

23. But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: For verily
I say to you, you shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son
of man be come.

23. But it is your duty so far to preserve your selves for further service, as
to flee from Persecutors, to go Preach elsewhere (so it be not when you have
any greater obligation to the contrary than your lives be worth.) And I tell
you, you shall not have gone over all the Cities of Israel in the performance
of this work that I lay upon you, till they shall see the Messiah in his own
person, openly owning his Office, and preaching to them as such himself.

N. This hard Text is variously expounded: 1. Some say, that the Romans
destruction of Jerusalem is Christ's coming here meant. 2. Others say, that it
is his coming by Constantines Conversion to set up Christianity in power and
honor, and that the meaning is, that the Cities of Judea shall not be all
converted till then. 3. Others say it is Christ's coming to Judgment; or, say
others, to call the Jews at his personal Reign, till when they will not be
generally converted. 4. It seems to me more probable that it is own open
declaring himself to be the Christ, and that his Kingdom is come: For, 1. he
yet preached but much like John, that the Kingdom of God (the Messiah) is at
hand. 2. And he did not yet bring his own Disciples to confess it, it being
after extorted from Peter, Mat. 16. and he highly praised for confessing him.
3. And he forbad Peter, and those he healed, and the very Devils to confess
him. 4. So that properly his Kingdom began at his Exaltation, even his
Resurrection, Ascensior, and sending down the Spirit. 5. There is another
Exposition of some that think he meant, Tho I send you from me now, let not my
absence discourage you: I will be with you again, before you have gone over all
the Cities; As if he spoke of their return to him at their next meeting.

24, 25. The disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord.
It is enough for the disciple that he be as his Master, and the servant as his
Lord: if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall
they call them of his household?

24, 25. You are not greater or better than I: It Is enough if you be used but
as I am. If they say that I work by Beelzebub, what words or false accusations
be so bad which you may not expect that are my followers.

26. Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered that shall not be
revealed, and hid, that shall not be known.

26. Therefore fear not their false accusations, or their threats: For there is
nothing now covered with false pretenses, reasonings or slanders, which shall
not be uncovered, and truly opened, and not any thing hidden by fraud or force,
which shall not be made known.

27. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in
the ear, that preach ye upon the house tops.

27. What I speak to you alone or in Parables, that publish fearlesly to all
the world.

28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul:
but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

28. Your bodies are mortal and must die, and God may suffer men to kill them:
But fear not men that can do no more, nor can kill or undo the soul that is
immortal: But fear God and offend not him, who can destroy both body and soul
in hell.

29. Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall
to the ground. 30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

29, 30. If Gods providence dispose of the least motions and events of the
least of his Creatures, such as a poor Sparrow is, will he not take care of you
that are his Children. Yea, he regards every hair of your heads; how much
more your lives and souls.

31. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many Sparrows.

31. Trust God and fear not men: For he that made you better than Sparrows,
will regard you accordingly.

32, 33. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in Heaven: But whosoever shall deny me before
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven.

32, 33. Note 1. By confessing Christ is meant, open owning him as our Lord and
Savior, what ever we suffer by it. 2. To be owned by God through Christ our
advocate, is the great interest that we should first secure.

34. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace,
but a sword. 35. For I am come to set a man at variance against his Father, and
the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in
law. 36. And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

34, 35, 36. Think not that the coming of the Messiah is to settle Israel in
power, and bring all Nations to subjection or peaceable confederacy with them,
and to set my disciples in a state of prosperity: you must expect the contrary,
that by owning me and my doctrine, your very friends and kindred will turn your
enemies, Parents and Children will hate and persecute you, and out of your own
houses will arise your most dangerous enemies.

37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he
that loves son or daughter, more than me, is not worthy of me.

37. And let not this turn you off: For if you love Father or Mother, Son or
Daughter more than me, and would forsake me rather than be forsaken or
persecuted by them, you are not capable of being my true Disciples such as I
will save.

38. And he that takes not his cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of
me.

38. And he that, if he be put to it, will not follow me under the cross, and
suffer a shameful Death rather than deny me, or forsake faith and godliness, is
not a true Christian, nor qualified for salvation; nor will I own him in the
day of Judgment.

39. He that finds his life shall lose it: and he that loses his life for my
sake, shall find it.

39. He that will save his life by denying me, or by any sin, shall lose it,
for he shall lose everlasting life, and shall die as well as others, and
perhaps as soon: And he that is put to death for faith and righteousness, has
not lost his life, whenas death is but his passage to life everlasting.

40. He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives
him that sent me.

40. And seeing you are my Messengers, and your Commission shall be sealed by
the convincing evidence of the miraculous and sanctifying operations of the
Holy Ghost, I will own you in all you say, do, or suffer according to your
commission, and will reward them that receive you and your words, as if they
received me my self; (for I am not to stay on earth to do all my work my self,
but will do it by my Ministers.) And he that receives me shall be accepted by
my Father, as if he had received him.

N. As this is a most strong and comfortable obligation to the receiving of
Christ's true Ministers; so it is dreadful profaneness to hear a proud
domineering enemy of Godliness, that has got by force into the title of the
Ministry, and labors to make true Godliness odious, and persecuteth the most
faithful, to plead this Text, as if he that heard and received their malignant
scorns at Piety, did hear and receive Jesus Christ.

41. He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a
prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous man, in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward.

41. Note, 1. This tells us that God rewards not men according to their
gifts, but according to the will and heart: And it is a great comfort to every
ungifted and poor inferior Christian, that they may have the reward of
Preachers, if they do but receive them and further their works as they are
able: yea, if they do but love them, and would receive them if they could, God
takes it as done.

2. But by the same reward, is meant the same in kind, but not in degree.

3. And by a Righteous man, is meant an eminent godly man; and that he that
loves such, and entertaineth them, shall be numbered with the truly righteous:
But it means not that every wicked liver shall speed as the Righteous, if he
will but receive such, tho he amend not himself. But he that loves a good man
because he is such, and shows b^ receiving him, tho to his cost and danger,
that his love is sincere, shall be numbered with such himself.

42. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of
cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in
no wi^e lose his reward.

42. He that loves a Christian as such, more than his riches, and would give
him more if he had it, if he give but a cup of cold Water, to the poorest
weakest Christian because he is a Christian, shall not lose the reward that I
here promise.

Note, 1. What a safe way of usury has Christ taught all Believers? He is an
unbeliever who thinks he shall be a loser by any obedience to Christ.

2. It is not the Rich only that shall have the reward of Charity, but the Poor
also that do their best, and would give if they were able.

3. It is not only charity to Preachers and rare persons, but to the least
Christians, that Christ will reward.

4. Therefore it is not only slandering, reviling and (...) e^in^nt servants of
Christ, but even the (...) Christians, that Christ will con^ (...) miserable
pretense to say, they (...) ^ty (perhaps for dissenting from (...) of
usurpers,) as if any men were free from all error.

CHAP. XI.
1. ANd it came to pass when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve
disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.

1. Having given his twelve Disciples their instructions, he went about also to
preach himself.

2. Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of
his disciples, 3. And said to him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look
for another?

2, 3. Note, It is doubtful whether ( John being in Prison and not seeing
Jesus) the meaning be, Art thou the same Jesus that I baptized, etc. Or, (as is
more likely) that he sent his Disciples that they might be convinced by more
than John's testimony.

4. Jesus answered and said to them, Go and show John again those things which
ye do hear and see. 5. The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the
lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
have the gospel preached to them. 6. And blessed is he whoever shall not be
offended in me.

4, 5, 6. It is not my bare word but my works that shall answer you: it is by
the fruit that the tree must be known: The miraculous works of Divine Power are
done, and the works of love to men's bodies, and the Gospel of Salvation is
preached for their Souls. And these being Gods works, are Gods testimony what I
am. And yet the meanness of my appearance, and my contempt and suffering from
men, will be to many, a stumbling block, and make the work of believing
difficult, and blessed are they that believe notwithstanding all these
difficulties.

7. And as they departed, Jesus began to say to the multitude concerning John,
What went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with the wind; 8.
But what went ye out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that
wear soft clothing are in kings houses? 9. But what went ye out to see? A
prophet? yea, I say to you, and more than a prophet.

7, 8, 9. Jesus took this occasion to describe John to the people; saying, What
went you to John in the Wilderness to see? not a toy like a shaken Reed? Nor
yet a pompous Gallant in gay clothes? such be not in Wildernesses but in Kings
houses: you will say A Prophet? Yes, and greater than any foregoing Prophets; A
nearer Messenger of the Kingdom of God.

10. For this is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

10. For this is the Harbinger of the Messiah, promised by other Prophets.

11. Verily I say to you, Among them that are born of women, there has not
risen a greater than John the Baptist. Notwithstanding he that is least in the
kingdom of heaven, is greater than he.

11. There has not been a greater than John before him: as being nearest the
Kingdom of the Messiah: But yet, the least of my Ministers in this my Kingdom,
is greater than he, and shall have more eminent gifts of the Spirit, as well as
a more excellent office and work; so far shall my Kingdom begun after my
Ascension, excel all ages that were before it.

12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.

12. And as the people crowded to John in the wilderness, and now as you see
flock after me, so since John began to preach, I may say, that these multitud^s
of inferior people, crowd as it were into the Kingdom of Heaven, and will not
lose it, while it is neglected by the higher sort.

13. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. And if ye will
receive it, this is Elias which was to come. 15. He that has ears to hear, let
him hear.

13, 14, 15. The Law and Prophets till John indeed foretold the Messiah; but
not so determinately and nearly as John did: And if you can receive it, I tell
you, John is that Elias that Malachi foretold should go before to prepare the
way to Christ. The belief of this is of great moment to your faith.

16. But whereto shall I liken this generation? It is like to children sitting
in the Market, and calling to their fellows; 17. We have piped to you, and ye
have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not lamented.

16, 17. But the unbelievers of this generation, do as children in their games
complain of one another; you will neither dance when we pipe, nor lament when
we mourn to you; you are cross to us whatever game we play.

18. For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He has a Devil.
19. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold, a man
gluttonous, and a wine bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is
justified of her children.

18, 19. John lived austerely on Locusts and wild-honey: and they took him for
a possessed madman: And of me that exercise no such unusual austerity of diet,
but mere temperance, they say, I am a gluttonous man, and a lover of wine, No
innocence will suffice to escape the false censures of Malignants: But the sons
of Wisdom will justify it.

20. Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were
done, because they repented not. 21. Woe to thee Chorazin, Woe to thee Bethsaida:
for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and
Sydon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 22. But I say
to you, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon at the day of judgment
than for you.

20, 21, 22. Note, 1. Christ's own Preaching and Miracles had so little success,
as that he is put to upbraid the places where he had wrought them for their
impenitence: Therefore the best Preachers may be put to the like. 2. The
punishment of such as are unconverted under the most convincing Preaching, will
be most intolerable. 3. Tho it be Gods grace which converteth Souls, yet he
usually so proportioneth it to the means he uses, that the same means
ordinarily would convert some, which converts not others.

23. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to
hell: For if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in
Sodom, it would have remained until this day. 24. But I say to you, that it
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for
thee.

23, 24. Thou Capernaum where I have dwelt, have by my presence, preaching and
works been honored with the heavenly gifts; but for impenitence shall be
destroyed: If Sodom had seen and heard what thou have, their repentance would
have prevented their destruction. But their doom at the day of Judgment shall
be more tolerable than thine.

25. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them to babes. 26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in
thy sight.

25, 26. Then Jesus said to God his Father, I thank thee, O Father, who being
Lord of Heaven and Earth, have the absolute right to dispose of all, that thou
have chosen the despised unlearned sort of men to make known effectually the
Gospel of Salvation to, rather than the men of reputation for learning and
wisdom in the world, and have left proud self-conceited men in their ignorance,
whilst thou have taught the humble and meek. This pleases me, as being the
choice and good pleasure of thy wisdom.

27. All things are delivered to me of my Father, and no man knows the Son
but the Father, neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to
whomsoeever the Son will reveal him.

27. All things are delivered by the Father to me, upon my right of Redemption,
in order to the ends of my saving office; so that I am (under the Divi^^
nature) even in my humanity made the universa^ (...) Ruler, and Benefactor. And
as none can comprehend the mystery of my Person, Office, and Works, save the
Father that sent me, so none can savingly know God the Father, but the Son, and
he to whom the ^^n will make him known, by the Gospel and the illumination of
the Spirit.

28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest 29. Take my yoke on you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls. 30. For my yoke is easy, and my
burden is light.

28, 29, 30. Come to me all ye that are under the slavery of Sin and Satan, and
under Gods displeasure by your guilt, and under the burdensome ceremonious and
cursing Law, and the Pharisees tutorage, and under the toil of a poor afflicted
condition in the world; and I will give you deliverance and rest: Take on you
the yoke of my Government and Covenant, and learn of me as your Teacher by my
Doctrine and Example: for I am meek and lowly, and my Doctrines are not suited
to the Pomp and grandeur of this world, nor to the interest and mind of the
proud and covetous, but to men of a low and humble quality; and in this you
shall find rest to your tired troubled fearful Souls: For my Service and Law is
gracious, and ^asie, fitted to the relief of the guilty and distressed, and all
that I lay on you by my word and works is sight in comparison of the heavy
burdens that you undergo.

CHAP. XII.
1. AT that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the corn, and his
disciples were hungry, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat.

Note, Both the labor and the early eating seem here meant, but specially the
first.

2. But when the Pharisees saw it, they said to him, Behold, thy disciples do
that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath day.

2. Art thou a good Teacher who suffer thy Disciples to break Gods law?

Note, That the Pharisees controversy against Christ was, that he was not
religious, and strict enough in keeping Gods Law: so that pretended strictness
is no proof that men are in the right.

3. But he said to them, Have ye not read what David did when he was hungered,
and they that were with him, 4. How he entered into the house of God, and did
eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, nor for them that were
with him, but only for the priests? 5. Or have ye not read in the law, how that
on the sabbath days the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are
blameless?

3, 4, 5. Your strictness and your accusation of my Disciples, are but from
your ignorance of the Scripture. Have ye not read that hunger justified David
and his company for eating the consecrated Bread, which else none but the
Priests might lawfully eat. And that the Priests in the temple labor on the
Sabbath, and break the outward rest of the day, which would be profanation, did
not the Temple service justify it.

6. But I say to you, that in this place is one greater than the temple.

6. But if the Temple service can justify labor, I am greater than the
Temple, and my service and authority can justify it.

7. But if ye had known what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice,
ye would not have condemned the guiltless.

7. If instead of ignorant preciseness for Ceremonies, you had but learnt the
true meaning of God, in his preferring mercy before Sacrifice, you would not
have thought that Ceremonies and externals are commanded men for their hurt,
and must be observed against mercy to our selves or others: Gods commands are
all for man's good; and he makes not externals and ceremonies for a snare to
hurt men. You would not have censured the guiltless as sinners had you
understood this.

Note, This (twice repeated) most openly condemns the Papal Church Government.

8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.

8. And as Moses's Law was but to lead men to Christ, in whom it is fulfilled;
so it cannot bind any against him and his authority and saving work; for which
works sake all things are delivered into his hands; even the Law and Sabbath,
of which he is Lord.

9, 10. And when he was departed thence, he went into their Synagogue: And
behold, there was a man who had his hand withered, and they asked him, saying,
Is it lawful to to heal on the sabbath day? that they might accuse him.

9, 10. Note, That the ceremonial outward strictness of hypocrites, is used to
ensnare and hurt those that are not of their mind.

11. And he said to them, What man shall there be among you that shall have one
sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on
it, and lift it out?

11. Will you not draw a sheep out of a pit on the Sabbath Day, if you have but
one.

12. How much then is a man better than a sheep? wherefore it is lawful to do
well on the sabbath days.

12. It is lawful to prefer and do a greater duty before a less.

13. Then says he to the man, Stretch forth thy hand: and he stretched it
forth, and it was restored whole like as the other.

14. Then the Pharisees went out, and held a council against him, how they
might destroy him.

13, 14. Note, That it is part of the Religion of Hypocrites, to destroy men
for doing the greatest good, against their Laws.

15. But when Jesus heard it, he withdrew himself from thence, and great
multitudes followed him, and he healed them all: 16. And charged them that they
should not make him known.

15, 16. Note, 1. It is a duty to avoid the hands of Murderers and Persecutors,
unless when our sufferings are like to do more good than our lives. 2. Christ
forbid them making him known, partly to avoid the envy and rage of persecutors,
and partly because the time was not yet come, till all his works set together
with his Resurrection and Spirit, should make up a full proof.

17, 18. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet,
saying, Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is
well pleased: I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the
Gentiles. 19. He shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his
voice in the streets. 20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax
shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. 21. And in his
name shall the Gentiles trust.

17, etc. In all this he fulfilled what was prophesied by Isaiah, Behold, etc.
Him whom I have selected for this work of Salvation, in whom I am well pleased,
as fulfilling all my will; He shall have the fullness of the Spirit, and he
shall teach the Nations the way of Truth and Righteousness; He shall not subdue
men by tumults, violence, or wars, but as the Prince of Peace and Grace, he
shall deal gently with the weak, and cherish the least degree of goodness, and
pardon the faults of the penitent, and not use severity of Justice, till he
have gathered his Church out of the world, and overcome and judged his final
enemies: And it is he in whom all nations shall be blessed.

22. Then was brought to him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb, and he
healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw.

23. And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David?

22, 23. This people were so astonished to see his works, that they said, Sure
this is the Messiah the son of David.

24. But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow does not cast out
devils, but by Beel-zebub the prince of the devils. 25. And Jesus knew their
thoughts, and said to them, Every kingdom divided against it self is brought to
desolation; and every city and house divided against it self shall not s^and.
26. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how then shall
his kingdom stand.

24, etc. The Pharisees could not deny the matter of fact, it being notorious,
and therefore they had no shift left for their unbelief, but saying, that All
such works are not of God; The Prince of Devils to deceive the people, gives
him power to cast out devils, and do his miracles. But Christ said, If the
Devil have a Kingdom, he has wit to preserve it; Is it the Devils work to* do
good to men's Souls and Bodies? If holy doctrine, and casting out (...) and
healing the diseased, be against Satan (...), then he is against himself, if he
be (...). Kingdom, City or House will not stand (...) ^^vid^d and fight against
it self.

27. (...) ^^^z^bub cast out devils, by (...) ^^^en cast them out? ther^^ore
(...) be your judges. 28. But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then
the kingdom of God is come unto you.

27, 28. And if you think me a Conjurer and confederate with Satan, what say
you of your own Countrymen my Disciples who cast them out by the power they
receive from me? Are they all conjurers too? Therefore they shall be witness
against your unbelief and blasphemy: But if all this be certainly done by me by
no less power than the Spirit of God, you should see that this is Gods
attestation to me, and that his Kingdom is come, in which the Messiah is to
conquer Satan, and destroy his works.

29. Or else, how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods,
except he first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil his house.

29. How could I cast out Satan from his possession and destroy his works, if I
did not overcome him.

30. He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathers not with me
scatters abroad.

30. So far am I from working by the Devil, that I take him for mine enemy that
does not serve me in my opposition to his Kingdom, and will judge him as one
that is for Satan.

N. In War men use to say of their own Soldiers, [ He that is not for us is
against us, and to be counted an enemy] But of the Countrymen and the enemies
quarters [ He that is not against us is for us:] that is, If he do us no harm,
he does us good, and let us use him kindly. So Christ says of professed
Christians; If they be not effectually for me, I will judge them as treacherous
and against me, and shall not save them. But of those without the Church, he
says, He that is not against us is for us; that is, tho he be not himself in a
state of Salvation as true Christians are, yet its commendable to do us no
harm, and the Church is assisted by such fair and moderate unbelievers.

31. Wherefore I say to you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
to men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven to men.
32. And whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven
him, but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

31, 32. All other sin and blasphemy against me as I appear in my humane
nature, has some excuse, and may be cured, and so be pardoned: But seeing the
Great works of the Holy Ghost done by me and to be done by my Disciples, in
Miracles and Sanctification, are the greatest evidences that God will give the
world to convince them of the truth of my Gospel, he that is convinced of the
fact that all these Miracles and this holiness is wrought, and will yet deny it
to be Gods attestation, and blasphemously stand to it, that its the work of the
Devil, this man rejects the greatest evidence and shall have no greater, and
so his infidelity is incurable, and aggravated with blasphemy and obstinacy,
and will never be repented of nor forgiven.

Note, This blaspheming the Holy Ghost, 1. Is the sin of none but resolved
Infidels: 2. And such of them only as are convinced of the great works of the
Holy Ghost, miraculous and others. 3. And yet rather than they will believe in
Christ by this Divine testimony, will believe and say, that it is by the Devil
and Conjuration that all this is done.

See my Treat of the Blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, in my Book called, The
unreasonableness of Infidelity.

33. Either make the tree good and his fruit good, or else make the tree
corrupt and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruits.

33. Judge of the tree by the fruit: Of the power which I work by, by the
works: If it be no good work to heal the Sick, and Blind, and Lame, and cast
out Devils, and preach repentance and forgiveness of sin, to convert and save
Souls, then God is not the Author of them. If they be bad works, they have a
bad cause; If they be good works, they have a good Author: either say plainly
(you that ascribe them to the Devil) that the works are good, and the Devil is
good: or else that the Devil is bad and the works are bad: Or if you confess
the works to be good, confess that they are done by the Spirit of God.

34. O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

34. I need go no farther for an instance than your selves; were you not a
generation of Vipers, the Serpents seed, ye would not blaspheme the Holy Ghost
and his works: for your mouths speak out of the evil of which your heart is
full: As you are, so you speak; you are so bad that you cannot speak well: And
if I worked by the Devil, my works would be bad as the Devil is.

35. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure brings forth evil things.

35. Good men are such, first at the heart, where goodness is a settled habit
and nature, and out of this treasure, they bring forth good words and deeds:
And a bad man being such at the heart, does speak and do accordingly.

Note, Tho hypocrites may have words and deeds much better than their hearts,
that is but in some by instances, and not in the tenor of their lives: Fictions
are narrow and soon overcome.

36. But I say to you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account thereof in the day of judgment.

36. And think not lightly of you belying and blaspheming the Holy Ghost; for I
tell you, that for every Lie you shall give account in the day of judgment, and
be condemned if you be not proved penitent believers.

N. In the Hebrews use, Idle and Vain were taken for deceitful, false or lying.

37. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned.

37. For (tho thou must be made and accounted by God, a just man, by thy inward
change, and thy forgiveness, in order before thy words or works, yet)
supposing, that thou survive, God who has made a Law for thy words (and works)
will judge thee by that Law, as justified and rewardable, or as unjust and
punishable, in the day of Judgment. Christ has not made us lawless, nor made
us a Law (of Grace) in vain: No man shall be saved that is not justifiable
against the accusation, that he lived and died an impenitent ungodly man, any
more than if he had died an infidel.

38. Then certain of the Scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master
we would see a sign from thee.

38. We would see some certain sign from Heaven that indeed God does own thee
thy word.

39. But he answered and said to them, An evil and adulterous generation
seeks after a sign, and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of
the prophet Jonas: 40. For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the
whales belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the
heart of the earth.

39, 40. A false hearted people that will not be convinced by miracles, but
ascribe them to the Devil, yet would have a sign from Heaven, of their own
choosing: But God will not gratify their insolent demand: They shall have no
sign but that of Jonas who was a Type of me, lying in the Whales belly three
days and nights (as I shall, part for three days.)

41. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this generation, and
shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold,
a greater than Jonas is here. 42. The Queen of the south shall rise up in
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it; for she came from the
uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold a
greater than Solomon is here.

41, 42. Nineveh repented at a far less warning and convincing means, than the
Miracles and words of the Messiah sent from heaven: And the Queen of the South
came from a far land to hear the wisdom of Solomon; but these men despise a far
greater than Solomon; these therefore shall condemn them.

43. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry
places, seeking rest, and finding none. 44. Then he says, I will return into
my house, from whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty,
swept, and garnished: 45. Then goes he and takes with him seven other
spirits, more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there; and the
last state of that man is worse than the first: even so shall it be also to
this wicked generation.

43. etc. The case of this wicked generation is like that of a man that had the
Devil cast out of him, but being unthankful, and continuing in his sin, the
Devil (by Gods permission) possesses him again, and brings with him seven
worse spirits, and so his end is worse than he was before he was delivered: So
I have preached the Gospel, and cast out Devils in this land; but being
rejected by the obstinate unbelievers, the Devil will get a worse possession of
them than that from which I did eject him, and they shall be cut off for their
unbelief.

46, 47. While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren
stood without, desiring to speak with him: Then one said to him, Behold, thy
mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee: 48. But he
answered and said to him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my
brethren?

46, etc. Do thou know who they be that I esteem as my Mother and brethren?

49, 50. And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said,
Behold, my mother, and my brethren: For whosoever shall do the will of my
Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

49, 50. Note, 1. Christ spoke not this to teach men to dishonor Parents, or
to lay by natural affection; but to let all know that Regeneration puts men
into a more honorable, beloved, and happy relation to him, than natural
generation or kindred: 2. Which is exceeding comfort for every true Christian,
3. And direction to us how to love such, 4. And a terrible prognostic of the
misery of those that hate and persecute them.

CHAP. XIII.
1. THe same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea side. 2. And
great multitudes were gathered together to him, so that he went into a ship and
sat, and the whole multitude stood on the shore. 3. And he spoke many things to
them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow.

1, 2, 3. N. Christ thought a Ship, or a House, or a Mountain no unmeet place
to preach in, and yet avoided not the Temple or Synagogues. 2. They that will
have the word with Gods blessing must follow after it. 3. Similitudes were
suitable to such learners* 4. Preaching is like sowing seed.

4. And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side, and the fowls came and
devoured them up. 5. Some fell on stony places, where they had not much earth;
and forthwith they sprang up, because they had no deepness of earth. 6. And
when the sun was up they were scorched, and because they had not root, they
withered away. 7. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang up and
choked them. 8. But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some
an hundred fold, some sixty fold, some thirty fold. 9. Who has ears to hear
let him hear.

4, etc. Note, The first sort was not earthed. The second sort had little earth
and rooting* the third sort had earth and root, but among thorns which had
greater possession, and choked it. Of so great weight is it to understand this
difference of hearers, that it is as much as our ears and understandings are
worth.

10, 11. And the disciples came and said to him, Why speak thou to them in
parables? He answered and said to them, Because it is given to you, to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; but to them it is not given.

10, 11. Because tho God has given you some knowledge already of the mysteries
of the Kingdom of the Messiah, these men are ignorant like children, and must
be taught by familiar similitudes accordingly, being yet incapable of other
manner of teaching.

12. For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance; but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that he
has.

12. For here it is true, that to him that has shall be given, etc. He that
has already the understanding of the rudiments and fundamentals, is thereby
capable of receiving and understanding more: one truth opens the way unto
another: But they that have no considerable knowledge, are hardly taught it,
and if it be by their wilful neglect or contempt, are like by their guilt and
folly to lose all the profitable use even of their reason.

13. Therefore I speak to them in parables, because they seeing see not,
hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. 14. And in them is fulfilled
the prophecy of Esaias, which says, By hearing ye shall hear, and not
understand, and seeing, ye shall see, and shall not perceive. 15. For this
peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their
eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted,
and I should heal them.

13, etc. I speak to them in similitudes, as children must be first taught to
spell, because tho they have understanding, eyes and ears, they are so ignorant
that they understand not even what eyes and ears and reason tell them. As the
Prophet Isaiah says, etc. This people by wilful neglect of knowledge are such,
as will not understand even what they hear and see: For their hearts are
stupifyed, and their understanding so dull, and they have so sinfully shut
their own eyes, for want of care and love to truth, that thus they keep out the
knowledge of the Gospel, and shut out my offered grace, which else would
convince and convert them, and they would be healed.

Note, 1. That the way of Parables is not mentioned as an obscure way to hide
the truth: but as a low familiar way, as ignorant carnal men are capable of. 2.
The Prophecy, nor Christ, means not that its Gods intent to hide the truth lest
it convert men, but that this is the effect and event of their own wilful
neglect, whereby their conversion is as effectually hindered, as if they did it
purposely, lest they should be converted.

16. But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear. 17.
For verily I say to you, that many Prophets and righteous men have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them* and to hear those things
which ye hear and have not heard them.

16, 17. How great is Gods mercy to you, that has given you both teaching and
understanding, by which you are made capable of more. I tell you, prophets and
righteous men of old, did desire to see and hear what you do, but it was not
granted them, but reserved for you.

18, 19. Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. When any one hears the
word of the Kingdom, and understands it not; then comes the wicked one, and
catches away that which was sown in his heart: this is he which receives seed
by the way side.

18, 19. Note. 1. By not understanding is meant also, Not considering it to
take it in: 2. It is said to be sown in his heart, only because it was by the
sower so intended, but not as there received.

20. But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that
hears the word, and anon with joy receives it: 21. Yet has he not root in
himself, but dureth for a while; for when tribulation or persecution arises
because of the word, by and by he is offended.

20, 21. Note, That the reason why such fall away, was the want of rooting of
the word, is plain. But whether such should be saved if they had died before
they fell away, is a controversy too long to be here handled, and not so
needful as some think.

22. He also that received seed among the thorns, is he that hears the word;
and the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word,
and he becomes unfruitful.

22. That is, He loves the wealth and prosperity of this world more than the
Word, and so that which he most loves does prevail against the other, and he
lives more to the world than unto God; and for the world will forsake his
duty, and Christ himself in strong temptations.

23. But he that received seed into the good ground, is he that hears the
word and understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings forth some an
hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty.

23. Note, Qu. What is it that makes the ground called Good before the
receiving of the word? Answ. 1. There was a certain degree of faith which was a
state of Salvation before Christ was personally known or preached as incarnate:
These persons that had this, were good ground, ready to hear the Gospel when it
was preached: Those that truly repented according to John's Preaching, were
prepared to receive Christ. 2. And those that faithfully obey that Light of
Truth already revealed to them, desiring more, are better prepared for more,
than other men.

24. Another parable put he forth to them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
like to a man that sowed good seed in his field. 25. But while men slept, his
enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way.

24, 25. Another similitude he used, to show how the Church will be corrupted
with Heresies and vices.

26. But when the blade was sprung up and brought forth fruit, then appeared
the tares also.

26. Note, Heresies and Church corruptions appear not at first; but when time
and temptation ripen them

27. So the servants of the householder came and said to him, Sir, did thou
not sow good seed in thy field, from whence then has it tares.

27. Note, Seeing God and his word are good, it puzleth men to think, how the
Church and world come to be so bad.

28. He said to them, An enemy has done this: The servants said to him, Will thou then that we go and gather them up?

29. But he said, Nay: left while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the
wheat with them.

28, 29. N. 1. Satan is the sower of Heresy and Vice (whoever be his
Ministers.) 2. Ministers and others are more inclined to vindictive severity
often, than Christ is. 3. God forbeareth the hypocrites and wicked (not through
in difference but) lest the godly suffer by their destruction. 4. Christ often
denies the revengeful and severe desires of his servants.

30. Let them both grow together till the harvest; and in the time of harvest,
I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in
bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn.

30. Note, 1. Gods delay to execute his judgment on the wicked, is no sign of
their safety; Their misery will surely come at last. 2. We must not
misinterpret Gods patience with the ungodly.

31. Another parable put he forth to them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his field, 32.
Which indeed is the least of all seeds, but when it is grown, it is the
greatest among herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come
and lodge in the branches thereof.

31. As a grain of Mustard Seed is one of the smallest sort of seeds, and yet
becomes a plant like a tree, etc. So the Kingdom of the Messiah begins in a
few poor men, but shall become a Kingdom that shall flourish in the World, so
that worldly men shall obtrude into it for worldly ends, and desire the
protection of Christian Governors.

Note, That the Mustard-plant was much greater in Judea than it is with us.

33. Another parable spoke he unto them, The Kingdom of Heaven is like to
leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole
was leavened.

33. As a little leaven does leaven a great quantity of meal, so the Gospel
shall convert a few at first where it comes, and afterward by the help of those
few, whole Towns and Countries shall turn Christians, and own the Truth.

34. All these things spoke Jesus to the multitude in parables, and without a
parable spoke he not to them: 35. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things
which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.

34, 35. Thus Jesus taught them only by Similitudes, as it is written, etc. I
will utter great and excellent Mysteries, which former ages have not known, and
that by the way of familiar Similitudes.

36. Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house, and his
disciples came to him, saying, Declare to us the parable of the tares of the
field

36. Note. It is the part of Learners, to ask their Teachers help to understand
that which they understand not.

37. He answered and said to them, He that sows the good seed is the Son of
man: 38. The field is the world, the good seed are the children of the kingdom;
but the tares are the children of the wicked one: 39. The enemy that sowed
them, is the devil, the harvest is the end of the world: and the reapers are
the angels.

37, etc. It is Christ that sows the good seed, by Preaching the Gospel and
planting the Churches by himself and his servants. The World is the first
object of the Gospel preached, and out of which believers are gathered: The
good seed (as sown is the Gospel, but) as springing up in fruit, are the
faithful, who are properly the members of the Church of Christ: The Tares (as
sown are evil doctrines and temptations, but) as sprung up in fruit are the
Children of the Devil, who is the father of wickedness; The enemy of God and
goodness and man that sowed them, by himself and his servants, signifies the
Devil: the time of harvest is, the end of this world, even the day of judgment:
The reapers or executioners are the Angels.

40. As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire, so shall it be
in the end of this world: 41. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and
they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do
iniquity. 42. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth.

40, etc. So in the end of this World: Christ shall send forth his Angels as
his executing Ministers; and they shall gather out of the world (which he is
over) and specially out of the visible Church, all rebellious unholy, wicked,
scandalous, carnal men, and shall cast them into hell, which is likened to a
lake of Fire; where they shall, in torment and a self-afflicting Conscience.

43. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
Father: who has ears to hear let him hear.

43. Then shall the righteous who are now obscured by infirmities and malignant
slanders, and are oppressed in the world, shine forth in glory in the Kingdom
of Love, even of God as their Father in Christ, as the Sun shines in the
heavens in resplendent glory. As ever you will use your ears or understandings,
believe and foresee this glorious blessed day to Believers.

44. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like to a treasure hid in a field, the
which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof, goes and sells
all that he has, and buyeth that field.

44. The way of Salvation by Christ, shows men the certain hopes of so
inestimable a treasure in the life to come, as makes the saithful choose it
for their best, and part with all the pleasure, profit, and honor of the world
to obtain it.

45. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant man seeking goodly
pearls: 46. Who when he had found one of geat price, he went and sold all that
he had and bought it.

45, 46. Note, He that finds not by faith, enough in the love of God and
heavenly glory, and in Christ the way thereto, to make him consent sincerely
and practically to sell or part with all the world rather than lose it, is not
capable of a just title to it, nor shall obtain it.

47. Again the kingdom of heaven is like a net which was cast into the sea, and
gathered of every kind: 48. Which when it was full, they drew to the shore, and
sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.

47, 48. The Church is gathered as men by casting a net into the Sea gather
fishes, good and bad: And at the day of judgment, Christ will take the good to
heaven, and cast away the bad to hell.

Note, 1. It is not to be wondered at, that the visible Church has good and
bad. 2. Yet this is not the design of the Gospel, which is fitted to make all
good, but by the intrusion of Hypocrites. Nor is it an excuse for the neglect
of discipline, and the just discrimination of the good and bad.

49. So shall it be at the end of the world, The angels shall come forth, and
sever the wicked from among the just. 50. And shall cast them into the furnace
of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

49, 50. These plain and dreadful words, more need bel^^f and deep
consideration, than exposition.

51. Jesus says to them, Have ye understood all these things? they say to him,
Yea, Lord. 52. Then said he to them, Therefore every scribe which is instructed
to the Kingdom of heaven, is like to a man that is an householder, which
brings forth out of his treasure things new and old.

51, 52. All that are furnished with holy knowledge, and are fitted to teach
others, must have an habitual treasure of it in their minds, from whence they
may be able to open the truth, exhort, reprove, and confute all the erroneous
on all just occasions: as a Housekeeper is stockt for the provision of his
family.

53, 54. And it came to pass that when Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence. And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in
their Synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, whence has this
man this wisdom, and these mighty works? 55, 56. Is not this the carpenters
son, is not his mother called Mary, and his brethren, James, and Joses, and
Simon, and Jude, and his sisters are they not all with us? whence then has
this man all these things? And they were offended in him.

53, etc. Note, 1. Familiarity breeds contempt. It is no impediment to our
faith, that we saw not Christ's person, parentage, and education. 2. Carnal men
are not satisfied by the evidence of Divine attestation, unless they can give a
reason of it, and overcome the difficulty and scandal of objections. 3. It is
uncertain whether Mary had other Children after Jesus, or these were his
brethren, or only his kindred.

57, 58. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor, save in his
own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works there
because of their unbelief.

57, 58. Unbelief made men incapable receivers of those miracles which else
Christ would have wrought.

CHAP. XIV.
1. AT that time Herod the Tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus, 2. And said to
his servants, This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the dead, and
therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.

1, 2. Note, That Herod did believe the Immortality of the Soul; else he could
not have believed John's Resurrection.

3, For Herod had laid hold on John, and b^und him, and put him in prison, for
Herodia's sake, his brother Philips wise. 4. For John said to him, It is not
lawful for thee to have her. 5. And when he would have put him to death, he
feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet.

3, 4, 5. N. 1. Faithful Prophets did tell Kings of their sin. 2. But such as
Herod cannot bear reproof. 3. The persecution of faithful Teachers is usually
for telling great men of their sins. 4. The multitude then did so much
reverence prophets, that they were a terror and restraint to persecuting
Rulers.

6. But when Herod's birth day was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before
them, and pleased Herod. 7. Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her
whatever she would ask. 8. And she being before instructed of her mother, said;
Give me here John Baptists head in a charger.

6, 7, 8. N. Great men's feasts and frolicks are a usual season of great sin,
and carnal pleasures are their snares. 2. Rash Oaths are the fruit of vice and
the seed of more. 3. Voluptuous wantons are often the most cruel and bloody
persecutors. 4. The Devil seldom wants suggestors of cruelty.

9. And the king was sorry: nevertheless for the oaths sake, and them which
sat with him, he commanded it to be given her.

9. N. Wicked men often sin with troubled conscience: but yet will do it for
their base ends. 2. Hypocrites that dare murder the just, yet may make the
Conscience of a wicked Oath their pretense. (How conscionably then should bad
Oaths be avoided and good ones kept?) 3. The reputation of m^n in bad company,
is a usual snare of iniquity.

10, 11, 12. And he sent and beheaded John in prison. And his head was brought
in a charger, and given to the damsel; and she brought it to her mother. And
his disciples came and took up the body and buried it, and went and told Jesus.

10, 11, 12. Note, The Blood of Saints is vile and cheap to Tyrants, that can
sell them to a Whore or wanton: But they shall pay dear for it at the last. 2.
So great a Prophet as John must be a Martyr, that he may be like to Christ. 3.
Its as true Martyrdom to suffer for Duty as for Faith. 4. The blood of Saints
is part of the sport and pleasure of lascivious wicked women.

13. When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence by ship into a desert place
apart: and when the people had heard thereof, they followed him on foot, out of
the cities.

13. Note, 1. The Lord of Life that came in flesh to save the world, was fain
to fly for his life into a wilderness from the face of men, yea of the eminent
members of the Jewish Church. 2. It is not cowardice, or unlawful to fly from
persecutors, till we have some special call to suffer.

14. And Jesus went forth and saw a great multitude, and was moved with
compassion toward them, and he healed their sick.

14. Note, Those that follow Christ, and seek to him, are liker to find his
compassion than those that drive him away.

15. And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This is a
desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away, that they may
go into the villages, and buy themselves victuals. 16. But Jesus said to them,
They need not depart, give ye them to eat. 17. And they say to him, We have
here but five loaves and two fishes. 18. He said, Bring them hither to me. 19.
And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and took the five
loaves and two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake, and
gave the loaves to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.

15, etc. Note, 1. Christ fed the Body to win the Soul, and so must we. 2.
Nothing is too little which God will bless. 3. Tho God be every where, yet
Christ directs us in Prayer to him to look up to Heaven; for there is the
Glory in which he will appear to glorify his people. 4. If the Son of God must
look up to heaven and bless his food, surely we must not take it like brutes,
without craving Gods blessing on it.

20. And they did all eat, and were filled, and they took up of the fragments
that remained twelve baskets full. 21. And they that had eaten, were about five
thousand men, besides women and children.

20, 21. Note, 1. This Miracle was done before five thousand Witnesses and
more, that there might be no suspicion of deceit, or misreport. 2. He that was
Lord of all and could feed by Miracle, yet would not have the fragments lost.

22. And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and to
go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away. 23. And
when he had sent the multitude away, he went up into a mountain apart to pray.

22, 23. Note, Christ used to pray alone, because his case so differed from all
men's in the world, (having no sin, etc.) that the same prayers would not suit
the case of others which were fit for him.

24. And when the evening was come, he was there alone: But the ship was now in
the midst of the sea, tossed with waves, for the wind was contrary. 25. And in
the fourth watch of the night Jesus went out unto them walking on the sea.

24, 25. Note, 1. Christ permits dangers to us, that he may the more notably
deliver us. 2. The waters can bear him, when he will walk on them. All elements
are at his service.

26. And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled,
saying, it is a spirit, and they cried out for fear.

26. Note, Nature makes man afraid of apparitions of Spirits, because unknown
and unusual.

27. But straightway Jesus spoke to them, saying, Be of good cheer: it is I, be
not afraid.

27. Note, Christ's true Disciples should be so far from being afraid of him, as
hurtful to them, that they should make him their comfort and courage against
the fears of men and devils.

28. And Peter answered him, and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto
thee upon the water.

28. N. This showed much faith in Peter: yet none must tempt God, nor go
unbidden into danger.

29. And he said, Come: And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked
on the water to go to Jesus. 30. And when he saw the wind boisterous, he was
afraid, and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me. 31. And
immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand and caught him, and said to him, O
thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt.

29, etc. Note, 1. Even strong faith has its weakness, and is liable to fears:
2. Our weak faith causing great fear, would expose us to sinking did not Christ
lay hold on us.

32. And when they were come into the ship the wind ceased. 33. Then they that
were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son
of God.

32, 33. N. Renewed great conviction^, renew and increase the exercise of
faith, and praise to Christ.

34. And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Genesaret. 35.
And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all the
country round aabout, and brought to him all that were diseased. 36. And
besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment: and as many as
touched were made perfectly whole.

34, etc. N. What great cause have we to trust a Savior so able and willing to
save Body and Soul, and to believe his word.

CHAP. XV.
1. THen came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees which were of Jerusalem, saying,
2. Why do thy disciples transgress the traditions of the elders? for they wash
not their hands when they eat bread.

1, 2. N. Poor Souls that know not God, do take up with ceremonies of their own
and their forefathers making, and put the name of Religion on these to cheat
themselves, when such things are not so much as an image of true Religion. O
what base thoughts have these men of God, who think he is pleased or displeased
with men, as they keep or neglect such trifles.

3. But he answered and said to them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment
of God by your traditions.

3. N. The Rebels that break Gods Laws by their Laws, yet charge Gods servants
with sin, for not keeping their Laws and Traditions against Gods Laws. They
think Gods Laws too many and too strict, and yet make more of their own, and
are precise for keeping them.

4. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and mother: and he that
curses father or mother, let him die the death. 5. But ye say, Whosoever shall
say to his father or mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou might be
profited by me, 6. and honor not his father or his mother (he shall be free)
thus ye have made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition.

4, 5, 6. Gods command to honor Parents binds you to relieve them, if they be
in want: And duty to Parents is so great, that contempt of them deserves death.
But ye have like hypocrites got a trick to pretend to devote your estates to
God, that you may defeat your parents, and so quite frustrate Gods commandment.

7. Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias Prophecy of you, saying, 8. This people
draws nigh to me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me. 9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the traditions of men.

7, 8, 9. Note, 1. It is the part of hypocrites to pretend Religion, for lip
labor, and Traditions and Ceremonies of their own, and think God is honored
and pleased with the injunctions and Canons of men, while they break Gods
Commands (an^ hate and persecute those that keep them) 2. This humane Religion
of hypocrites is vain, (and worse than vain) It is lost labor and sinful
profanation.

10. And he called the multitude, and said to them, Hear and understand. 11.
Not that which goes into the mouth defiles a man, but that which comes out
of the mouth, this defiles a man.

10, 11. It is not the quality or uncleanness of your food, that is sin and
soul defilement; but it is sinful words (and deeds) the product of sinful
hearts, that God will charge on you as your uncleanness.

12. Then came his disciples, and said to him, Know thou that the Pharisees
were offended, when they heard this saying?

12. Note, Erroneous men and hypocrites are offended at the clearest truth
which crosses their old opinions and way.

13. But he answered and said, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up. 14. Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the
blind. And if the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch.

13, 14. Their Opinions and Traditions, and their Sect in making a Religion of
these, are not of God, but of their own invention, and therefore God will root
them up. God will not bless Humane Religions. Let them alone a while; their
judgment is near. They and their Disciples as blind Leaders and followers, will
fall into the ditch of temporal and eternal perdition.

15. Then answered Peter and said to him, Declare to us this parable. 16. And
Jesus said, Are ye also yet without understanding? 17. Do not ye yet
understand, that whatsoever comes in at the mouth, goes into the belly, and
is cast out into the draught. 18. But those things which proceed out of the
mouth come forth from the heart, and they defile a man.

15, etc. Meat that passes through a man cannot defile his Soul: but it is the
products of a sinful heart that defile it.

19. For out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false-witness, blasphemies, 20. These are the things
which defile a man: But to eat with unwashen hands defiles not a man.

19, 20. It is out of a sinful heart that all sins proceed, as evil thoughts
and designs, etc.

Note, The heart it self is not here excluded from guilt, but included as the
defiled and defiling cause of all actual sin.

21. Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sydon.
22. And behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried to
him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my daughter is
grievously vexed with a devil.

21, 22. Then he went to the borders of Israel near the Heathen Country, and a
heathen Canaanitish or Syropheni^ian woman hearing of his fame, went to him,
and begged of him to heal her daughter vexed with a Devil.

23. But he answered her not a word: And his disciples came and besought him,
saying, Send her away, for she cries after us. 24 But he answered, and said, I
am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

23, 24. Dismiss her, that she trouble us not. He said; My personal Ministry
is to be to the straying Jews, and not to the Heathens.

25. Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me. 26. But he
answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread and cast it to
the dogs. 27. And she said, Truth, Lord, yet the dogs eat the crumbs which fall
from their masters table.

25, etc. To give that which is designed for Israel to Heathens, is but like
casting the Childrens bread to Dogs. She said, It is true Lord, and I confess
my self to be but as one of the Dogs, and claim not the Childrens portion, but
if I have as dogs the crumbs that fall, they will have never the less.

28. Then Jesus answered, and said to her, O woman, great is thy faith, Be it
unto ^hee even as thou will: And her daughter was made whole from that very
hour.

28. Note, Great faith makes men capable of great mercies, even of having what
they justly desire.

29. And Jesus departed thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee, and went
up into a mountain, and sat down there. 30. And great multitudes came unto him,
having with them those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others,
and cast them down at Jesus feet, and he healed them.

29, 30. Note, How earnestly will men seek for bodily hea^th, who are senseless
of their Souls concerns: If Christ's Ministers could give all men health and
wealth, what abundance of followers would they have, and who would for this,
imprison, persecute or silence them:

31. Insomuch that the multitude wondered when they saw the dumb to speak, ^^e
maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see, and they glorified
the God of Israel.

31. Note, Great and sens^ble Miracles and (...) force men to acknowledge the
hand of God and to praise him.

32. Then Jesus called his disciples to him, and said, I have compassion on the
multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to
eat; I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint by the way. 33. And his
disciples say to him, Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness as
to fill so great a multitude? 34. And Jesus says to them, How many loaves have
ye? and they said, Seven, and a few fishes. 35. And he commanded the multitude
to sit down on the ground. 36. And he took the seven loaves, and the fishes,
and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples
to the multitude. 37. and they did all eat and were filled, and took up of the
broken meat that was left, seven baskets full. 38. And they that did eat, were
four thousand men, beside women and children. 39. And he sent away the
multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala.

32, etc. This was the second Miracle of compassionate feeding the hungry. Is
not Christ in Heaven as merciful and sufficient for Soul and body, as he was on
Earth?

CHAP. XVI.
1. THe Pharisees also with the Sadducees came, and tempting, desired him to
show them a sign from heaven.

1. Not believing the reports of all his Miracles, they desired that they
themselves might see some sign from Heaven, which might certainly prove that
God had sent him: thinking that he could not do it.

2. He answered and said to them, when it is evening, ye say it will be fair
weather, for the sky is red. 3. And in the morning, It will be foul weather to
day, for the sky is red and lowering; O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face
of the sky, but can ye not discern the signs of the times?

2, 3. You can conjecture what weather will be by the sky: And is it to you so
hard a matter to know by my doctrine and all the miracles and good works that I
have done, that I am sent of God, that you must prescribe what signs God shall
show you from heaven, before you will believe.

4. A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall no
sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas: And he left them and
departed.

4. When your own wickedness hinders you bebelief, you call for a sign from
heaven to convince you. But I again tell you, you shall have no sign but that
of the Prophet Jonah. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still.

5. And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to
take bread. 6. Then Jesus said to them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.

5, 6. Note, Christ does not bid them to avoid all converse with these men, or
not to hear them read the Law of Moses, but to take heed of receiving any of
their false doctrine.

7. And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have taken no
bread.

8. Which when Jesus perceived, he said to them, O ye of little faith, why
reason ye among your selves, because ye have brought no bread? 9. Do ye not yet
understand, neither remember ye the five loaves of the five thousand, and how
many baskets ye took up? 10. Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and
how many baskets ye took up? 11. How is it that ye do not understand that I
spoke not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and of the Sadducees? 12. Ten understood they how that he bade them
not beware of of the leaven of bread; but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and
of the Sadducees.

7, etc. We are dull of understanding till Christ instruct us, and apt to put a
carnal sense upon his words.

13. When Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his
disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?

13. Note, Christ would not so much as urge his own Disciples to confess him to
be the Christ, till his works were a cogent testimony, that their faith might
not be precarious, nor by bare command, but by convincing evidence.

14. And they said, Some say thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others
Jeremias, or one of the Prophets.

14. Note, 1. Men were convinced that he was of God, (that is, the multitude,
but not the Rulers:) But they thought he was not the Messiah, but some great
Prophets Soul in a new body. 2. By this it is evident that the multitude then
believed the immortality of the Soul: else they could not think that those
Souls came into other Bodies.

15, 16. He says to them, But whom say ye that I am. And Simon Peter answered
and said, Thou art the Christ, the son of the living God.

15, 16. Note, 1. It was meet that those that were to preach Christ to others
should be brought to an open confession of him themselves. 2. Its like the rest
believed as Peter tho he only spoke.

17. And Jesus answered and said to him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jonah; for
flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in heaven.

17. It is a point of so great importance to Sanctification, Justification, and
Salvation, verily to believe me to be the Christ and Savior, that this faith
is the evidence and means of thy blessedness: It is not mere man that has
revealed this so as to make thee a true believer, but my heavenly Father, by my
works and word, and by his grace.

18. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

18. And as thou have consest me to be Christ, I will say to thy comfort, that
as thy name signifies a Rock or Stone, So by thee (and thy brethren) I will
build my Church on this Rock, against which all the powers of Hell, the Devils
and wicked men shall not prevail.

Note, 1. It is a great controversy whether by [ this Rock] be meant, 1.
Christ himself, 2. Or the faith and confession of Christ, 3. Or Peter himself.
But no doctrinal controversy depends on it: For all three are certain
truths. 1. No doubt but primarily Christ is the Rock on which the Church is
built. 2. And no doubt but Faith and Confession being the condition of our part
in Christ, the Church is so far built thereon. 3. And no doubt but the Apostles
are called Foundation stones on which the Church is built, and therefore Peter
whose name imports it, and was a chief speaker among them, as the foreman of
a Jury. 2. Though the Powers of Hell may seem to prevail as they did over
Christ while he was on the Cross, they are then next an overthrow themselves.

19. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever
thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever thou shall
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

19. And hereafter I will make thee a ruling Steward over my Church as it is
Gods Kingdom on earth, preparatory to the Heavenly Kingdom of Glory; and the
due administration of thy office by these Keys of Power, shall be the ordinary
way to Heaven, and a forerunner of the final Justification of the Faithful,
and of the final condemnation of the Impenitent and ungodly, whom by my
doctrine and the due application of it, thou bindest over to my judgment.

Note, As Peter was the foreman or speaker in their common confession, so by
Peter the promise is made to them all; And to them all Christ after gave this
power: But he never made Peter governor of the rest of the Apostles, Much less
the Pope.

20. Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was
Jesus the Christ.

20. N. Because this honor was reserved chiefly, 1. To the time of the
accomplishment of all the evidences by his Resurrection and Ascension, and
giving of the Holy Ghost. 2. And to the work of the Spirit then on the
Apostles, by which they were suddenly advanced to a fitness for this work,
above what they attained by Christ's personal teaching them on earth.

21. From that time forth began Jesus to show to his disciples, how that he
must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and chief priests,
and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day.

21. Note, 1. This Christ did, 1. To make them know that he knew things to
come; 2. And to make them know that it was not to reign as an earthly King that
he was sent. 3. And to prepare them to bear his sufferings, and not to expect
fleshly prosperity by him. 2. It was the Poor that followed Christ, and the
Rulers and Teachers that crucified him.

22. Then Peter took him and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee,
Lord, this shall not be unto thee.

22. Peter contradicted him, saying, God forbid; Lord favor thy self, and
expose not thy self to this.

Note, 1. The flesh is ready to suggest fleshly counsel, and to oppose all that
tends to suffering. 2. We have need to be fortified against temptations of
loving friends as well as enemies.

23. But he turned and said to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an
offense to me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that
be of men.

23. He looked at him with displeasure, and said to Peter, I say to thee as I
did to the Devil, when he tempted me, Get thee behind me, for thou do the
work of Satan, the adversary, in tempting me for self-preservation, to violate
my Fathers command, and my undertaking, and to forsake the work of man's
Redemption and Salvation: As thy counsel savoureth not the things that be of
God (his will, work, and Glory) but the things that be of men (the love of the
body and this present life) so it signifies what is in thy heart: (take heed
lest this carnality prevail.)

Note, 1. All things must displease us that displease God, and are against his
interest and the good of man.

2. Even the best men and nearest friends may by temptation and error, be made
Satan's instruments to do his work in some particulars of great moment.

3. Good men do the Devils work often times when they know it not, but verily
think it is all for Christ.

4. No love or respect to men's nearness or goodness, must draw us to flatter
them in sin, or to speak lightly of it; we must not mince it or extennate it
because good men commit it: we must lay it home on them, that would by
justifying it make it pass for duty. Lest the name of Good men should serve
Satan more effectually than men of known wickedness can do.

5. It is no railing on just occasions to tell tempting friends, and godly men
or Ministers, that they are doing the Devils wo^k, and are instead of Devils to
the tempted.

To hinder us in Gods work and men's Salvation, is to be Satan's to us. O how
many Satan's then are called Reverend Fathers, who silence and persecute men for
Gods work, as the whole course of the Papal Discipline, and worship manifes^^th.

7. It is carnal savouring worldly, and fleshly interest too much, and the
things of God, the Soul, and Heaven to little, which is the common cause of the
sinful counsels, and course, even of Sacred men.

24. Then said Jesus to his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. 25. For whoever will save
his life shall lose it, and whoever will lose his li^e for my sake shall find
it.

24. Christ took this occasion to preach self-denial to his Disciples; saying,
Let him that will be my Disciple and follow me, and expect Salvation by me,
resolve to deny his carnal self, and self-interest, and resign himself to me,
as being not his own, but mine: Not making the cross, but patiently taking and
bearing it when it is laid upon him, and follow me by sufferings unto glory.
For this is the method determined by God, that whoever resolves to save his
life and not be undone in the world to avoid sin, this man shall finally lose
his life and life eternal. And whoever will lose his life, rather than by sin
to forsake me and his duty, shall find that life with felicity in heaven, which
he lost on earth.

N. Christ's peremptory terms of Salvation, are to prefer it and him before our
lives.

26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul.

26. Will it not be an ill bargain to gain all the world for a short time to
the flesh, and lose ones own Soul and its happiness for ever? And what will
compensate the loss of the Soul? For what price would you sell its happiness.

N. 1. Men has a Soul that lives when he leaves this world. 2. It were a mad
bargain to sell a man's Soul for all that this world can afford. O how many do
that daily indeed, which they durst not do by an express bargain with the Devil.

27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels,
and then he shall reward every man according to his work.

27. Believe it I shall come at last in Judgment, in Divine Glory attended by
Angels, and then I will reward those that were faithful to me, or perfidious,
and all men, according to their works: therefore whatever you suffer now,
propare for the judgment of that day.

28. Verily I say to you, There be some standing here which shall not taste of
death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.

28. And I tell you, least you think this my coming in Glory to judgment
incredible, that some here shall live to see a visible representation of that
my glorious appearing.

Note, That this is meant of his transfiguration, the addition of it in the
several Evangelists shows. Nor is Dr. H. his reason against it from the
former verse of any force, it being not the same coming that is here spoken of,
but its representation.

CHAP. XVII.
1. ANd after six days Jesus takes Peter and James and John his brother, and
brings them up into an high mountain apart. 2. And was transfigured before
them, and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

1, 2. And as Christ had promised them a glimpse of his Kingly Glory, so within
six days he performed it, to Peter, James and John whom he selected for
peculiar favors: in a high mountain he was transfigured into a glorious
appearance, his face shining like the Sun, and his raiment like light.

Note, Christ would have this help of sense, to confirm their Faith. Of this
transfiguration I have written at large in a Book called, My Dying Thoughts.

3. And behold, there appeared to them Moses and Elias talking with him.

3. Note, 1. Moses whose body was buried, and Elias whose body was but changed,
appeared alike.

2. The chief Legislator and chief Prophet appeared to show that the Law and
the Prophets did but lead to Christ. 3. Did not the departed Saints live after
death, they could not appear in Glory. 4. They talked with Christ of his
sufferings at Jerusalem. 5. Either Christ told the three Disciples who they
were, or their own appearance showed it. 6. How much better company is above
than here.

4. Then answered Peter, and said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here:
if thou will let us make here three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias.

4. Note, 1. We are apt to desire more of Heaven on earth than God will allow,
(But not so apt to desire to go by death to that glory where it is:) Fain we
would have it come down to us.

2. A glimpse of glory is enough to rap a Soul into ecstasy.

3. We know not what we say, when we talk of felicity in Tabernacles on earth.
4. A glimpse of glory will make us out of love with worldly company and vanity.
How loath then would the Souls in Heaven be to come down.

5. While he yet spoke, behold a bright cloud over-shadowed them; and behold, a
voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased: hear ye him.

5. Note, 1. Heavenly inhabitants must not stay on earth; nor Heavenly visions
and raptures be here long or frequent. 2. God again owned his Son by a voice
from heaven, as perfectly Righteous, and as pleasing him by man's redemption,
and reconciling us to him, and teaching the doctrine which is pleasing to him.

6. And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their faces, and were sore
afraid.

6. Note, The voice of God even when he speaks mercy, is enough to humble and
prostrate man.

7. And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.

7. N. It is Christ that must raise our troubled and humbled Souls from our
dejectedness and fear.

8. And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man save Jesus only.

8. Note, Christ will stay with us, when Moses and Elias will not; nor are
earthly comforts durable.

9. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell
the vision to no man till the Son of man be risen again from the dead.

9. The reason is before mentioned: After the resurrection was the fittest
season.

10. And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias
must first come?

10. Why say the Jewish Doctors that Elias must come before the Messiah; if
this was he that we saw.

11. And Jesus answered and said to them, Elias truly shall first come, and
restore all things. But I say to you, that Elias is come already, and they knew
him not, but have done to him whatsoever they listed: likewise also sh^^l the
Son of man suffer of them. 13. Then (...) disciples understood that he spoke to
the (...) John the Baptist.

11. etc. It is (...) that is said out of Mal. that Elias must come, but it was
John that was meant under the name of E^ias, (...) ^^ey knew not, but killed
him while they looked for him, and so they will do by me.

14. And when they were come to the mu^^ (...), there came to him a certain
man, kn^^^^g down to him, and saying, 15. Lord have ^ercy on my son, for he is
lunatic, and sore vexed; for often times he falls into the fire, and often into
the water. 16. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.

14. N. By Lunatic is meant one that had the Epilepsie or some such disease
upon the change of the Moon. A real disease, of which yet the Devil was the
executioner, and further joined with it extraordinarily.

17. Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation; how
long shall I be with you, how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.

17. It is long of your own unbelief and perverseness that they could not cure
him: how long shall I work miracles among you before you will believe? will you
drive me from among you by your unbelief, to go to others?

N. This seems plainly spoken to the man of himself and such others, and not
as some say, to the disciples.

18. And Jesus rebuked the devil, and he departed out of him: and the child was
cured from that very hour. 19. Then came the disciples to Jesus apart and said,
Why could not we cast him out? 20. And Jesus said to them, Because of your
unbelief:

18, etc. Your unbelief as well as the man's was that which hindered you: you are
all therein to be blamed.

20. For verily I say to you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye
shall say to this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove,
and nothing shall be impossible to you.

20. For if you have the least true belief and trust in my Power and Will for
the working of any such miracle as I commission you to work, if it were as hard
as the removing of a mountain, it should not be too hard for you.

Note, It is not faith but presumption which has no promise of success, if
they or any are confident of working any miracle which Christ never
commissioned or called them to work, or Promised his blessing to.

21. Howbeit, this kind goes not out but by fasting and prayer.

21. But by faith I mean not confident presumption, that God will do it in your
own way: But for such as this, God will be sought by Fasting and fervent
Prayer, in which way you may expect success, if the person also be capable that
seeks help.

22. And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man shall
be betrayed into the hands of men. 23. And they shall kill him, and the third
day he shall be raised again: And they were exceeding sorry.

22, 23. Again Christ foretells them of his death and resurrection, to instruct
and prepare them for it: which they were grieved at.

24. And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute money,
came to Peter and said, Does not your Master pay tribute? He says, yes. And
when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What think
thou Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their
own children or of strangers? 26* Peter says to him, Of strangers: Jesus says
to him, Then are the children free.

24, 25. N. They had two sorts of Tribute, but that here meant its likest was
Pole Money, imposed by Augustus first: And by [ children] is not meant free
Subjects; for such did pay: but their own families. And then its hard to know,
what Christ's answer meant, unless it were as many say, Then this Tribute
belongs of right to the house of David, and I being of it am free. Or else, [If
Kings own Families be not taxed, I that am the Son of the universal King, from
whom is all power, and whose Subjects they are, am rightfully freer than their
Children] This seems to me to be the since. But he questioneth not but
Tribute is due to Kings and other Powers.

27. Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, Go thou to the sea, and cast
a hook, and take the fish that first comes up, and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a piece of money; take that and give to them for me and
thee.

27. But we must deny our own right to avoid offense: Go therefore and cast a
hook and I will bring a fish to thy hand with half a Crown (a Stater) in his
mouth; which is the Poll-money for t^o persons: Pay them that for thee and me.

Note, 1. This showed the great power of Christ. 2 But why did he pay for Peter
and not the rest? Ans. Peter had a house in Capernaum where they were, and was
there to pay his Poll-money, Matthew. 5.8, 14.

If it be as others think, the Tax to the Sanctuary that is here meant, it will
make no doctrinal alteration: The sense then will be, [A Tax, due to God, is
rather due to me, than from me, that am the Son of God.]

CHAP. XVIII.
1. AT the same time came the disciples to Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest
in the kingdom of heaven.

1. Ambition stirred in them, to debate who should be greatest in Christ's
Church or Kingdom, next himself.

2, 3. And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of
them, and said, Verily I say to you, Except ye be converted, and become as
little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

2, 3. Christ set a child before them as a visible answer, and said, Except
true conversion give you a new and humble mind, and take you off from ambitious
overvaluing earthly pomp and power, that as teachable and obedient Disciples to
the, you may be drawn to set more by heavenly things, you cannot be capable of
entering into the heavenly Kingdom, much less of being greatest there: nor are
you fit for a place in the Church on earth (much less of power) without
covenanting this.

4. Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

4. Tho worldly men will think otherwise, I tell you that the humblest
Christian is the best, and the best is indeed the greatest, as being dearest
unto God, and he is fittest also for Church power.

5. And whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives me.

5. And he that receives or shows kindness to any such humble Godly
Christian, I will take and reward it as done to me.

N. How do the Papal Clergy read this, that hate, revile, silence, and ruin or
burn such? But they cheat their Souls by saying, that such are but Heretics
and Schismatics, and deny them to be Christ's, and then they think they are
disobliged, and may use them as they first judge and call them.

6. But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the Sea.

6. But whoever he be that shall gall, discourage, or by threatening, derision,
or persecution seek to drive the least from faith and holy living, it were less
hurt to that man, (how big soever he now look and talk) that he were drowned in
the Sea, with a millstone about his neck: for God will take vengeance on him

7. Woe to the world because of offenses: for it must needs be that offenses
come, but woe to that man by whom the offense comes.

7. Woe to the world by reason of the Scandals, oppositions and impediments to
faith, holiness and salvation, which men will lay before each other, some by
error, some by crimes, and some by persecution: such scandals and hindrances
and temptations there will be: God will permit them for trial, and men will
commit them. But the sin is great, and it will be woe to the guilty, especially
the malignant persecutors and seducers.

8. Wherefore if thy hand or foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from
thee: It is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than
having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into fire everlasting. 9. And if thy
eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee: It is better for thee to
enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell
fire.

8, 9. Let nothing seem too dear to thee to secure thy salvation against such
scandals and hindrances and temptations: If it be friend, or interest, as dear
to thee as thy hand, or foot, or eye, it is a smaller loss to cast it away
here, and be saved hereafter than to keep it here and be damned hereafter to
endless misery. If thou had no other way to avoid sin but dismembring thy
body, it would be a duty and no loss to do it.

Note, 1. Christ had said this before, Mat. 5.30. Its no fault to say the same
thing often. 2. If it be so dangerous to be tempted by others, its worse to be
our own tempters.

10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: for I say to you,
that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven.

10. Note, O what men are they that read and preach this, and yet not only
despise them, but first ignorantly or maliciously slander them, and then by
this justify their railing, persecuting and destroying them. 2. What a comfort
is it to the least true Christian, that they have their Angels that have charge
of them, who always see Gods face in glory: And shall not we then see it?

11. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.

11. And I that came into the world to save sinners, will require it at your
hands if you wrong or persecute them, or hinder them from the way of their
salvation.

12. How think ye? if a man have a hundred sheep, and one of them be gone
astray, does he not leave the ninety and nine, and goes into the mountains,
and seeks that which is gone astray. 13. And if so be he find it, verily I
say unto you, he rejoices more of that sheep, than of the ninety and nine
which went not astray.

12, 13. Christ likeneth himself to men that have by unexpected success in
recovering the lost, a more sensible joy than for the rest, tho not a higher
esteem. And if he so much rejoice in them, how will he take it of those that
hate, persecute or tempt them.

14. Even so it is not the will of your Father who is in heaven, that one of
these little ones should perish.

14. God loves them better than you love sheep; therefore he will save them,
and judge all those that would afright or drive away from their duty, the
meanest person.

15. Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother. 16. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. 17.
And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church: but if he neglect
to hear the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen man, and a publican.

15, etc. And according to this compassionate tenderness of God, and your
Savior, must be your dealing with one another; not to favor sin in any, but
to seek by love to save the sinner: Therefore if any one that thou have
brotherly communion with, do trespass against thee, by injury, or by scandalous
crimes within thy notice, go and tell him his fault privately in brotherly love
and tenderness, yet showing him the evil of his sin that he may repent: If he
hear thee so as to repent and amend, thou have won him from the danger of his
guilt, which may be a comfort to thee: But if he defend his sin, or will not
repent and amend, cease not thy love or labor, but take with thee one or two
meet persons, that two or three witnesses may the more aw him, or credibly
convict him. And if he neglect to hear them, (having exercised due patience for
the trial, and fit means to convince him) then make it public, by telling the
Church, in whose communion he lives; either by opening it in the Congregation
that the Church-Guides may reprove him and exhort him to repent, and pray for
his repentance; or when that is not convenient, tell it the Guides of the
Church that they may make it public and do their office. And if he neglect to
hear, this public exhortation, have no more communion or familiarity with him
than with a Heathen or Publican, but so carry it that he and others may see
that thou esteemest him not as one of the Christian Society whom Christ will
own.

Note, This Text which is Christ's Law of Church Discipline, is perverted diverse
ways, by several sorts of mistakers. Some feign that it speaks not of sins
against God, but of injuries against men: and that by the Church is meant the
Civil Judicature that then was, (inferior or superior Sanhedrim.) But, 1. it
is evident that it is to Christians or Disciples that Christ gives this Law;
others received no Law from him. And it was how to deal with a Brother in order
to Repentance, and Salvation, as the foregoing verses show. 2. Christ knew that
the Sanhedrim were his deadly enemies, and foretold that they would condemn
him; And therefore never made a Law to his Disciples to use them as their
ordinary Judicature. 3. He knew that they would hate and persecute his
Disciples, and therefore never sent them to them for right. 4. He came to
ubrogate Moses Law, and overthrow their Mosaic policy: And therefore did not
establish it by this Law. 5. He could never mean that Christians must take him
for a Heathen that heard not the Jews Council, when ^he foretold them how that
Council would scourge them in their Synagogues, and cast out their names, and
say all manner of evil of them falsely.

1 Nor did Christ set up a Christian Judicature of Magistrates, having the
power of the sword instead of the Jewish. For, 1. Christ himself refused to use
such a power, on earth. 2. He forbad it his Disciples that strove for it. 3.
The Text speaks of no forcing power, but persuasive, and of no penalty but
Alienation and disowning. 4. The Apostles did never set up any such coactive
Civil Judicature, nor the Church after them for 300 years and much more: which
they would have done had Christ commanded it. 5. But they did set up such
Ecclesiastic Judicatures wherever they gathered Churches; which was their
actual visible exposition of this Law of Christ. 6. It is not restitution, or
recovery of Lands, Goods or Rights that is here mentioned as the end; but the
Winning of a brother by repentance. 7. And what is more noted by Christ as an
offense or trespass against us, than scandal, and dishonouring the Christian
name and society, and grieving good men by sinning against God. I think these
evidences prove past doubt, that it is the discipline of Christian Churches
Christ here institutes by a standing Law; for which he gave the power of the
Keys.

2. The Church is told and heard when the Rulers are told and heard, either
before the whole congregation, or that they may publish it. The whole
congregation is not to speak and be heard, nor necessarily to be told by the
offended himself. But as the city is said to Receive and to Execute any Order
from the King, when the Magistrates do their part in it, and the people theirs,
so it is with the Church.

3. But how the telling of one Lay-chancellor or Civilian, and hearing or not
hearing him, and being Excommunicate by him concerns this Law, I know not, no
nor telling or not hearing one single person that judges alone over many
hundred Churches at a distance and without their notice.

4. This discipline is of great moment, for the honor of Christ and his
Church, that it be not as impure as the Infidel world, nor a Swine-fly instead
of a Society of Saints; And that it may be known that Christ came not as
deceivers do, to get himself a number of followers as bad as other men, but to
sanctify a peculiar people to God, zealous of good works, and forsaking the
world, the flesh and the devil; and to keep Christians from the snare and the
shame of infectious and wicked Associates: and to keep sin under open disgrace.

5. Yet if Pastors neglect this holy discipline, the sin is theirs: It does not
necessitate the innocent to forsake the Church, unless their Doctrine or
Practice amount to a professed rejection of some essentials of Christianity, or
else, they force men to sin or own their sin. But they that can choose better
without more hurt than benefit, should prefer it before undisciplined Chuches.

18. Verily I say to you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

18. I tell you that my Church on earth is the Seminary or Suburbs of my Church
in heaven, and those that you as my Ministers absolve according to my word,
they being not deceitful, but true professors of faith, and repentance, they
shall be absolved in heaven; And those that you bind over as impenitent to my
judgment, being such indeed, shall be condemned and shut out of heaven: and I
will own and confirm your judgment of men by the power I give you, if you do it
according to my word.

N. God gives Pastors power to condemn and cast out none from heaven, nor to
save any, but only such as condemn and cast out themselves, or such as save
themselves by faith, more than the Church can do.

19. Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching
any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is
in heaven.

19. And I tell you that I may encourage you to concord, that if two of you
(much more if all or many) shall agree in your Prayers, Discipline or Appeal to
God, he will accept your endeavors, and they shall not be in vain, but blessed.

20. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them.

20. For as I am with every single Christian, so I will more eminently bless
with the fruits of my presence, the Assemblies of the faithful be they never so
small. N. It is in hatred to Christ's presence and name, that Satan persecuteth
such meetings.

21. Then came Peter and said to him, Lord how often shall my brother sin against
me, and I forgive him? till seven times.

21. Peter said to him, What if my brother do often sin to my injury or
scandal, and be often thus admonished; how often must I forgive him? seven times
seems much.

22. Jesus says to him, I say not to thee, till seven times, but till seventy
times seven.

22. It is not the number of times, but his true repentance that is to be here
regarded: Note, There are some sins that often committing will prove that the
Repentance is not true. He that should daily or weekly beat you, steal,
murder, fornicate, and as often say, I Repent, is not to be believed, but
forfeiteth his credit. But he that is but often angry, or defective in the
degrees of sincere duty, may be believed if he often profess repentance.

23. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven like to a certain king, which would
take account of his servants. 24. And when he had begun to reckon, one was
brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents. 25. But forasmuch as he had
not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and
all that he had, and payment to be made.

23, etc. And that you may know on what terms you must look for mercy and
forgiveness your selves, I will liken Gods government to a Kings that would
call his servants to account, and demand his due, and make his Debtors know
what he might expect of them in justice.

26. The servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have
patience with me and I will pay thee all.

26. The servant unable to pay, appealed from justice, and begged mercy,
promising to pay when he should be able.

27. Then the Lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him,
and forgave him the debt.

27. As he appealed to mercy, he found mercy, and his Lord forgave him and set
him free.

28. But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellow servants, who
owed him an hundred pence, and he laid hands on him, and took him by the
throat, saying, Pay me that thou owe: 29. And his fellow servant fell down at
his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me and I will pay thee
all. 30. And he would not, but went and cast him into prison, till he should
pay the debt.

28, etc. He that had received so much mercy, used his fellow servant with
unmerciful rigor, exacting all his due.

31. So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and
came and told to their Lord all that was done. 32. Then his Lord after he had
called him, said to him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt
because thou desiredst me. 33. Should not thou also have had compassion on
thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee.

31, etc. I forgave thee a great debt, and should not thou forgive a little
one? If mercy was so necessary to thee, why did not thou show mercy to thy
fellow servant as I did to thee.

34. And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due to him. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do
also to you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.

34, 35. Note, Here its doubted, 1. How God ^s said to forgive unmerciful men,
2. And to demand (...) which he had forgiven, and to unpardon it again. Answ.
God has diverse degrees of forgiveness, 1. To give the world a pardon of all
sin, on condition of thankful acceptance, is a great degree of forgiveness, tho
it be no actual discharge till accepted. 2. To suspend the execution of
punishment (with such an offer) and to give him time, ease and mercy, who
deserved to be all that time in hell, is a degree of actual forgiveness* for to
forgive the sin is to forgive the punishment; and bad men have much punishment
here forgiven them, which they deserved. And both these may be reversed by men's
unbelief and sin.

3. Whether the sins of Infants pardoned in Baptism, may return in guilt by
covenant breaking; or any other that have not confirming grace, but such as
Adam and the Angels had and lost is a controversy that is yet undecided among
Christians.

4. But were perseverance never so sure eventually, yet in the tenor of the
Covenant, Pardon and Salvation are given on condition; And God may well say, If
you perform not the condition, you shall yet perish. That by this warning they
may be moved to perform it. And should pardoned sin be unpardoned again, it
would be no change in God, nor in his word, but in man. He that says, The
faithful shall be accepted, and the unfaithful perish, changes not if any
should perish by unbelief, God and his word are still the same. And forgiving
others is part of the condition of our continued forgiveness.

CHAP. XIX.
1. ANd it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he
departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan.

2. And great multitudes followed him there. 3. The Pharisees also came to him,
tempting him, and saying, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife, for
every cause.

1, etc. When Christ had thus long preached in his own country where he dwelt,
far off from Jerusalem, he drew nearer it into Judea, and there also multitudes
flocked after him; and the Pharisees attempted by questions to ensnare him, etc.

4. And he answered and said to them, Have ye not read, that he which made them
at the beginning, made them male and female. 5. And said, For this cause shall
a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they two shall
be one flesh. 7. Wherefore they are no more two, but one flesh. What therefore
God has joined together let no man put asunder.

4. etc. Look to the original and you shall find that God made them one Male
and one Female, and by the Law of Conjugality, united them for procreation and
converse as into One; the Relative Union being likened to a natural union of
the parts of one body: and that so nearly, that on this account Father and
Mother were to be left to a closer union with a wife. Therefore do not you
separate that which God has so nearly united.

7. They say to him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away.

7. They thought to take advantage by this against him, as contradicting Moses
Law, and said, etc.

8. He says to them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you
to put away your wives, but from the beginning it was not so.

8. You mistake a permission for a command: your Fathers were an ignorant dull
unruly sort of people, and Moses was put to make but such Laws as they could
bear: Therefore he permitted putting away, but only commanded that they should
not do it without a bill of Divorcement.

9. And I say to you, whoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery, and whosoever marries
her that is put away does commit adultery.

9. Note, 1. The Fornication must be proved and not only suspected. 2. It must
be Fornication since Marriage. 3. A man is not commanded for this to put her
away, and not forgive it, if there be reason for it, but only permitted. 4. In
Commonwealths the Magistrate must be judge, for public safety, 5. The woman
is not so fitly said to put away her husband; but by the Magistrate may have
the same remedy of a Divorce when she does desire it.

10. His disciples say to him, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it
is not good to marry.

10. Then the danger and misery of unsuitable marriage is so great, that it is
better never marry.

11. But he said to them, All men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom
it is given.

11. He said, Men must not avoid a lesser evil by a greater: some men's
temperament, and some men's condition in the world, make Marriage necessary to
them. All have not the gift of chastity.

12. For there are some Eunuchs which were so born from their mothers womb; and
there are some Eunuchs which were made Eunuchs of men: And there be Eunuchs
which have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake: He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it.

12. There are some unapt for congress with Women, who were born so: And some
are made so by men, by castration: And some have made themselves such, that
they might the better avoid all venereous temptations. He that is able to live
in a continent single life, without greater hurt, let him do it; but all cannot.

13. Then there were brought to him little children, that he should put his
hands on them and pray, and the disciples rebuked them. 14. But Jesus said,
suffer little children and forbid them not to come to me; for of such is the
kingdom of heaven.

13, 14. Some brought their children to him that he would lay his hands on them
and bless them according to their infant capacity: and the Disciples chid them
away, thinking such company below him: But Jesus said, Hinder them not, and
forbid not little children to come or be brought to me: For I tell you, that it
is not the self-conceitedly wise, but those that are as ready to learn and be
ruled as such children are, that yet set not their wit and will against
instruction, but are as it were beginning the world, that will make up the
Christian Church.

15. And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.

15. Qu. But why did he not Baptize them? Answ. He Baptized few of the Aged yet
that believed, and that Baptism which he used was but little differing from
John's, till after his Resurrection the Christian Baptism was not fully
instituted, as the entrance into his Gospel Church.

16. And behold, one came and said to him, Good Master, what good thing shall I
do that I may have eternal life?

16. Note, 1. It was then taken for granted, except by the Sadducees, that an
eternal life of happiness was to be attained. 2. And that well-doing on Man's
part, was the way to attain it.

17. And he says to him, Why call thou me good? There is none good but one
that is God: but if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

17. Thou know not how great a word thou speak of me, when thou call
me Good: Goodness is Gods name and Attribute: There is none Essentially,
Abs^lutely and most perfectly Good but God. But if thou will enter into life,
keep Gods commandments.

18. He says to him, which? Jesus said, Thou shall do no murder, Thou shall
not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness,
19. Honor thy father and thy mother, and, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self.

18, 19. Note, Christ knew the Order of the commandments; but named the Fifth
and the Tenth by themselves, as being of special note; the Fifth for Government
it self, and the Ninth, the summary of the Second Table. For, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self, If, is that which is meant by, Thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors, etc. that is, not by self-love want love to him, and draw from
him to thy self, or oppose his good.

20. The young man says, All these have I kept from my youth up: what lack I
yet.

20. Note, No doubt but he had broken these commands, especially the last: but
he judged by his freedom from the gross acts of sin.

21. Jesus said to him, If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have,
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven: and come and
follow me.

21. Jesus said, the state of Christianity, or Qualification for Salvation, is
this, Resolvedly and Practically, to prefer Heaven, before all the Prosperity
of this World, so as to part with All, for Heaven, when thou art Called to it:
Therefore I will now try thee, whether thou can do this. Go sell all and give
to the poor, and follow me, and take the hopes of a Treasure in Heaven, instead
of all.

22. But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful, for he
had great Possessions.

22. But this seemed so hard a Motion to him, that he would not consent, but
went away sorrowful; for he was very rich.

23. Then said Jesus to his Disciples, Verily I say to you, That a rich man
shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. 24 And again, I ^ay to you, It
is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of God.

23.24. The difficulty of a Rich Man's being a sound Christian and Saved is
great, that I may express it by the common Proverb, of a Camels going through a
Needles Eye.

25. When his Disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who
then can be saved? 26. But Jesus beheld them, and said to them, With men this
is impossible, but with God, all things are possible.

25.26. This amazing the Disciples, he said, So naturally and strongly do men
love this World, and its Prosperity, and so hardly do they believe, and love
the unseen Heavenly Felicity, that it is impossible for mere fleshly Man, to
make so great a change upon the heart; But the Grace of Almighty God, can, and
will do it.

27. Then answered Peter, and said to him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and
followed thee, What shall we have therefore.

27. Peter said, We have consented to thy terms, and forsaken All, and
followed thee: What shall be our reward?

28. And Jesus said to them, Verily I say to you, that ye which have followed
me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the Throne of his
glory, ye also shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel.

28. Fear not being loosers by forsaking all: You that have sincerely forsaken
All for me, shall in my Kingdom and future State, have ruling Power, Dignity,
and Honor.

Note, It is doubted by Expositors, Whether this speak only of their chief
Power on Earth in the Catholic Church, and answerable Glory in Heaven: Or of
any peculiar reign over the Tribes of Israel, in Heaven, or on Earth, after the
resurrection. The General sense is sure, tho what more there is be doubtful.

29. And every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my namesake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

29. And it is not you only, but all others that lose and forsake any thing
here, for my Namesake in the hope of the Kingdom of Heaven, shall be so great
gainers by it, that they shall have in this Life a hundredfold better in value
than they lost, and in the World to come Everlasting Life. The worse condition
of the Faithful, is an hundred times better than others.

30. But many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first.

30. But as to the degree of Glory, I must tell you, it will not be given
according to priority of Age, or Conversion, but according to the preparations
of Grace. And many that are now called, and have less Holiness will have less
Glory, than many that will be more Eminent Saints many Ages hence.

CHAP. XX.
1. FOR the Kingdom of heaven is like to a man that is an householder, which
went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his Vineyard.

2. And when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them
into his vineyard.

1.2. Note, The Parable is to show, That God will not give men more Glory than
others, because they were the first Christians; but, because his Grace has
made them the best: tho in time after others.

3. And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the
marketplace. 4. And said unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and what
ever is right I will give you. And they went their way. 5. Again, he went out
about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. 6. And about the Eleventh
hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and says to them. Why stand
ye here all the day idle? 7. They say to him, Because no man has hired us. He
says to them, Go ye also into the Vineyard, and what ever is right, that shall
ye receive.

3. etc. The hours were about Nine a Clock, and at Twelve, and at Three, and at
Five. God is not for idleness; but has work for all times and Ages.

8. So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard says to his Steward, Call
the laborers and give them their hire; beginning from the last unto the first.

8. Note Gods Reward is in the evening of our days, and the evening of the
World; when Work is done.

9. And when they came that were hired at the Eleventh hour, they received
every man a penny. 10. And when the first came, they supposed that they should
have received more, and they likewise received every man a penny. 11. And when
they had received it, they murmured against the good man of the house. 12.
Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal
with us, who have born the burder and heat of the day.

9.10.11.12. He made no difference in their Wages for the Time of their Work:
But he will make difference for the Work it self: They that are called, near
the end of the World, shall have as much, as those that heard Christ Preach:
And those that are Converted in their Age, if they be more Holy, than those
that began in Youth, will be more Happy. 2. This Parable means not, that our
Reward is Wages for the value of our Work as beneficial to God, in Commutative
Justice; but only speaks of the proportion. 3. Nor does it imply, That any in
Heaven will murmur at other men's Salvation, but that the Jewish Disciples were
yet inclined to grudge, that the Gentiles were equalled with them. And it is to
cure such envy now.

13.14. But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong;
did thou not agree with me for a penny. Take that thine is and go thy way: I
will give to this last, even as unto thee: 15. Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with my own? Is thine eye evil because I am good?

13.14.15. I break no Covenant with thee: Thou art not meet to give me Laws of
Equity: Liberality to another, is no wrong to thee. Am I not the rightful
disposer of my own? Must I give none more than the Value of their Work
deserves? All shall have Equity, but all shall not have equal bounty. Thou
should be glad of thy Brothers receivings.

16. So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many are called, but
few chosen.

16. So the last called in time, may be made the Chief in Dignity; and the
first called in time, may be in Grace and Glory among the lowest. Yea, of many
that come into the Church at the first calling (as the Jewish Disciples) few
may prove sincere and Saved.

17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the Twelve Disciples apart in the
way, and said to them. 18. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man
shall be betrayed to the Chief Priests, and to the Scribes, and they shall
Condemn him to Death: 19. And shall deliver him to the Gentiles, to mock, and
to scourge, and to Crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again.

17.18.19. He foretold them that at Jerusalem he should Suffer, be Crucified,
and Rise again, etc.

Note, This frequent Prediction was a full proof of Christ's truth, and
voluntary Suffering.

20. Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children, with her Sons,
worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him. 21. And he said to her,
What will thou? She says to him, Grant, that these my two sons may sit the one
on thy right hand, and the other on thy left, in thy Kingdom.

20.21. N. Ambition is even in Christ's Disciples, till special Grace humble
them; seeking Preferment and Honor in the Church, is a Vice that Christ gives
us this warning to avoid. Carnality is apt to corrupt the Minds even of Eminent
Ministers, and Disciples.

22. But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask; are ye able to drink
of the Cup that I drink of, and to be baptized with ^he baptism that I am
baptized with? They ^a^ to him. We are able.

22. You think to find Worldly Honor and Dignity in my Kingdom, But you are
mistaken; It is Suffering for me, that you must expect: Can you drink of this
bitter Cup, as I must do, and be Baptized in Blood, as I must be? And they
over-confidently answered, We are able: Not knowing their trial, or their
weakness.

23. And he says to them, Ye shall drink indeed of my Cup, and be Baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with: But to sit on my right hand, and on
my left is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father.

23. Ye shall indeed suffer more than now ye think of ( James was quickly
Martyred:) But to be next me in my Kingdom, is not to be given by me upon such
Petitioning, but only to those to whom my Father has prepared it; and who
shall be fittest for it?

24. And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against the
two brethren.

24. Note, 1. As some are prone to Ambition, so others to envy them, and be too
much offended. 2. This ambitious part of Christ's Ministers here, began
Discontent that tended to Schism, had not Christ soon rebuked it. 3. Christ's
own Twelve Apostles had their mutual Distasts.

25. But Jesus called them to him and said, Ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
Authority over them. 26. But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will
be Great among you, let him be your Minister. 27. And whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your Servant.

25.26.27. Christ rebukes these Ambitious desires of Superiority among them,
and says, The Civil Government by the Sword, which the Gentiles exercise, is
as Lords by force and fear, and the Great in strength command the rest to do
their wills. But in my Church as such, among you my Disciples it shall not be
so: But (tho you must be subject to the coercive Government of Magistrates,
yet) your own proper Government and pre-eminence shall be, by serviceable
Humility and Love, over Volunteers: Church-greatness shall consist, in being
most greatly serviceable to the conversion and Edification of Souls* and in
most humble condescension to that end: And he shall be accounted the Chief
Pastor and Christian, who is most humbly serviceable to all. And the Proud, and
Domineering, and Unserviceable, shall be the lowest or basest.

28. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister; and
to give his life a ransom for many.

28. As I my self came not to live in State, with great Attendance of Servants,
but to serve Men for their good; not to receive by their service to me, but to
save them by my Service for them, and giving my very Life a Ransom for many.

29. And as they departed from Jerico, a great multitude followed him: 30. And
behold, two blind men sitting by the way-side. 31. When they heard that Jesus
passed by Cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David.

29.30.31. The Blind hearing by fame, that he Healed all, cried to him for
Mercy, believing that he could heal them.

32. And Jesus stood still and called them and said, What will ye, that I shall
do t^ you?

32. Note, Believers may have what they will of Christ which is meet for them,
and they for it.

33.34. They say to him, Lord that ou^ eyes may be opened. So Jesus had
compassion on them, and touched their eyes, and immediately their eyes received
sight, and they followed him.

33.34. Note, 1. Bodily Calamities are easily felt, and Bodily Welfare is
easily desired. 2. And tho Christ most value those who prefer Spiritual
Mercies, yet he has compassion also on men's Bodies, as serviceable to their
Souls, and to his Glory.

CHAP. XXI.
1. AND when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and were to come to Bethphage to the
mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two Disciples. 2. Saying to them, Go into the
Village over against you, and straitway ye shall find an Ass tied, and a Colt
with her, loose them and bring them to me. 3. And if any man say ought to you,
ye shall say, The Lord has need of them, and straitway he will send them. 4.
All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
saying, 5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes to thee meek,
sitting on an ass and a colt the foal of an ass.

1. etc. Note, Christ's way of Travail was as poor men's, on Foot: And it was
the rich sort of persons that road on Asses, (they being there bigger than
ours,) and only Men of great State or War that rode on Horses. And Christ
knowing that the People would at his Entrance into Jerusalem, applaud him with
Hosanna, as the Messiah and King of the Jews, resolved to own their Testimony
so far, as to ride in, in some State. 2. Tho both the Ass and Colt be loosed,
and brought; it was the Colt only that Christ rode on.

6. And the Disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them. 7. And brought the
ass and the colt, and put on them their clothes and they set him thereon, 8.
And a very great multitude spread their Garments in the way, others cut down
branches from the trees and strewed them in the way. 9. And he multitude that
went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David,
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest.

6.7.8.9. N. This was the common peoples Pro^laiming him King, and the Messiah;
spreading Garments and Boughs, being their Solemnization and Mosanna their
Acclamation; (a Word which signifies [ Save now] and was used with that sort
of Pomp. [ Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord?] signified,
Blessed be the Messiah and King, whom we have long looked for, and God has now
sent.] To which in Luke is added, [ Peace in Heaven, and Glory in the Highest:]
That is, Let the Heavenly Prosperity and Glory come down upon this Kingdom, and
his Kingdom tend to Heavenly Peace or Prosperity, and Glory to God, and Man
with God.

10. And when he was come into Jerusalem all the City was moved, saying, Who is
this? 11. And the multitude said, This is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth of
Galilee.

10.11. The Citizens all came to see who it was that came in so applauded: And
the people that accompanied him in, told them, It is Jesus the famous Prophet
whose Miracles you have heard of.

12. And Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and
bought in the Temple, and overthrew the Tables of the Money changers, and the
seats of them that sold Doves. 13. And said to them, It is written, My house
shall be called a house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of Thieves.

12.13. In this State he went on to the Temple, and as one in Power, he cast
out them that had turned the Temple into a Marketplace, to furnish men with
Sacrifices, and over-threw the Tables of them that like Goldsmiths, or Bankers
Exchanged Money for advantage; Alleging, Isa. 56.7. My House etc. Ye have made
a Marketplace of it, where the Covetous Defraud Men for gain.

14. And the blind and the lame came to him in the Temple, and he healed them.

14 He wrought out his Miracles openly in the Temple, as he had done in the
Country.

15. And when the Chief Priests and Scribes saw the wonderful things that he
did and the children crying in the Temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of
David, they were sore displeased, 16. And said to him, Hear thou what these
say?

15.16. The Rulers that knew they were under the Roman Power, and saw that
Jesus was not like to deliver them from it, were greatly displeased when they
heard the inferior Multitude, and Youths crying him up as the King, Messiah,
and said, Hear thou what these say of thee; will thou suffer them to raise a
Sedition for thee, and expose us all to the Romans Wrath.

16. And Jesus says to them, yea; Have ye never read, Out of the mouths of
babes and sucklings have thou perfected praise.

16. Yea, As it is Written, Psalm. 8.2. etc. N. The Septuagint which Matthew
uses, differs from the Hebrew: but not in sense.

17. And he left them and went out of the city unto Bethany, and he lodged
there. 18. Now in the morning as he turned into the City he hungered, 19. And
when he saw a figtree in the way he came to it, and found nothing thereon but
leaves only, and said to it, Let no more fruit grow on thee henceforward, for
ever: And presently the figtree withered away. 20. And when the Disciples saw
it, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the Figtree withered away.

17.18.19.20. N. It began then to die: but it was the next day that the
Disciples saw it, and wondered.

21. Jesus answered, and said to them, Verily I say to you, If ye have faith
and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the figtree; but
also if ye shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into
the Sea, it shall be done. 22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in
prayer, believing ye shall receive.

21.22. Nothing shall be too hard which God has promised, and ye by Faith and
Prayer are fit to receive.

23. And when he was come into the Temple, the chief Priests and the Elders of
the People came to him, as he was teaching, and said, By what authority do
thou these things, and who gave thee this authority?

23. The Chief Priests and Elders Examined him, to show his authority.

24.25. And Jesus said to them, I also will ask you one thing, which if you
tell me, I^ likewise will tell you, by what authority I do these things? The
baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? And they reasoned with
themselves, saying, If we shall say from heaven, he will say to us, Why did ye
not then believe him? 26. But if we shall say of men, We fear the People; for
all hold John as a Prophet.

24.25.26. They perceived the advantage Christ would have by their Answer;
Either John's Testimony, or the power of the Multitude, who reverenced Prophets
sent from God, and would have stoned them, Luke 20.6.

27. And they answered Jesus and said, We cannot tell. And Jesus said to them,
Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.

27. If you will not answer my Question, neither will I answer yours.

28. But what think you? A certain man had two Sons, and he came to the first
and said Son, go and work to day in my Vineyard. 29. He answered and said, I
will not, but afterward he repented and went. 30. And he came to the second,
and said likewise: and he answered and said, I go Sir, and went not: 31.
Whether of them two did the will of his father?

28. etc. That you may see, that your highest profession of Holiness and
Knowledge, while you disobey God, does leave you worse than the Publicans, and
vulgar whom you villifie: I will tell you a Parable, etc.

32. They say to him, The first: Jesus says to them, Verily I say to you, that
the Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you. 32. For John
came to you in the way of Righteousness, and ye believed him not; But the
Publicans and the Harlots believed him: And ye, when ye had seen it repented
not afterward that ye might believe him.

32. These despised Sinners Believed John, and repented; which you with all
your Knowledge did not, nor yet do; and so are further from the Kingdom of God,
than they; having no obedient religion, but Words and Ceremonies.

33. Hear another Parable: There was a certain householder who planted a
Vineyard and hedged it round about, and dug a wine press in it, and built a
town, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country.

33. Note, God did what was necessary to have made the Jews a happy Church* as
to means prepared: By digging a Wine Press, is meant, hollowing a Trough to
bruise the Grapes in, and building a Tower, is a Lodge, or Dwelling for the
Workmen.

34. And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the
husbandmen that they might receive the fruits of it.

34. God required the Fruit of all his Teachings, and Mercies to the Jews.

35. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another,
and stoned another. 36. And he sent other servants more then the first, and
they did to them likewise.

35.36. They Persecuted and Murdered the Prophets, Age after Age, and yet
seemed to honor Prophets.

37. But last of all he sent unto them his Son, saying, They will reverence my
Son.

37. N. This does not mean, that God thought so, and was Mistaken; But speaking
after the manner of Men, tells them, what he might requite in reason of them.

38. But when the husbandmen saw the Son, they said among themselves, This is
the Heir, Come let us kill him, and let us seize on the inheritance. 39. And,
they caught him and cast him out of the Vineyard, and slew him.

38.39. Note, This means not, that the Jews reckon him to be the Son of God,
but might and should have known it.

40. When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard comes. what will he do to those
husbandmen. 41. They say to him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men,
and will let out his Vineyard to other Husbandmen, who shall render him the
fruits in their season.

40.41. Thus God will destroy the Murderous Jews, and call the Gentiles.

N. Luke recites these words as Christ's, and that the Pharisees said, God
forbid. It Is like they consented to it, till they heard it applied to
themselves; and then said, God forbid.

42. Jesus says to them, Did you never read in the Scriptures, The stone which
the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the Corner. This is the
Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

42. Note, Tho this was spoken Psalm. 118. immediately of David, it ultimately
meant Christ, who should be the Foundation and Head of the Church, when the
Jews had Crucified him.

43. Therefore I say to you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation, bringing forth the fruits thereof.

43. I tell you this doleful Truth, you that boasted of your peculiarity and
hopes of the Kingdom of the Messiah, shall be deprived of it for your Sin, and
it shall be given to the Gentiles who will better entertain it, and obey it,
and be thankful for it.

44. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken, But on whosoever
it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder.

44. Bare Unbelief of such as stumble at the Cross, or turn away from Christ,
through offense and Temptation, will undo all that continue in it: But those
that prove Malignant Enemies, and fight against Christ, he will be as a Stone,
too heavy for him that takes it up to cast away, which will fall upon them, to
their greater Destruction.

45.46. And when the chief Priests and Pharisees had heard his Parable, they
perceived he spoke of them. But when they sought to lay hands on him, they
feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet.

45.46. N. 1. Personal close reproofs, and denunciation of Gods Judgments
enrageth hardened Sinners* 2. The Jews that applauded Christ, thought it no
Sedition to defend a Prophet against their High Priest and Rulers, who for fear
of them, durst not openly take Christ.

CHAP. XXII.
1. ANd Jesus answered and spoke again to them by Parables, and said, 2. The
Kingdom of heaven is like to a certain king, who made a marriage for his son.
3. And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding,
and they would not come.

1, 2, 3. The calling of men into the Church, is like a Kings inviting Guests
to his Sons Marriage feast, that would not come.

4. Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them who were bidden,
Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready; Come unto the marriage.

4. Christ's Ministers are often to invite men, and importune them to come in: and
to tell them that Christ and his merits are sufficient for them, and all is
ready and done on his part, preparatory to their belief, reception and consent:
they shall not perish for want of a sufficient Sacrifice.

5. But they made light of it, and went their way; one to his farm, and another
to his merchandise. 6. And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them
shamefully and slew them.

5, 6. Note, As did the Jews so do many others. make light of Christ, and all
his offers of Grace and Glory, and mind more their Farms and Merchandise, their
worldly interest and prosperity. And others more wicked than they, do persecute
those that would convert and save them. O odious unthankfulness! thus to
requite the greatest offers of Christ and his servants.

7. But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth, and sent forth his armies
and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their city.

7. Note, So did God send the Romans to destroy the Jews and burn Jerusalem;
and has often plagued persecutors, and the day of revenge will come.

8. Then said he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were
bidden were not worthy. 9. Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as
ye shall find bid to the marriage.

8, 9. All was ready on Christ's part, but the Jews unworthily rejected him. Go
call all the Gentiles that will come.

10. So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all,
as many as they found, both bad and good, and the wedding was furnished with
guests.

10. So the Gospel was preached to the Gentiles of all sorts, and high and low
came in to the Church.

11. And when the king came in to see his guests, he saw there a man which had
not on a wedding garment. 12. And he says to him, Friend, how came thou in
hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.

11, 12, N. Among the Jews the Marriages of rich men were solemnized with
extraordinary pomp and feasting, and by the Wedding or festival garment, is
meant, true Faith and Repentance. N. 1. Though all must be called in to the
Church, it is meant that they come as Christians indeed, with true Faith and
Repentance, and dishonor not the Church by worldly common hearts and lives. 2.
God will find out every Hypocrite in the Church. 3. None will be more
unexcusable and speechless in judgment, than ungodly hypocrites called
Christians, that live wickedly. 4. It is not the Minister that called such, nor
the company that joined with them, that are blamed.

13. Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and cast him into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

13. Note As it is a double sin to be ungodly after Baptism, and in the Church,
dishonouring the Christian name, so such shall have greater punishment than
ignorant infidels.

14 For many are called but few are chosen.

14. For those that are Baptized and called Christians are many, but those that
have true faith and repentance and godliness, and shall be saved, are few.

15. Then went the Pharisees and took counsel, how they might entangle him in
his talk.

15. The malicious Pharisees consulted how to get some words from him, for
which they might accuse him.

16. And they sent unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master
we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth, neither
carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the person of men. 17. Tell us
therefore what think thou, Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not.

16, 17. There were then two parties among the Jews: The King Herod's party who
were for giving Tribute to the Romans, and the Pharisees party that were
against the right of it. And they sought to ensnare Christ, saying, It is the
part of a Prophet not to fear man how great soever, but plainly to speak the
truth; and we know thou art such an one: Therefore tell us, etc.

Note, That the Jews fell under the Roman Power, by division, two brethren
striving for the principality. And one of them got the better by the Romans
help, consenting to be tributary under them: And his party (which ruled) were
for this Tribute. But the party of the other Brother who was overcome, took
them but for Usurpers, and such were the lower sort, and many Pharisees. So
that they thought to draw Christ either to fall under the Roman severity, or to
lose the Populacy, by his answer. (A way of ensnaring not yet ended.)

18. But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me ye
hypocrites* 19. Show me the tribute money? and they brought him a penny. 20. And
he says to them, Whose is this image and superscription? 21. They say to him,
Cesars: Then says he to them, Render therefore to Caesar the things that are
Cesars, and to God the things that are Gods.

18, etc. He knowing their wicked ensnaring design, said; ye hypocrites, Why
come you to ensnare me on pretense of being resolved by me --

Note, That they are three distinct questions. 1. Whether it be lawful to pay
tribute to Caesar, as being an owning of his power? 2. Whether it be a duty,
and, 3. Whether Caesar had true right to demand it? And Christ was desired to
answer the first: And he had taught his Disciples how lawful it was for peace
to give away their right: much more now does he intimate this to be lawful for
public peace and safety. 2. And the second question is by intimation resolved
in the first; For if it be lawful, public peace will make it a duty. But he
answers so cautelously as not to resolve the third question, Whether Caesar
had right, or were an Usurper, and so avoided their snare. Some think that
Hircanus dedition to the Romans gave them right, and others think he
represented not the Nation. And some think that many years possession gave him
right, and others say that mere possession without right grows not to right
by time. And some think that the Jews so long using Cesars Coin and Officers,
signified consent, and gave him right. And others say, That this alone
signified but Submission or Non-resistance, through disability and not
subjection or consent to Government. If Caesar were an Usurper, paying tribute
owned not his right, any more than contribution to conquering Soldiers; A man
may buy his life or peace of a Robber. But Christ seems to answer but to the
question asked him, and not to meddle with any more.

Obj. The Tax intended in the question, was that which Caesar alienated from the
Temple, and therefore the meaning was (Is it not Sacrilege to pay that to
Caesar that should be paid to God.) Ans. And Christ's answer is perfectly suited
to such a question: as if he had said, (without determining Cesars right to
govern them.) You need not ask whether you shall pay it to God or to Caesar: You
may do both if you are able: Pay Caesar that which is Cesars, and give God
nevertheless his due.

22. When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went
their way.

22. When they saw they could not ensnare him, they went away confounded and
disappointed

23. The same day came to him the Sadducees, which say there is no
resurrection, and asked him, 24. Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die,
having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed to his
brother. 25. Now there were with us seven brethren, and the first when he had
married a wife, deceased, and having no issue, left his wife unto his brother.
26. Likewise the second also, and the third, to the seventh, 27. And last of
all the woman died also. 28. Therefore in the resurrection, whose wife shall
she be?

23, etc. These Sadducees were Heretics that believed no life after this, nor
Angels nor Spirits, and yet professed to believe the five Books of Moses, and
so pretended Moses words to countenance their foolish error.

29. Jesus answered and said to them, Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures,
nor the power of God. 30. For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are
given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in heaven.

29, 30. You err through the ignorance of your gross and carnal minds, and
carnally misunderstand the Scriptures, and the nature and power of God, and so
of Spiritual things. In the life after this they have not flesh and blood that
lusts and generateth as here; but they are Spiritual substances like the
Angels in Heaven that generate not.

31. But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which
was spoken to you by God, saying, 32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob: God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

31, 32. That there is a life after this, is proved by Gods words: I am the
God, etc. That God is their God, implies that they are his people, and
therefore live: For to be Their God, is to be their Ruler and their Benefactor
and felicity; a relation which the dead are not capable of. And it is not said,
I was their God, but, I am their God. And if Abraham, etc. be alive, so are the
souls of other men; and as they die not with the body, but live with Spirits,
So they are capable of a Spiritual body which God will give them.

Note, It is well noted by Dr. Hammond, that as the Sadducees denied not only
the rising of the body, but the Immortality of the Soul, and all our life after
this, so it was this future life which they here meant, and Christ does prove
out of the books which they received: And that (...) signifies not only the
Resurrection of the Body, but our living after this life, when the body is
dead. And if the Soul were not Immortal there could be no resurrection of the
same man: Another Soul would be another man imbodied: And God does not make new
Souls to be rewarded or punished for that which they never did.

33. And when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his doctrine.

34. But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence,
they were gathered together. 35. Then one of them which was a lawyer, asked him
a question, tempting him, and saying, 36. Master, which is the great
commandment in the law.

33, etc. To try whether they could pose him, or ensnare him in his answer, one
asked this question,

37, 38, 39. Jesus said to him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and
great commandment. And the second is like to it, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self.

37, etc. Note, 1. Heart, Soul and mind, seem to mean but wholly with all thy
power, Tho we may distinguish them, as meaning the faculties Vital, Sensitive
and Intellectual must be devoted to God: Or as some say, The Will, Affections
and Understanding. 2. Christ tells us of a great difference between Gods
commands: These two are Great above the res^

40. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

40. These two are the very sum and end of all that is said in the Law and by
the Prophets. Love comprehends all.

41. While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them. 42. Saying,
What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They say to him, The Son of David.
43. He says to them, How then does David in spirit call him Lord, saying, 44.
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, t^ll I make thine enemies
thy footstool, 45. If David then call him Lord, how is he his Son? 46. And no
man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth
ask him any more questions.

41, etc. Note, They knew not that Christ must be the Son of God. They ceased
their tempting questions when they found themselves but silenced.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. THen spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his dissciples, 2. Saying, The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat. 3. And therefore whatever they bid you
observe, that observe and do; but do not after their works: for they say and do
not.

1, 2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees when they read and expound Moses Law, do a
work appointed of God; therefore (though you must beware of the leaven of their
corrupt exposition, yet) hear the Law which they read, and do all which they
command you out of the Law: But imitate not their sinful practice; for they
live not according to Moses Law which they deliver.

4. For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's
shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.

4. It is easy to preach strictly, but not to live so: They preach the rigor
of the Law, but keep it not.

5. But all their works they do to be seen of men; they make broad their
Phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments. 6. And love the
uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues. 7. And
greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.

5, 6, 7. They place their Religion in outward ceremonies and actions of the
body, which man can see: They write out the Law in Rolls, and wear them like a
chain; and make broad the borders of their garments, as Numb. 15.38. Deuteronomy.
22.12. And affect pre-eminence, great names and applause.

8. But be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye
are brethren.

8. Do not you affect these titles of Reverence, such as Doctor, or any that
gives too much to man.

9. And call no man your father upon the earth: for one is your Father which is
in heaven.

9. And call none in excess of Reverence, the Father of your Religion: for God
only is such a Father.

10. Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ.

10. And affect not the title of Masters in Religion; for you are all Scholars
to our Master Christ.

11, 12. But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant: and whoever
shall exalt himself shall be abased, and he that shall humble himself shall be
exalted.

11, 12. Church greatness and dignity consists in being most greatly
serviceable: But if you affect domination and preferment, you shall be abased:
and he that humbles himself shall be accounted the chief by God, and used
accordingly.

13. But woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut up the
kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in your selves, not suffer
them that are entering to go in.

13. You keep men from believing that they might be saved; pretending to be
Masters and teachers of the Law, you pervert it, and harden your selves in
unbelief, and are against others preaching the Gospel and believing it.

14. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye devour widows houses,
and for a pretense make long prayers, therefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation.

14. You are unmerciful, covetous, and oppressors, and think your Long Prayers
will salve all with God, and men and conscience.

Qu. Were they extemporary Prayers, or long Liturgies and forms? Answ. If the
former, the Pharisees had more of the gift of utterance than Christ's Disciples
then. But no doubt but they were long Liturgies or Forms; for else they were
not suitable to the times or the character of the Pharisees, who were
Church-rulers, and all for tradition, and ceremony and outside: And yet Christ
blames not the Forms, or the length, but their hypocrisy, and oppressing
cruelty. Only good is fit to cover evil.

15. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye compass sea and land
to make one proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child
of hell than your selves.

15. Ye are very diligent to convert men to your Religion, and make them more
guilty and more fierce against Christians than your selves.

16. Woe to you ye blind guides, who say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple,
it is nothing: but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a
debtor.

16. By a foolish distinction you feign a man not bound to keep his oath, nor
guilty if he bre^k it, who swears by the Temple, and yet say he is b^und that
swears by the gold of the Temple, as more holy.

17. Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold or the temple that
sanctifies the gold.

17. Is not the Temple consecrated to God before its Gold, which is but an
accident to the Temple.

18. And whoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever shall
swear by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty. 19. Ye fools and blind: for
whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift?

18, 19. Is not the Altar consecrated before the Gift, on which the gift must
be offered if consecrated.

Qu. Does not Christ here cross his own Law, by calling them Fools and Blind?
Answ. No: It is railing and reproach by venting hurtful passion which he
forbids. But for a Friend or a Preacher to convince men of the folly of
sinning, and reprove it, is a duty.

20, 21, 22. Whosoever therefore swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all
things thereon. And whosoever shall swear by the temple, swears by it, and by him
that dwells therein. And whosoever shall swear by heaven, swears by the throne
of God, and by him that sits thereon.

20, etc. The Altar is to be taken as relating to the Offering, and the Temple
and Heaven as relating to God, in the sense of the Oath.

23. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye pay tithes of mint,
and anise, and cummin, and have omitted the weighty matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, and says: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the
others undone.

23. What hypocr^ie is it to be precise in Tything and tri^ing small things,
and to neglect the great duties of the Law, just i^^ging, mercy, and faithful
dealing with all: these (...) which you should have first done, with grea^est
z^^l and care, and the small things to come in their proper place.

24. Ye blind guides, who strain at a gnat and swallow a camel*

24. N. They may be ^^^rply reproved as blind guides, who place their Religion
in Ceremonies and small things, while they omit Justice, Mercy, Fidelity, and
such great duties.

25. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye make clean the outside
of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and
excess.

25. You wash the outside of your Cups and Platers; but what contain they
within but the Drink and the Meat which you have got by extortion, and use to
intemperance and excess.

26. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup or
platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

26. See that thy Dish and Cup contain not the fruit of extortion, nor the food
of fleshly lust: and do thus by thy heart also as well as by thy cup and dish.

27. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye are like to whited
sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead
men's bones, and of all uncleanness. 28. Even so ye also outwardly appear
righteous to men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

27.28. So ye are adorned with your outward Ceremonies, and Legal and
Traditional observances, but within are Hypocrites and wicked.

29. Woe to you scribes and pharisees, hypocrites; because ye build the tombs of
the prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous. 30. And say, if we
had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them
in the blood of the prophets. 31. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves,
that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets. 32. Fill ye up then
the measure of your Fathers.

29. etc. As Hypocrites ye honor by your Ceremonies and Words the memory of
the Prophets and Righteous men, whom your Fathers Murdered, and you say, you
would not have done it; and yet you do the same, and worse. You confess, that
you are the offspring of those Murderers, and therefore liable to be plagued
for your Forefathers sins, if you Repent not: No wonder if you imitate them,
and fill up the measure till you be ripe for Vengeance.

33. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of
hell?

33. How can ye escape Damnation, who are the Seed of such Serpents and Vipers,
of the same nature, and go on in the same way of sin.

34. Wherefore behold I send unto you Prophets and wise men, and Scribes, and
some of them ye shall Kill and Crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge in
your Synagogues, and Persecute them from city to city: 35. That upon you may
come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous
Abel to the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
Temple and the Altar. 36. Verily I say to you, All these things shall come on
this Generation.

34. etc. I foretell you now what will befall you: I will send unto you yet
greater Prophets, etc. And thus you will use them. And so when you have filled
up the measure of your National Sin, the Destruction deserved by your
Ancestors, but suspended by the patien^e and long-suffering of God, shall be
suspended no longer, but shall fall on this forsaken Generation, and God will
remember all at once, in the day that he dreadfully destroys you.

N. 1. Whether this Zacharias was the Son of Jehojada, in Joash days: and the
Name of Barachias slipped into the Text by some Scribes conjecture out of the
Description of the Prophet Zachary: or whether it were any other is of no great
Moment.

2. The Sins of their Ancestors are said to be punished on that Generation. 1.
Because it being a National Punishment, was procured by National Sins which is
made up of many Ages. 2. Because Children derive Nature and Guilt in part from
Parents Sin, and not from Adam only, as the whole History of Scripture
shows. 3. Because they sinned as their Ancestors did.

The Sin here described, is much like theirs now, who Canonize the Saints whom
their Ancestors Persecuted and Murdered, and keep Holidays for them, and visit
their Shrines, and carry their Relics, and account their Names the Honor of
their Church; and at the same time, Hate, Persecute, Silence, and Murder those
that imitate them.

37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not?

37. How often have I offered by my Messengers, and attempted to gather thee into
a State of greatest savor and safety, with tenderest Love; but you would not
Consent.

N. 1. Christ would have taken the whole City and Nation into his Church, had
they not refused: And therefore Infants as they were before. 2. If the Jews had
all believed in Christ, he would not have continued the Law of Moses, and that
Policy, which did but lead to him, nor have forsaken the rest of the World, to
make them only his Church; but would have made them a part of the Catholic
Church.

38.39. Behold your house is left unto you desolate. For I say to you, Ye shall
not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name
of the Lord.

38.39. Your Temple and City are near to certain Desolation; when you have
executed you fury on me, I will leave you to the fury of Destroyers, and you
shall see me no more, till Conviction constrein you to desire me, as your
Savior.

Note, That the Country of Judaea where the remnant of the Jews, after the
Destruction of Jerusalem, abode, were Converted to Christ, as other Countries
were, in the days of Constantine, and after; and a Patriarck settled at
Jerusalem: an A. Bishop at Caesarea, and many Bishops and Churches among them,
though some remained obstinate.

CHAP. XXIV.
1. AND Jesus went out and departed from the Temple, and his Disciples came to
him for to show him the buildings of the Temple. 2. And Jesus said to them, See
ye not all these things? Verily I say to you, There shall not be left here one
stone upon another that shall not be thrown down.

1.2. All this shall be cast down for the Sin of this People.

3. And as he sat on the mount of Olives, his disciples came to him privately,
saying, Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy
coming, and of the end of the world.

3. They desired him that had so often told them, that he must be Crucified, and
Rise again, and yet come again, to tell them the meaning, and signs of this his
coming, which they did not well understand. Some Expositors of this hard
Chapter think, That the Question means no more, than [what shall be the Signs
of thy Coming to Destroy Jerusalem; and of the end of their Policy. Others
think, That they expected that Christ should presently come, and Reign at
Jerusalem and set up a Kingdom so excellent, as should be the beginning of a
New Age, or World; as Noah's after the Deluge, when all the World of wicked men
should submit to him or be destroyed. Others say, That these questions are put
of different things, and times, and accordingly Answered, 1. When the Temple
should be Destroyed? 2. When Christ would set up his Visible Kingdom. 3. When
the World should End? The two first undoubtedly they meant; but by his Coming I
do not think they meant, either his sending the Roman Army, nor his Coming at
the Day of Resurrection and Judgment; but his Coming to be a Visible Monarch,
and Declaring himself King, and Reigning accordingly. And 3. By the End of the
World, whether they meant the utter Desolation at last, or the End of the
Unreformed, Age, or World, which his Kingdom should overthrow, I am not
certain. And though Christ do not presently blame their mis-expectations, his
Answers approve them not, but tend to rectify them.

4. And Jesus answered, and said to them, Take heed that no man deceive you. 5.
For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

4.5. Its true, that this Temple shall be destroyed, and my Kingdom shall be
set up, and the world of Enemies be subdued, (and that of Nature be dissolved.)
But for your Question of the time, let me first admonish you to be fortified by
Patience and Faith, against many Deceivers, that will for trial be permitted to
pretend, that not I, but they are the true Messiah: (such were Simon,
Dositheas, Theudas,) and look not for a Visible Monarch.

6. And ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars, see that ye be not
troubled; for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.

6. There will be fearful Commotions, Risings, and Wars, before these things
come to pass; Let not that disturb you.

7.8. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and
there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in diverse places. All
these are the beginning of sorrows.

7.8. Wars by sedition among your selves, and Wars of other Nations, with other
Plagues and Commotions, and Signs, shall be but forerunners of that sorrowful
time.

9. Then shall they deliver you up to be affl^cted, and shall kill you: and ye
shall be hated of all nations for my Name sake.

9. And before that day foreknow, what shall befall your selves: Persecution,
Murder, and common Hatred, for my Name sake.

10. And then many shall be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall
hate one another.

10. And the temptations of those days shall prevail against many that
professed Faith, and shall pervert them, and draw them to betray, and hate my
true Disciples, and show their unfaithfulness.

11. And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.

11. And many that make themselves the Masters of Sects and Heresies, shall
pretend Inspiration, and Revelation for Lies, and pernicious Doctrines; and
many shall be deceived and follow them.

12. And because iniquity shall abound the love of many shall wax cold.

12. And iniquity shall so far abound, both in the World assaulting the Church,
and in the declining of Church Members (by Worldliness, Fleshliness, Pride, and
Heresy,) that the first fervours of Christian Love shall be abated.

13. But he that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved.

13. But he that overcomes these Temptations, and keeps his Integrity, and
persevereth in his Fidelity, shall attain the end of his Faith, and be Saved.

14. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a
witness to all nations, and then shall the end come.

14. And the Jews driving you away by Persecution, you shall Preach the Gospel
to the Heathen Nations, who by receiving it, shall condemn the Jews: And then
shall come the desolation of their State, and the ending of their Law and
Policy.

15. When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whosoever reade^h, let him
understand.) 16. Then let them which be in Judea, flee into the mountains. 17.
Let him which is on the house top, not come down, to take any thing out of his
house. 18. Neither let him which is in the field, return back to take his
clothes.

15.16.17.18. When ye see the desolating Heathen Army come to use their force
and violence, against the Sacred Place of the Jews, answering that which Daniel
says of others, then stay not but be gone, and be glad if by Flight you can
save your Lives, but stay not to save your Goods, or Clothes.

19. And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those
days.

19. And they that are made slow by impediments of children, etc. are like to
lose their Lives.

20. But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the sabbath
day:

20. It will increase the calamity of your Flight, if it should fall out in the
Winter, when the Weather will delay you; or on a Sabbath day, when the Jews
scruple Journeying; or a Sabbath Year, when the Land Untilled bears not Fruit.

21. For there shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning
of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. 22. And except those days
should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the Elects sake,
those days shall be shortened.

21.22. N. This was most dreadfully fulfilled, as Josephus who was then among
them, has fully written, 1100000 Killed, and 97000 Captives. 22. If these
Slaughters by the Romans should continue long, no Jews would be left alive. But
God will so far preserve the Believers, that their Armies shall stay but a
little while.

23. Then if any man shall say to you, Lo* here is Christ, or there: believe it
not. 24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very elect. 25. Behold, I have told you before.

23.24.25. In this Desolation it will add to their misery, that False Christ's
and Prophets shall rise, and promise to deliver them, and lead them further
into snares: And they shall do such Signs and Wonders, as if God did not
preserve them, would deceive the very chos^^ of God, the true Believers. But
whatever same you hear of such, believe it not: I have forewarned you.

26. Wherefore, if they shall say unto you Behold, he is in the desert, go not
forth: Behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not.

26. Go not after any such Deceiver, where ever they say he is, though he
promise deliverance.

27. For as the lightning comes out of the east, and shines even unto the
west, so shall the coming of the Son of man be.

27. For as you must look for no other Savior; so my coming will not be such
an appearance in Flesh, but by Heavenly Light shining forth from the East unto
the Western Parts of the World, by my Word and Spirit, turning men from
Darkness to Light; in preparation to my coming to Judgment, in which I will
suddenly appear from Heaven in Glory to all the World; as Lightning does in a
moment in the Skies.

Note, Some Expositors rather think, it speaks of his sudden Destroying
Jerusalem.

28. For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

28. And as for these forlorn Jews whose deserved Destruction is decreed of
God; they are as a carcass to the Eagles: the Roman Messengers of Gods Wrath
will find them out.

Note, Others expound it, [where the Gospel is Preached, thither will the
People flock.]

29. Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the sun be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.

29 N. Some Expound this Metaphorically, of the overthrow of all the Jewish,
State, Power, Policy. Others of the Roman Wars and concussions. Others,
properly, of dreadful Prodigies that shall appear before Christ's coming to
Judgment, Joel 2.31. and 3.15.

30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall
all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in
the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.

30. As some, [Then the Jews shall be convinced that their destruction was
Christ's Revenge for his Death, and Rejection; and all the Tribes of their Land
shall Mourn, as if they had seen Christ coming himself against them in the
clouds, with Power and Glory.] As others, [The sign of the Cross shall appear
to Constantine in the Sky; and all the Heathen Nations shall Mourn, and be
cast down; and they shall see Christ setting up his Kingdom, by imperial Arms,
with Power and Glory.] As others, [Then shall Christ suddenly appear from
Heaven, to Judge the World, and come in the clouds with Power and Glory, to the
grief and terror of all the Wicked.] Supposing that Christ passed from the
Destruction of Jerusalem, to speak of his last coming.

31. And he shall send his angels with a ^reat sound of a trumpet, and they
shall ga^her together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to
the other.

31. As some [He shall gather the Believers in all Jud^a whom he saves from
this Destruction.] As others [He shall send forth his Apostles with the Gospel,
as a Trumpet, to call his chosen out of the World, into his Church.] As others,
[By Constantine and Christian Powers, he shall through all the Empire set
Christians in Honor and Power over the Heathens.] As others, Literally, [He
shall at his appearing, and Judgment, send his Angels, and gather all his Elect
to himself.

32. Now learn a parable of the fig tree: When her branch is yet tender, and
puts forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: 33. So likewise ye, when ye
shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors.

32.33. By the similitude of the Fig Tree, I tell you, that there must be time
for these Changes; but when ye see the beginning of these Signs, Know that the
accomplishment is not far off.

34. Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these
things be fulfilled. 35. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall
not pass away.

34.35. As some, [Some yet alive, shall see all fulfilled that I have hitherto
spoken; that is, Only of the Destruction of Jerusalem.] As others, [That part
that I have spoken of the Destruction of Jerusalem, some alive shall see.] (for
it was but 38 years after.) As others, [some yet alive shall see the beginning
of the performance of all that I have said, and the rest will follow; and a
Thousand years with the Lord, is but as one Day.] When Heaven and Earth passes
away, you shall see, that my Word is all Fulfilled: They shall see the
Catholic Church.

36. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the angels of heaven, but
my Father only.

36. The day and hour of the Jews Destruction, say some, Of the End of the
World say others; none knows but God.

Note, 1. Whence the Ancient Doctors gathered, that Christ has a two old
Knowledge (Will and Operation.) One Humane and Imperfect, the other Divine and
Perfect. 2. Angels may increase in knowledge.

37. But as the days of Noe were: so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be. 38. For as in the days that were before the flood, they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into
the ark. 39. And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so
shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

37.38.39. As in the days of Noe they would not believe their danger, till it
surprised them, but lived presumptuously in their fleshly pleasure, and worldly
business; so will it be with Sinners at my Coming; (Both at the destruction of
Jerusalem, and at the day of Judgment.)

40. Then shall two be in the field, the one shall be taken, and the other
left: 41. Two women shall be grinding at the mill, the one shall be taken, and
the other left.

40.41. [Then I will manifest my distinguishing Providence: One, that is, a
Believer shall be taken to me, and be Saved; and the other left to their
delusion, and destruction in unbelief.

Note, The difficulty of most of these foregoing Texts, forbids me to be
peremptory in determining, whether they spoke only of the destruction of
Jerusalem, (as in Mark, the Question seems to intimate;) Or also of the End
of the World, (as some words in the Answer seem to intimate.) And I incline to
think, that as the Types and Prophecies of the Old Testament, spoke proximately
of the things and persons Typifying, but remotely and chiefly thereby of
Christ, and the things Typifyed: so these Texts speak, first of the destruction
of Jerusalem; and next, of the Calling of the Gentiles, and Catholic Church;
but thereby finally and chiefly, of the End of the World: As if Christ said, As
it will be here now, so it will be then, parabolically.

42. Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does come.

This therefore is the necessary wisdom of all, to be as men on their watch,
never a sleep, or mindless; but always ready, as expecting the Coming of your
Lord: And then, though you understand not all Circumstances before hand, you
shall be safe.

43. But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what hour the
thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house
to be broken up. 44. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as you
think not, the Son of man comes.

43.44. Seeing men will watch against a Thief, if they knew when he would come,
watch you for the preventing of surprise, because you know not, but it may
presently be the time; and it must be a continual readiness that must be your
safety; not only as to the destruction of Jerusalem, but as to every man's
particular Judgment: (For Christ spoke for the use of us all to the end; and
not only for the few Jews that heard him.)

45. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord has made ruler
over his household, to give them meat in due season. 46. Blessed is that
servant, whom his lord when he comes, shall find so doing.

45.46. And those that are faithful and wise Teachers and rulers of his Church,
to give them meet and seasonable instruction, as food for their Souls, shall be
found at their Lords coming Blessed Persons, and shall be abundantly gainers
by their labors and their Sufferings.

47. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods.

47. I tell you such Ministers, (how poor or despised soever now by the world,)
shall be advanced to a far greater dignity than their present Pastoral Office,
even to a participation under Christ of the Universal Government.

48. But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his
coming. 49. And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink
with the drunken.

48.49. But if any Assume the Sacred Ministry, and shall say in his heart, It
is long since Christ promised to come; and now his coming is either uncertain,
or will not be in hasle; and thereupon shall indulge ^his fleshly Lusts, and
shall turn a malignant abuser of his fellow Servants, and Persecute, Silence,
and Oppress them, and give himself up to the pleasure of his Appetite, in
Feasting, and Drunkenness.

50. The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him,
and in an hour that he is not ware of. 51. And shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion with the hypocrites, there shall be ^eeping and
gnashing of teeth.

50. The Lord of that Servant will surprise him in his Sin and Security, when
he least suspecteth it; and will execute that Vengeance on him, which is due to
such as aggravate their wickedness, by Hypocrisy; and make him feel that as it
is odious, so it is dreadful to profane Holy things, and to fight against
holiness in the Name of Christ, and at once, to be a Minister, a Worldling, a
Sensualist, and a Persecutor.

Annotation, It is of great moment, for the understanding of this Chapter, and
much of Christ's Gospel, to know the true meaning of Christ's Kingdom, and his
Coming. Tho often he spoke directly of his last coming to Judgment; yet
ordinarily this seems his meaning. His Kingdom is that Reign in Heaven on
Earth at once which he was to exercise as the Messiah, or God Incarnate, having
Redeemed lost Man. The little poor Nation of Israelites were his peculiar
People before: Upon his Ascension, the Gentile World was to be Called, and a
Catholic Church gathered over the Earth, in a more excellent covenant of
peculiarity; and this Catholic Church, is the Kingdom of the Messiah: His
coming, is not his sending his Enemies to destroy Jerusalem; nor yet his
Visible Appearance in Person, (till Judgment,) but his setting up this his
Kingdom: his coming to Reign, that is, to Erect this Catholic Church: This is
plainly expounded, in Luke 17.20, 21, 23. The Pharisees demanded, when the
Kingdom of God should come? He told them, The Kingdom of God comes not with
observation, or outward show, (by personal visible Appearance of the King, in
Pomp and Splendour with a Court, as Monarchs rule) nor shall they say, Lo here,
or Lo there; (No Head, King, or Court shall be Visible:) for behold, the
Kingdom of God is in you, (or among you:) It is a Spiritual Reign in Souls, and
in the Church; of which you have already some beginnings. 24. For as the
Lightning that Lightneth out of one part under the Heaven, shines to the other
part under Heaven; So shall also the Son of man be in his Day: but first he
must suffer and be rejected of this Generation, etc. that is, when he has
Suffered, and been Rejected, he will Rise, Ascend, and from Heaven send his
Spirit and Word to enlighten the World from East to West, and call a Catholic
Church amongst the Gentiles, and this is his Kingdom and Reign; And this
Generation shall not pass, till this Catholic Church be thus gathered, though
not perfected: What else can be meant by Christ's many Parables, that the
Kingdom of God, is like a grain of Mustard Seed. A little Leaven hid in Meal. A
Field sown, that after had Tares. A Net cast inro the Sea, etc. When the
Catholic Church was made, Christ's Kingdom came, and when his Kingdom came, he
came as King to Govern it, by his Spirit, Word, and Ministers, Matthew, 21.43.
The Kingdom of God, (that is, the Church State of peculiarity) shall be taken
from you, and given to a Nation (the Gentile word) bringing forth the Fruit
thereof: But the Perfection of the Kingdom will be at last. And as to the Time
of his Appearing for Judgment, it must specially be observed, that he tells
them, That it was not known either to Angels, or to himself. And if Christ knew
it not, (as man,) how presumptuous are they that foretell it. And whereas they
say, It was but the Day and the Hour, and not the Year, that he knew not? I
answer, That by Day and Hour, is meant in general The Time. And if Christ knew
it not, no wonder if he foretold it not to his Disciples, but told them, It
shall be uncertain to you, that you may be always ready: Therefore, though it
be false that Grotius says, That Paul thought, that the Coming of Christ would
be in his days; It is true, that Paul knew not but that it might be in his
Days. They might know indeed, that it would not be, till certain Signs
foretold, came to pass; but after that, they were still to expect it as
uncertain.

CHAP. XXV.
1. THen shall the kingdom of heaven be likened to ten virgins, which took
their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. 2. And five of them were
wise, and five were foolish.

1. When Christ comes to Judgment, (either on the Jews as aforesaid, or on any
with Death; or on all, at the last Day,) the Administration of his Kingly
Government, toward the Ready, and Unready may be illustrated by this
similitude, of Ten Virgins, etc.

Note, The Custom of the Jews was, to make very Pompous Feasts, at Weddings,
and many Virgins used to go to the Brides House, and thence with hand Lamps to
go, and attend her to the Wedding.

3. They that were foolish, took their Lamps, and took no oil with them. 4. But
the wise took oil in their vessels with their Lamps.

3.4. The Foolish made no preparation but for the present, but the Wise
provided for the time to come, supposing there might be some delay.

Note, The Parable is, to stir up all to preparation for Death and Judgment;
and all the Trials that are to come: and to prove it damning Foolishness after
all warnings to delay, and be unprepared.

5. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept.

5. Note, The Lamp, and the Vessel of Oil signify, Preparation by sudden act,
and Preparation by a stated habit: Wise, and Foolish, Good, and Bad, may sleep
upon delay; and keep not up still the same lively Activity: But the Godly have
still the holy Nature and Habits.

6. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridgroom comes, Go ye
out to meet him.

6. And when they are deepest in security, or forgetfulness, and minding
Worldly things, they suddenly hear that Christ by Death or Judgment is coming;
He is just at hand: There Is no more delay, you must presently come away to
Judgment, and to be saved if you are his.

7. Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.

7. When the Midnight cry comes, and there is no longer stay, all men good and
bad, wise and foolish, will be awakened, to attempt some sudden preparation:
The worst almost under the sentence of Death will think, what now must I do to
be Saved: self-love, and fear, will make them cry for Mercy, with some kind of
Repentance, though they be Unconverted.

8. And the foolish said to the wise, Give us of your oil for our lamps are out.

8. The unprepared unholy Souls, when Death and Judgment comes, would fain then
be found in the State of holy Believers, and would die the death of the
righteous, and wish for their preparations.

9. But the wise answered, saying, Not so: lest there be not enough for us and
you, but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

9. These wishes then are vain: One man cannot be Saved by another man's
Righteousness: It must be your own, or it will not save you. Go therefore and
make your own preparation.

10. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came, and they that were
ready* went in with him to the marriage; and the door was shut.

10. Death and Judgment will not stay for the unready: They that then are found
unsanctified, only under fears and wishes to be saved, will be shut out, when
holy prepared Souls are all let in.

11. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.

11. Self-love and fear, will make the unholy Cry in vain, too late for Mercy.

12. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.

12. But he will not own, or open to such seekers, but reject them. N. Not that
true Conversion and Holiness is ever too late. But those fears and cries for
Mercy, which in time might have been good preparations for a true Change, may
be all lost, and come short of it at the last extremity.

13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour, when the Son of
man comes.

13. God has purposely concealed the time of Christ's Coming from the knowledge
of all Men, that all might be obliged to be in constant watchful readiness:
yea, it is said, That Christ himself knew it not as man, They that say, The
Year may be known, though not the Day, or Hour; distort the Text which means,
by Day and Hour, the Time: as if he had said, You are not sure (save by the
Signs forementioned not Fulfilled) but it may be the next Day, or Hour: so
that the Apostles themselves were uncertain, tho they rebuked them that
pretended to know, that it was at hand, before Jerusalem was Destroyed. From
their days till now, God has kept the Church uncertain, but that it might
quickly come. So that Grotius is mistaken, that thinks Paul believed it would
be in his days; as if he had by a false Motive drawn men to godliness: But Paul
knew not how soon it might have come. Ignorance of it is needful; but Error is
hurtful: (of which before.)

14. For the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling into a far country, who
called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods: 15. And unto one he
gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, to every man according
to his several ability, and stairway took his Journey.

14.15. Christ passing into the Heavens, commits to his Servants the Word,
means, and mercies of his Grace, that they may improve them till he come by
Death and Judgment, to call them to account; Not giving the same degree of
means and mercy to all, but to some more, and to some less.

16. Then he that had received the five talents, went and traded with the same,
and made them other five talents. 17. And likewise he that had received two, he
also gained other two.

16.17. They that had the greater means and helps improved them, to their own
increase of Grace, and the good of others, and the service and honor of their
Lord.

18. But he that had received one, went and dug in the earth, and hid his
lords money.

18. Note, Tho the least helps should be answerably improved, yet the less
(such as those have, who have little more than the Light of Nature) excite not
men so powerfully to an improvement.

19. After a long time, the Lord of those servants comes and reckons with
them.

19. Note, Christ here intimates that hiscoming to reckon with them would not
be hasty.

20. And lo he that had received five talents came and brought other five
talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst to me five talents, behold, I have
gained besides them five talents more.

20. I have used them to the increase of thy grace in me, and to the good of
men, and to thy Glory.

21. His Lord said to him, Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things, enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.

21. His Lord who freely gave him his talents to use, yet rewarded his faithful
usage of them, and praised his fidelity, saying, I will give thee great things,
because thou have well and faithfully used the smaller mercies of this life
which I gave thee.

22. He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou
deliveredst to me two talents, behold I have gained two other talents besides
them. 23. His Lord said to him, Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will make the ruler over many things:
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

22, 23. N. 1. The reward of Glory given for our diligent improvement of the
mercies of this life, is consistent with the freeness of the gift. 2. God
himself will praise the fidelity of his Servants, as worthy of praise. 3. Great
rewards will crown the Faithful for little things here sincerely done. 4. It is
our Lords own joy that the faithful shall enter partake of.

24. Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee
that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering
where thou have not strewed: 25. And I was afraid and went and hid thy talent
in the ground, Lo, there thou have that is thine.

24, 25. The fear of thy severity made me think it safest to keep thy Money
merely from being lost.

N. Hard thoughts of God makes men backward to his service, which is a work of
Love; and sinful fear is an enemy to holy diligence and fruitfulness.

26. His Lord answered and said to him, Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou
knew that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strewed. 27.
Thou ought therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my
coming I should have received my own with usury.

26, 27. Note, 1. God will take a slothful servant for a wicked servant:
unprofitableness and omission of duty, is damnable unfaithfulness in us that
are but Stewards and Servants. To do no harm is a praise fit for a stone and
not for a man. 2. To confess Gods holy Government, and yet to be unholy, is to
be self-condemning.

Qu. Does this Text justify usury? Ans. It speaks of that sort of increase
made by exchange and trading, without reproof, and with seeming approbation.
Gain by Trading and Merchandise is one sort of Usury: all Usury is unlawful
which is against Justice or Charity. And all other is lawful; and some that is
a work of Charity is to some a duty.

28. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it to him which has ten
talents. 29. For to every one that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance; but from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he
has.

28, 29. He shall be deprived of the mercies of this life, who improved them
not for a better life, when he that so improved them shall have an abundant
reward, the mercies of this life and that to come.

30. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

30. N. 1. Omission and unprofitableness is damning sin. 2. Hell is called Fire
for pain, and Darkness for uncomfortableness.

31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: 32. And before him shall
be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
shepherd divides his sheep from the goats. 33. And he shall set the sheep on
his right hand, and the goats on his left.

31, etc. The coming of Christ shall be in Glory, with all his holy Angels, who
served him here for the good of his Elect; and as Judge he shall sit on his
Throne of Glory: And all persons and Nations shall be called by him to
Judgment, and he shall separate them as sheep and goats, etc.

34. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

34. Then Christ shall pronounce this sentence on the Faithful, Come, etc. N. O
comfortable words, [ Come,] Whither? To Christ, to God, to Heaven! [ ye blessed
of my Father,] sure such shall be blessed indeed, [ inherit] not only use [the
Kingdom,] in participation with the King of Glory: [ prepared for you] by
eternal Love, and Decree.

35. For I was hungry and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink,
I was a stranger and ye took me in: 36. Naked and ye clothed me, I was sick,
and ye visited me, I was in prison and ye came to me.

35, 36. N. 1. These works are noted as the effects of Faith and Love, without
which they would have been but dead works. 2. The causal [ for] signifies not
any merit by commutative Justice, as giving God any benefit; But their moral
qualification and fitness to receive the Kingdom freely given, but on such
conditions, that we signify our thankful acceptance by true devotedness to
Christ. And thus all are judged (that is, finally justified or condemned)
according to their works, as judged by the Law of Grace and Faith, and not by
Moses Law or that of Innocence. 3. Love to Christ is not sincere, if it will
not cause us to prefer his interest in his poor Saints (much more in the whole
Church) before our Ease, Wealth and safety.

37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee hungry
and fed thee? when saw we thee thirsty and gave thee drink? 38. When saw we
thee a stranger and took thee in? or naked and clothed thee? 39 Or When saw we
thee sick or in prison and came unto thee?

37, etc. Christ does more interest himself in his servants love and good
works, than they thought or can easily believe; and valueth these more than we
do our selves.

40. And the King shall answer and say to them, Verily I say to you, in as much
as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to
me.

40. Note, 1. Those poor and weak Christians which the proud despise and scorn,
Christ calls his brethren: 2. And he takes that as done to him that is done
to them for his sake.

41. Then shall he say also to them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.

41. N. Every word unspeakably terrible. The cursed state is to depart from
Christ into everlasting fire with Devils, who were first adjudged to it, and
draw the wicked to be their Companions in torments by following them in sin.
Wicked men are so like Devils, that they must dwell with them for ever in
misery.

42, 43. For I was hungry and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me
no drink, I was a stranger and ye took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not,
sick and in prison and ye visited me not.

42, 43. Note, That it is not only hating, hurting, persecuting, scorning or
oppressing that men are damned for to hell fire with Devils, but also not
loving, relieving, and helping Christ's servants: for he trusted them with his
gifts for that use and trial. If these must be in hell with Devils, where will
oppressors, persecutors and murderers be?

44. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or
thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
to thee.

44. Note, Wicked men know not the greatness of their own sin, nor how much
that is against Christ which is against his servants.

45. Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say to you, in as much as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

45. N. The wicked shall suffer not only for hurting, but for not helping the
faithful, as if it had been Christ himself that they neglected. O what a motive
is this to Charity?

Qu. Will it not be endless thus to convince and judge all the world? Ans. No:
though this be spoken after the manner of Men, God can at once open every man's
case to his own Conscience, and judge all the world in a moment, as the Sun
does at once enlighten all the eyes on earth.

46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the righteous
into life eternal.

46. The Execution shall presently follow the Sentence. All that showed not
their faith in Christ, and love to him, by loving his servants above their
worldly wealth and pleasure, shall go to everlasting punishment with devils
that deceived them: And the faithful that loved Christ, and his interest and
servants above their fleshly interests shall go into endless life and
blessedness. But this does not extend to comdemn Infants or poor unable persons
for not doing what they could not; nor to deprive them of a reward that had a
will to do more than they were able.

CHAP. XXVI.
1. ANd it came to pass when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said to
his disciples, 2. Ye know that after two days is the passover, and the Son of
man is betrayed to be crucified.

1, 2. N. Christ went not ignorantly or constrained to his death, but willing
and foreknowing it.

3. Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders
of the People, unto the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas. 4.
And consulted how they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him. 5. But they
said, Not on the feastday, lest there be an uproar among the people.

3, etc. N. 1. The chief Men, Priests and Rulers were the chief Murderers. 2.
Its a wonder that the people were not destroyed as Seditious Rebels, rather
than feared by such Rulers; when they would have resisted or stoned them that
had assaulted Christ, or a Prophet.

6. Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper. 7. There
came to him a woman, having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and
poured it on his head, as he sat at meat. 8. But when his disciples saw it,
they had indignation, saying, To what purpose is this wast? 9. For this
ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.

6, etc. 1. It being usual at great feasts in the Country to anoint, she
signified by this her great love and honor to Christ. 2. Judas was the chief
murmurer, but perhaps some others might object.

10. When Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the Woman? for
she has wrought a good work on me. 11. For ye have the poor always with you,
but me ye have not always. 12. For in that she has poured this ointment on my
body* she did it to my burial.

10, etc. N. Tho works of Charity to the poor are highly esteemed by Christ,
and preferred before many rites and smaller matters, yet some works of piety
must be preferred before them. And that duty may in its season be greater,
which is not so at another time.

13. Verily I say to you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the
whole World, there shall also this, that this woman has done, be told for a
memorial of her.

13. N. 1. How highly Christ valueth the true love and costly piety of the
meanest! 2. Christ knew and decreed that the Gospel or History of his Life,
Death, and Burial, and Resurrection should be preached throughout the world,
yea and written to: The words in Matthew. 24. [ Let him that reads understand]
seem to be Christ's own words, and to imply that all those his words should be
written; at least we may well answer them that ask, Where did Christ Command
them to write the Scripture? that 1. His Spirit in them commanded it. 2.
Writing is but the most public sort of Preaching.

14. Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief
Priests. 15. And said to them, what will ye give me, and I will deliver him
unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. 16. And
from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

14, 15, 16. N. Christ knowingly permitted an Hypocrite in the Apostleship, and
to betray him, to foretell us that Covetous falshearted Hypocrites will be in
the Visible Church; and will betray it. 2. Covetous love of Money is the root
of treachery in Hypocrite Ministers and others. 3. Judas's sin was not by a
sudden Passion, but deliberate: contrived and contracted (for three pound
fifteen Shillings.)

17. Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, the disciples came to
Jesus, saying, where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?

17. On the fifth day of the week called now Thursday at eventide, etc.

18. And he said, Go into the City to such a man, and say to him, the Master
says, My time is at hand, I will keep the passover at thy house with my
disciples.

18. N. As to the great controversies here, whether Christ and the Jews did
eat the passover the same day, and whether Christ did eat the Paschal Lamb,
or only the unleavened bread and bitter herbs; which was the beginning of the
passover, being to have eaten the Lamb at the next evening, if he had not been
Sacrificed himself. I leave the discussion of them to Commentators, who handle
them at large, not troubling ordinary Readers with them.

19. And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and made ready the
passover. 20. Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. 21. And
as they did eat, he said, Verily I say to you, that one of you shall betray me.
22. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say to
him, Lord, is it I? 23. And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with
me in the dish, the same shall betray me.

19, etc. N. 1. Christ being under the Law was to keep the Law of the Passover.
2. The innocent Disciples were troubled both at the tidings of the thing, and
that they should be under suspicion.

24. The Son of man goes as it is written of him: but woe to that man by whom
the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good for that man, if he had not been
born.

24. N. Gods decree to bring good out of men's evil, extensuateth not men's sin
or punishment; the escaping of a Greater evil, is here called [ Good] not in
itself, but to that Man.

25. Then Judas, answered and said, Master is it I? He said to him, Thou have
said.

25. N. Judas was before resolved and hardened; so that this notice did not
stop him from the sin.

26. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it,
and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body.

26. N. 1. This bread was unleavened, and part of the Passover. 2. The blessing
it, was the Separating it to this holy use, and praying God to bless it, and
pronouncing it blessed. 3. The breaking it, signified the breaking of Christ's
Body, represented hereby as the Sacrifice for sin. 4. The giving it, signifies
the giving himself, to believing receivers; with and for their spiritual and
everlasting life. For the Sacrament as Administered has these three parts. 1.
The Consecration, 2. The Commemoration, or Representation, 3. The Communication
5. [ This is my Body] means [ This is my sacrificed body representative.]
When it is Consecrated it is not to be called [ Bread] that is, mere bread, for
it has now another form, and forma denominat; But it is only a Relative form:
If you ask what matter it has, It is Bread still; If you ask what form, it is
Christ Sacramental Body. As if you ask of the Kings Coin, what is it, it is in
General Money, particularly this or that piece of Money* The answer is not, it
is Silver or Gold, for that speaks not the Form. But if you ask what Metal it
is made of, it is Silver or Gold, so is it here.

6. It is not Christ's Body as Glorified in Heaven that is represented in the
Sacrament, but as Crucified flesh. The second council of Nice with the
foregoing General Council at Constantinople, agree that Christ's body in Heaven
is not flesh, (though they differ about Images.) Flesh and blood enter not
there, but Spiritual bodies; it is not flesh if it consist not of fibrous
Coagulated blood and Chyme made of food; which is not there.

7. But it is the true body of Christ that was first offered to God in
sacrifice, and as such Given to believing receivers so far as to be theirs in
Relation of Mystical union, and the Meritorious cause of their pardon, grace
and glory.

8. What a novel monster the fiction of Transsubstantiation is? I have fully
opened in a little Treatise called [ full and easy Satisfaction what is the
true Religion.] 9. The Circumstances of Christ's action are occasional and no
Laws for us: As are 1. Giving it at a Passover, 2. At the end of a meal, 3. At
supper, or at night, 4. In an Inn or Guest Chamber, 5. To none but his family,
6. To none but men, 7. To none but Ministers, 8. In an upper room, 9. Lying
along in each others bosoms, 10. But once in his life, 11. Giving it to all at
once and not one by one (tho that seem of more importance than the rest) 12.
Delivering the bread before he gave thanks over the Cup, and not over both at
once: (tho no doubt these may safely be imitated.

9. Whether Judas was present or not is uncertain, (and of no doctrinal moment)
if he were, and Christ also washed his feet with the rest, it showed his
obdurateness that could go presently forth to betray him. Doubtless if wicked
Hypocrites intrude, the sin and punishment is only their own, so be it we sin
not by neglecting discipline; for the Keys are given to the Pastors to keep
out men proved incapable by impenitence.

27. And he took the cup, and gave thanks and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of this. 28. For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for
many, for the remission of sins.

27, 28. N. Giving to one by one is not Necessary. 2. The evangelists speak not
all the same words in reciting Christ's administration. Matthew has no more but
[ This is my Body] nor Mark neither; leaving out [ Which is given for you] as
Luke has it, or [ Which is broken for you] as Paul has it [ Do this in
Remembrance of me.] And of the Cup, there are different words of Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and Paul; and Mark mentions their drinking it before Christ's words [
This is my blood of the New Testament, etc.] But what is not spoken by one is
by another, and the sense is the same; and it tells us that if such a
difference be in our administration it nullifieth not the Sacrament.

28. [This wine is representatively or Sacramentally my blood shed (not as that
of the Paschal Lamb, for Jews only to seal that Old Covenant of their
peculiarity, but) for the Gentiles also or the world, to purchase and seal the
Universal Covenant of Grace, which gives free pardon and life to all true
believing accepters.

29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine,
till that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.

29. Two difficulties here arise, 1. Did not Christ drink with them after his
resurrection? Ans. 1. Some say, He drank no wine, but water which was their
Ordinary drink. 2. Others answer, The Kingdom of his Father began at his
Resurrection. 3. Others, say it means [ Shortly I shall leave you, and drink
no more with you.] 4. Others probably think he meant [ I shall no more keep a
Passover or Sacrament with you.]

2. The other difficulty is, How he will drink of it in the Kingdom of his
Father. 1. Some say, Literally after the Resurrection on Earth. 2. Some say,
that a thousand years before the end of the World; all things shall be restored
to the primitive Paradise state, and Christ reigning on Earth, shall drink of
the fruit of the Vine new; or renewed. 3. Others say, This will be after the
Resurrection in the New Earth. 4. But the usual and safest Exposition is, that
the Metaphor signifies only mutual Joy in Heaven.

30. And when they had sung an hymn they went out into the mount of Olives.

30. N. Whether this Hymn was that used by the Jews, (which were all the
113.114.115.116.117.118. Psalms?) or one made for that use by Christ is
uncertain: But they all joined, and tell us, how suitable Thanksgiving, and
singing Psalms or Hymns at Sacraments and Feasts is.

31. Then says Jesus to them, All ye shall be offended because of me this
night: For it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the
flock shall be scattered abroad.

31. You will all be troubled at my Apprehension, and be affrighted away from
me; as it is written, etc.

32. But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.

32. N. Christ often foretelling his Resurrection, proves his Truth; why he
would not appear in Jerusalem, and to all, but in Galilee, and to few; he gave
us not the reason of it: But he fore-knew the Jews rejection, and would not
force belief in them by fight.

33. Peter answered and said to him, Though all men shall be offended because
of thee, yet will I never be offended.

33. Nothing shall affright me from thee. N. His resolution was good: But his
self-confidence was bad.

34. Jesus said to him, Verily I say to thee, that this night before the cock
crow, thou shall deny me thrice.

34. Before the time called Cocks crowing be past etc.

Note, Christ knows before what man's free will will do.

35. Peter said to him, Though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee
Likewise also said all the disciples.

35. N. When men are resolved, they are often too insensible of their weakness
and mutability.

36. Then comes Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and ^a^th to
the disciples, Sit ye here while I go and pray yo^der. 37. And he took with him
Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful* and very heavy.

36.37. Q. Why did not Christ use to pray with his Disciples, but by himself.
Answ. 1. We know not whether he used it or not 2. He sang a Hymn with them at
the Passover. But his Case so differed from all other men's, that (except in
Thanksgivings, and Generals) the same Prayer would not suit him and them.

38. Then says he to them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death:
tarry ye here and watch with me.

38. N. Christ took our Nature, though not our Sin: And Nature is averse to
Death, and sensible of its hurt: And the sense of Gods Enmity to Sin, (though
not to him,) was the chief part of his Suffering.

39. And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed saying, O
my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thou will.

39. Note, 1. Prostration was a humbling Posture but this Example binds us not
to the same gesture.

2. The first act of Man's Will, is simple complacence in good, and averseness
to evil, as such: According to this, as Christ was a Man, he was averse to
Death and Suffering, as Man is, (else it would be no penalty;) And this is it
that he expresses, First, in his, Prayer. But the Second Act of Man's Will is,
about Ends and Means that stand in Competition, and is called, Choosing, or
Refusing: when two things inconsistent stand in competition, the better is to
be chosen: And according to this Christ forms the Second Part of his Prayer,
[ Not as I will,] q. d. Thou have given me a Nature, which does, and must
desire good, and not evil, which desires, that I may not Suffer. But it is thy
Will, and my Consent to Suffer: Therefore thy Will, and not my simple Volition
be done.

40.41. And he comes to the Disciples, and finds them asleep, and says unto
Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray, that ye enter
not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

40. 41. Note, Christ was to have no support from man, in his Sufferings. 2.
Sleeping, when we should Watch and Pray is a fault, but such a one as may stand
with Grace. 3. Watching and Praying is Gods means appointed to save men from,
and in Temptation. 4. The spirit of the Faithful is willing to do more good
than they are able. 5. The Flesh in Faithful Men, may prevail against the
Spirit in sins of natural infirmity, for a time, though not in gross Sins, in
the design and bent of heart and life. 6. Christ tenderly excuses his Servants
infirmities.

42. He went again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my father, if this
cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.

42. I resign my will to submit to thine, and I desire to fulfill it, for
which, I came in Flesh.

43.44. And he came, and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy.
And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the
same words.

43.44. Ost speaking the same things in Prayer, is meet for them that have the
same causes and wants.

45.46.47. Then comes he to his disciples, and says to them, Sleep on now,
and take your rest, behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going; behold, he is at hand that
does betray me. And while he yet spoke, lo, Judas one of the twelve came, and
with him a great multitude with swords and slaves from the chief priests and
elders of the people

45.46.47. Note, To be hunted to death by the Chief Priests and Rulers, to have
a Multitude ready to serve them in it with armed Violence, to be betrayed by
One of his Disciples, and forsaken by the rest, was the case of Christ
Suffering, in which we must be prepared to follow him.

48. Now he that betrayed him, gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall
kiss, that same is he, hold him fast. 49. And forth with he came to Jesus, and
said, Hail master, and kissed him. 50. And Jesus said to him, Friend, wherefore
art thou come? Then came they and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.

48, etc. Note, 1. Hypocrites cruelty is exercised under the name of
Friendship. How many Thousand Persecute Christ, in his cause, and Servants, on
pretenses of Faith, Religion, Order, and Enmity to Sin? 2. Its a pitiful sight
to see poor ignorant People, in obedience to Rulers, Persecuting Christ, to
their own Destruction? as if it were he and his servants, that were their
dangerous Enemies.

51. And behold, one of them which were with Je^us, stretched out his hand, and
drew his sword, and stroke a servant of the high priests, and smote off his ear.

51. Natural inclination to defense, and Love to Christ, overcame Peter's
consideration and patience.

52. Then said Jesus to him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for all
they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword

52. Put up thy Sword, and let us patiently submit to Violence: For as none
must use the Sword, without just Warrant and Authority; so usually they that
fight for themselves, are destroyed, and suffer more than they that patiently
endure Violence and Injustice.

Note, Christ does not in these words make all self-defence, or War unlawful,
but he does more than forbid unwarrantable Fighting; meaning, that not only
unlawful resistance of Power, and Revenge, but even wars and fighting against
injuries and Enemies usua^^^ hasten Death, and increase Men's Sufferings. And
therefore they should forethink, whether War, or Patience* be like to do more
hurt.

53. Think thou, that I cannot n^^ pray to my father, and he shall presen^^y
give me more than twelve legions of angels?

53. Note, 1. Angels are ready to serve Christ, at his desire. 2. It should
stop our impatient thoughts of rash, and unlawful self-defence, to think, that
God can otherwise deliver us.

54. But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?

54. N. We must not strive against Events which we foreknow will come to pass.

55. In the same hour, said Jesus to the multitude, Are ye come out as against
a thief with swords and staves to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in
the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

55. Why did you not take me in the Temple, but thus in the Night like a Thief.

56. But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be
fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him and fled.

56. All this was foretold in Scripture. They let his Disciples go, and they
fled away in fear.

57. And they that had laid hold on Jesus, led him away to Caiaphas the high
priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled. 58. But Peter followed
him afar often, unto the high priests palace, and went in, and sat with the
servants to see the end.

57. They brought him to their Archpriest, as glorying in their success: And
Peter went in where the Servants sat.

59. Now the chief priests and elders, and all the council sought false witness
against Jesus to put him to death. 60. But found none: yea, though many false
witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came two false witnesses, 61.
And said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to
build it in three days.

59. etc. N. 1. As Hypocrites in Religion, are worse than Pagans, in that they
father their wickedness on God, and Religion; so Hypocrite-Judges, and Lawyers
are herein worse than lawless Murderers, that they abuse and disgrace Law, and
Government, by using them to in^ustice, and bloodshed. 2. No man is so good or
innocent, that false Witness may not Condemn.

62. And the high priest arose, and said ^^^o him, Answerest thou nothing? What
(...) which these witness against thee? ^3. (...) h^ld his peace.

6^.6^. N. Christ was silent, to show, 1. That he was not over solicitous for
his Life. 2. When Malignant false Judges are resolved what to do against
Innocence and Right, it is often in vain to talk it out with them. And they
watched for words of his own to Accuse him of.

63. And the high priest answered, and said unto him, I adjure thee by the
living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ the Son of God.

63. N. 1. Once for all take notice, that [ answering] was then among the Jews
a common Phrase, for [ speaking in course] though no question was asked. 2. It
was the Malignant Policy of that Archpriest, to make Christ his own Accuser,
and Witness when they could get no other: For they knew that he that bound his
Disciples to confess him, would not refuse to confess himself, when adjured by
God: though he was silent as to his Defense against Personal Accusations. And
so it is with Christ's Enemies to this day, who put Christians, that dare
neither lie, nor conceal necessary truth upon self-Accusation. As they could
find nothing against Daniel, except about the Law of his God, which he durst
not break to save his Life; so do the Devils Officers take advantage of good
Men's Consciences, to destroy them.

64. Jesus says to him, Thou have said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter
shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in
the clouds of heaven.

64. I am he, and though I stand here to be judged by you, your Eyes shall see
me coming in Glory, and in Power, to Judge you, and all the World: (or as some
say, To Destroy you by the Romans.)

65.66. Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He has spoken
blasphemy, what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard
his blasphemy. What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death.

65.66. Then the High Priest had that which he desired, and by rending his
Clothes, showed his Abhorrence of the supposed Sin of Christ, and demanded the
Sentence of the Court against him, as a Blasphemer. And they Voted him for it
guilty of Death.

Note, 1. How foolish a thing is it to think, that any Law, or any man's
Innocence, or Goodness, will preserve Justice, or Piety, while bad men are
Judges. Can any Law be better than Gods? Or any Person better than Christ? The
Devils Judges possessing the place that God instituted to defend Truth and
Equity, will condemn God himself manifest in Flesh, by his own Law, and as
sinning against himself. And they are since the same.

2. The very Murderers of Christ, would seem greater enemies to Blasphemy, and
more zealous for Gods Honor, than God himself: So little are False Men to be
believed.

67. Then did they spit in his face and buffeted him, and others smote him with
the palms of their hands. 68. Saying, prophecy to us, thou Christ, who is he
that smote thee.

67.68. N. It was God in Flesh, that submitted to all this scorn and abuse for
our Sin. 1. O then, what does Sin deserve? 2. And why should we look for
better, and be over-tender of our Flesh or Reputation.

69. Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came to him, saying,
Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. 70. But he denied before them all,
saying, I know not what thou say. 71. And when he was gone out into the
porch, another maid saw him, and said to them that were there, This fellow was
also with Jesus of Nazareth. 72. And again he denied with an oath, I do not
know the man.

69. etc. N. 1. A man that is forwardest in professing Courage, and in drawing
the Sword, and laying about him, is in greater danger basely Cowarded by silly
Wenches. So uncertain a thing is Man. 2. Distrustful fear, and love of Life,
may draw men into multiplied heinous Sin.

73. And after a while came to him they that stood by, and said to Peter,
Surely thou also art one of them, for thy speech betrayeth thee. 74. Then began
he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock
crew.

73. Matthew mentions but one Cock crowing; It being the middle or second
that is meant. 2. To ask, what had become of Peter, if he had dyed in this Sin?
and how far did he fall from Grace, is not so profitable, as to consider our
own frailty and danger, and how to escape the like.

75. And Peter remembered the words of Jesus which said to him, Before the cock
crow, thou shall deny me thrice: And he went out, and wept bitterly.

75. N. Christ looked on Peter, (as John says,) and this began to melt him
into Repentance, with the hearing of the Second Cock: Yet though he wept, he
did not return, and openly Confess Christ, as he did after. Doubtless the
Disciples had far more Grace, and were less liable to Fall after the Holy Ghost
came down on them at Pentecost, than before.

CHAP. XXVII.
1. WHen the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people,
took counsel against Jesus to put him to death.

1. Note, The Romans had taken from the Jews the power of putting men to Death:
Therefore they consulted how to get the Roman Government to do it: Priests, and
Rulers, all Conspire it.

2. And when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate the governor.

2. When they had judged him to deserve Death after their Law, they bring him
bound to Pilate the Roman Governor, to have him Condemn, and Crucify him.

3. Then Judas who had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
priests and elders, 4. Saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the
innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that.

3, 4. N. 1. It is uncertain whether Judas was before emboldened to betray him
for gain, by thinking that he would deliver himself by a miracle; or whether he
was made senseless by the Devil, till now that God awakened his conscience. 2. O
how differently does sin appear in the hour of flattering temptation, and when
conscience is thoroughly wakened? It seems not then the same thing, because
conscience is not in the same case. 3. We see here what cold comfort companions
in sin will give a man in misery or despair? See thou to that, is all that can
be got then from them that tempted and hired him to sin. 4. O the stupidity of
seared sleepy consciences! that these Arch-priests and Rulers should not be
touched with Judas's terror and repentance, but say, What is that to us, when
it was they that hired him to sin, and sinned still.

5. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went
and hanged himself.

5. N. 1. Sinners gain will at last be like a hot iron, too hot to hold:
Despair shall force restitution when true repentance will not do it. This will
be all the comfort of unlawful gain at last. 2. That Judas strangled himself,
and that he fell headlong and his bowels burst out, are both certain: But how
he was strangled, whether by mere terror, or by a cord, and how he burst,
whether by mere suffocation, or by the fall, and how he fell, whether by
precipitation, or by breaking of the cord, etc. are things uncertain.

6. And the chief Priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful to
put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.

6. N. Thus Arch-hypocrites make conscience of Ceremony, and make no conscience
of Perjury, Persecution, and Murdering the Innocent. Blood they thirst for and
own; and they will give Money to procure it: but the price of blood must not be
consecrated.

7. And they took counsel, and bought with them the potters field to bury
strangers in.

7. N. This was supposed to be a pious use, so holy and charitable would they
be.

8, 9. Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood to this day.

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet, saying, And
they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom
they of the children of Israel did value: 10. and gave them for the potters
field as the Lord appointed me.

8, etc. N. How punctually was this foretold? But by whom is a doubt still. The
Text here says by Jeremy: the words are found only in Zachary, Chapter 11.12. Some
think that Zachary did but recite them from some Tradition from Jeremy: Others
that Matthew. forgot the names: Others that the Scribes since have mistaken: But
Mr. Mede thinks that this and the rest of Zachary to the end, are truly part of
Jeremy's Book, mis-joyned with Zach. by old mistake.

11. And Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, saying,
Art thou the king of the Jews? And Jesus said to him, Thou say.

11. N. It Is like Pilate asked in derision, but Christ affirmed it in earnest,
that he was their King by Right.

12. And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered
nothing. 13. Then says Pilate to him, Hear thou not how many thing they
witness against thee. 14. And he answered him to never a word; insomuch that
the governor marvelled greatly.

12, etc. N. Christ knew the time to speak, and the time to be silent, when
speaking would do no good.

15. Now at that feast the governor was wont to release to the people a
prisoner, whom they would. 16. And they had then a notable prisoner called
Barabbas. 17. Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said to them,
Whom will you that I release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?
18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him?

15. etc. He knew that it was the doing of the Priests and Rulers to prosecute
him, and thought that possibly the people might be for his life, rather than
for such a one as Barabbas.

19. When he was set down on the Judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying,
Have thou nothing to do with that just man, for I have suffered many things
this day in a dream because of him.

19. Women and dreams may be better Monitors to some Rulers, than Arch-priests
their wit and interest.

20. But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should
ask Barabbas and destroy Jesus.

20. N. It is the Priests and Rulers that stir up the malignity of the rabble
to do mischief.

21. Then the Governor answered and said to them, Whether of the two will ye
that I release unto you? they said Barabbas.

21. N. The people were of two parties: One part were for Christ, and that so
many that the Priests for tear of them durst not take him openly: But the other
party were the malignant rabble, who were ready to call for innocent blood, if
Priests and Elders did but set them on.

22. Pilate said to them, What shall I do then with Jesus which is called
Christ? They all said to him, Let him be crucified.

22. N. Nothing is so bad that ignorant wicked men may not do? nor any so good
that they may not murder.

23. And the governor said, Why, what evil has he done? but they cried out
the more, saying, Let him be crucified.

23. N. Its in vain to call for reason or justice to an ignorant malignant
rabble. A Heathen Ruler was less unjust, than the Priests and their blind
followers.

24. When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but rather a tumult was
made, he took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am
innocent of the blood of this just person, see ye to it.

24. N. Just Judges will do unjustly for the sake of any: But this hypocrite
thought the rabble, and the Priests importunity would excuse him: and the guilt
was only theirs.

25. Then answered all the people and said, His blood be on us, and on our
children.

25. N. And so it has been to this day with a most dreadful Vengeance; they
being killed with a most horrid slaughter, their City and Temple Burnt, and the
unbelieving offspring being Vagabounds over the earth, abhorred by all Nations
where they come. O dreadful curse! What need any other than themselves to make
ignorant wicked people miserable: They are the most direful enemies, yea Devils
and a Hell unto themselves.

26. Then released he Barabbas to them, and when he had scourged Jesus he
delivered him to be crucified.

26. N. He was scourged after he was sentenced to death: Yet John mentions it
before.

27. Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and
gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers. 28. And they stripped him, and
put on him a scarlet robe. 29. And when they had platted a crown of thorns,
they put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand, and they bowed the knee
before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail king of the Jews. 30. And they spit
upon him, and took the reed and smote him on the head.

27. etc. N. It was God in flesh that was thus made as a fool, the common sport
and scorn for our sins: and shall we think to be saved in a life of fleshly
pleasure; without partaking of the Cross? No wonder if the Cross was a
stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles; to trust Life and
Soul on one that was thus used; till the Holy Ghost by miracle and power
conquered unbelief.

31. And after that they had mocked him they took the robe off from him, and
put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.

31. When they had done with derision, they proceed to his Execution. All this
was suffered for us.

32. And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, him they
compelled to bear his cross.

32. Note, He that was compelled was innocent, but they that compelled him were
the Murderers.

33. And when they were come to a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a
place of a scull, 34. They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall, and
when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink.

33. N. This called Gall, and by Mark, Myrrh, is supposed to be a drink that
was poisonous, commonly given to Malefactors to hasten death for their ease;
which Christ refused.

35. And they crucified him, and parted his garments casting lots: that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, They parted my garments
among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lo^s.

35. They divided his other Garments, and cast lots for his seamless coat.

36, 37. And sitting down, they watched him. And set up over his head, his
accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

36, 37. So it was pretended Treason or Usurpation that he died for by the
Romans, and Blasphemy by the Jews; To bear the imputation of such wickedness
was not the least of Christ's sufferings.

38. Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and
another on the left:

38. N. Thus was he numbered with the transgressors, to expiate transgressions.

39. And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads. 40. And saying,
Thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it in three days, save thy self:
if thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross. 41. Likewise also the
chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and elders, said, 42. He saved
others, himself he cannot save. If he be the king of Israel let him now come
down from the cross, and we will believe him. 43. He trusted in God, let him
deliver him, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God.

39, etc. Note, Had these known him, and foreknown what would follow, this
scorn had been forborne. 2. They make his own words the matter of their
accusation, by perverting them. A way still used by such men. 3. They turn his
profession of himself into scorn, little knowing that this derided King would
judge them and all the world. 4. They turn his saving of others into his
derision: Neither the Goodness nor the Greatness of his miraculous works will
restrain them. 5. They turn his very relation to God, and trust in him, to his
scorn. 6. Infidels will prescribe Christ the terms on which they will believe
in him, or else they will not believe: But the faithful take Gods terms and
cogent evidences, and presume not to prescribe terms unto him.

44. The thieves also who were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.

44. Note, 1. All conspire to reproach the Son of God. 2. When we are in
suffering, all sorts take liberty to load him that is cast down: As in wars all
talk against them that are conquered. 3. The thieves here are said to do that
which only one of them did (a usual Phrase.)

45. Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land till the
ninth hour.

45. N. 1. It was extraordinary darkness; but not so great as to hinder
converse: therefore it did not convince them. 2. The Sun must not shine on that
odious fact, which yet the hardened agents glory in, and in darkness go on in
the works of darkness.

46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli,
Lamasabacthani, that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

46. Note, He either spoke in the Syriack Tongue, Psalm. 22.1. (which was a
Prophesi^ of him) or as some think the express Hebrew words, tho now variously
written.

2. By Gods forsaking him, is not meant any abatement of Divine Love: but that
God both exposed him to this death by wicked men* and withdrew from his Humane
nature the sense of his complacence, and let out upon his Soul a deep
afflicting sense of his displeasure against man for sin, which was his penalty
as he was our surety, and suffered in our stead as a Sacrifice for our sin. 3.
Christ was thus far forsaken for us, that we might never be quite forsaken.

47. Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said, the man calls
for Elias.

47. N, It is uncertain whether they spoke this in ignorance of the Language,
whether Hebrew (which the Jews had forgotten) or Syriack (which the Roman
Soldiers might not understand:) Or, (which is more probable) in mere profane
scorn.

48. And straitway one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with
vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. 49. The rest said, Let
be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him.

48, 49. N. In mere scorn.

50. Jesus when he had cried with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.

50. N. Luke tells us his last words [Father into thy hand I commend my Spirit.]

51. And behold the vail of the temple was rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom, and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent. 52. And the graves were
opened, and many bodies of saints which slept, arose, 53. And came out of the
graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared to
many.

51, etc. N. By the Vail some think is meant a Curtain hanged; others say, The
stone wall that was built between the inner Sanctuary and the outer: This
renting signified the ending of the Jewish Law and Sanctuary, and the opening
to us an access to God by Christ. The Earthquake, and the rending of the Rocks,
and opening of the Graves went sometime before his Resurrection: But the rising
and appearing of them was after. It is not the Souls of Saints that slept, but
those bodies that rose. All this convinced not the hardened Jews.

54. Now when the Centurion and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw
the earthquake, and those things which were done, they feared greatly, saying,
Truly this was the Son of God.

54. Note, The Heathen Soldiers were not so obdurate as the hypocrite Priests
and Rulers and their followers.

55. And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from
Galilee ministering to him. 56. Among which was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the
mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedees children.

55. Note, 56 These women stuck closer to Christ than his twelve chief
disciples did.

57. When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph,
who also himself was Jesus disciple. 58. He went to Pilate, and begged the body
of Jesus: then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered.

57, 58. Note, Christ's death ends not Joseph's love 2. Pilate was less
malignant than the Jews.

59. And when Joseph had taken the body he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth:
60. And laid it in his own tomb, which he had hewed out of the rock; and he
rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed.

59.60. N. Well might he lend him a grave, who would save him from the grave by
a resurrection.

61. And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting against the
sepulcher.

61. Note, To follow him in love as far as they were able.

62. Now the next day that followed, the day of the preparation, the chief
priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate; 63. Saying, Sir, we remember
that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise
again. 64. Command therefore that the sepulcher be made sure until the third
day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say to the
people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the
first. 65. Pilate said, to them, Ye have watch, go your way, make it as sure as
you can. 66. So they went, and made the sepulcher sure, sealing the stone, and
setting a watch.

62, etc. Note, God permitted and overruled their malignant suspicion, to
prevent all such calumnies and objections against our faith, ever after.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1. IN the end of the sabbath, as it began to to dawn, toward the first day of
the week, came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the sepulcher.

1. Note, They came in love with spices to have embalmed his body.

2. And behold, there was a great earthquake, for the angel of the LORD
descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and
sat upon it. 3. His countenance was like lightening, and his raiment white as
snow. 4. And for fear of him the keepers did shake and became as dead men.

2, etc. Note, 1. Well might Abraham say, if one rose from the dead, they will
not be persuaded, when all this would not convince men. 2. If an Angel be so
dreadful, what will God be to the wicked?

5. And the angel answered and said to the women, Fear ye not: for I know that
ye seek Jesus, who was crucified. 6. He is not here: for he is risen, as he
said: Come, see the place where the LORD lay. 7. And go quickly, and tell his
disciples that he is risen from the dead. And behold, he goes before you into
Gallilee, there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.

5. N. Angels were the preachers of Christ birth to Shepherds, and they are
the first preachers of his Resurrection to Women.

8. And they departed quickly from the sepulcher, with fear and great joy, and
did run to bring his disciples word.

8. N. Women must be the first preachers of Christ's resurrection to his
Apostles.

9. And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All
hail. And they came, and held him by the feet, and worshipped him.

9. N. It was poor Women that had been sinners, that Christ honored with his
first apperance.

10. Then said Jesus to them, Be not afraid, Go, tell my brethren that I go
into Gallilee, and there they shall see me.

10. N. 1. He would not show himself so openly, to the malicious forsaken
people at Jerusalem. 2. His disciples and kinsmen are called his Brethren. 3.
No one evangelist mentions the whole of this History; but what one omitteth
another has (of which after.)

11. Now when they were going, Behold, some of the watch came into the city,
and showed to the chief priests all the things that were done. 12. And when
they were assembled with the Elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large
money to the soldiers. 13. Saying, say ye, His disciples came by night, and
stole him away while we slept. 14. And if this come to the governors ears, we
will persuade him and secure you.

11. N. What will convince hardened, forsaken men.

15. So they took the money, and did as they were taught. And this saying is
commonly reported among the Jews to this day.

15. N. 1. Lying is the Devils great means against Faith; And the love of
money is the means that subserveth it. 2. They that will not believe the
truth, easily believe deceiving lies.

16. Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain, where
Jesus had appointed them. 17. And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but
some doubted.

17. N. Tho the evangelists say no more of Christ's meeting them on this
Mountain, and what he there said to them; and Luke and John say nothing of it,
and there seem a strange difference in their Narratives of Christ's appearances,
it is but one saying what another had omitted; and no one of them saying all
(of which after on John 20. and 21.)

18. And Jesus came, and spoke to them, saying, All power is given to me in
heaven and on Earth. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

18. After these and other appearings to them, Jesus said, As I have dyed to
redeem the World, in order to the ends of my undertaking, the Father has given
me an Universal Propiety and Governing power by the right to Redemption; as
chief Administrator under him in Heaven and Earth. So that henceforth all the
concerns of men in this World and the other, are at my dispose; and all men
under my Government by Right and Obligation. By which authority I now
commission you, to go, abroad the World and make all Nations (to the utmost of
your power) my Disciples; taking them into my Church by Solemn Covenant,
celebrated by Baptizing them, into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

N. 1. Christ's Right of Dominion and Empire is founded in the Fathers Covenant
with him as redeemer. 2. And being Universal Lord, Redemption is so far
universal as to prove these and other common effects. Romans 14.9. To this end
Christ dyed, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of
the living.

2. The word translated Teach signifies [ Disciple to me] or [ make Nations my
Disciples.]

3. All Christians should endeavor to make Christianity the National Religion,
that the Kingdoms of the World may become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ; that is that they be [ Christian Kingdoms] and not only Christians
gathered out of Kingdoms.

4. This makes not all to be Christians, who are in those Kingdoms, but only
such as are Discipled.

5. Infants being parts of all Kingdoms, this text commands to Disciple and
Baptize them, they are made Disciples by being justly dedicated to Christ, by
those that have true Power to dispose of them, to learn of him, and obey him as
they grow up and are Capable. As Christ was relatively, Head of the Church in
his Infancy, when his humane nature was incapable of the actual administration;
so are Infants capable of being Disciples by Covenant, Dedication, (by those
that have the dispose of them for their good, and can covenant for them which
men) and by Relation and Obligation. God had never a Church on Earth, of which
Infants were not Infant-members since there were Infants in the World.

6. To be baptized into the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost; is no less
than by solemn Covenant to give up ones self to God the Father, as our Father
reconciled by Christ; our chief owner and rules, and our chief Benefactor, even
as our God; and to Christ as our Savior, and the Holy Ghost as our Sanctifier.
And merely to consent to learn of Christ, makes none a baptizable disciple.

7. Baptism is Christening, and is the badge of those that must love and take
each other for Christians, and the terms of Church Unity; till it be nullified
by verbal or actual apostasy.

And it is Church tyranny and Schism, to make Canons which shall exclude those
from the Church of Christ, whom he takes in by baptism; before they
impenitently nullify that Covenant in whole or in some essential part, viz. by
proved denying essentials of Faith, or forsaking some essential part of
obedience.

8. Baptism making us Christians, is our state of Regeneration by which we may
know our right to Justification and Salvation; that is, He that consents
heartily and unfeignedly to the Baptismal Covenant, is Regenerate and
justified, and shall be saved. And he that does consent but with the mouth and
outward sign, or leaves out some essential part in his heart consent, is
regenerate only sacramentally and a visible member of the Church, but is not
justified nor shall be saved.

20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and
^o, I am with you always, to the end of the World.

20. And when you have Baptized them, and so united them to me and my universal
Church, upon their understanding professed faith and repentance, (and
dedication of their seed to me) then congregate them in order under faithful
Pastors. And as you as general Teachers to all the Churches, must deliver to
them all the commands which I have committed to your trust (by word and
writing) so these Pastors must further instruct them that they may grow up in
knowledge, of all these my commands: And in the performance of this charge, I
shall by the help of my Spirit and protection, be present with you and such
pastors in their course, to the end of this World, (or age) till I shall come
in glory to the final judgment. Tho you see me not, I shall be as really
assisting to you and regardful of you, even in all your labors and sufferings,
as if you saw me.

Note, 1. This general command of teaching all Nations Christ's commands,
includes writing the Scriptures, without which they could not teach posterity
in all Nations his commands.

2. It makes them his entrusted Apostles, from whose fidelity we may
believingly receive his commands: And therefore implies the promise of his
Spirit to make them true and credible reporters.

3. It implies that his commands are the universal Laws for his Catholic
Church. And no man or men have authority to make Laws for the universal Church
on Earth but he; and to undertake it, is to undertake the prerogative of
Christ, and to be Vice-christ by usurpation; be it Pope or Councils.

4. Yet the precept of observing his commands, forbids not the observing of the
commands of any lawful limited local rulers under him, not crossing his
commands; Parents, Masters, Pastors, Princes must be obeyed in their Provinces
and Places; even about Gods worship. If men make subordinate Laws, according to
Christ's General Laws of Love, Concord, Edification, Order, they must be obeyed
(as e. g.) what translations of Scripture to use, what Psalms, Meters, Tunes,
Gestures, Time, Place, and abundance such like.

The Gospel according to St. MARK.
Note, 1. That this is the same Mark against whom as not fit to be taken with
them, St. Paul sharply contended with Barnabas, even to parting a sunder. But
it was not as charging him with any crime, but as unfit to be taken with them
in so long and hard a work, which he before deserted. 2. It is said by some to
be a tradition, that Mark wrote this from the Mouth of Peter; but that is
uncertain. 3. It is questioned, seeing, it is only the eleven Apostles, to whom
Christ promised the Eminent help of the Spirit to bring all his Doctrine to
their remembrance, and lead them into all Truth; How can we be sure that Mark
and Luke who were no Apostles, and had not this promise did never mistake in
their writing the Gospel? Ans. Tho Christ promised not Infallibility to all
Preachers then, he promised and gave the Eminent Miraculous gifts to the Spirit
to others, as well as to the Apostles, as appeared in Stephen, Philip, and
others. And this spirit was to sit them for the work to which they were called,
which his miracles by them attested. 2. And the Apostles that then lived,
approved these writings of Mark and Luke, and so did the Churches where the
gifts of the Spirit did then most abound; who also delivered them down to us.

Whether this Mark was Bishop of Alexandria, or only a transient Evangelist
there a while, is an Historical controversy of no great Moment. When Antioch
had at once so many great Apostles, Prophets, and Teachers, and no one of them
then a Bishop to rule the rest as their Pastor, we may well conjecture that the
case of Alexandria did not much differ from that of Antioch (and Jerusalem
where neither James nor any one was Governor of the Apostles.)

The Reader must not expect that I repeat at large the Paraphrases or Notes
which are written on Matthew, when the same History and words are by Mark
repeated.

CHAP. I.
1. THE beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God. 2. As it is
written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, who shall
prepare thy way before thee. 3. The voice of one crying in the Wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.

1. etc. The public entrance of Christ on his Ministry, and Preaching the glad
tidings of Salvation, was by the preparation of John's Ministry Preaching
Repentance, to fit men for the Kingdom of the Messiah at hand; which the
Prophets had foretold.

Note, Whether by the Prophets be here meant Isay and Malachi; or only Isay,
is a Controversy of small moment.

4. John did Baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance,
for the remission of sins.

4. John told the Jews, that the Messiah was now come, and brought Pardon and
Salvation to all that received him; and therefore persuaded them all to Repent,
that they might be Pardoned, and fit Members of his Kingdom: and Baptized those
that Professed this.

5. And there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem,
and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins.

5. The generality of the people (longing for the promised Messiah,) were glad
of this News, that he was Come, and thronged to John, Confessing their Sins,
and Professing Repentance, and were Baptized by him.

6. And John was clothed with camels hair, and with a girdle of a skin about
his loins: and he did eat locusts and wild honey.

6. N. This kind of Eremetical Life, and Abstinence, is overvalued by them who
place Merit, or Perfection in it; and is unjustly vilifyed by some, who know
not of how great use it is some persons, to withdraw from worldly Vanities, and
Temptations.

7. And preached, saying, There comes one mightier than I after me, the
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.

7. N. Christ and his Servants are patterns of Humility: But Satan and his
servants are known by Pride.

8. I indeed have baptized you with water; but he shall baptize you with the
holy Ghost.

8. My Baptism does but prepare you; but his shall power out the Spirit on the
Baptized.

9. And it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee,
and was baptized of John in Jordan.

9. N. Qu. Did Christ Profess Repentance for the Remission of Sins? If not, how
was he capable of John's Baptism? Answ. He was not Baptized to the same uses,
as other men, but as owning John's Baptism, and the Coming of the Kingdom of
God. As a General will wear the same Colors with his Soldiers, though theirs
signify subjection to him.

10. And straitway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and
the Spirit like a dove descending upon him.

10. See on Matt. 3.

11. And there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.

11. N. God from Heaven Preached the Gospel at Christ's Baptism.

12. And immediately the spirit drives him into the wilderness. 13. And he was
there in the wilderness forty days tempted of Satan, and was with the wild
beasts, and the Angels ministered to him.

12.13. N. 1. To conquer Temptations, is to conquer Satan. 2. Angels brought
him meat at the end of the Forty days.

14. Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee preaching
the gospel of the kingdom of God.

14. That the Kingdom of God was coming.

15. And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand:
repent ye and believe the gospel.

15. The promised time of the Messiahs appearing is Come: Repent: and believe
this glad-tidings.

16. Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his
brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers. 17. And Jesus said
to them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men. 18.
And straitway they forsook their nets and followed him.

16. etc. See on John 1.40. and Matt. 4.18.

19. And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw James the son of
Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the ship mending their nets.
20. And straitway he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the
ship with the hired servants, and went after him.

19.20. N. He spoke to their hearts.

21. And they went into Capernaum, and straitway on the sabbath day he entered
into the Synagogue, and taught. 22. And they were astonished at his Doctrine;
for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes.

21.22. He spoke, as Authorized by God to speak in his name, and not as an
ordinary Expositor of the Law.

23. And there was in their Synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he
cried out, 24. Saying, Let us alone, what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus
of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee, who thou art, the holy
One of God. 25. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace* and come out of
him. 26. And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and c^^^d with a loud voice,
he came out of him. 27. And they were all amazed, insomuch, that they
questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is
this? For with authority commands he even the unclean spirits, and they do
obey him.

23. etc. N. 1. By an Unclean Spirit, he meant the Devil as such. 2. Forced
Obedience is common to Devils; Willing and Loving Obedience belongs to
Children.

28. And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round
about Galilee. ^9. And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue,
they entered into the house of Simon, and Andrew, with James and John.

29. N. Christ's Chief Apostles dwelt in Capernaum.

30. But Simons wives mother lay sick of a fever: and anon they tell him of
her. 31. And he came and took her by the hand, and lift her up, and immediately
the fever left her, and she ministered to them.

30.31. She was persently so cured, that she served them.

32. And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were
diseased, and them that were possessed with devils. 33. And all the city was
gathered together at the door. 34. And he healed many that were sick of diverse
diseases, and cast out many devils, and suffered not the devils to speak
because they knew him.

32. etc. He needed not the Devils Testimony.

35. And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and
departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.

35. N. Have not we Sinners more need to break our sleep for secret Prayer? He
prayed not with his Disciples, because the same Confessions and Prayers were
not fit for him, and them.

36. And Simon, and they that were with him, followed after him. 37. And when
they had found him, they said unto him, All men seek for thee. 38. And he said
unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also: for
therefore came I forth.

36.37.38. I must Preach in more places than one.

39. And he preached in their Synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast out
devils. 40. And there came a leper to him, beseeching hi^ and kneeling down to
him, and saying unto him, If thou will, thou can make me clean. 41. And Jesus
moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and says unto him,
I will, be thou clean. 42. And as soon as he had spoken* immediately the
leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.

39.40. Believing his Power, he found, that he was willing,

43. And he straitway charged him, and forthwith sent him away; 44. And says
unto him, See thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way, show thy self to the
priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded for a
testimony unto them.

43. N. Christ required the Legal Duties to the unlawfully-called, and bad
Priests.

45. But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the
matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was
without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter.

45. Publication raised Envy, and caused Christ to withdraw into the
Wilderness: what wonder if our Hearers indiscretion hurt us?

CHAP. II.
1. AND again he entered into Capernaum, after some days, and it was noised that
he was in the house. 2. And straightway many were gathered together; insomuch
that there was no room to receive them, no not so much as about the door: and
he preached the Word unto them.

1.2. He Preached to them that were within the house, and without the door, not
fearing the Reproach of a Conventicle.

3. And they came unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was born of
four.

4. And when they could not come nigh unto him for press, they uncovered the
roof where he was, and when they had broken it up, they let down the bed,
wherein the sick of the palsy lay. 5. When Jesus saw their faith, he said to
the sick of the palsy, Son thy sins be forgiven thee.

5. The Sin for which thou art thus Afflicted, is forgiven thee.

6. But there were certain of the Scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their
hearts.

7. Why does this man thus (...) blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God
only?

7. None but God can forgive any wrong done to God: But 1. Christ was God. 2. A
Minister of God may declare Gods forgiveness.

8. And immediately, when Jesus perceived in his spirit, that they so reasoned
within themselves, he said to them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts?
9. Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven
thee: or to say, Arise, take up thy bed and walk? 10. But that ye may know,
that the Son of man has power on earth, to forgive sins, (he says to the sick
of the palsy,) 11. I say to thee Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way
into thy house. 12. And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and wentforth
before them all; insomuch, that they were all amazed, and glorified God,
saying, We never saw it on this fashion.

8, etc. Is it not all one to forgive the Sin, and to forgive the Punishment.
We never saw such Works before.

13. And he went forth again by the seaside, and all the multitude resorted to
him, and he taught them.

13. N. In Field-Meetings, House-Meetings, Mountain-Meetings, Ship-Meetings,
Synagogue-Meetings, and Temple-Meetings, he Taught the People, and Preached the
Gospel.

14. And as he passed by, he saw Levi the son of Alpheus sitting at the receipt
of custom, and said unto him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.

14. N. He called Publicans.

15. And it came to pass, that as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many
publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples: for
there were many, and they followed him. 16. And when the scribes and pharisees
saw him eat with publicans and sinners, they said to his disciples, How is it
that he eats and drinks with publicans and sinners?

17. When Jesus heard it, he said to them, They that are whole, have no need of
the physician, but they that are sick? I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance.

15. etc. N. 1. The Hypocrite Pharisees will be more strict and holy than
Christ, if separating from others, and aggravating other men's Sins, and
justifying themselves were Holiness. 2. I came to be a Savior to Sinners, by
calling them to Repentance, that they may be Converted, and Forgiven. If you
are no Sinners, I am no Savior for you.

18. And the disciples of John, and the Pharisees used to fast: and they come
and say to him, Why do the disciples of John, and the Pharisees fast, but thy
disciples fast not? 19. And Jesus said to them, Can the children of the
bride-chamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the
bridegroom with them, they cannot fast: 20. But the days will come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then they shall fast in those days.

18. Why do you think you merit by your fasting? which is to be used only in
its season. You use not to fast but feast at your Marriages; my presence is
more joyful to them, than a Marriaged feast; when I am ascended, and they are
exposed to the scorn and persecution of men; they shall fast. Humiliation will
be more suitable to their outward state, tho they inwardly rejoice.

21. No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new
piece that filled it up, takes away from the old, and the rent is made worse.
22. And no man puts new wine into old bottles: else the new wine does burst
the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be marred: but new
wine must be put into new bottles.

21.22. They are not yet fit for austerities.

23. And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the
sabbath day, and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of corn.
24. And the Pharisees said to him, Behold, why do they on the sabbath day that
which is not lawful?

23.24. Ceremonious Hypocrites will be still strickter then Christ in the
Ceremonious part, while they violate morals.

25. And he said to them, Have ye never read what David did, when he had need,
and was hungry, he, and they that were with him. 26. How he went into the house
of God, in the days of Abiathar the high Priest, and eat the shewbread, which
is not lawful to eat, but for the Priests, and gave also to them which were
with him?

25. etc. Do you not know that precepts of rites and ceremonies, give place to
necessity and precepts of Charity, and self preservation? And that David's
instance proves this, in the days of Abiathar, a little before he was High
Priest, even in his father Abimeleohs Priesthood, he and his company did eat
the hallowed bread, which without necessity had not been lawful.

27. And he said to them, The sabbath is made for man, and not man for the
sabbath. 28. Therefore the son of man is LORD also of the Sabbath.

27.28. The sabbath is appointed to be a means of the good of Man, and not man
a means of it: And no means is to be used against its end, but (...) it; even
the good of Man. And therefore, I (...) to settle the Laws of grace, as
conducing to (...) recovery and good of man, have power of dispensation or
alteration of the Sabbath, as shall tend to the ends of man's good and Salvation.

CHAP. III.
1. ANd he entered again into the synagogues, and there was a man there which
had a withered hand. 2. And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the
sabbath day, that they might accuse him.

1.2. N. Malignity is not restrained by Miracles.

3. And he says to the man that had the withered hand, Stand forth. 4. And he
says to them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath day, or to do evil? to
save life, or to kill? but they held their peace.

3.4. Do you ceremonious murderers that lay wait for my life now, keep the
sabbath; and do I break it by saving men's lives.

5. And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for
the hardness of their hearts, he says to the man, Stretch forth thine hand.
And he stretched it out: and his hand was restored whole as the other.

5. N. 1. Anger and grief for men's sin, were justified by Christ's example. 2. A
hard heart can sin against Miracles and Mercy.

6. And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with the
Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

6. N. Its folly to doubt whether there be Devils, while Devils incarnate dwell
among us; what else but Devils sure, could make ceremonious hypocrites, consult
with Politic Royalists to destroy the Son of God for saving men's health and
lives by Miracle. Quer. Whether if this withered hand had been their own, they
would have plotted to kill him, that would have cured them by a Miracle, as a
sabbath Breaker? And whether their successors would silence and imprison Godly
Ministers, if they could cure them of all their sicknesses, and help them to
preferment, and give them money to feed their lusts?

7. But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a great
multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judea.

7. N. They that will drive away mercy from them, shall be without it; and
speed as they choose, and those that follow after Christ and mercy sincerely,
shall have their (...).

8. (...) from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyond Jordan, and they
about Tire and Sidon, a great Multitude, when they heard what great things he
did, came unto him. 9. And he spoke to his disciples, that a small ship should
wait on him, because of the multitude, lest they should throng him. 10. For he
had healed many, insomuch that they pressed upon him for to touch him, as many
as had plagues.

9.10. Were men but as regardful of their Souls as of their bodies, how
universally and joyfully would Christianity and Godliness be received.

11. And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried,
saying, Thou art the Son of God. 12. And he straightly charged them, that they
should not make him known.

11.12. N. He would not have the Devil preach the Gospel, lest it should bring
it under supicion.

13. And he goes up into a mountain, and calls unto him whom he would: and
they came unto him. 14. And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him,
and that he might send them forth to preach.

13.14. N. Apostles were witnesses and preachers, but not Lords nor Silencers,
nor Persecutors.

15. And to have power to heal sicknesses and to cast out devils.

15. N. But not to do mischief, and promote the Devils Kingdom, by fighting
against love and Godliness.

16. And Simon he surnamed Peter, 17. And James the son of Zebedee, and John
the brother of James (and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of
thunder. 18. And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas,
and James, the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Canaanite. 19. And
Judas Iscariot who also betrayed him: and they went into an house.

16. etc. N. He suited the number to the twelve tribes, till the Church was to
be made Catholic, and then he increased the number.

20. And the multitude comes together again, so that they could not so much as
eat bread. 21. And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him, for they said, He is beside himself.

20.21. His kindred thought that all this ado, did signify some ecstasy, and
would have got him home. But one very old Greek Copy (Bezas) reads it thus, [
When the scribes and the rest heard of it, they came to apprehend him; for they
said, that he made men mad.

22. And the Scribes who came down from Jerusalem, said, He has Beelzebub, and
by the prince of the devils casts he out devils.

22. They denied not the matter of fact of his Miracles, but said that he did
it by the Prince of the Devils.

23. And he called them to him, and said to them in parables, How can Satan
cast out Satan. 24. And if a kingdom be divided against it self, that kingdom
cannot stand. 25. And if a house be divided against it self, that house cannot
stand. 26. And if Satan rise up against himself and be divided, he cannot
stand, but has an end. 27. No man can enter into a strong man's house, and
spoil his goods, unless he first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil
his house.

23. etc. It is not by the Devils own consent that he is cast out, but by
overcoming him.

28. Verily I say to you, All sins shall be forgiven to the sons of men, and
blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: 29. But he that shall
blaspheme against the holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in danger of
eternal damnation: 30. Because they said, He has an unclean spirit.

28, etc. All other sin and blasphemy is curable and pardonable, but if men
will take all the miracles, gifts, and graces of the holy Ghost, by which I and
my servants prove me to be sent from God, to be all done by the Devil to
deceive them, there is no greater evidence of Gods attestation left to convince
them, and therefore their blasphemous unbelief is uncurable and unpardonable.

31. There came then his brethren and his mother, and standing without, sent
unto him, calling him. 32. And the multitude sat about him, and they said to
him, Behold thy mother and thy brethren without seek thee. 33. And he answered
saying, Who is my mother or my brethren. 34. And he looked round about on them
that sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren. 35. For
whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and
my mother.

31, etc. If you would know me, you must look beyond my fleshly Kindred and
Relations: As I am of an higher offspring, so I have higher works to do than
to please natural kindred. (I draw you not from due regard to your natural
kindred: God commands you to honor Parents.) But Spiritual Relations to me
as such, are more amiable and happy than mere Natural Relations as such. It is
a more amiable thing to be a Lover of God and to obey him, than to be my
Mother, Sister or Brother: If they had no better, they would perish for ever.
But all that love God and obey him shall be saved;) This is great comfort to
every true Christian, that they are dearer to Christ than Mother, Brother or
Sister as such, would have been, had they not been holy.)

CHAP. IV.
1. ANd he began again to teach by the sea side, and there was gathered to him
a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship, and sat in the sea: and the
whole multitude was by the sea on the land. 2. And he taught them many things
by parables, and said to them in his doctrine. 3. Hearken, behold, there went
out a sower to sow: 4. And it came to pass as he sowed, that some fell by the
way side, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up. 5. And some fell on
stony ground where it had not much earth, and immediately it sprang up, because
it had no depth of earth. 6. But when the sun was up, it was scorched, and
because it had no root it withered away. 7. And some fell among thorns, and the
thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no fruit. 8. And other fell on
good ground, and did yield fruit, that sprang up and increased, and brought
forth some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred. 9. And he said to them,
He that has ears to hear let him hear.

See Paraphrase on Matthew. 13.

10. And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve, asked him
the parable.

10. He is said to be alone when the multitude were gone.

11. And he said to them, To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom
of God, but to them that are without, all these things are done in parables:
12. That seeing they may see, and not perceive, and hearing they may hear, and
not understand, lest at any time they should be converted, and their sins
should be forgiven them.

See Matthew. 13.12, 13. God has vouchsafed you greater help and light than to
those without, that are not my Disciples: Parables are fitted to their ignorant
state, who wilfully neglect instruction, and are never the better for what they
hear, so that it does not convert and heal them. Did they enquire and
diligently search for truth, it should be fullier opened to them.

13. And he says to them, Know ye not this parable? and how then will ye know
all parables.

13. If ye understand not this plain similirude, how will ye understand many
more which you must hear.

14. The lower sows the word. 15. And these are they by the way side where
the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan comes immediately and takes
away the word that was sown in their hearts. 16. And these are they likewise
which are sown in stony ground, who when they have heard the word, immediately
receive it with gladness: 17. And have no root in themselves, and so endure but
for a time, afterward when persecution or affliction arises for the words
sake, immediately they are oftended. 18. And these are they which are sown
among thorns, such as hear the word. 19. And the ca^es of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things, entering in, choke the
word, and it becomes unfruitful.

See Matthew. 13. The several Writers of Christ's words give us the same in sense,
tho there be some small difference in the words.

20. And these are they which are sown on good ground, such as hear the word
and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirty, some sixty, and some an
hundred.

20. N. All sound Christians are not equally fruitful. 2. The quality of the
hearts of the hearers, causes the differing success of the same Doctrine or
Sermons on different persons.

21. And he said to them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or
under a bed, and not to be set on a candlestick.

21. God does not give you more light than others, to hide it, but to use it
for the good of many.

22. For there is nothing hid which shall not be manifested, neither was any
thing kept secret, but that it should come abroad.

22. Light is for the manifesting of all things, and it will manifest all
things, how dark or secret soever they seem.

23. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

23. Let him that has ears and understanding see that he hear Gods word
regardfully, with all the serious attention of his heart: for it is of greatest
concernment to his soul.

24. And he said to them, Take heed what you hear: with what measure ye mete,
it shall be measured to you: and to you that hear shall more be given. 25. For
he that has to him shall be given, and he that has not, from him shall taken
even that which he has.

24, 25. See that you set your hearts to the word you hear: For as you use Gods
word, he will use you: Learn faithfully and you shall be taught more: but if
you stifle or neglect the truth, your knowledge will be as none, or worse than
none to you* and God may forsake your understandings.

26. And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into
the ground. 27. And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should
spring and grow up he knows not how.

26, 27. N. Man sows but God blesses it; and we see it not grow, but see
that it has grown. Who then shall exact of another an account just when or how
he was convetted.

28. For the earth brings forth fruit of her self, first the blade, then the
ear, and after that the full corn in the ear. 29. But when the fruit is brought
forth, immediately he puts in the sickle, because the harvest is come.

28. Do your part in sowing, and God will prosper it: And tho you see not
present fruit, it will ripen and show it self last, and be rewarded and fully
blessed.

30. And he said, Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God, or with what
comparison shall we compare it. 31. It is like a grain of mustard seed, which
when it is sown in the earth is less than all the seeds that be in the earth.
32. But when it is sowed, it grows up, and becomes greater than all herbs,
and shoots out great branches, so that the fowls of the air may lodge under
the shadow of it.

30, etc. You all look for the Kingdom of the Messiah, but you mistake in
expecting a sudden visible pompous appearance of it: It is the Catholic Church
for which now I am sowing the seed of the Gospel, and seems like a grain of
Mustard Seed, a small inconsiderable thing, one of the contemptiblest Societies
on Earth: But God will prosper this seed so that my Church shall become so
conspicuous and eminent that Princes and Nations and worldly men, shall be glad
for their interest to have the name of Christians, and to be under the
protection of the Christian Powers.

33. And with many such parables spoke he the word to them, as they were able
to bear it. 34. And without a parable spoke he not to them, and when they were
alone he expounded all things to his disciples.

33, 34. He spoke to them according to their low capacities, as to Children by
familiar comparisons, further teaching the sense of all to those that as
Scholars came to learn of him.

35. And the same day when even was come, he says to them, Let us pass over
unto the other side. 36. And when they had sent away the multitude, they took
him even as he was in the ship; and there were also with him many other little
ships. 37. And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the
ship, so that it was now full, 38. And he was in the hinder part of the ship
asleep on a pillow, and they awake him and say to him, Master, carest thou not
that we perish?

35. etc. N. God raises dangers to show us our weakness, and his power in our
deliverance. 2. They are safe who are in the same ship with Christ. 3. Yet
Christ seems for a time to neglect us in our dangers, as if he cared not what
became of us.

39. And he arose and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, Peace, be still:
and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. 4. And he said to them, Why
are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have no faith? 41. And they feared
exceedingly, and said one another, What manner of man is this, that even the
wind and the sea obey him.

39. etc. N. All things obey Christ save voluntary sinners. 2. It is but a word
of his that is needful to allay all our dangers. 3. Too much fear, shows too
little faith. Trusting Christ is the cure of such fear. 4. How greatly should
he be reverenced and obeyed by man, whom wind and seas, and all creatures must
obey?

CHAP. V.
1. ANd they came over to the other side of the sea into the Country of the
Gadarenes. 2. And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him
out of the tombs, a man with an unclean spirit, 3. Who had his dwelling among
the tombs, and no man could bind him, no not with chains. 4. Because that he
had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked
asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces, neither could any man tame
him. 5. And always night and day he was in the mountains, and in the tombs,
crying, and cutting himself with stones.

Matthew. 8.28. tells us, that they were two: which Mark denies not, tho he
mention but one.

6. But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him:

6. Devils worship is but a constrained confession of Christ's power over them.

7. And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus,
thou Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God that thou torment me not.

7. N. It is no wonder if malicious hypocrites abuse the name of God by
Excommunications and reproaching of his truest servants, when the Devil durst
use Gods name to adjure Christ himself.

8. For he said to him, Come out of the man thou unclean spirit.

8. N. It appears that Devils are not always just in the same condition, but
when they are restrained from going about to do mischief, it is to them an
imprisonment and tornment; as it is to a Wolf to be tied up from killing sheep.

9. And he asked him, What is thy name? and he answered him saying, My name is
Legion, for we are many.

9. N. Spirits lose not their individuation by falling into one common soul. 2.
Seeing the greatest multiplicity is among the least of beings (there are more
Boughs and Sprigs than Trunks of Trees, more Flies than men, etc.) It seems
that the very nature of Devils is debased with their quality, and they are not
now of so light a spiritual nature as they were before their fall; if there
were so great a number to afflict one man.

10. And he besought him much, that he would not send them away out of the
country. 11. Now there were nigh to the mountains a great herd of swine
feeding. 12. And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine,
that we may enter into them. 13. And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the
unclean spirits went out and entered into the swine, and the herd ran violently
down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand) and they were
choked in the sea.

10, etc. Let us play a small game rather than none: It will somewhat abate our
pain, to do some mischief tho a less, and not to be imprisoned in the deep. N.
The reason why Devils hurt us no more, is because God will not give them leave.

14. And they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city and in the
country. And they went out to see what it was that was done. 15. And they come
to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with the devil, and had the Legion,
sitting and clothed, and in his right mind, and they were afraid. 16. and they
that saw it told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil,
and also concerning the swine. 17. And they began to pray him to depart out of
their coasts.

14. etc. N. When they were healed by Christ, they followed him. But when they
lost their Swine by him, they would be rid of him.

18. And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the
devil, prayed him, that he might be with him.

19. Howbeit, Jesus suffered him not, but says to him, Go home to thy friends,
and tell them, how great things the Lord has done for thee, and has had
compassion on thee. 20. And he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis, how
great things Jesus had done for him: and all men did marvel.

18. etc. N. All must honor God in their places; but not all in one place and
station.

21. And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much
people gathered unto him, and he was nigh unto the sea. 22. And behold, there
comes one of the rulers of the synagogue Jairus by name, and when he saw him,
he fell at his see. 23. And besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter
lies at the point of death, I pray thee come and lay thy hands on her that she
may be healed, and she shall live. 24. And Jesus went with him, and much people
followed him, and througed him.

21. N. Each Synagogue had more than one Ruler. 2. It was then a great mercy to
be Afflicted: For such came to Christ for help: while others maligned him.

25. And a certain woman which had an issue of Blood twelve years, 26. And had
suffered many things of many Physicians, and had spent all that she had, and
was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse. 27. When she had heard of Jesus,
came in the press behind, and touched his garment: 28. For she said, If I may
but touch ^is clothes, I shall be whole. 29. And straightway the fountain of
her blood was dried up: and she felt in her body that she was healed of that
plague.

25. etc. N. Her strong Faith prepared her for a speedy cure.

30. And Jesus immediately knowing in himself, that virtue was gone out of him,
turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes? 31. And his
disciples said to him, Thou see the multitude thronging thee, and say
thou, Who touched me? 32. And he looked round about to see her that had done
this thing. 33. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in
her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth. 34. And he said
to her, Daughter, thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace, and be whole of
thy plague.

31. etc. N. Many touched his clothes that were never the better; so many use
his name, when they that use it in Faith are healed. 2. She feared Christ was
angry with her, when he healed her.

35. While he yet spoke, there came from the ruler of the synagogues house,
certain which said, Thy daughter is dead; why troublest thou the master any
further. 36. As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he says to the
ruler of the Synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe.

35. etc. Take heed lest distrust deprive thee of thy desire.

37. And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John the
brother of James. 38. And he comes to the house of the ruler of the synagogue,
and sees the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly. 39. And when he
was come in, he says unto them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is
not dead, but sleeps. 40. And they laughed him to scorn: but when he had put
them all out, he takes the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that
were with him, and enters in where the damsel was lying. 41. And he took the
damsel by the hand, and said to her Talitha Cumi, which is, being interpreted,
Damsel (I say unto thee) arise: 42. And straitway the damsel arose, and walked,
for she was of the age of twelve years: and they were astonished with a great
astonishment. 43. And he charged them straightly, that no man should know it: and
commanded that something should be given her to eat.

37. etc. N. It was needful that he, on whom all must trust for Life
Everlasting, should show, that he has the power of Life, and Death: Yet would
not have it divulged, to avoid untimely Persecution.

CHAP. VI.
1. AND he went out from thence, and came into his own country, and his
disciples followed him. 2. And when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach
in the synagogue; and many hearing him were astonished, saying, From whence
has this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him,
that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands.

3. Is not this the carpenter, the Son of Mary, the brother of James and Joses,
and of Judas and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? and they were
offended at him.

2. Because they knew his visible Original, and Education, and Kindred to be
like other of their Neighbors, they were by this, made backward to believe,
him to be the Son of God.

4. And Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor but in his own
country, and among his own kindred, and in his own house.

4. It is usual for Prophets to be least set by at home, where men that see
their Natural Original, yet see not the Spirit of God in them, nor know his
operations,

5. And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a
few sick folk and healed them. 6. And he marvelled because of their unbelief,
And he went round about the villages, teaching.

5. It was not for want of Power in Christ; but because they were incapable
receivers. Thus Sin goes on from bad to worse: Unbelief deprived them of the
Miracles that should have cured it.

7. And he called to him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and
two, and gave them power over unclean spirits.

7. He assigned not to any one, a singular Province, but set them by Two's, of
which no one was Ruler of another.

8. And commanded them, that they should take nothing for their journey, save a
staff only: no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse: 9. But be shod with
sandals: and not put on two coats. 10. And he said to them, In what place
soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart from that place.

8. etc. N. This is no binding Example to all Preachers.

11. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence,
shake off the dust under your feet, for a testimony against them: verily I say
to you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
Judgment, then for that city.

11. N. Rejecting the greatest Mercy, and Gospel Light, deserves the greatest
punishment in Hell: What then will become of Persecutors?

12. And they went out and preached, that men should repent.

12. N. Repentance is as real a part of the Gospel, as Faith: And repenting of
Unbelief as it signifies Conversion, is Faith it self. Alas, that so
reasonable a duty as Repenting, should be so hardly obtained.

13. And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick,
and healed them.

13. And when the Miraculous Power cease, the ceremony of Anointing cease.

14. And king Herod heard of him, (for his name was spread abroad) and he said,
that John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works do
show forth themselves in him.

14. N. Herod believed, the Immortality of the Soul; else he could not have
believed the Resurrection.

15. Others said, That it is Elias. And others said, That it is a prophet, or
as one of the prophets. 16. But when Herod heard thereof, he said, It is John
whom I beheaded, he is risen from the dead.

15.16. His Conscience put him in fear of John.

17. For Herod himself had sent forth, and laid hold upon John, and bound him
in prison for Herodias sake, his brother Philips wife; for he had married her.

17. N. He could bear the guilt, but not the reproof But God will make the
proudest bear more.

18. For John had said to Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers
wife.

18. N. He that has a call, to tell Kings of their Sin, must do it faithfully.

19. Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him, and would have killed him,
but she could not.

19. N. See the bloody mind of a wicked Que^^ The cause of John's Death, is but
foretelling a Sinner of his Sin.

20. For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and
observed him, and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly.

20. His Conscience telling him; that John was a Just and Holy man, made him
reverence him; and do many things which John Preached to him, and hear him with
some pleasure; but could not leave his Sin.

21. And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a
supper to his lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilee: 22. And when
the daughter of the said Herodias came and danced, and pleased Herod, and them
that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou will, and I will give it thee. 23. And he swear unto her, Whatsoever thou shall
ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my kingdom.

21. etc. N. 1. Yet will such wretches lose the Kingdom of Heaven, rather than
let go a base lust for God; so much more liberal are they to their Flesh and
fellow-Sinners.

24. And she went forth, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she
said, The head of John the Baptist. 25. And she came in straightway with haste
unto the king, and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a
charger, the head of John the Baptist.

24.25. N. Blood and Revenge is by a Lustful Woman, preferred before half a
Kingdom: such are the Enemies of holy men.

26. And the king was exceeding sorry, yet for his oaths sake, and for their
sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her.

26. All unwillingness and sorrow for Sin, is not true Repentance; but that
which is more effectual against Sin, than the temptation is for it.

27. And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be
brought, and he went, and beheaded him in the prison. 28. And brought his head
in a charger, and gave it to the damsel, and the damsel gave it to her mother.

27.28. This wicked, bloody King wanted not an Executioner to do his Will, in
the most heynons Sin.

29. And when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and
laid it in a tomb.

30. And the Apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all
things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.

29.30. Of their Doctrine and Miracles.

31. And he said unto them, Come ye your selves apart into a desert place, and
rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so
much as to eat. 32. And they departed into a desert place by ship privately.
33. And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran a foot
thither out of all cities, and out went them, and came together unto him.

33. N. Fervent desire is very diligent and laborious.

34. And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with
compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd? and
he began to teach them many things. 35. And when the day was now far spent, his
disciples came to him, and said, This is a desert place, and now the time is
far passed, 36. Send them away, that they may go into the country round about,
and into the villages, and buy themselves bread: for they have nothing to eat.
37. He answered and said to them, give ye them to eat. And they say to him,
Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and give them to eat?

34. Their Penny was Seven pence half penny. Beza reckons the 200 pence, to
35 pound Frank of Tours.

Note. The Luxurious Bellys of this Land would have taken bread but for a dry
Feast, though they had the Fishes also.

38. He says to them, How many loaves have ye? go and see. And when they knew,
they say, Five, and two fishes. 39. And he commanded them to make all sit down
by companies upon the green grass. 40. And they sat down in ranks by hundreds,
and by fifties. 41. And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes,
he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves and gave them to his
disciples to set before them, and the two fishes divided he among them all. 42.
And they did all eat, and were filled. 43. And they took up twelve baskets full
of the fragments, and of the fishes. 44. And they that did eat of the loaves,
were about five thousand men.

38. etc. N. 1. This Miracle had Witnesses enough. 2. Though God do not now
feed his Servants by Miracle, he does perform his Promise, and provide for
them, nevertheless; and is no less to be trusted. 3. Even Miraculous Food is to
be Sanctified by Heavenly benediction.

45. And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and to
go to the other side before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people. 46.
And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray. 47. And
when the even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on
the land. 48. And he saw them toyling in rowing, for the wind was contrary to
them: and about the fourth watch of the night he comes unto them, walking upon
the sea, and would have passed by them. 49. But when they saw him walking upon
the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out. 50. For they all
saw him, and were troubled, and immediately he talked with them, and said to
them, Be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid. 51. And he went up unto them
into the ship, and the wind ceased, and they were sore amazed in themselves,
beyond measure, and wondered.

45. etc. N. 1. If Christ must pray so much, what need we? 2. If Christ say, it
is I, be not afraid, it should quiet tumerous souls. 3. Even the appearance of
Christ himself in a strange way, may amaze the faithful.

52. For they considered not the miracle of the loaves, for their heart was
hardened.

52. Had they duly considered the miracle of feeding, no further miracle would
have seemed so strange to them. N. They that have not hearts hardened as the
wicked, may be hardened as to some particular thing.

53. And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Genesareth, and
drew to the shore. 54. And when they were come out of the ship, straightway
they knew him. 55. And ran through the whole region round about, and began to
carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was. 56. And
whithersoever he entered into villages: or cities, or country, they laid the
sick in the street, and besought him, that they might touch if it were but the
border of his garment? and as many as touched him were made whole.

53. N. O that we were as earnest followers of Christ for Salvation, as they
were for their Bodies! And that we could as boldly believe and trust him for
our soul^, as common experience of success caused them to do for their health.

CHAP. VII.
1. THen came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, who
came from Jerusalem. 2. And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with
defiled (that is to say, with unwashen) hands, they found fault. 3. For the
Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat not, holding
the tradition of the elders. 4. And when they come from the market, except they
wash, they eat not: many other things there be, which they have received to
hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and tables.

If these hypocrites had not Ceremony and Tradition, and Obedience to their
Councils to make Religion of, how could they quiet their Consciences in their
wordly wicked lives? And what pretense could they have had to persecute Christ
and his Apostles, had not disobedience to their masterships, and councils, and
Traditions in Ceremony, served their malignity for a pretense. The Devil will
be religious to destroy Religion.

5. Then the Pharisees and ^cribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples
according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashed hands?

5. Why observe you not the Cannons.

6. He answered and said to them, Well has Esaias prophesied of you,
hypocrites, as it is written, This people honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me. 7. How be it in vain do they worship me teaching
for doctrines the traditions of men.

6. etc. Well does I say describe you Hypocrites, This people, etc. give me an
outside ceremonious Worship, but their hearts are void of true holiness,
Religion, and spiritual worship But all their Hypocrital worship of ^^e is in
vain, while they make doctrines and Laws of Religion of the injunctions of men,
and the traditions or cannons of their Councils or elders.

8. For ^aying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, as
the washing of pots and cups: and many other such things ye do.

8. God commands one to preach and obey his word, and to live in love and show
mercy, etc. These you lay aside, and hinder the preaching of his word, and
persecute his Servants, and then you are zealous for your ceremoniea, N. It is
not washing f^r cleanliness, but for Ceremony that Christ speaks against.

9. And he said to them, Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye
may keep your own tradition.

9. You think it very well done, to set against Godliness and Gods own Laws; or
make nothing of them, that you may keep your own presumptious Cannons or
traditions. N. By [ Full well,] is meant [ Full ill.] Christ shows us that
all use of Ironies or derisions is not unlawful.

10. For Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother: and [ who so ourseth]
father or mother, let him dye the death.

10. Who so revileth.

11. But ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, It is Corban, that
is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me, he shall be
free.

11. If he say, it is devoted to God, N. God accepts not any thing vowed to
him for worship, which he before bound us by his command to employ any other
way.

12. And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or mother. 13. Making
the word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye have delivered:
and many such things ye do.

13. N. They thought that their cannons could loose men from Gods commands. As
if a cannon should forbid men to give to the poor, or to preach the Gospel, or
worship God; who is bound to it by Gods Law.

14. And when he had called all the people unto him, He said to them, Hearken
to me every one of you, and understand. 15. There is nothing from without a
man, that entering into him can defile him: but things which come out of him,
those are they which defile a man. 16. If any man has ears to hear, let him
hear.

14, etc. N. He speaks of defiling by Guilt.

17. And when he was entered into the house from the people, his disciples asked
him concerning the parable. 18. And he says to them, Are ye so without
understanding also? do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without
enters into the man, it cannot defile him. 19. Because it enters not into
his heart, but into the belly, and goes out into the draught, purging all
meats?

17. etc. Meat makes not a sinful heart or will as such.

20. And he said, That which comes out of the man, that defiles a man. 21.
For from within out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, 22. Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness. 23. All these evil
things come from within and defile the man.

23. These make him a sinner and guilty. And so do gluttony and drunkenness,
but not as Meat and Drink, but as sinful excess.

24. And from thence he arose and went into the borders of Tire and Sidon, and
entered into a house, and would have no man know it, but could not be hid. 25.
For a certain woman whose young daughter had an unclean Spirit, heard of him,
and came and fell at his feet. 26. The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by
nation, and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her
daughter. 27. But Jesus said to her, Let the children first be filled: for it
is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it unto the dogs.

26. N. Phaenice and Canaan were one place, 27. I am sent first to the
Israelites, Gods peculiar people, to whom you Canaanitos go for dogs, and must
not have their part.

28. And she answered and said to him, Yes Lord, yet the dogs under the table
eat of the childrens crumbs. 29. And he said to her, For this saying, go thy
way, the devil is gone out of thy daughter. 30. And when she was come to her
house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed.

28. etc. N. Not for the wittiness of her saying, but for the Faith and
Importunity. They that will take no denial of Christ, shall have no denial.

31. And again departing from the coasts of Tire and Sidon, he came unto the
sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. 32. And they
bring unto him, one that Was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech: and
they beseech him to put his hand upon him. 33. And he took him aside from the
multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his
tongue. 34. And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and says to him, Ephphata,
that is, Be opened. 35. And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of
his tongue loosed, and he spoke plain: 36. And he charged them that they should
tell no man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they
published i^. 37. And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He has done all
things well: he makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.

33. Christ's looking up to heaven and sighing, implies some more than ordinary
difficulty in the cure. Bodily mercies are magnified by all.

CHAP. VIII.
1. IN those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat,
Jesus called his disciples to him, and says to them, 2. I have compassion on
the multitude, because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing
to eat. 3. And if I send them away fasting, to their own houses, they will
faint by the way, for diverse of them came from far.

2. Christ's compassion is our great consolation and ground of trust.

4. And his disciples answered him, From whence can a man satisfy these men
with bread herein the wilderness? 5. And he asked them, How many loaves have
ye? and they said, seven. 6. And he commanded the people to sit down on the
ground, and he took the seven loaves and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to
his disciples to set before them; and they did set them before the people. 7.
And they had a few small fishes, and he blessed, and commanded to set them also
before them. 8. So they did eat, and were filled; and they took up of the
broken meat that was left, seven baskets. 9. And they that had eaten were about
four thousand, and he sent them away.

N. Its like their loaves then were but like our cakes, by the custom of
breaking them.

10. And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and came into
the parts of Dalmanutha. 11. And the Pharisees came forth and began to question
with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him.

10, 11. They would try whether he were the Son of God, by a sign from heaven
of their own choosing.

12. And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and says, Why does this generation
seek after a sign? verily I say to you, there shall no sign be given this
generation.

12. He deeply groaned in grief for their obdurateness, and said, Have not this
kind of men had signs enough to convince them? Must they further choose what
Miracles they shall have? Verily no such desire of these perverse men, shall be
satisfied (the miracle of my resurrection they shall have.

13. And he left them, and entering into the ship again, departed unto the other
side. 14. Now the Disciples had forgotten to take bread, neither had they in
the ship with them more than one loaf. 15. And he charged them saying, Take
heed, beware of the leven of the Pharisees, and of the leven of Herod.

15. The dangerous enemies of the Gospel are the Ceremonious Pharisees, and the
King Herod a jealous Roman Governor. Take special heed that the Pharisees
seduce you not by their deceits, nor the King and his Officers affright you not
from the Faith by his cruelty.

16. And they reasoned among themselves saying, It is because we have no bread.
17. And when Jesus knew it, he says to them, Why reason ye because ye have no
bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet
hardened? 18. Having eyes see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye
not remember? 19. When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many
baskets full of fragments took ye up? and they said, Twelve. 20. And when the
seven among four thousand, how many baskets of fraqments took ye up? and they
said, Seven. 21. And he said to them, How is it that ye do not understand.

18. N. It is a great sin to have a power of understanding and considering, and
not to use it. 2. And a great sin quickly to forget Miracles, or mavelous
providence, and to fall into new distrustful reasonings in our next wants.

22. And he comes to Bethsaida, and they bring a blind man unto him and
besought him to touch him: 23. And he took the blind man by the hand, and led
him out of the town, and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon
him, he asked him if he saw ought? 24. And he looked up and said, I see men as
trees, walking*

24. etc. I discern not Men from Trees by their shape, but suppose them men,
because they walk.

25. After that he put his hands again on his eyes, and made him look up; and
he was restored, and saw every man clearly. 26. And he sent him away to his
house, saying, Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any man in the town.

25, 26. To avoid ostentation and envy.

27. And Jesus went out, and his disciples into the towns of Cesarea Philippi,
and by the way, he asked his disciples, saying to them, Whom do men say that I
am?

27. Not but that he knew: but his question was to occasion their confession.

28. And they answered, John the Baptist: but some say Elias, and others, One
of the Prophets. 29. And he said to them, But whom say ye that I am? and Peter
answered and says to him, Thou art the Christ. 30. And he charged them that
they should tell no man of him.

29. Men were to discern who he was by his works: and he would not have it
commonly proclaimed, till his Resurection and Spirit had completed those works
and evidences by which it was to be proved.

31. And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many things,
and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests and scribes, and be
killed, and after three days rise again. 32. And he spoke that saying openly:
and Peter took him, and began to rebuke him. 33. But when he had turned about,
and looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me,
Satan: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be
of men.

N. 1. Christ made them know that he designed not a Worldly Kingdom, when he
tells them of his de^t^ and resurrection. 2. Peter in his fleshly wisdom
thought Christ was not so wise as he. No wonder if Novices now think themselves
wiser than their wisest teachers: and specially if such are censured as
imprudent for not avoiding suffering. 3. Even a Peter by such carnal wisdom may
so far serve Satan as to deserve so sharp a rebuke as to be called a Satan. 4.
Savouring the things of men and flesh more than of God, is the great sin that
we are all in danger of, and deserves sharp rebuke.

34. And when he had called the people unto him, with his disciples also, he
said to them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. 35. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it;
but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospels, the same shall
save it.

34. This case of Peter occasioned Christ to call off all his Disciples from
worldly expectations, and to tell them what they must trust to; and that they
are no Disciples for him if they cannot trust him with their lives; and if they
believe not that they shall gain more by him than their lives are worth: N. To
deny a man's self is to forsake his life rather than forsake Christ. As to deny
Christ was to forsake him to save life or any thing else. He that will save his
life by denying Christ, shall lose it and his salvation: And he that denies
his life for Christ and the hope of Salvation shall save it for ever.

36. For what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? 37. Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

36. How poor a price is all the profit and pleasure of this life, to hire a
man by sin to lose his salvation, or what can make up that man's loss? N. And
will pride, revenge, gluttony, drunkenness, or fornication, then make him a
saver that loses his soul by them? or will preferment, Lordship, and pomp, and
power recompense him.

38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed,
when he comes in the glory of his Father and the holy angels.

38. If men be so far ashamed of a crucified, a scorned, a persecuted Christ,
as to deny him to escape shame or suffering, a glorified Christ in Judgment
before Angels and Men will disown them, and say, I know you not. It is not a
Popedom, or a Cardinalship, nor a Lordship that nominal Christians are ashamed
of, but it is poor persecuted Christianity.

CHAP. IX.
1. ANd he said, Verily I say to you, there be some of them that stand here,
who shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with
power.

1. Till they see a glimpse of that glorious or powerful appearance of the King
of the Church in which he shall come at the last.

2. And after six days Jesus took with him Peter, and James, and John, and
leads them up into an high mountain apart by themselves, and he was
transfigured before them. 3. And his raiment became shining exceeding white as
snow, so as no fuller on earth can white them.

4. And there appeared to them Elias with Moses, and they were talking with
Jesus. 5. And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be
here, let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one
for Elias. 6. For he wist not what to say, for they were sore afraid.

2. This was the performance of the foregoing Promise.

See on Matt. 17.

Note, For Glorified Saints from Heaven to wait on Christ in his own splendour,
was a glympse resembling his Last Coming. 2. If the sight of Christ, Moses, and
Elias, in glorious Splendour made the Three Apostles, through the strangeness of
it, sore afraid; no wonder, if even the thought of what we shall see after
Death, possess us with dread, though it be our hope, and joy.

7. And there was a cloud that overshaddowed them: and a voice came out of the
cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him.

7. Hear, and obey him, as the chief Messenger of my will, of whom I give you
this Testimony from Heaven.

8. And suddenly when they had looked round about; they saw no man any more,
save Jesus only with themselves. 9. And as they came down from the mountain,
he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen, till
the Son of man were risen from the dead. 10. And they kept that saying with
themselves, questioning one with another, what the rising from the dead should
mean.

10. etc. Though he had often told them of his Resurrection, they understood him
not.

11. And they asked him, saying, Why say the Scribes, that Elias must first
come? 12. And he answered, and told them, Elias verily comes first, and
restores all things, and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must
suffer many things, and be set at naught. 13. But I say unto you, that Elias is
indeed come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, as it is
written of him.

11. etc. John Baptist was Elias; (not the Soul of Elias reincorporate, but he
that was meant in Malachi:) And they have used him, as they will do me; as
Elias was Persecuted by Ahab.

14. And when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about them,
and the Scribes questioning with them. 15. And straightway all the people when
they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and running to him, saluted him. 16. And
he asked the Scribes, What question ye with them? 17. And one of the multitude
answered, and said, Master, I have brought unto thee my son, which has a dumb
spirit: 18. And wheresoever he takes him, he teareth him; and he fometh, and
gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away: and I spoke to thy disciples that
they should cast him out, and they could not.

14. etc. See on Matt. 17.14. N. The Disciples yet had not the full Power that
they had after Christ's Resurrection.

19. He answered him and says, O faithless generation, how long shall I be
with you, how long shall I suffer you? bring him unto me.

19. The want of Faith in you, did more to your frustration, than the want of
Power in my Disciples.

20. And they brought him to him: and when he saw him, straightway the spirit
tare him, and he fell to the ground, and wallowed foming.

20. Here is the perfect description of an Epi^epsie: And the folly of Atheists
tells them, That Natural Diseases are not to be imputed to Devils: That is,
Because an Axe, or a Halter Kills a man; therefore the Law, the Judges, or the
Executioner are no causes of it.

21. And he asked his Father, How long is it ago, since this came to him? And
he said, Of a child. 22. And often times it has cast him into the fire, and into
the waters to destroy him: But if thou can do any thing, have compassion on
us, and help us.

21. N. It appears this man's Faith was weak, in saying, [If thou can do any
thing,] Yet he had some hope.

23. Jesus said unto him, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him
that believes.

23. If thy Faith make thee a capable receiver, thou shall find that I want not
Power.

24. And straitway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears,
Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief.

24. He was afraid of losing the Cure of his Child for want of Faith, and yet
his Faith was weak, and wavering, and therefore he said, If I had no belief in
thee, I had not come to thee, but I am weak and timorous, and therefore pray
thee to strengthen my Faith, and make up in thy mercy what is wanting in my
Belief. This is alas the Case of most Christians.

25. When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the soul
spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee come out of
him, and enter no more into him. 26. And the spirit cried, and rent him sore,
and came out of him, and he was as one dead, insomuch that many said, He is
dead.

25.26. N. Christ's cures seem sometimes to the Flesh to put men into a worse
condition than they were before.

27. But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up, and he arose. 28. And
when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, Why could
not we cast him out? 29. And he said unto them. This kind can come forth by
nothing but by prayer and fasting.

27. etc. N. 1. Even Miraculous Cures may require the use of means, and the
same means may serve for one, that will not for another. 2. A double
qualification may be necessary, one in the Minister, and another in the Patient.

30. And they departed thence, and passed through Galilee, and he would not
that any man should know it. 31. For he taught his disciples, and said unto
them, The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill
him, and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day. 32. But they
understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him.

30, etc. N. Christ saw it necessary often to foretell his Sufferings, and
Resurrection; which is a great argument for our Faith.

33. And he came to Capernaum, and being in the house, he asked them, What was
it that ye disputed among your selves by the way? But they held their peace;
for by the way they had disputed among themselves, who should be the greatest.
35. And he sat down and called the twelve, and says unto them, If any man
desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all.

33.34. etc. N. They were ashamed to own their Ambition.

The Pre-eminence among my Ministers consists in being the most Humble, and
the most Serviceable.

36. And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when he had
taken him in his arms, he said unto them, 37. Whosoever shall receive one of
such children in my name, receives me: and whosoever shall receive me,
receives not me, but him that sent me.

36, 37. Humble and harmless Christians are so dear to me, that he that in Love
and Mercy receives and shows Kindness to one of these, I will take it, as if
he did it to my Self; and my Father will take that which is done, in Love and
Obedience to me, to be done as to himself. If you will be great in my Kingdom,
and dear to me, be Humble, and harmless.

38. And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in
thy name, and he follows not us, and we forbad him, because he follows not
us.

38. N. Had John been now as full of Love, as he was afterward, he would not
have forbad this man to do good.

39. But Jesus said, Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall do a
miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. 40. For he that is not
against us, is on our part.

39. N. Men that Preach in Christ's Name, therefore are not to be silenced,
though faulty; if they do more good than harm. Dreadful then is the Case of
them that Silence Christ's faithful Ministers.

40. In point of Service to the Church, He that is not against it, is someway
for it: as Soldiers say of Countrymen that are not against them: But as to
their own Salvation, He that is not for Christ above all the World, is against
him, and no sincere Christian; As Captains say of their listed Soldiers: Fight,
or be Cashiered.

41. For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink, in my name, because
ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward.

41. He that does the least good to a Christian, from a true Love to Christ,
would do more, were it in his Power: And he that does good but from common
Principles, though he be not Saved, shall have some Reward, and shall be no
loser, but a gainer, by all the good that he does.

42. And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it
is better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast
into the sea.

42, N. O then, what will become of Tempters, Persecutors, and malignant
Enemies. By [ offending] is meant, [ hindring] from Faith and a holy Life. And
by [ better] is meant, [ Its a smaller hurt.]

43. And if thy hand offend thee, cut it of^: it is better for thee to enter
into life maimed, then having two hands, to go into hell, into the fire that
never shall be quenched: 44. Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. 45. And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter halt into life, then having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched. 46. Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. 47. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee
to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast
into hell fire. 48. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

43. etc. So great is the difference between the welfare of this Flesh and the
Life to come, that you cannot get Heaven, and escape Hell fire at too dear a
rate: If a Hand, or Foot, or Eye, were so strong a hindrance as that you had no
other way to avoid Sin and Hell, it is a far less evil to lose such a Member,
than to lie in Hell. N. The meaning is not, that any man is in such a Case,
that he has no better way to avoid sin, and Hell: But if he had no better, he
should choose this: Nor does it mean, that maimed Persons are maimed in Heaven:
but if it were so, it were a less evil.

49. For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be
salted with salt. 50. Salt is good: but if the salt has lost its saltness,
wherewith will ye season it? Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another.

49. And be sure, that the fire of Affliction shall be as Salt to you all, that
now are thinking of Pre-eminence: and those of you that are sound, it shall
make fitter to be pure Sacrifices to God. 50. And you that are Preachers, and
Professors of Christianity, being thus salted, your selves must be the salt of
the Earth, to season others, by holy Doctrine and Practice. But if you should
lose sound Doctrine, and Christianity, what then shall season you? Keep up
sound Truth (that seasoneth, though it cause some smart) in your selves, and
instead of seeking Superiority, live in peace, and gentle Meekness with one
another.

CHAP. X.
1. AND he arose from thence, and comes into the coasts of Judea by the
farther side of Jordan: and the people resort to him again; and as he was wont,
he taught them again. 2. And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife? tempting him. 3. And he answered and
said unto them, What did Moses command you? 4. And they said, Moses suffered to
write a bill of divorcement, and to put her away.

1. N. These Hypocrites seemed by putting cases of Conscience* to be afraid of
Sinning.

5. And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your heart, he
wrote you this precept. 6. But from the beginning of the creation God made them
male and female. 7. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and
cleave to his wife. 8. And they twain shall be on^ ^lesh: so then they are no
more twain, but one flesh. 9. What therefore God has joined together, let no
man put asunder.

5. This Law was good in it self, because it was fitted to your condition: But
it was the badness, and hardness of your Hearts that made such a Tolleration
needful to you to keep you from worse; so it was not a full approbation of the
thing: For the perfect Law of Innocence so united Man and Wife, that no man
should Separate them, for his own pleasure, without Gods license.

10. And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same matter. 11. And
he says unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another;
commits adultery against her. 12. And if a woman shall put away her husband,
and be married to another, she commits adultery.

10. etc. N. Though Mark mention not the exception of the case of Adultery,
mentioned by other Evangelists, it is employed.

2. Quest. Does Adultery dissolve Marriage? Ans. It gives cause of a
dissolution, by divorce, or desertion: But in some cases, it is Lawful for the
injured Person to forgive the wrong; and continue in the relation, without
being Married over again.

3. Quest. May the Woman put away her Husband for Adultery? Answ. They that
deny it, because only the Man has Governing Power, say nothing: For the man
does it not as a Governor, but as an injured Contractor, seeks it as Justice
from the Magistrate; or righteth himself, if permitted by the Magistrate; or if
unjustly forbidden. And the Woman may be an injured Contractor, as well as the
Man, and may seek to the Magistrate for a Divorce; and in some cases, if denied
by the Magistrate, may right her self by Desertion. But whether that Desertion
shall be called, A putting away, is but a controversy about the Name, and not
the Thing. In what cases it is Lawful to Marry again is a different
Controversy.

13. And they brought young children to him that he should touch them, and his
disciples rebuked those that brought them. 14. But when Jesus saw it, he was
much displeased, and said to them, Suffer the little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God.

13, 14. N. Tho they brought them not to be baptized (Christian Baptism being
not fully instituted till after Christ's Resurrection) yet they are offered to
Christ for his acceptance and benediction. 2. He gave them such acceptance and
blessing, and declared them to be such as the Kingdom (or Church) of God
consists of: He could not mean only [of adult persons that are like these
Infants in the Kingdom of God:] else he might have taken up a Lamb or a Dove,
and blessed them and said [of such harmless creatures is the Kingdom of

God.] But he must mean [ of them and such as them,] or of such both in age,
and also in humble teachable receptivity] is the kingdom of God: else it would
be no reason to bless them. Which can be nothing lower than acceptance as
Visible-Infant-Church-Members.

2. He that in all ages from the beginning took Infants to be Infant-Members of
his Church, and came not to destroy but to enlarge mercies to the faithful and
their seed, and says, They are holy; and was much displeased with his
erroneous Apostles for forbidding them to be brought for his benediction, sure
will not be well pleased with those that now forbid them to be dedicated in the
Baptismal Covenant to him. But yet if any man will say, I deny not the interest
of the Infants of the Faithful in the Church and Covenant, but only think (that
Baptism was appointed only for the solemn reception of the adult, and so will
be Baptized at age, after (or without) Infant Baptism, merely to satisfy
Conscience, and then live in Love and Peace with those of another mind, I
should gladly live in Love and Peace with such.

15. Verily I say to you, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a
little child, he shall not enter therein. 16. And he took them up in his arms,
put his hands upon them and blessed them.

N. 1. These words plainly intimate that he received them as capable of the
Kingdom of God, that is the Church on Earth, and in Heaven. Christ does not
thus bless unbelievers and their seed, but those that 1 Cor. 7.14. are called
Holy.

17. And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and
kneeled to him, and asked him, Good master what shall I do that I may inherit
everlasting life?

17. N. It hence appears that the Jews (except the Sadducees) then believed
an everlasting life. 2. And that we should do whatever God would have us do to
attain it.

18. And Jesus said to him, Why call thou me good? there is none good but
one, that is God,

18. Good indeed in the prime sense is a high title, none being more proper to
God himself, and none perfectly and primarily and essentially good but God: Its
a greater matter to be good than thou deemest.

19. Thou know the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not
steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy father and mother.

19. N. Defraud not is the sense of the Tenth Commandment, that is, Love thy
Neighbor as thy self, so as not to desire from him any thing to his hurt. Qu.
Why does Christ mention none of the Commandments of the first Table? Answ. The
man is supposed to confess God, and consequently his duty to him, and to mean
in his question, What good works must I do toward others? Qu. 2. Why does not
Christ recite the Commandments in their true order? Answ. When the matter alone
is intended, the order is not necessary. 2. The Evangelists recite not all
Christ's words in the same order that he spoke them, as is evident in the
difference of their recitals. These very words are otherwise recited by Matthew.
19.18, 19. [ Thou shall do no Murder,] is first, and, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self, is last, and instead of [ Defraud not.]

20. And he answered and said to him, Master, all these have I observed from my
youth.

20. N. He meant that he had not directly in the outward act broken any of
these; not knowing how far the Law reaches.

21. Then Jesus beholding him, loved him, and said to him, One thing thou
lackest, go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven; and come, take up the cross and follow me.

21. Jesus beheld him with kindness, approving in him what was good, and said,
So far thou have done well: But there is more than this necessary to obtain
everlasting life, even to prefer it before all the wealth and pleasure of this
world, and life it self; and to try thee herein; Go and sell all and give to
the poor, and take heaven for thy treasure instead of all, and follow me in
self-denial unto suffering. N. Not that all are bound to sell all; but all are
bound so to prefer heaven, as will make them forsake all that stands against it.

22. And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved; for he had great
possessions.

22. Carnal men may be sorry that they cannot bring down God to their terms:
Good and bad would be as well as they can both here and hereafter: But when
they see they cannot have both Earth and Heaven, the Faithful choose heaven (tho
sensible of earthly sufferings) and the worldly choose the world; and most to
keep off sorrow and despair, do force on themselves a hope that they shall have
both, and that God will save them on their own terms.

23. And Jesus looked about and says to his disciples, How hardly shall they
that have riches enter into the kingdom of God?

23. How hard is it to persuade rich men to love heaven better than earth, and
to yield to the conditions of salvation.

24. And the disciples were astonished at his words: but Jesus answered again,
and says to them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to
enter into the kingdom of God. 25. It is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

24. So bad is the heart of man, that it is exceeding hard to have riches and
not to place men's trust in them, and such as do so cannot be true Christians
and be saved.

N. To trust in riches is to take them for our best, and to take and expect
more comfort from them than from Christ and Heaven.

26. And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then
can be saved? 27. And Jesus looking upon them, says, With men it is
impossible, but not with God: for with God all things are possible.

27. N. Sure the inordinate desire to be rich must needs signify unbelief: Can
men seek that which they believe makes their salvation almost impossible? The
same I say of murmuring poverty.

28. Then Peter began to say to him, Behold we have left all and followed thee;
29. And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say to you, There is no man that has
left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospels. 30. But he shall receive an
hundred fold, now in this time, houses, and brethren, and Sisters, and mothers,
and children, and lands with persecutions: and in the world to come, eternal
life. 31. But many that are first, shall be last, and the last first.

29. etc. N. To forsake them for Christ is rather to displease them or part
with them than with Christ and our Duty; when they stand in Competition, as
comforts, or in opposition as adversaries; It is not to forsake them in
Passion, or for want of due Love to them; nor to go into a Monastery, or as
rebellious Prodigals, or on any unjust cause.

2. A hundred fold in this life, is in value: God will here do better for them,
in things of greater worth. And all Christians shall be endeared to them in
Love and Communion.

32. And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem: and Jesus went before
them, and they were amazed, and as they followed, they were afraid: and he took
again the twelve, and began to tell them what things should happen to him. 33.
Saying, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered up
to the chief priests, and to the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,
and shall deliver him to the Gentiles. 34. And they shall mock him, and shall
scourge him, and shall spit on him, and shall kill him, and the third day he
shall rise again.

32. When they were before put in fear of going to Jerusalem, he told them
again plainly what and how he must suffer, and rise again. N. Of all Prophecies
this is the most confirming.

35. And James and John the sons of Zebedee come unto him saying, Master, we
would that thou should do for us whatever we shall desire. 36. And he said
to them, What would ye that I should do for you? 37. They said to him, Grant to
us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand in
thy glory.

35. etc. They came with their Mother: N. Tho this might show a strong belief
of his Resurrection and Kingdom, if it were spoken as here placed, next his
telling them of his Death and Resurrection: yet afterward this Faith seems to
be almost forgotten. And they were far from perfect, while they were so
selfish, ambitious and presumptuous in their request.

38. But Jesus said to them, Ye know not what ye ask: Can ye drink of the cup
that I drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?

38. It is meeter for you to consider whether you can suffer with and for me.

39. And they said, We can? And Jesus said to them, Ye shall indeed drink of
the cup that I drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized
with. 40. But to sit on my right hand, and on my left hand, is not mine to
give, but it shall be: given to them for whom it is prepared.

39. N. Their purpose was good, but not their self-confidence. 40. It is to be
given by way of reward to the most excellent and meet, according to my Fathers
Decree, and not by me now by way of partial favor, as Courtiers obtain of
Princes.

41. And when the ten heard it, they began to be much displeased with James and
John.

41. N. Christ own followers and Apostles had their great displeasures at each
other, and indignation: no wonder then if such arise in the Church now. 2. It
was then the aspiring Ambition of two that would have been above the rest, that
caused this breach and indignation: No wonder if the same Cause, have the same
Effects, and worse, when it is in worse Men, and in very many.

42. But Jesus called them to him, and says* unto them, Ye know that they
which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles, exercise lordship over them; and
their great ones exercise authority upon them. 43. But so shall it not be among
you: but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your Minister. 44. And
whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all.

42. etc. Jesus purposely thus decided the controversy: You are not called to
an Empire, or Dominion; The Rulers of the Nations exercise Lordship and Command
on them. But your Pre-eminence shall be Moral, and he that is the worthiest in
Humility, and Serviceableness to the rest, and in that Light and Love that fits
them for it, shall have the Chief Authority with you: For his Wisdom, and
Service, Reason and Love, shall most prevail with Christians for respect in
Church Affairs.

45. For even the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to Minister,
and to give his life a ransom for many.

45. Why should you set up a higher Dominion over one another, than I have
exercised over you? Have not I been more a Servant to you, in Teaching and
Guiding you, than you have been to me, by any Service you have done me: Have
not I stooped to you all, and will do even to Death.

46. And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his
disciples, and a great number of people, blind Bartimeus, the son of Timeus,
sat by the highway side, begging. 47. And when he heard that it was Jesus of
Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus thou Son of David, have mercy on
me. 48. And many charged him that he should hold his peace; but he cried the
more a great deal, Thou Son of David have mercy on me. 49. And Jesus stood
still, and commanded him to be called: and they call the blind man, saying unto
him, Be of good comfort, rise, he calls thee. 50. And he casting away his
garment, rose, and came to Jesus. 51. And Jesus answered and said to him, What
will thou that I should do to thee? The blind man said unto him, Lord* that I
might receive my sight. 52. And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way, thy faith has
made thee whole: and immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in
the way.

46. etc. See on Mat. 20.30. N. 1. It Is great comfort to be called to Christ.
2. Christ makes whole efficiently but Faith, by moral receptive qualification,
of a free gift.

CHAP. XI.
1. AND when they came nigh to Jerusalem unto Bethphage, and Bethany, at the
mount of Olives, he sends forth two of his disciples. 2. And says to them,
Go your way into the Village over against you, and as soon as ye be entered into
it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never man sat, loose him, and bring him.
3. And if any man say to you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord has need of
him, and straightway he will send him hither. 4. And they went their way, and
found the colt tied by the door without, in a place where two ways met: and
they loose him. 5. And certain of them that stood there, said to them, What do
ye loosing the colt. 6. And they said to them even as Jesus had commanded: and
they let them go.

1. N. Christ knew things distant, and what men would say and do. Though man's
Acts be free, God accomplisheth his will, by man's freest Acts. 2. It was an Ass
with her Colt; though Mark name but the Colt.

7. And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast their garments on him, and he
sat upon ^im. 8. And many spread their garments in the way: and others cut down
branches of the trees, and strawed them in the way. 9. And they that went
before, and they that ^ollowed, cried, saying, Hosanna, blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord. 10. Blessed be the kingdom of our father David,
that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna, in the highest.

7. We receive with all joyful Applause the Messiah that is come from God;
Blessed be He, and blessed be his Kingdom; Let the Heavens applaud and bless it.

11. And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and unto the temple; and when he had
looked ^ound about upon all things, and now the ^ventide was come, he went out
unto Betha^y with the twelve. 12. And on the morrow when they were come from
Bethany, he was hungry. 13. And seeing a figtree afar off, having leaves, he
came, if happily he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he
found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not yet.

11. etc. N. Its not likely that Christ was ignorant, that Figgs hit not that
year, and that this Tree was fruitless: But by this Miracle he showed, The
Destruction of Fruitless Jews and Hypocrites. 3. Its like he lay out of Door at
Bethany, as he used to do by night in the Garden where he was taken, because he
would not burden poor men's Houses with all his followers: Else sure he would
not have come away hungry.

14. And Jesus answered and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee hereafter
for ever. And his disciples heard it.

14. Note, 1. This Phrase of answering to a fig tree, must be expounded by the
use of the word in those times, when to [answer] signified but [to say] 2. The
Curse hurts not the Tree, but to instruct Men.

15. And they come to Jerusalem, d^ Jesus went into the temple, and began to
cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of
the money changers, and the seats of them that sold doves. 16. And would not
suffer that any man should carry any vessel through the temple.

15. N. He Showed that he had the authority of a King, tho he would not set up
a temporal Kingdom 16. Christ now seemed to be more ceremonious than the
Pharisees: But he was made under the Law, and would not abrogate our little
till all were fulfilled by him: He was to keep it to save men from it. 3. He
yet teaches us to Reverence the place of solemn worship for the worship sake.

17. And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be
called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves.

17. The Temple was dedicated for Holy worship for Jews and Proselites of all
Nations; but these use Merchandise here and rob men by deceit.

Quest. May places now be temples dedicated to Holy worship? Answ. No doubt of
it, but that the reverence of Gods name and worship, not only allows but
requires us when we can, to separate comely places, to Holy worship from
common use; And why they may not be called Temples I know not.

18. And the Scribes and chief priests heard it, and sought how they might
destroy him, for they feared him, because all the people were astonished a^ his
do^trine.

18. Tho one would think Christ's zeal for the Temple should have pleased them
that crved it up as their Glory, and accused Christ, and Stephen and Paul for
dishonouring it, yet because Christ did it as he did by the peoples
countenance, they feared the wrath of the Romans, lest they would take it for
Sedition, and so they should suffer by it.

19. And when even was come, he went out of the city.

19. Lest they should surprise him in the Night, as they did at last.

20. And in the morning, as they pa^sed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from
the oot. 21. And Peter calling to rem^mbrance, says unto him, Master, b^hold,
the fig tree which thou cursed ^t is withered away. 22. And Jesus answering,
says unto them, Have faith in God. 23. For verily I say unto you, that
whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into
the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things
which he says shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever he says. 24.
Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe
that ye recieve them, and ye shall have them.

23. No difficulty shall hinder you from obtaining what God has promised, and
is fit to be done, if you firmly trust his Love and promise.

25. And when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have ought against any: that your
Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.

25. And forgiving and Charity is necessary to success as well as Believing:
Believing supposes other requisites.

26. But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven
forgive you your trespass.

26. Note, This shows that the promise of granting believers Prayers, means
caeteris paribus, other requisites being answerable.

27. And they come again to Jerusalem, and as he was walking in the temple,
there come to him the chief priests, and the Scribes and the elders. 28. And
say to him, By what authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this
authority to do these things.

27. Note, They judged truly that they were not to be done without authority:
But knew not his authority from God.

29. And Jesus answered and said to them, I will also ask of you one question,
and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things. 30. The
baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? answer me.

30. Note, Had they confessed John to be of God, he would have produced his
testimony: Had they denied it, they had gainsayed themselves and the peoples
voice: For the generality of them were baptized by John, in hope that their
Messiah and his Kingdom, and their deliverance were at hand.

31. And they reasoned with themselves, saying, if we shall say, From heaven,
he will say, Why then did ye not believe him? 32. But if we shall say, Of men,
they feared the people: for all men counted John, that he was a prophet indeed.
33. And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And Jesus answering,
says unto them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

31. N. It was well that they considered what might be said against them, which
now most Christians do not in their disputes. 2. These Persecutors and the
Romans had some Charity and consideration, in that they were restrained by the
fear of the People, and did not accuse and fine them as for Routs, Ryots and
Seditions 3. They that deny necessary premises are not to be disputed with.

CHAP. XII.
ANd he began to speak unto them by parables. A certain man planted a vineyard,
and set an hedge about it, and dug a place for the wine-fat, and built a
tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country. 2. And at
the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the
husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard. 3. And they caught him, and beat him,
and sent him away empty. 4. And again he sent unto them another servant, and at
him they cast stones, and wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully
handled. 5. And again he sent another, and him they killed: and many others,
beating some, and killing some.

1. See on Matthew. 21. Note, Who did this: Answer, The only national Church on
Earth. 2. Did they cease upon this warning of Christ. Ans. No but do worse. 3.
Why did they do ^t. Ans. Through folly and wickedness. 4. The things that have
bin are: This is no strange thing yet on Earth.

6. Having yet therefore one son, his well-beloved, he sent him also last unto
them, saying, They will reverence my son. 7. But those husbandmen said amongst
themselves, This is the heir, come let us kill him, and the inheritance shall
be ours. 8. And they took him, and killed him and cast him out of the vineyard.

8. Note, No wonder that no innocence, or worth can preserve his Ministers from
their rage, and from being cast out of the Vineyard.

9. What shall therefore the Lord of the vineyard do? he will come and destroy
the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others.

9. He will destroy these Jews, and call the Gentiles to become his Church.

10. And have ye not read this scripture? The stone which the builders rejected
is become the head of the corner. 11. This was the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes.

10. Psalm. 118. Isa. 28.16.

12. And they sought to lay hold on him, but feared the people, for they knew
that he had spoken the parable against them: and they left him, and went their
way.

12. N. That which is spoken against bad men enrageth them, be it never so true
and necessary.

13. And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees, and of the Herodians, to
catch him in his words. 14. And when they were come, they say unto him, Master,
we know that thou art right, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the
person of men, but teach the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to give
tribute to Caesar, or not?

13. They send those that thought Caesar an Usurper, or at least had no right
to that sort of tribute, alienated from the Sanctuary, and the Herodians that
were for Caesar's right. Note, They give Christ a flattering Character to
ensnare him.

15. Shall we give, or shall we not give? 16. But he knowing their hypocrisy,
said to them, Why tempt ye me? bring me a penny that I may see it. And they
brought it, and he said to them, Whose is this Image and superscription? and
they said to him Caesar's. 17. And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's: and to God the things that are Gods. And
they marvelled at him.

15. See on Math. 21. Note, We are not bound to answer directly to all such
insnaring questions, nor to satisfy the Tempters.

18. There came unto him the Sadduces who say there is no Resurrection, and
asked him saying. 19. Master Moses wrote to us, If a man's Brother die and leave
his wife behind and have no Children, that his brother should take his wife,
and raise up seed to his brother. 20. Now there were seven brethren, the first
took a wife and dying left no seed. 21. And the second took her, and dying left
no seed, and the third likewise. 22. And the seven had her and left no seed,
Last of all the woman dyed also. 23. In the Resurrection therefore when they
shall rise, whose wife shall she be of them: for the seven had her to wife.

23. Erroneous Men from one false supposition, infer many that are worse.

24. And Jesus answering said to them, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know
not the Scriptures neither the power of God. 25. For when they shall rise from
the dead they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of
God which are in heaven.

24. Carnal Men think Carnally of things Heavenly: Spiritual Glorified bodies
are like Angels, and as they die not, so they generate not any more than they
(nor eat and drink as here.)

26. And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the book of
Moses, how in the bush God spoke unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? 27. He is not the God of the dead, but
the God of the living: ye therefore do greatly err.

See on Matthew. 22.

28. And one of the Scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, and
perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, Which is the first
commandment of all. 29. And Jesus answered him, The first of all the
commandments is, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. 30. And thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this is the first commandment. 31. And
the second is like, namely this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self:
there is none other commandment greater than these.

Note, Love is the most full and final act of the Soul. It is the total
inclination, and adherence of the will to God as God, the infinite good, and to
Man for his sake as far as his Conformity to God has made him amiable. It
fervently rises toward God here by desire and seeking; and fully delights
in him hereafter.

32. And the Scribe said unto him, Well Master, thou have said the truth: for
there is one God, and there is none other but he. 33. And to love him with all
the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all
the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices. 34. And when Jesus saw that he answered
discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no
man after that durst ask him any question.

34. Note, If the confession of these two great commands, was a matter to
greatly esteemed both of Christ and by this Scribe, how greatly do they differ
from Christ, who besides the profession of the whole Baptismal faith and
Covenant, require abundance of unnecessary or uncertain things to Church
Communion and concord, if not to Salvation.

35. And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, How say the
Scribes that Christ is the son of David? 36. For David himself said by the holy
Ghost, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. 37. David therefore himself calls him Lord, and whence
is he then his son?

37. He is the Lord in his Divine Nature, and his Son in his human Nature.

37. And the common people heard him gladly. 38. And he said to them in his
doctrine, Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and love
salutations in the marketplaces. 39. And the chief seats in the synagogues,
and the uppermost rooms at feasts: 40. Who devour widows houses, and for a
pretense make long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation.

37. Let not these proud Hypocrites deceive you, who by their long Liturgies,
and Ceremonies, and claim of Superiority, do but cloak their Worldliness, Pride
and Oppression, and are Religious to their greater Damnation.

41. And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast
money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much. 42. And there
came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing.
43. And he called unto him his disciples, and says unto them, Verily I say
unto you, that this poor widow has cast more in, then all they which have cast
into the treasury. 44. For all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of
her want did cast in all that she had, even all her living.

41. It is no note of self-denying piety, to serve God so Liberally of that
which the flesh can spare, and which costeth the flesh no denial of its
desires, but to serve it with the first, and God with its leavings. 2. God
accepts a willing mind, where (...) and power is wanting.

CHAP. XIII.
ANd as he went out of the Temple, one of his Disciples says unto him, Master,
see what manner of stones, and buildings are here. 2. And Jesus answering said
unto him, see thou these great buildings? there shall not be left one stone
upon another, that shall not be thrown down. 3. And as he sat upon the mount of
Olives, over against the Temple, Peter, and James, and Andrew asked him
privately. 4. Tell us when all these things shall be, and what shall be the
sign when all these things shall be fulfilled.

See in Matthew. 24. Note, Nature would foreknow even the evil to come.

5. And Jesus answering them, began to say, Take heed lest any man deceive you.
6. For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

6. Many shall pretend that they are sent to restore the Jewish Kingdom, and
draw in people to their destruction.

7. And when ye shall hear of Wars, and and rumors of Wars, be ye not troubled:
for such things must needs be, but the end shall not be yet. 8. For nation
shall rise against nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom: and there shall be
earthquakes in diverse places, and there shall be famines, and troubles: these
are the beginnings of sorrows.

8. Many commotions must go before the de^^ruction.

9. But take heed to your selves: for they shall deliver you up to counsels,
and in the Synagogues ye shall be beaten; and ye shall be brought before Rulers
and Kings for my sake for a testimony against them.

9. I allow you by lawful means to keep your selves out of their hands; but I
foretell you that their Councils will condemn you, and in their Synagogues they
will scourge you like Malefactors, and cast you out, and you shall be brought
before such as Herod, Agrippa, and the Roman Procurators, to answer for being
Christians. That your testimony may evince against them, that they heard the
Gospel, and did not obey it.

10. And the Gospel must first be published among all nations.

10. Before their destruction, the Gospel must be spread and published abroad,
both to Jews and Gentiles.

11. But when they shall lead you and deliver you up, take no thought
beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatever shall
be given you in that hour that speak ye, for it is not ye that speak, but the
Holy Ghost.

11. Tho you may be discouraged for want of matter, boldness or utterance, let
not this trouble you; for I promise you the present help of my Spirit.

12. Now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the son,
and children shall rise up against their parents, and shall cause them to be
put to death. 13. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name sake: but he
that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

12.13. Your kindred themselves shall be your enemies, and shall not spare your
very lives: And the vulgar of all sorts shall be seduced to take you for the
plagues of the World, and commonly mention you as a hateful sort of men: But
bear all this patiently: Trust God, and hold out to the end, and you shall be
saved from all this and more.

14. But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet standing where it ought not (let them that reads understand) then
let them who be in Judea flee to the mountains. 15. And let him that is on the
house top not go down into the house, neither enter therein to take any thing
out of his house. 16. And let him that is in the field, not turn back again to
take up his garment.

14. But when you shall see the Roman Ensigns set up against Jerusalem, like
Antiochus's desolating abomination, mentioned by Daniel, (expect not that I
should speak more plainly to you, to enrage the Roman power), then speedily be
gone, and shift for your selves, and be glad, tho you lose your goods, if you
save your lives.

17. But woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those
days. 11. And pray ye that your slight be not in the winter. 19. For in those
days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning of the creation,
which God created to this day, neither shall be.

17. It will be an increase of misery to all that are h^ndred in flight: For
the affliction of those days will be unparalled.

20. And except the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved: but
for the elects sake whom he has chosen he has shortened the days.

20. Those calamities shall not destroy all; but God has some chosen ones whom
he will preserve.

21. And then if any man say to you, Lo here is Christ, and lo he is there,
believe him not. 22. For false Christ's, and false Prophets shall rise and shall
show signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were possible, the very elect. 23. But
take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things.

21. The miserable Jews will follow diverse that will pretend they are sent to
be their Saviors: But I warn you, Trust none such.

24. But in those days, after that tribulation, the Sun shall be darkened, and
the Moon shall not not give her light. 25. And the stars of Heaven shall fall,
and the powers that are in Heaven shall be shaken. 26. And then shall they see
the Son of man coming in the clouds, with great power and glory.

See Matthew. 24.29, 30.

27. And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his elect
from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part
of heaven.

See Matthew. 24.31.

28. Now learn a parable of the fig tree: when his branch is yet tender and
puts forth leaves, ye know that summer is near. 29. So ye in like manner,
when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh even at the
doors. 30. Verily I say to you that this generation shall not pass till all
these things be done. 31. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall
not pass away.

29.30. Expect the destruction of Jerusalem when ye see these signs: And doubt
not of my Word: Some now alive shall live to see it. (It was not 40 years.)

32. But of that day and that hour knows no man no not the angels which are*
in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.

32. But these things not coming discernibly, as effects of natural causes,
neither Angels, nor Christ as man can foretell just the day and hour, because
they depend on the mere will of God.

33. Take you heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.

33. It is kept unknown to you, that you may watch and pray, and be still
prepared.

34. For the Son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house,
and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and commanded
the porter to watch. 35. Watch ye therefore (for ye know not when the master of
the house comes, at even or at midnight, or at the cock crowing, or in the
morning.) 36. Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. 37. And what I say to
you, I say to all, Watch.

34. So long shall Christ be out of sight that he will seem to men as one in a
far Country: But see that you do the work he set you, and watch for his coming
in a wakeful prepared state continually. This is my charge to you and to all.

Note, It occasioneth great perplexity to the Readers here and Matthew. 24. that
the destruction of Jerusalem, and the final coming of Christ, seem to be set so
near together, as if the latter were to come soon after the former. V. 24. [ In
those days] or [ Immediately]; which causes them to expound the latter part
allegorically, as meaning only the great commotions in Judaea: Which seemetth a
very hard exposition of Christ's coming with his Angels visibly in the Clouds,
and gathering his Elect from the four ends of Heaven, etc. The apparition to
Constantine, and the powerful deliverance of the Christians from Heathen rage
is less harsh than this. But 1. things of greatest distance may be quickly set
together in Writing; and the questions may occasion the Conjunction. 2. Christ
spoke for all Ages as well as for them. 3. A thousand years with the Lord is as
one day. 4. And it is undeniable that the Writers gave us not just all the
words that Christ spoke. For 1. he spoke in Caldee, and they translate them
into Greek 2. In this and other instances, their words often differ among
themselves. 3. They profess to omit much that Christ said. 4. They place his
words often in diverse orders. Therefore we must not gather any thing from a word,
or from the omission of a clause, which contradicts the scope of the Text,
and the certain truth.

CHAP. XIIII.
1. AFter two days was the feast of the passover and of unleavened bread: and
the Chief Priests and the Scribes sought how they might take him by craft and
put him to death. 2. But they said, not on the feast day, lest there be an
uprore of the people.

2. They feared the peoples rescuing him.

3. And being in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat,
there came a woman having an Alablaster box of ointment of spikenard, very
precious, and she break the box and poured it on his head.

3. Note, This Simon, it is most like, having been cured by him of a Leprosy,
showed his thankfulness in entertaining him. 2. Bethany like the Villages near
London, contained a large circuit of ground, it being usual for Citizens so to
set their Country-houses, and for such grounds to be so populous. 3. It was a
Cruise of precious Spike Oil, shaken and poured out.

4. And there were some that had indignation among themselves and said, why was
this wast of the oinment made. 5. For it might have bin sold for more then
three hundred pence and have been given to the poor: and they murmured against
her.

4. Note, Whether it was any beside Judas is doubtful. Man's wit is apt to be
censorious against good works; on pretense of some good which they more value.
2. Three hundred pence of theirs, is, as Budeus and Beza calculate, fifty two
French Crowns and a half. A Crown is 6 s. 8 d. our Noble.

6. And Jesus said let her alone: Why trouble ye her; she has wrought a good
work on me. 7. For ye have the poor with you always, and when soever ye will ye
may do them good, but me ye have not always.

6. Note, That is not best at one time, that is best at another; but every
thing in its season.

8. She has done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my body to
the burying. 9. Verily I say to you, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached
throughout the whole world, this also that she has done shall be spoken of for
a memorial of her.

9. Note, The greatest honoring of Christ tends to our own greatest honor,
(tho despised at present by the profane.)

10. And Judas Iscariot one of the twelve, went unto the chief priests to
betray him to them.

10. Note, The Devil draws sinners to be the seekers of their own temptation,
sin and misery.

11. And when they heard of it they were glad, and promised to give him money.
And he sought how he might conveniently betray him.

11. Note, 1. The wicked are glad to be assisted in sin. 2. Money is the bait
of wickedness and blood. 3. When the heart once consents to sin, men study
how to accomplish it.

12. And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover his
disciples said unto him, where will thou that we go and prepare, that thou
may eat the passover. 13. And he sends forth two of his disciples, and
says unto them, Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a
pitcher of water: follow him. 14. And wheresoever he shall go in, say to the
goodman of the house, The Master says, where is the guest chamber; where I
shall eat the passover with my disciples. 15. And he will show you a large
upper room furnished and prepared: there make ready for us. 16. And his
disciples went forth and came into the city, and found as he had said unto
them, and they made ready the passover.

16. Note, Christ knew what was future and unseen, even voluntary acts.

17. And in the evening he comes with the twelve. 18. And as they sat and did
eat Jesus said, Verily, I say to you, one of you which eats with me, shall
betray me. 19. And they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him, one by one,
Is it I? And another said, is it I? 20. And he answered and said unto them; It
is one of the twelve that dippeth with me in the dish.

19. Note, They feared themselves and his suspicion, and were troubled at the
Prognostic. 2. Christ's giving Judas the Sop is here past by.

21. The Son of man indeed goes as it is written of him: but woe to that man by
whom the Son of man is betrayed: good were it or that man if he had never been
born.

21. Note 1. Gods foreknowledge or decrees excuse n^^^^^ans sin. 2. By [ Good]
is meant [ A less evil.]

22. And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave
to them, and said, Take eat: this is my body.

22. Note, Here it is called at once Bread and his Body: Bread Naturally, and
His Body Sacramentally, that is, Representatively and Significantly, For [ It]
is the Relative, and [ Bread] is the Antecedent: What did Christ Take? Bread:
What did he Bless? I^: What did he Break? [It.] What is [ It] but that
before-named? Bread. Yet by so doing he made it his Body? How? As the King
makes a piece of Wax to become his Great Seal, by which he conveyeth Land,
Liberty and Life. Or a piece of Silver to be Money.

23. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them: and
and they all drank of it. 24. And he said unto them, this is my blood of the
new testament, which is shed for many.

23. By the Cup is meant the Wine.

Note, It is strange that men who find that Christ throughout the Gospel still
taught by Parables or Similitudes, (saying, This is such a thing, and That is
such a thing; as the Seed is the Word, the Field is the World, the Reapers are
the Angels, etc.) should force themselves to believe that there is no
similitude used here. The Lord deliver his Church from those who burn men that
believe not that Bread is no Bread, but made Christ himself; while themselves
believe not that Christ himself is Christ indeed, but are Infidels.

25. Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine,
until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God. 16. And when they had
sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.

25. See Matthew. 24. It Is more than probable that this Hymn was a form.

27. And Jesus says unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this
night: for it is written, for I will smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be
scattered.

27. Your Faith shall stagger, and you shall forsake me, and fly in fear.

28. But after that I am risen: I will go before you into Galilee.

28. See Job. 21.1, 2, 3.

29. But Peter said unto him: Although all shall be offended, yet will not I.
30. And Jesus says unto him, Verily I say unto thee, that this day, even in
this night before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice.

30. Note, This is not contraay to other Evangelists that say [ Before the Cock
crow.] For 1. They mean before Cocks crowing time be past, or before the second
Cocks crowing.] 2. The Writers spoke the sense of Christ's words, and not always
the precise words themselves.

31. But he spoke the more vehemently, if I should die with thee, I will not
deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all.

31. Note, If the Apostles so little know themselves, what wonder if most
Christians, know not how bad they are.

32. And they came to a place which was named Gethsemani, and he says unto his
disciples, Sit ye here, while I shall pray.

33. And he takes with him Peter, and James, and John, and began to be sore
amazed and to be very heavy. 34. And says to them, my soul is exceeding
sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here and watch. 35. And he went forward a little
and fell on the ground and prayed, that if it were possible the hour might pass
from him. 36. And he said, Abba, Father, All things are possible to thee, take
away this cup from me, not what I will, but what thou will.

34. Note, It is an error that Christ's Godhead was instead of a human Soul:
For his Soul was sorrowful and suffered, but so could not his Godhead. 2. His
nature in the first instant had a sinless aversness to suffering as such, but
his Reason and Will submit to it in the second instant, because it is according
to Gods Will, for greater benefit.

37. And he comes, and finds them sleeping, and says to Peter, Simon,
sleep thou? could thou not watch one hour. 38. Watch ye and pray lest ye
enter into temptation? The Spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak.

37. Have thou strength to die with me, who can not watch one hour with me.
Watching and Praying is the means to avoid temptation, and consequently sinning
and suffering for sin. The Mind and Will, sanctified by Gods Spirit is inclined
to duty, but it has not an absolute Despotical power over the fleshly weakness
and backwardness, but a political only.

39. And again he went away and prayed, and said the same words. 40. And when
he returned he found them asleep again, (for their eyes were heavy) neither
wist they what to answer him. 41. And he comes the third time, and says unto
them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come, behold,
the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

40. They were ashamed: 41. Now I have no more use for your watching with me:
Take your own course or rest: My apprehenders are at hand.

42. Rise up, let us go, lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand. 43. And
immediately while he yet spoke, comes Judas one of the twelve, and with him a
great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and the Scribes,
and the elders. 44. And he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying,
whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he take him, and lead him away. 45. And
as soon as he was come, he goes straitway way unto him and says Master,
master, and kissed him.

44. Note, Thus Satan's servants that wear Christ's Livery, both Priests and
Magistrates, betray Christ, by his own Titles, and by pretense of Love and
Honor.

46. And they laid their hands on him and took him. 47. And one of them, that
stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant of the high priests and cut off his
ear.

47. Note, Had bu^ one Peter done this rash unwarrantable act against Papists,
when they are killing true Christians as Butchers do Sheep, they would publish
to the World, that the whole party are seditious Rebles: yea, if any do but
speak against their Murders. I mean they have done thus.

48. And Jesus answered and said to them, Are ye come out as against a thief
with swords and with staves, to take me. 49. I was daily with you in the temple
teaching, and ye took me not: but the scripture must be fulfilled.

49. The Scripture foretold all this usage.

50. And they all forsook him and fled. 51. And there followed him a certain
young man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body, and the young men
laid hold on him. 52. And he left the linen cloth and fled from them naked.

50. All the Disciples locally forsook him to save themselves, though not so as
totally to desert him with their heart. 51. Being in the night, some young man,
either undrest, or raised out of bed, was come thither.

53. And they led Jesus away to the high priest, and with him were assembled
all the chief priests, and the elders, and the Scribes.

53. They led Christ as Prisoner to those that sent them to take him; which was
the Jews Church-representative, or Council.

54. And Peter followed him a far off, even into the place of the high priest:
and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself by the fire. 55. And the chief
priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus, to put him to
death. 56. For many bare false w^tness against him, but their witness agreed
not together.

55. They first resolve of his Death, and after search for some pretended
cause: But their suborned witness spoke not crime enough for Death.

57. And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him, saying, 58.
We heard him say, I will destrory this temple that is made with hands, and
within three days I will build another made without hands. 59. But neither so
did their witness agree together.

58. Note, We have men seemingly wise now, that would say, Why did Christ speak
so unadvisedly as to give occasion to such accusers? But what can be spoken so
well, from whence such men will not take occasion of Calumny.

60. And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying,
Answerest thou nothing? What is it which these witness against thee?

60. Note, The Archpriest (who was relatively and by profession the holiest
man of that Nation, and of the whole World) was the Arch-enemy and persecuter
of Christ, and the greatest plague of his whole Country.

61. But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked
him, and said unto him, Art thou the son of the blessed. 62. And Jesus said I
am: And ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds of heaven.

61. When the subtle Priest could prove nothing against him, he craftily puts a
question to him (equal to an ex officio oath) which he knew he would answer,
that he might out of his own words accuse him.

63. Then the high priest rent his cloths and says, what need we any further
witness. 64. Ye have heard his blasphemy, what think ye? And they all condemned
him to be guilty of death.

63. Note, He had been better have rent his heart for his wickedness: Here is
Diabolism it self clothed with the highest pretense of holy zeal, by the holy
Prelate, and his confederates? No wonder if the whole Convocation condemn
Christ, when such an High Priest leads them.

65. And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to bu^fe^ him,
and to say unto him, Prophecy: And the servants did strike him with the palms
of their hands.

65. Note, This the Son of God endured for our sins: And does it beseem us to
be tender of suffering abuse.

66. And as Peter was beneath in the palace: there comes one of the maids of
the high priest. 67. And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon
him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth. 68. But he denied,
saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou say. And he went out into
the porch, and the cock crew.

66. Note, It is dangerous among persecuters to be a friend to Christ. 2.
Wonderful that the first Cock did not waken Peter's conscience, having bin so
warned. But what will we not do if God leave us to our selves.

69. And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by, This is
one of them. 70. And he denied it again. And a little after, they that stood by
said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them: for thou art a Galilean, and
thy speech agrees thereto. 71. But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I
know not this man of whom ye speak. 72. And the second time the cock crew:

70. Note, No man is long safe in the mouth of great temptation, if
extraordinary mercy save him not.

72. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the
cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he
wept.

72. Note, Before the love of life, and fear of death, prevailed (in act) But
now the Love of Christ begins to prevail again, and greive, and shame him
for his sin.

CHAP. XV.
1. ANd straitway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the
elders and Scribes, and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried him
away, and delivered him to Pilate.

1. To be put to death.

2. And Pilate asked him, Art thou the king of the Jews? And he answering said
unto him, Thou say it.

2. I am.

3. And the chief priests accused him of many things; but he answered nothing.
4. And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many
things they witness against thee. 5. But Jesus yet answered nothing, so that
Pilate marvelled.

3. He would not strive against calumniators, nor against the death which he
came to undergo.

6. Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they
desired. 7. And there was one named Barabbas, who lay bound with them that had
made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection. 8.
And the multitude crying aloud, began to desire him to do as he had ever done
unto them. 9. But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you
the king of the Jews? 10. (For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him
for envy).

9. Note, He called him their King in scorn.

11. But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release
Barabbas unto them. 12. And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What will
ye then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the king of the Jews? 13. And
they cried out again, Crucify him.

12. Note, The people are but the mouth of the Priests.

14. Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil has he done? And they cried
out the more exceedingly, Crucify him. 15. And so Pilate willing to content
the people, released Barabbas unto them: and delivered Jesus, when he had
scourged him, to be crucified.

4. Pilate to please the People, and they to please the Priests, all please the
Devils, displease God, and undo themselves. And yet by all this God is saving
the World.

16. And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Pretorium, and they
call together the whole band. 17. And they clothed him with purple, and platted
a crown of thorns, and put it about his head. 18. And began to salute him, Hail
King of the Jews. 19. And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit
upon him, and bowing their knees, worshipped him. 20. And when they had mocked
him, they took off the purple from him and put his own clothes on him, and led
him out to crucify him.

16. As the Priests are the chief contrivers of the Murder, the Soldiers are
fittest for execution; such usually being hardened by blood and wickedness into
a destroying inclination, the great executioners of the Devil for the ruin of
the World. Alas, mad Sinners, little know you whom you scorn, and how your
sport will end at last. Reader, see here what sin is. And what thou and I have
deserved, that needed such a Sacrifice.

21. And they compelled one Simon a Cyrenian who passed by, coming out of the
country, the father of Alexander and Rufus. to bear his cross. 22. And they
bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the place of a
skull. 23. And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he received
it not. 24. And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting
lots upon them, wha^ every man should take. 25. And it was the third ^our, and
they crucified him. 26. And the superscription of his accusation was written
over, The King of the Jews.

See on Mat. 27.

24. See on Joh. 19.24.

26. Meaning that they put him to death, for proclaiming his Kingdom (though it
was a spiritual one.)

27. And with him they crucified two thieves, the one on his right hand, and
the other on his left. 28. And the scripture was fulfilled which says, And he
was numbered with the transgressors.

27. Note, Men imputed sin it self to him: God only reputed him a Sacrifice for
our sins.

29. And they that passed by, railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying,
Ah thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days. 30. Save thy
self, and come down from the cross. 31. Likewise also the chief priests
mocking, said among themselves with the Scribes, He saved others, himself he
cannot save. 32. Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that
we may see and believe: and they that were crucified with him, reviled him

29. Note, All this tells us what sin is? And when his servants follow him in
sufferings, Priests, Soldiers and Rabble with insult with scorns.

33. And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land,
until the ninth hour. 34. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice,
saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani, which is, being interpreted, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me?

33. Note, Christ was forsaken so far as to be left to the power of Satan's
Servants, and deprived of life, and to have the sense of Gods Justice against
Man's sin: And this to show that we deserved to be forsaken, and to keep us from
being utterly forsaken. But Gods Love and esteem of him was not abated, but his
suffering was meritorious.

35. And some of them that stood by when they heard it said, Behold he calls
for Elias. 36. And one ran and filled a sponge full of vinegar and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone, let us see whether Elias will
come to take take him down.

36. In scorn they still insult.

37. And Jesus cried with aloud voice, and gave up the Ghost.

37. Saying Father, into thy hand I commend my Spirit.

38. And the vail of the temple rent in twain, from the top to the bottom. 39.
And when the Centurion who stood over against him saw, he so cried and gave up
the Ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God.

39. That he dyed not as other men in that case do.

40. There were also women looking afar off, among whom was Mary Magdalen and
Mary the Mother of James the less, and of Joses and Salome. 41. Who also when
he was in Galilee followed him and ministered unto him, and many other women who
came up with him to Jerusalem.

42. And now when the even was come, because it was the preparation, that is,
the day before the Sabbath.

40. Note, It is likely that it is James that's called the Brother of Christ,
that is, he that is called James the less: for Joses and James, are called
brethren, as here, so Math. 13.55. But whether Littleness of Statu^ or Dignity
be meant it is uncertain.

43. Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable Counceller, who also waited for the
Kingdom of God, came and went in boldly unto Pilate, and cra^ed the body of
Jesus. 44. And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead, and calling unto him
the Centurion he asked him whether he had bin any while dead. 45. And when he
knew it of the Centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.

45. Note, He feared lest he should seem dead and be taken down alive, till
inquiry resolved the doubt.

46. And he bought fine linen, and took him d^^^, and wrapped him in the linen,
and (...) ^ep^lchre which was hewn out of a ^ock, and r^lled a stone unto the
door (...) the ^^pulchre. 47. And Mary M^gd^len, and Mary the mother of Joses,
beh^^d where h^ was laid.

46. ^^^e, Joseph showed great boldness and faith, in ow^ing Christ so openly
when he was dead: and so ol^ Ni^^demus who joined with him. 2. As Ahahs Court
h^d one Obadiah, so even the Jewish Rulers had a Jos^ph and a Nico^emus? And
there were Saints in Nero's house. 3. Christ's being buried in fine Linen
makes it not our duty; nor a sin to be buried in woollen; yea tho it had bin
the greatest enemy of Christ that in opposition to him, had made the new Law
which does command it.

The Grave was also sealed and Watched.

Christ's bur^^^ has in some sort Sanctified the Grave, to true believers. We
man boldly there lay down these bodies, as still in his power and care that was
buried for us

CHAP. XVI.
1. ANd when the sa^bath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the Mother of
^am^s, and Salome, had bought sweet spic^s that they might come and anoint him
2. And very early in the morning, the first day of the week, they came unto the
s^pulchre at the rising of the sun. 3. And they said among themselves, Who
shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulcher? 4. (And when they
looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away) for it was very great.

4. The Angel had before done it and frighted away the Soldiers.

5. And entering into the sepulcher, they saw a young man sitting on the right
side, clothed in a long white garment, and they were affrighted. 6. And he
says unto them, Be not affrighted, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was
crucified: he is risen, he is not here: behold the place where they laid him.

See on Job. 20. The reconciling of the seeming differences of the Evengelists,
about the Apparitions.

7. But go your way, tell his di^ciples, and Peter, that he goes before you
into Galilee, there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

See Joh. 21.1, 2.

8. And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulcher, for they trembled
and were amazed; neither said they any thing to any man: for they were afraid*

8. Fear made them silent.

9. Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he appeared first
to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils.

9. The rest were near her.

10. And she went and told them that had bin with him, as they mourned and wept.

10. She was the first messenger of Joy, to the morning weeping Disciples.

11. And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her
believed not.

11. Note, Christ's Disciples found a great difficulty to believe his
Resurrection: and he took them no^ at the worst.

12. After that he appeared in another form to two of them, as they walked and
went into the country. 13. And they went and told it unto the residue: neither
believed they them. 14. Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at
meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief, and hardness of heart, because
they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen.

12. Mark does but give us a brief touch of some of Christ's appearances, and
leave much recorded by others. Note, unbelief and Hardness of heart, are
radical sins in us, and of difficult cure. Note, Christ finds so much of
these in us, as to upbrail us with them, as our fault and shame; and directs
us what to blame and resist in our selves.

15. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to
every creature. 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he
that believes not, shall be damned.

15. To all men as far as ye are able. 16. He that upon your Preaching
believes the Gospel, and sincerely gives up himself in the Baptismal Covenant
to God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, by a practical and obedient
Trust and dedication, shall be forgiven and be saved from sin, from the curse
of the Law, from Satan, and from Hell; But those to whom you Preach who will
not believe, and take me for their Savior, and God for their God, shall be
condemned to Hell as refusers of Salvation.

17. And these signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they cast
out devils, they shall speak with new tongues: 18. They shall take up serpents,
and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands
on the sick, and they shall recover.

17. And because it cannot be expected that all people believe things so
strange and unlikely to nature upon your bare affirmation, I will by sending
down the Holy Ghost, attest your word by these miraculous signs: They that
believe, and specially you my Apostles shall in my name cast out Devils from
the Possessed, and make them obey me and confess me: You shall speak in various
Languagues, which you ^ever learnt. Poison shall not hurt you, either Serpents
outwardly, or taken inwardly: And you shall pray and lay your hands on the sick
in my name, and they shall recover, Note, 1. That not every one shall have all
these gifts, but some one and some another; not that you shall use them, when,
and how you will, but as pleases the Holy Ghost that gives them.

19. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into
heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.

19. Note, His Ascension they beheld, and his Glorification they believed by
the Spirits revelation.

20. And they went forth, and preached every where: the Lord working with them
and confirming the word with signs following. Amen.

20. And accordingly they began in Judah, and thence went abroad through the
Gentile World, every where Preaching the Gospel of Christ (his Person, Life,
Doctrine, Sufferings, Resurrection, Ascension, Kingdom, Judgment, Glory and
Blessing to his Church) The Lord by his Grace making their teaching successful,
and assisting, and confirming it by the promised Miracles.

The Gospel according to St. LUKE.
CHAP. I.
1. FOrasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of
those things which are most surely believed amongst us, 2. Even as they
delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eye-wit-nesses, and
ministers of the word:

1. Diverse having published the declaration or History in order, of those
matters of Fact and Doctrine, which have been done and are fully believed among
us Christians, 2. Even as those men did faithfully deliver them to us, who from
the beginning were eyewitnesses of the works of Jesus, and Ministers who
attended him, and have preached his word.

3. It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things
from the very first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus,

3. I also thought good to write the like history in order to thee, most
excellent Theophilus, both to confirm what is by others written, and to add
especially of the beginning of the history, what in others is omitted; having
my self, by very diligent search, got full notice of these matters from the
very first, which others mention not.

4. That thou might know the certainty of those things wherein thou have
been instructed,

4. That I may contribute my endeavor, to increase thy knowledge, and confirm
thy belief of those things concerning Jesus Christ, which thou have already
learned among us.

5. THere was in the days of Herod the King of Judea, a certain priest named
Zacharias, of the course of Abia, and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron,
and her name was Elizabeth.

5. Note, The Families of the Priests officiated in their courses, and Abia's
course was the 8th of old, 1 Chronicles. 24.10. After it was the 12th Nehem. 12.1.
And after that the eleventh, Neh. 12.17.

6. And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments,
and ordinances of the Lord blameless.

6. They were both sincere godly persons, living in true obedience to all the
Commandments and ordinances of God, according to the Law and light which they
were under, without the blot of any gross or scandalous Sin.

7. And they had no child, because that Elizabeth was barren, and they both
were now well stricken in years. 8. And it came to pass, that while he executed
the priests office before God in the order of his course, 9. According to the
custom of the priests office, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the
temple of the Lord. 10. And the whole multitude of the people were praying
without at the time of incense.

7, 8, 9, 10. Note, The Priest went into the sanctuary to offer, and the people
that while prayed without the Sanctuary, not without the Temple. In imitation
of which our Temples usually are built in three parts, The Chancel for the
Clergy, the body of the Church for the Laity, and all below the Font for the
Catechumens, and suspended, who are no communicants; (as the outward Court was
for Gentiles.)

11. And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord, standing on the right
side of the altar of incense. 12. And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled,
and fear fell upon him. 13. But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias,
for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou
shall call his name John. 14. And thou shall have joy and gladness, and many
shall rejoice at his birth:

11, 12, 13, 14. He was born to an austere life, and and to martyrdom, yet his
birth was joyful, though to such a painful life and death, for the Churches
service:

15. For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink, neither
wine, nor strong drink, and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from
his mothers womb.

15. Note, 1. The best men and most useful are greatest in Gods sight. 2.
Extraordinary denying the flesh agrees well with the extraordinary gift of the
Spirit. 3. Infants may have the Holy Ghost, before it appears.

16. And many of the children of Israel shall he turn the Lord their God.

6. Note, To turn many by repentance to God, was the effect of the Holy Ghost,
and of John's extraordinary worth and work.

17. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the
just, to make ready a people, prepared for the Lord.

17. He shall be possessed with such fullness of Spirit and Power to prepare the
way for Christ, as Elias had, as is propheci'd in Mal. 4.6. Note, By [ turning
the hearts of the Fathers to the Children] some think is meant [turning the
tyrannical oppression of Rulers, to fatherly love and lenity to inferiours] But
Dr. H. more probably translateth it [ with the Children;] That is, he shall
turn Fathers and Children old and young. Others say it is but to turn men's
minds to the Love of one another, and those that disobey God, to the true
wisdom of just men who obey and trust him.

18. And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this, for I am an
old man, and my wife well stricken in years. 19. And the angel answering, said
unto him, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, and am sent to speak
unto thee, and to show thee these glad tidings. 20. And behold, thou shall be
dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be
performed; because thou believe not my words, which shall be fulfilled in
their season.

18, 19, 20. I am one of the many Angels that stand before God, and am sent to
tell thee this; And to reprove thy unbelief; And to convince thee, for a sign,
thou shall be dumb, etc.

21. And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long
in the [temple.] 22. And when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and
they perceived that he had seen [a vision] in the temple: for he beckned unto
them, and remained speechless.

21, 22. Sanctuary. 22. Some Revelation.

23. And it came to pass, that as soon as the days of his ministration were
accomplished, he departed to his own house.

23. That Ceremonious service might be done by a dumb man; but so cannot the
Gospel Ministration.

24. And after those days, his wife Elizabeth conceived, and hid her self five
months, saying, 25. Thus has the Lord dealt with me, in the days wherein he
looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.

24, 25. She retired from Peoples observation and discourse, saying, the Lord
has showed me mercy in taking away my reproach.

26. And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God, unto a city of
Galilee, named Nazareth, 27. To a virgin espoused to a man, whose name was
Joseph, of the house of David, and the the virgins name was Mary.

26, 27. Not married but betrothed.

28. And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly
favored, the Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou among women.

28. Rejoice, for thou art highly favored of the Lord, who makes thee blessed
above all women.

29. And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind
what manner of salutation this should be. 30. And the angel said unto her, Fear
not, Mary, for thou have found favor with God. 31. And behold, thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus, 32.
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God
shall give unto him the throne of his father David.

29, 30, 31, 32. She understood it not. That Glorious Kingdom meant in the
promise to David's seed, of which his Kingdom was but a type.

33. And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom
there shall be no end:

33. His Kingdom over the Faithful Israel of God, begun in grace, shall be
Everlasting in Glory.

34. Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?
35. And the angel answered and said unto her, The holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee. Therefore also that
holy thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

34, 35. This shall be done without Man by the Holy Ghost, and the
overshaddowing power of God, and therefore he shall be properly called; the Son
of God.

N. 1. Though this give us the most known reason, why Christ is called the Son
of God in Scripture, it is not said to be the only reason, excluding his
eternal Generation. 2. Yet Christ often calls himself, the Son of Man, which
signifies no more, but that he was truly a Man, and born of a woman.

36. And behold thy cousin Elizabeth, she has also conceived a son in her old
age, and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. 37. For with
God nothing shall be unpossible.

36, 37. Note, 1. Though Elizabeth was of the Tribe of Aaron, and Mary of the
Tribe of Judah, they were a kin by Elizabeth's Mother marrying a Levite.

2. Nothing should seem difficult to faith, when it is known to be Gods will
and word.

38. And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to
thy word:

38. Amen. Let thy word come to pass: (They are the expression of Mary's faith
and hope.)

38. And the angel departed from her. 39. And Mary arose in those days, and
went into the hill country with have, into a city of Judea. 40. And entered
into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elizabeth.

38, 39, 40. The Angels words made her go see how it was with Elizabeth.

41. And it came to pass, that when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the
babe leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost. 42. And
she spoke out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 43. And whence is this to me, that the mother
of my Lord should come to me? 44. For lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation
sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. 45. And blessed is
she that believed, for there shall be a performance of those things which were
told her from the Lord.

41, 42, 43, 44, 45. The Holy Ghost filled her to speak out these word
prophetically, etc.

46. And Mary said, My soul does magnify the Lord, 47. And my spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior. 48. For he has regarded the low estate of his
hand-maiden: for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

46, 47, 48. Mary also filled with the Spirit, speaks these words of praise to
God; My Soul, etc. 48. He has raised me highest who was one of the lowest.

49. For he that is mighty has done to me great things and holy is his name.
50. And his mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to generation.

49, 50. Mercy to all that fear God and their posterity, is the great name or
notification of the most Holy God to man.

51. He has showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts. 52. He has put down the mighty from their seats,
and exalted them of low degree. 53. He has filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich he has sent empty away;

51, 52, 33. He has showed that it is he that is Almighty, by scattering the
proud in their own vain imaginations; And by casting down the high and exalting
the low; And by satisfying the needy, and bringing the prosperous to distress.

54. He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy, 55. As he
spoke to our fathers, and to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

54, 55. The promises which he made to Abraham and his seed, he is now
performing in their proper sense, for the saving of all the believing seed: The
mercy which promised it, is now performing it.

56. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.

56. Note, It was many months between Mary's espousal to Joseph, and their
marriage.

57. Now Elizabeth's full time came, that she should be delivered, and she
brought forth a son. 58. And her neighbors and her cousins heard how the Lord
had showed great mercy upon her, and they rejoiced with her.

57, 58. In giving a son to one so old.

59. And it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the
child, and they called him Zacharias, after the name of his father. 60. And his
mother answered and said, Not so, but he shall be called John. 61. And they
said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name. 62.
And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called. 63. And he
[asked] for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John: and they
marvelled all.

59, 60, 61, 62. Note, They would have the name, keep the memorial of
Ancestors. 63. By signs.

64. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spoke,
and praised God. 65. And fear came on all that dwelt round about them, and all
these sayings were noised abroad thoroughout all the hill-countrey of Judea.
66. And all they that had heard them, laid them up in their hearts, saying,
What manner of Child shall this be? And the hand of the Lord was with him.

64, 65, 66. It raised in all the Country great expectations, what this Child
would prove: And God did extraordinarily bless him.

67. And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied,
saying, 68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed
his people, 69. And has raised up an horn of salvatition for us in the house
of his servant David. 70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, which
have been since the world began: 71. That we should be saved from our enemies,
and from the hand of all that hate us.

67, 68, 69, 70, 71. Spoke by inspiration. Note, Christ was prophesied of from
the beginning of the World, after Adams Fall: N. Tho Gods Spirit in him
understood just what manner of Savior Christ would be, and what sort of
deliverance from enemies he would bring (by the destruction of the Jews and
calling the Gentiles) we know, not that Zachary, Elizabeth and Mary understood
this while they thus prophesied,

72. To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy
covenant, 73. The oath which he swear to our father Abraham, 74. That he would
grant unto us, that we being delivered our of the hands of our enemies, might
serve him without fear, 75. In holiness and righteousness before him, all the
days of our life.

72, 73, 74, 75. That the Messiah delivering us from all our enemies spiritual
and corporal, we may serve him in safety, not terrified by them.

Note, Holiness and Righteousness are the sum of Gods acceptable service.

Note, The chief benefit of deliverance from cruel enemies, is that we freely
and peaceably serve God.

76. And thou, child, shall be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou
shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways, 77. To give knowledge
of salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins,

76, 77. Thou shall be a Prophet of God, to go before Christ, to prepare men to
receive him, by calling them to repentance, proclaiming that a Savior is come
to save his people by pardoning their sins.

78. Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high
has visited us, 79. To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace,

78, 79. The tender mercy of God, having given us from Heaven, the sum of
heavenly Light to visit us, 79. even to them that lived in the darkness of sin
and misery, and to guide us into the way of life and happiness.

80. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts,
till the day of his showing unto Israel.

80. And John, with his increase of age and strength, showed great strength of
the Spirit of God in him, and he dwelt in the wilderness, (or, say some, in the
hill Country of Judaea,) (bred up in a life of holiness, and mortification)
till the time that he set upon his public ministry; of preaching the Kingdom
of the Messiah and repentance, and baptizing.

CHAP. II.
1. ANd it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar
Augustus, that all the world should be taxed. 2. (And this taxing was first
made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria) 3. And all went to be taxed, every
one into his own city.

1, 2, 3. Augustus decreed that all the Empire, called the Roman world, should
be enrolled in their several Families and Cities: That he might know the state
of his Empire, and how to tax them.

4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into
Judea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, (because he was of
the house and lineage of David,) 5. To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife,
being great with child.

4, 5. She was now married, though called espoused.

6. And so it was, that while they were there, the days were accomplished that
she should be delivered. 7. And she brought forth her firstborn Son, and
wrapped him in swaddling cloths, and laid them in a manger, because there was no
room for them in the inn.

6, 7. Note, It should be rather [ in the stables] than [ in the manger.] Had
Joseph been a rich man its like he would have found better room.

8. And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field; keeping
watch over their flock by night.

8. Some one part of the night, and some another, by turns (as is most likely.)

9. And lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord
shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. 10. And the angel said unto
them, Fear not: for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be
to all people.

11. For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord. 12. And this shall be a sign unto you: ye shall find the babe
wrapped in swaddling cloths, lying a [manger.]

9, 10. Glory is Light. Christ's birth is cause of universal joy. 12. stable.

13. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host,
praising God, and saying, 14. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
good will toward men.

13, 14. Note, Angels are the heavenly host. Note, Gods praise and Glory is the
end of all his works. Note, Angels rejoiced at Christ's birth, and for man's
redemption.

14. In Christ the Redeemer God will be glorified in Heaven, Peace will be made
on Earth, by this great Reconciler, and Gods Love or Benevolence will be
toward men.

Or [ Glory be to God in the Heavens through the Redeemer, and Reconciliation,
or Peace, on Earth to men that are the objects of Gods good will.]

Q. Is it necessary or lawful to keep a day as holy in remembrance of Christ's
birth? Ans. 1. If any should appoint a weekly day for it, it would be an
usurping of the same power, (that has already separated a weekly day for it,
it would be an usurping of the same power) that has already separateh a
weekly, day for commemorating the work of Redemption, though specially for
Christ's Resurrection: And it would seem an accusing Christ's Law of
insufficiency. 2. And if any should make a yearly days observation necessary to
the universal Church. 1. They would usurp a power, not given to any, (to make
Laws for all the Church.) 2. And they would accuse Christ's Law as imperfect.

But if particular Christians, Churches, or Countries, voluntarily agree to
celebrate yearly, the memorial of Christ's birth, it is but what almost all the
Churches on earth do, and have done at least 1300 years; And i^ ^^lawful to
keep a yearly day of remembrance for a^y (...) deliverance or mercy to the
Church, even in an Ap^^^le. But if any Christian think that it is an unlawful
addition to the institution of the Lords day, which Go^ set a part for our
commemorating the whole work of Redemption, such should not be forced to keep
it against their Consciences; but must avoid affronting them that do.

15. And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven,
the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see
this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us, 16.
And they came with have and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in a
manger, 17. And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which
was told them concerning this child. 18. And all they that heard it wondered at
those things which were told them by the shephards. 19. But Mary kept all these
things, and pondered them in her heart. 20 And the shepherds returned,
glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, as
it was told unto them,

15, 16, 17, 18. In a Stable. 19. Regarded them as tending to what was
promised her. 20. Angel are not first sent to Princes, but to poor Shephards,
who must preach Christ.

21. And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child,
his name was called Jesus, who was so named of the angel before he was
conceived in the womb.

21. Jesus is [a Savior.] He was circumcised, as bound to keep the Law of
Moses, not as a seal of pardon of sin to him.

22. And when the days of her purification, according to the law of Moses, were
accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord.

22. To the Priest, as in Numb. 3.12.46.

23. (As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that opens the
womb, shall be called holy to the Lord,) 24. And to offer a sacrifice,
according to that which is said in the law of the Lord; A pair of turtle doves,
or two young pigeons.

23, 24. See Levit. 12.6.8.

25, And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon, and the
same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the
holy Ghost was upon him. 26. And it was revealed unto him by the holy Ghost,
that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord Christ.

25. Note; The Messiah was much expected at that time.

Note; It is Just and Devout men that God specially favors by ex^raordinary
gifts of his Spirit.

27. And he came by the spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in
the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law, 28. Then took he
him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said, 29. Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word: 30. For mine eyes have seen thy
salvation, 31. Which thou have prepared before the face of all people. 32. A
light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Praised God saying, now thou have performed thy word,
by letting me live to see Christ, let me die in Peace as soon as it pleases
thee: For I have seen the Savior, whom thou have appointed to be a light to
the gentile World, to lead them into the way of Faith and Righteousness to
thee, and to be the honor of the Jews, of whom he is born after the flesh; but
the special glory of all that by Faith receive him.

33. And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things that were spoken of
him. 34. And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this
child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel: and for a sign
which shall be spoken against.

33, 34. He shall prove eventually, a stumbling block, on which many Israelites
shall fall to their destruction, and the chief Corner Stone, on which Believers
shall be built up to Salvation; and the talk and obloquy of Men.

35. (Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also) that the thoughts of
many hearts may be revealed.

35. Yea thou also shall bear a deep part in sufferings by grief of heart, and
Men, in these Trials, shall show what they are, even the different State of
their secret Thoughts.

36. And there was one Anna a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe
of Aser, she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from
her virginity. 37. And she was a widow of about four-score and four years,
which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers,
night and day.

37, 36. She kept close to the Temple Worship, and was constant in the duties
of Fasting, Mortification and Prayer.

Note. It is not proved that she deserted all outward calling or labor in the
World, on pretense of Religion, while she was able for it: And if it be done
but when age or sickness disableth one, it is lawful, and well.

Note. Some think Fasting unfit for age and weakness: But digestion being then
weakest, and most dying by that suffocation of crudities, and not by mere
defect of nutrimental matter, moderate Fasting may be fit for the aged, as well
as for the young.

Note; She was not of the sick mind of the profane nominal Christians, that
cannot abide long Prayers, and Religious strictness.

38. And she coming in at that instant, gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and
spoke of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

38. She was inspired then to come in, and to Prophecy of Christ, and declare
him to the People, that looked for the Messiah.

39. And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord,
they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth. 40. And the child grew,
and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon
him.

39, 40. Q. What increase of Spiritual strength was Christ capable of, and what
greater fullness of Wisdom and Grace! Ans. His Divine nature was capable of no
increase: But the humane was capable, 1. Of increase of bodily stature and
strength. 2. Of seeing more objects, then he saw at first. 3. Of actual knowing
them by that sight. 4. Of improving them to holy uses as known, which he did
not in Infancy. 5. Of doing many good works, which he could not do in Infancy.
6. And of the increase of such habits, by all these acts as are acquired by
them. As Adam when new Created had perfect faculties; but not perfect knowledge
of all the Creatures before he saw them, nor the fullest improvement of them,
nor the perfect habit of such use, as it is distinct from the faculties
perfection.

41. Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover.
42. And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem, after the
custom of the feast. 43. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they
returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem, and Joseph and his
mother knew not of it. 44. But they supposing him to have been in the company,
went a days journey, and they sought him among their kinsfolks and acquaintance.

41, 42, 43, 44. Note; It may seem an unnatural neglect of a Child: But they
had found him so manlike in all other matters, that they trusted him with
himself.

45. And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking
him. 46. And it came to pass, that after three days, they found him in the
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them
questions.

45, 46. Note; Christ himself disdained not to hear the Jewish Doctors, and to
ask them Questions.

47. And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.
48. And when they saw him, they were amazed; and his mother said unto him, Son,
Why have thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee
sorrowing.

47, 48. Note; If Christ's Holy Mother blamed him, as dealing ill with his
Parents, by mistake, for want of true knowledge of the inside of the case, what
wonder if the best Person do, by the like ignorance of the case, by mistake,
blame and censure one another, and misreport accordingly.

49. And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I
must be about my Fathers business? 50. And they understood not the saying,
which he spoke unto them.

49, 50. Where should I be but in my Fathers House, about his work? your
ignorance makes you blame me.

51. And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto
them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

51. Note; Christ, who submitted in his Humanity, to a state of Infancy,
(sanctifying that state, and showing, that as an Infant was yet in title, King
and Head of the Church; so Infants may be Members of him, and it) did also in
his Childhood subject himself to his supposed Father, and to his Mother,
reverencing them, and obeying them, both as part of his meritorious
Humiliation, and to sanctify a state of subjection, and become a Pattern
thereof to us all: And it will greatly condemn proud, rebellious Children, and
Youth, who will not obey the just government of Parents, (but their fleshly
appetites and lusts,) wh^^ the Son of God Incarnate, condescended to subjection.

Mary's laying up all these sayings, was the working of her Faith and Hope,
perceiving that God was going on to fulfill the Promises made to her.

52. And Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and man.

52. His Humane Nature increased, as in stature, so in actual Humane Knowledge,
and its habits, knowing more than he knew in Infancy as Man: And God, that by
way of approbation and complacence, loves all things, so far as they are
lovely, so approved and loved his Humanity more, as it grew more in act and
habit toward perfection.

CHAP. III.
1. NOW in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate
being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother
Philip tetrarch of Iturea, and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the
tetrarch of Abilene, 2. Annas and Cajaphas being the highpriests, the word of
God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.

1, 2. Note; A Tetrarch is the Governor of the fourth part of a Province, or
large Country. Whether Annas and Caipahas were both High Priests (by
corruption*) at once, or exercised it by turns; or being yearly chosen, one had
it one part of the year, and the other succeeded him; or whether Annas is so
called for his power with, or over the High Priest by affinity and interest, or
whether Annas, though so called; had another sort of Government distinct from
the Priesthood, Expositors are not agreed. But it is certain, that the High
Priesthood was greatly corrupted, and usually bought of the Romans.

3. And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins,

3. Preaching Pardon to all true Penitents, and telling them that public
deliverance from their National Calamity was at hand to be offered them, if
they would prepare for it by Repentance.

4. As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying,
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
his paths straight. 5. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and
hill shall be brought low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the
rough ways shall be made smooth, 6. And all flesh shall see the salvation of
God.

4, 5, 6. Prepare your selves for the Kingdom of God, in which he will raise
the humble and the oppressed, and take down the proud and the oppressors, and
will bring in Justice and Reformation into an unrighteous, wicked World; and
the Savior of the World shall appear, and his Salvation be proclaimed and
wrought throughout the Earth.

7. Then said he to the multitude, that came forth to be baptized of him, O
generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 8.
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within
your selves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.

7, 8. Do you think to escape the wrath that is coming on you, by an
hypocritical Repentance, and the Ceremony of Baptism? Show that you truly
repent by your reformed lives, and presume not on your being Abraham's Seed:
For God, that can make Man of Stones, can of the Gentiles raise a Seed of
Believers to Abraham.

9. And now also the ax is laid unto the root of the tree: every tree
therefore, which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire.

9. God is ^ntring into Judgment with you, and will ^ut down wicked and
fruitless Hypocrites for the fire.

10. And the people asked him; saying, what shall we do then? 11. He answers
and says unto them, he that has two coats, let him impart to him that has
none, and he that has meat, let him do likewise.

10, 11. Love others as your selves, and see them not suffer in want, while you
have supply for them, and can spare it from your plenty: Prefer* their
necessity before your fullness or superfluity.

12. Then came also Publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, Master, what
shall we do? 13. And he said unto them, Exact no more than that which is
appointed you.

12, 13. Excise, or Tax-gatherers.

14. And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do?
And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages.

14. Live not as Soldiers use to do, by violence to the poor people that
cannot resist them, and by false accusing, and robbing, and plundering.

Note; He means not that it is enough to Salvation, to amend the crimes of
their lives, without a renewed, holy heart; but that this also must be done.

15. And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts
of John, whether he were the Christ or not: 16. John answered, saying unto them
all, I indeed baptize you with water, but one mightier then I comes, the
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose; he shall baptize you with
the holy Ghost, and with fire:

15, 16. See on Matthew. 3. Note; The great and peculiar work and notification of
Christ, was his sending the Holy Ghost on his Disciples.

17. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will
gather the wheat into his garner, but the chaff he will burn with fire
unquenchable. 18. And many other things in his exhortatation preached he unto
the people.

17, 18. Who will winnow you thoroughly, and will gather and save all true
Believers, and burn the Unbelievers in fire unquenchable.

Note; Christ, that is a Savior, is the severe destroyer of his obstinate
Enemies.

19. But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his brother
Phi^ips wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done, 20. Added yet this
above all, that he shut up John in prison.

19, 20. Note; John would not sorbear the faithful discharge of his office in
reproving a wicked King to save his liberty or life. 2. To imprison and
persecute his reprover, was wicked in Herod above all his former wickedness.

21. Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass that Jesus also
being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened. 22. And the holy Ghost
descended in a bodily shape-like a dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven,
which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased.

21, 22. Note, Baptism, with his own Prayer, were the means thus miraculously
approved by God, in which he will bear witness to his Son from Heaven.

Note, The descent of the Holy Ghost on Christ, with Gods vocal Testimony, was
a fit investiture of him in the office, of the Captain of our Salvation, who
was to mark out his Soldiers with the same gift of the Holy Ghost, and his
adopting word.

23. And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was
supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli. 24. Which was the son
of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi, which was
the son of Ianna, which was the son of Joseph, 25. Which was the son of
Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the
son of Eli, which was the son of Nagge, 26. Which was the son of Maath, which
was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei, which was the son of
Joseph, which was the son of Juda, 27. Which was the son of Joanna, which was
the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was the son of
Salathiel, which was the son of Neri, 28. Which was the son of Melchi, which
was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam, which was the son of Elmodam,
which was the son of Er, 29. Which was the son of Jose, which was the son of
Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim, which was the son of Matthat, which was
the son of Levi, 30. Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda,
which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of
Eliakim. 31. Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Mena, which was
the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,
32. Which was the son of Jesse, which was the son of Obed, which was the son of
Booz, which was the son of Salmon, which was the son of Naasson, 33. Which was
the son of Aminadab, which was the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom,
which was the son of Phares, which was the son of Juda, 34. Which was the son
of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac, which was the son of Abraham, which was
the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor, 35. Which was the son of Saruch
which was the son Ragau, which was the son of Phaleg, which was the son of
Heber, which was was the son of Sala, 36. Which was the son of Cainan, which
was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem, which was the son of Noe,
which was the son of Lamech, 37. Which was the son of Mathusala, which was the
son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which was the son of Maleleel, which
was the son of Canan, 38. Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth,
which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.

23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. He entered on
his public office about thirty: And now young novices run into the Ministry.
Luke recites the pedigree of Joseph, and Matthew of Mary Q. Whence had Luke
that part of the pedigree that is not written in the Scripture before? Ans. By
other History and Tradition, with the help of Gods Spirit.

The Genealogical controversies I pass by.

CHAP. IIII.
1. ANd Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was led
by the spirit into the wilderness, 2. Being forty days tempted of the devil,
and in those days he did eat nothing: and when they were ended, he afterward
hungered. 3. And the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, command
this stone that it be made bread. 4. And Jesus answered him, saying, It is
written, that man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God. 5.
And the devil taking him up into an high mountain, showed unto him all the
kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. 6. And the devil said unto him, All
this power will I give thee, and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto
me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. 7. If thou therefore wilt worship me,
all shall be thine. 8. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind
me, Satan: for it is written thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 8. See on Matthew. 4. strongly inspired by the Holy Ghost,
was led by him, etc.

6. Though Satan lied in part, yet he has great power over the Kingdoms and
Glory of the World, partly as a Templer, and partly as Gods executioner, but
all under Gods absolute will: The success shows that too many receive them
from him, that they may serve him by them, as enemies to the Church of Christ.

Note, Blasphemous temptations must be answered with rejecting hatred.

9. And he brought him to Jerusalem and set him on a pinnacle of the temple, and
said unto him. If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down from hence. 10.
For it is written, He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee: 11.
And in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone. 12. And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God.

9, 10, 11, 12. Note, Satan uses to tempt by perverted Scripture, yet it is by
right expounded Scripture, that he must be repelled.

Q. How did the writers know these secret things* Ans. Christ told them his
Disciples (though that be not written.)

13. And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for
a season.

13. Luke recites them not in the same order with Matthew, but the same things.

Note; Christ's Victory over the Tempter was part of his saving work, and to
prepare for our Victory.

14. And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee, and there went
out a fame of him through all the region round about.

14. Note; Though the Constitution of Christ's Person was by the Divine Nature
of the second in the Trinity, yet the Scripture usually ascribes his works to
the operation of the Holy Ghost in him.

15. And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all. 16. And he came
to Nazareth, where he had been brought up; and as his custom was, he went into
the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.

15, 16. Note; Christ separated not from the Jews corrupt Church.

17. And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias, and when
he had opened the book, he found, the place where it was written, 18. The
spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel
to the poor, he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance
to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them
that are bruised, 19. To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

17, 18, 19. Note; He chose a Text that described his own Office, and applied
it.

20. And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat
down: and the eyes of all them that were in the synagogues were fastened on
him. 21. And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in
your ears.

20, 21. Note, This Instance proves it not necessary to sit in Preaching; but
lawful, where custom or circumstances forbid it not.

22. And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's son?

22. They applauded his Preaching, but undervalued him for being known to be
their Neighbors Son.

23. And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician,
heal thy self: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy
country.

23. As a Physician must first heal himself, so do thou do thy Miracles here
among thy Kindred and Neighbors.

24. And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own
country.

24. God can cause him to be accepted; but as he works ordinarily by means:
familiarity breeds contempt.

25. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of
Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great
famine was thoroughout all the land: 26. But unto none of them was Elias sent,
save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. 27. And many
lepers were in Israel in the time of Elizeus the prophet; and none of them was
cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.

25, 26, 27. Prophets cure not all that are diseased: You shall not see
Miracles, nor be saved, for being my Neighbors, if you be not Believers: And
familiarity and prejudice makes fewer of you believe, than of others.

28. And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled
with wrath. 29. And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto
the brow of the hill (whereon their city was built) that they might cast him
down headlong:

28, 29. Note; They that applauded his Preaching, when the Application grated
on them would have killed him; even the Nazarite Neighbors that hated him not
heretofore.

30. But he passing through the mids of them, went his way; 31. And came down to
Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath days. 32. And they
were astonished at his doctrine; for his word was with power.

30, 31, 32. By Miracle unhurt.

33. And in the synagogue there was a man which had a spirit of an unclean
devil, and cried out with a loud voice; 34. Saying, Let us alone, what have we
to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know
thee who thou art, the holy One of God.

33, 34. Christ's Power over Devils forced this confession.

35. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And
when the devil had thrown him in the mids, he came out of him, and hurt him
not. 36. And they were all amazed, and spoke among themselves, saying, What a
word is this? for with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits,
and they come out; 37. And the same of him went out into every place of the
country round about.

35, 36, 37 Christ specially cured the diseases, that the Devils caused, to
show that he came to conquer Satan, and save men from his power.

38. And he arose out of the synagogue, and entered into Simons house; and
Simons wives mother was taken with a great fever, and they besought him for
her. 39. And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever, and it left her. And
immediately she arose, and ministered unto them.

38, 39. Note, We have still the same Physician.

40. Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with diverse
diseases, brought them unto him: and he laid his hands on every one of them,
and healed them. 41. And devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying,
Thou art Christ the Son of God. And he rebuking them, suffered them not to
speak; for they knew that he was Christ.

40, 41. Experience made them believe that he could heal them.

42. And when it was day, he departed, and went into a desert place* and the
people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he should not depart
from them. 43. And he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other
cities also: for therefore am I sent.

42, 43. Note; Preaching the Gospel was his great business* to the belief of
which, his Miracles were but means subservient.

CHAP. V.
1. ANd it came to pass that as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of
God, he stood by the lake of Genesareth. 2. And saw two ships standing by the
lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets. 3.
And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simons, and prayed him that he
would thrust out a little from the land: and he sat down and taught the people
out of the ship.

1, 2, 3. That he might not be crowded.

4. Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Lanch out into the deep,
and let down your netts for a draught. 5. And Simon answering, said unto him,
Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at
thy word I will let down the net. 6. And when they had this done, they enclosed
a great multitude of fishes; and their net brake. 7. And they beckoned unto
their partners, which were in the other ship, that they should come and help
them. And they came and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink.

4, 5, 6, 7. Note; The Sea, and Earth, and all therein are at Christ's command.

8. When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus knees, saying, Depart from
mo, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. 9. For he was astonished, and all that were
with him, at the draught of fishes which they had taken: 10. And so was also
James and John the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon. And Jesus
said unto Simon, Fear not, from henceforth thou shall catch men.

8, 9, 10. Note; The miracle and danger made him afraid.

11. And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all and
followed him.

11. Note; It was not only by his bare Command [ Follow me,] but by this
Miracle that they were moved.

12. And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold, a man full of
leprosy; who seeing Jesus, fell on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord,
if thou will, thou can make me clean. 13. And he put forth his hand, and
touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean. And immediately the leprosy
departed from him. 14. And he charged him to tell no man: but go and show thy
self to the priest, and offer for thy clensing, according as Moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them.

12, 13.14. Note; A Miracle that the Priests themselves were to have notice of.
See Matthew. 8.

15. But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great multitudes
came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities. 16. And he
withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed. 17. And it came to pass on a
certain day, as he was teaching, that there were pharisees and doctors of the
law sitting by, which were come out of every town of Galilee, and Judea, and
Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was present to heal them. 18. And behold,
men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy; and they sought means
to bring him in, and to lay him before him. 19. And when they could not find by
what way they might bring him in, because of the multitude, they went upon the
housetop, and let him down through the tiling with his couch, into the midst
before Jesus.

15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Note; O that we were all as diligent and believing for the
healing of our Souls!

20. And when he saw their faith, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven
thee. 21. And the scribes and the pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is
this which speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone? 22. But
when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto them, What reason
ye in your hearts? 23. Whether is easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or
to say, Rise up and walk?

20, 21, 22, 23. To forgive the punishment, is to forgive the sin; which you
shall see I have power to do.

24. But that ye may know that the Son of man has power upon earth to forgive
sins, (he said unto the sick of the palsy) I say unto thee, Arise and take up
thy couch, and go into thine house. 25. And immediately he rose up before them,
and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own house, glorifying God.
26. And they were all amazed, and they glorified God, and were filled with
fear, saying, We have seen strange things to day.

24, 25, 26. The Glory of all great things, is due only to God, whoever is the
Agent.

27. And after these things he went forth and saw a publican named Levi,
sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, Follow me. 28. And he
left all, rose up, and followed him.

27, 28. Levi is Matthew.

29. And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: and there was a great
company of Publicans, and of others that sat down with them. 30. But their
Scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and
drink with Publicans and sinners? 31. And Jesus answering, said unto them, They
that are whole need not a physician: but they that are sick.

29, 30, 31. Note; It is none of the meaning of God's Law, to be against
Charity, or man's good, but to keep us from encouraging evil.

32. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

32. It is sinners that need me for a Savior, and the unconverted that need
conversion.

33. And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and make
prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink?

33. The Disciples of John, and the Pharisees, used more strictness in tasks of
fasting, and making prayers, and in bodily austerities, than Christ's Disciples
did.

34. And he said unto them, Can ye make the children of the bride-chamber fast,
while the bridegroom is with them? 35. But the days will come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then they fast in those days.

34, 35. Then shall they have days of sadness.

36. And he spoke also a parable unto them, No man puts a piece of new
garment upon an old: if otherwise, then the new makes a rent, and the piece,
that was taken out of the new, agrees not with the old. 37. And no man puts
new wine into old bottles, else the wine will burst the Bottles and be spilled,
and the bottles shall perish. 38. But new wine must be put into new bottles,
and both are preserved.

36, 37, 38. Doctrines and Precepts must be suited to men's capacity. See Matthew.
9.

39. No man also having drunk old wine, straightway desires new: for he says,
The old is better.

39. They that have been used to a freer life, will not suddenly like
austerities.

CHAP. VI.
1. ANd it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he went
through the corn fields: and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did
eat, rubbing them in their hands. 2. And certain of the Pharisees said unto
them, Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days?

1, 2. The reason of the name of the second Sabbath, after the first, is
doubtful to us that live at this distance. Many conjectures there be. Some,
that it is the last day of unleavened Bread; others, that it is the day of
Pentecost, etc.

3. And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David
did, when himself was an hungered, and they which were with him: 4. How he went
into the house of God, and did take and eat of the shewbread, and gave also to
them that were with him, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone?

3, 4. Hypocrites will be stricter than Christ, but it is when they err, or are
strict in evil, or in shadows against the greater things.

5. And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

5. I have power to use all Ceremonies to the ends of Redemption, for the good
of Man.

6. And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into the
synagogue and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was withered, 7. And
the scribes and pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the
sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him. 8. But he knew
their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, and
stand forth in the mids: And he arose and stood forth. 9. Then said Jesus to
them, I will ask you one thing, Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or
to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it?

6, 7, 8, 9. See Matthew. 12. What better work for the Sabbath Day, than to save
life? And he that will not do that when he may, is guilty of murder.

10. And looking round about upon them all, he said unto the man, Stretch forth
thy hand. And he did so, and his hand was restored whole as the other. 11. And
they were filled with madness, and communed one with another what they might do
to Jesus.

10, 11. Note; Nothing so enrageth the Devil and his Servants, as doing the
greatest good: This is to them the greatest crime.

12. And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain to
pray, and continued all night in prayer to God.

12. Note; What need then have we to pray?

13. And when it was day, he called unto him his disciples; and of them he
chose twelve, whom also he named apostles:

13. Note; His Prayer seems to be in order to the choice of his Apostles,
that is, Deputed Commissioned Messengers, next under him, to gather and guide
his Church.

14. Simon (whom he also named Peter) and Andrew his brother, James and John,
Philip and Bartholomew, 15. Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alpheus, and
Simon called Zelotes, 16. And Judas the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot,
which also was the traitor. 17. And he came down with them, and stood in the
plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of
all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coasts of Tire and Sidon, which came
to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases. 18. And they that were vexed
with unclean spirits: and they were healed. 19. And the whole multitude sought
to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all.

14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. O the wonderful mercy of our Savior to Bodies and
Souls!

20. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed be ye poor;
for yours is the kingdom of God.

20. Ye my Disciples, though poor in the World. Note; Matthew more fully
repeateth this Sermon than Luke.

21. Blessed are ye that hunger now; for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye
that weep now; for ye shall laugh.

21. See Matthew. 5.

22. Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you
from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for
the Son of man's sake.

22. Blessed are ye though you now hunger, weep, are hated, etc. because it is
for Righteousness sake.

23. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for behold, your reward is great
in heaven: for in like manner did their fathers unto the Prophets.

23. Note, But we must see that the cause be good, and that our hearts be sound
with God in the main, and in all other Cases.

24. But woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation. 25.
Woe to you that are full: for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now: for
ye shall mourn and weep. 26. Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you:
for so did their fathers to the false prophets,

24, 25, 26. Woe to you ungodly unbelievers, though you be now rich, and full,
and merry, and well spoken of: (Not because you are rich and full. etc.) But
though you are so, because you have no better: For man's welfare is to be judged
of, by what he shall have hereafter, and not by what he has here.

Note, Luke omitteth diverse of the beatitudes, but recites the woes which
Matthew omitteth: Whether this Sermon was twice spoken by Christ, or (which is
liker) but once, is uncertain.

27. But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them which
hate you. 28. Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you. 29. And unto him that smites thee on the one cheek, offer also the
other: and him that takes away thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat also. 30.
Give to every man that asks of thee; and of him that takes away thy goods,
ask them not again.

27, 28, 29, 30. See on Matthew. 5. prefer charity and peace before thy right;
and right not thy self to thy neighbors greater hurt.

31. And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise.

31. Love your neighbors as your selves, and make not too great a difference
beetwen their interest and your own: For justice will not be maintained without
Love.

32. For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also
love those that love them. 33. And if ye do good to them which do good to you,
what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same. 34. And if ye lend to
them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to
sinners, to receive as much again.

32, 33, 34. All this is but the exercise of self-love, and is not so much as
virtue; much less that charity in which you must excel all wicked men.

35. But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again:
and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the highest:
for he is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil. 36. Be ye therefore
merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

35, 36. Let your Love and good works be in imitation of God your Father,
taking his approbation for your full reward.

37. Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: forgive; and ye shall be forgiven: 38. Give, and it shall be given
unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over,
shall men give into your bosom: for with the same measure that ye mete withal,
it shall be measured to you again.

37, 38. God's rewards are sure and full.

Note; The word [ men] v. 38. is not in the Text; but [ They shall give,]
signifies [ It shall be given,] as Luke 16.9. [ They shall receive you into
the everlasting habitations,] is, [ That ye may be received:] And Angels are
liker to be the Instruments than Men, from whom we cannot expect to be measured
to, as we measure to them. Yet the Promise may extend to this, that when God
sees it good, he will make Men, yea Enemies, the Instruments of his reward.

39. And he spoke a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind? shall they
not both fall into the ditch?

39. He that will be a Teacher of others, must himself first understand what he
teaches. Teaching-ignorance is the calamity of the Church, the deceiver of
Souls, and the condemnation of the Teachers.

40. The disciple is not above his master: but every one that is perfect shall
be as his master.

40. You must look to speed no better than I that am your Master; but it will
be your perfection to imitate me; Learn of me, and suffer with me, and you
shall be blessed with me.

But some expound it [you cannot expect that the Disciples of ignorant Teachers
should attain to any higher perfection than their Masters] which they gather
from the context: But Luke uses often to conjoin various sayings and subjects.
See Matthew. 10.24.

41. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but
perceivest not the beam that is in thy own eye? 42. Either how can thou say
to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when
thou thy self beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite,
cast out first the beam that is in thine own eye, and then shall thou see
clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brothers eye.

41, 42. It is of great necessity for Teachers and Reprovers, to know
themselves, and be free from scandals, and the crimes which they reprove and
not as Pharisees, to be loose in Morals, and cruel to others, while they are
zealous for their Ceremonies; else their Hypocrisy will aggravate their
Iniquity.

43. For a good tree brings not forth corrupt fruit: neither does a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit. 44. For every tree is known by his own fruit: for
of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble-bush gather they grapes.

43, 44. If thou be a bad man thy self, and guilty of worse than thou preachest
against, who will believe thee, or expect good fruit from so bad a man?

Note; But Matthew otherwise connecteth these sayings.

45. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that
which is good: and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings
forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.

45. As the man is, so usually will his words and actions be (for hypocritical
force is usually short l.v'd.)

46. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?

46. All the good words and praises of God and Religion, from disobedient men,
do but aggravate their sin.

47. Whosoever comes to me, and hears my sayings and does them, I will show
you to whom he is like. 48. He is like a man which built a house, and dug
deep and laid the foundation on a rock and when the flood arose, the stream
beat; vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded
upon a rock.

47, 48. As a building on a Rock will stand in Storms; so he that obeys my
Word, will stand in Trial. Q. How is our Obedience made the Rock that we build
on? Is not Christ the Rock? Ans. Similitudes must not be stretched beyond their
intent. It Is only the stability of the obedient that is meant.

49. But he that hears and does not, is like a man that without a foundation
built an house upon the earth, against which the stream did beat vehemently,
and immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house was great.

49. Hypocritical, disobedient Hearers, and Professors, have no firm foundation
and stability, trusting to a barren Opinion instead of true Faith, and so fall
by woeful ruin in their Trials.

CHAP. VII.
1. NOw when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people, he
entered into Capernaum. 2. And a certain centurions servant, who was dear unto
him, was sick and ready to die. 3. And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him
the elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant.
4. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying, That he
was worthy for whom he should do this. 5. For he loves our nation, and he has
build us a synagogue.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5. See M^^th. 8.9.

6. Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the
centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not thy self, for
I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. 7. Wherefore neither
thought I my self worthy to come unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant
shall be healed. 8. For I also am a man set under authority, having under me
soldiers, and I say unto one, Go, and he goes: and to another, Come, and he
comes: and to my servant, Do this, and he does it.

6, 7, 8. Note; The Devotion of this man in building a Synagogue, and his great
Humility, show that he was better prepared for Faith than many others.

9. When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned him about,
and said unto the people that followed him, I say unto you, I have not found so
great faith, no, not in Israel.

9. As Man, he marvelled; as God, he foreknew it.

Note; Whether he took Christ for his Savior, is uncertain; but the ^earing of
his works had caused him strongly to believe his power to heal.

10. And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole
that had been sick. 11. And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a
city called Naim; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. 12.
Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man
carried out the only son of his mother, and she was a widow: and much people of
the city was with her. 13. And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her,
and said unto her, weep not. 14. And he came and touched the bier, (and they
that bare him stood still) and he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. 15.
And he that was dead, sat up, and began to speak: and he delivered him to his
mother. 16. And there came a fear on all, and they glorified God, saying, that
a great Prophet is risen up among us; and that God has visited his people.

10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Note; This Savior has still the same Love and
Pity, though he use not Miracles so much. He is still Lord of Life and Death.

17. And this rumor of him went forth throughout all Judea, and throughout all
the region round about. 18. And the disciples of John showed him of all these
things. 19. And John, calling unto him two of his disciples, sent them unto
Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come, or look we for another?

17, 18, 19. Note; It Is like John did it to convince his Disciples.

20. When the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist has sent us unto
thee, saying, Art thou lie that should come, or look we for another?

20. See Matthew. 11.

21. And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and
of evil spirits, and unto many that were blind he gave sight. 22. Then Jesus
answering said unto them, Go your way, and tell John what things ye have seen
and heard, how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the
deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor the Gospel is preached. 23. And
blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.

21, 22, 23. Tell John what is done, and let him judge by the works. But men's
great danger is, of being scandalized at my visible meanness, and my sufferings.

24. And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak unto the
people concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness for to see? a reed
shaken with the wind? 25. But what went ye out for to see? a man clothed in
soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously appareled, and live delicately,
are in kings courts. 26. But what went ye out for to see? a prophet? Yea, I say
unto you, and much more than a prophet. 27. This is he of whom it is written,
Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before
thee. 28. For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women, there is not
a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of
God, is greater than he.

24, 25, 26, 27, 28. The least true Believer in my Church has a more
honorable state and work, See Matthew. 11.

29. And all the people that heard him, and the publicans justified God, being
baptized with the baptism of John.

29. All the People that heard Christ speak so highly of John, were pleased at
it and justified God that sent him; for they had been baptized by him. Or, as
others expound it, [all the People that heard John, and the publicans received
his Message from God, etc.]

30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him.

30. [Rejected Gods Message sent by John] or [rejected Christ's Testimony of
John.]

31. And the Lord said, Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this
generation? and to what are they like? 32. They are like unto children sitting
in the marketplace, and calling one to another, and saying, We have piped unto
you, and ye have not danced: we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. 33.
For John the Baptist came neither eating nor drinking wine, and ye say, He has
devil.

31, 32, 33. See Matthew. 11.33. That he is distracted.

34. The Son of man is come eating and drinking, and ye say, Behold, a
gluttonous man, and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. 35. But
wisdom is justified of all her children.

34, 35. Ne^^her his auster^ty, nor my free conversation, do escape your
censure. But the wise will justify Wisdom.

36. And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. And he
went into the Pharisees house, and sat down to meat, 37. And behold, a woman in
the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the
Pharisees house, brought an alabaster box of ointment. 38. And stood at his
feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe
them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with
the ointment.

36, 37, 38. A Woman who had been of a bad life.

39. Now when the Pharisee, which had bidden him, saw it, he spoke within
himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who, and what
manner of woman this is that touches him; for she is a sinner?

39. Christ and the Pharisees agreed that sin is hateful.

40. And Jesus answering, said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
thee. And he said, Master, say on. 41. There was a certain creditor, which had
two debtors; the one ought five hundred pence, and the other fifty. 42. And
when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore,
which of them will love him most? 43. Simon answered and said, I suppose that
he to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou have rightly judged.

40, 41, 42, 43. Note; When God forgiveth great sins, it is that we may love
him much.

44. And he turned unto the woman, and said unto Simon, see thou this woman?
^ entered into thine house, thou gave me no water for my feet: but she has
washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. 45. Thou
gave me no kiss: but this woman, since the time I came in, has not ceased to
kiss my feet. 46. Mine head with oil thou did not anoint: but this woman has
anointed my feet with ointment.

44, 45, 46. She has showed more Love than tho^.

47. Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she
loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little.

47. Her great Love shows that her great sins are forgiven, for it is her
^rateful return: But they that think they need but little pardon, will return
but little thankfulness for it.

48. And he said unto h^^, Thy sins are forgiven.

48. Note, No doubt they were truly repented of, hated, and forsaken.

49. And they that sat at meat with him, began to say within themselves, who is
this that forgiveth sins also? 50. And he said unto the woman, thy faith has
saved thee, go in peace.

49. Note, None can forgive sins against God but God, and man after (not before
him) by declaring and delivering Gods pardon.

50. God pardons and saves all true believers; And thou have showed that
thou art a believer. Though God freely give pardon and Salvation, thy faith
makes thee a qualified receiver, and so saves thee.

CHAP. VIII.
1. ANd it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city and
village preaching, and showing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God: and the
twelve were with him. 2. And certain women which had been healed of evil
spirits, and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils,
3. And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others,
which ministered unto him of their substance.

1, 2, 3. In the thankful sense of their deliverance attended him, and
contributed to his m^intenance.

Note, Christ that was Lord of all, and gave other^ Life and Salvation,
disdained not to live on others gifts, and contribution.

4. And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of
every city, he spoke by a parable: 5. A sower went out to sow his seed: and as
he sowed, some fell by the ways side, and i^ was trodden down, and the fowls of
the air devoured it. 6. And some fell upon a rock, and as soon as it was sprung
up, it withered away, because it lacked moisture. 7. And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it. 8. And other fell on
good ground, and sprung up, and bare frui^ an hundredfold. And when he had
said these things, he cried, He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

4, 5, 6, 7, 8. See the exposition, on Matthew. 19.

Note* It is the difference of the receivers, and reception, which is the
notable cause of different succ^sses of the same word; yet supposing Gods
election.

9. And his disciples asked him, saying, What might this parable be? 10. And he
said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but to
others in parables; that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not
understand.

9, 10. Note, The reception of one truth prepares for more, and the rejection
of Gods calls prepares men to be forsaken.

11. Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God. 12. Those by the
wayside, are they that hear: then comes the devil, and takes away the word
out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved. 13. They on the
rock are they, which when they hear receive the word with joy; and these have
no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. 14.
And that which fell among thorns, are they, which when they have heard, go
forth, and are choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of this life, and
bring no fruit to perfection.

11, 12, 13, 14. Note, Hopeful and fair beginnings in very many fall short of
Salvation.

15. But that on the good ground ar^ they, which in an honest and good heart,
having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

15. Who receive the Gospel so, as to renew them, their hearts before prepared
being by it sanctified, and persevere to maturity.

16. No man, when he has lighted a candle, covers it with a vessel, or
puts it under a bed: but sets it on a candlestick, that they which enter
in may see the light.

16. Light is not to be hid, nor God's Gifts and Man's Knowledge; being given
not only for themselves, but for the good of all about them.

Note 1. Woe then to unjust silencers of God's faithful Ministers! And 2. To
idle, treacherous, unfaithful Pastors.

Note; These passages are otherwise connected in Matthew.

17. For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest: neither any thing
hid, that shall not be known; and come abroad.

17. Note; Oh then how vain is the hiding endeavor of the Hypocrite! And how
little should we trust to lies, or to the secrecy of our sins!

Note; The connection of these sentences is not too much to be minded.

18. Take heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever has, to him shall be
given; and whosoever has not, from him shall be taken even that which he
seems to have.

18. The thankful receiving of what is given you, and the well using of what
you have, is the way to have more given you: But the rejection or abuse of it,
forseiteth what you have.

Note; When Luke collecteth several passages, spoken on several occasions, like
Solomon's Proverbs, to feign an Analysis, and thence put the sense on them, is
to make the sense, and not to expound it.

19. Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come at him
for the press. 20. And it was told him by certain, which said, Thy mother and
thy brethren stand without desiring to see thee. 21. And he answered and said
unto them, My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God and
do it.

19, 20, 21. N. He knew that their acquaintance with his Parents, Kindred, and
Education, was the hinderance of their Faith; and therefore he lets them know
that he had a higher Original and Kindred, and valued spiritual before carnal
Relations.

22. Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship with his
disciples: and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the other side of the
lake: and they lanched forth. 23. But as they sailed, he fell asleep: and there
came down a storm of wind on the lake, and they were filled with water, and
were in jeopardy. 24. And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master,
master, we perish. Then he rose, and rebuked the wind, and the raging of the
water: and they ceased, and there was a calm.

22, 23, 24. Note, 6. And cannot he with a word rebuke all popular and
tyrannical rage against his Church?

25. And he said unto them, Where is your faith? and they being afraid,
wondered, saying one to another? What manner of man is this? for he commands
even the winds and water, and they obey him.

25. Note; And shall not we obey him?

26. And they arrived at the country of the Gadarens, which is over against
Galilee. 27. And when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city, a
certain man which had devils long time, and ware no cloths, neither abode in
any house, but in the tombs. 28. When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down
before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus,
thou Son of God most high? I beseech thee torment me not. 29. (For he had
commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For oftentimes it had
caught him: and he was kept bound with chains, and in fetters; and he brake the
bands, and was driven of the devil into the wilderness.) 30. And Jesus asked
him, saying, What is thy name? And he said, Legion; because many Devils were
entered into him. 31. And they besought him that he would not command them to go
out into the deep.

26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. See on Matthew. 8. and Mark 5.8, 9. The bottomless Pit.
N. The Devils are not yet confined to Hell, nor in their utmost misery.

32. And there was there a herd of many swine feeding on the mountain: and they
besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them: and he suffered
them. 33. Then went the Devils out of the man, and entered into the swine: and
the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were choked. 34.
When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went and told it in
the city and in the country. 35. Then they went out to see what was done, and
came to Jesus, and found the man out of whom the devils were departed, sitting
at the seet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid. 36.
They also which saw it, told them by what means he, that was possessed of the
devils, was healed.

32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Note 1. One man is of more worth than multitudes of Swine
(though swinish sinners vilify themselves.) 2. What would not Devils do
against us, if God should permit them?

37. Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarens round about,
besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great fear: and he
went up into the ship, and returned back again. 38. Now the man, out of whom
the devils were departed, besought him that he might be with him: but Jesus
sent him away, saying, 39. Return to thine own house, and show how great things
God has done unto thee. And he went his way and published throughout the whole
city, how great things Jesus had done unto him.

37, 38, 39. Note; All men's service of God is not in one way; some may do most
good at home, and in a private state of life, and some more publicly.

40. And it came to pass, that when Jesus was returned, the people gladly
received him; for they were all waiting for him. 41. And behold, there came a
man, named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue, and he fell down at
Jesus feet, and besought him that he would come into his house: 42. For he had
one only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she lay a dying. (But as he
went, the people thronged him.)

40, 41, 42. Bodily Gifts are gladly received, and earnestly sought.

43. And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her
living upon Physicians, neither could be healed of any, 44. Came behind him,
and touched the border of his garment: and immediately her issue of blood
stanched. 45. And Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter, and they
that were with him, said, Master, the multitude throng thee, and press thee,
and say thou, Who touched me? 46. And Jesus said, Some body has touched me:
for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.

43, 44, 45, 46. Note; Peter carpt at Christ's words, because he knew not the
reason of them

47. And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and
falling down before him, she declared unto him, before all the people, for what
cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately.

47. She was afraid lest he would be angry with her for stealing a Cure without
his consent.

48. And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made
thee whole, go in peace.

48. Note; Faith heals not efficiently, but as the necessary moral
qualification of the receiver of a free gift.

49. While he yet spoke, there comes one, from the ruler of the Synagogues
house, saying to him, Thy daughter is dead, trouble not the Master. 50. But
when Jesus heard it, he answered him, saying, Fear not, believe only, and she
shall be made whole. 51. And when he came into the house, he suffered no man to
go in, save Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the
Maiden. 52. And all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, Weep not; she is not
dead, but sleeps.

49, 50, 51, 52. Permitting it to come to extremity magnified the Miracle.

53. And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

53. She was dead by the cessa^ion of natural life and motion, and not dead, by
a remote departure of the Soul; it being o^tained to restore the suspended
life: And so both Christ and they said true.

54. And he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called, saying,
Maid, arise. 55. And her spirit came again, and she arose straitway: and he
commanded to give her some meat. 56. And her Parents were astonished: but he
charged them that they should tell no man what was done.

54, 55, 56. See on Mark 5.

CHAP. IX.
1. THen he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and
authority over all devils, and to cure diseases. 2. And he sent them to preach
the Kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.

1, 2. To Save Bodies and Souls.

3. And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor
scrip, neither bread, neither money, neither have two coats a piece. 4. And
whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart. 5. And
whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city, shake off the very
dust from your feet for a testimony against them.

3, 4, 5. See on Matthew. 10.10, 11. To witness that it is not long of your
unwillingness, but their own, that they are forsaken and perish.

6. And they departed and went through the towns, preaching the gospel, and
healing every where. 7. Now Herod the tetrach heard of all that was done by
him: and he was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was
risen from the dead: 8. And of some, that Elias had appeared: and of others,
that one of the old prophets was risen again. 9. And Herod said, John have I
beheaded: but who is this of whom I hear such things? and he desired to see him.

6, 7, 8, 9. Note; Christ, that was familiar with the Poor, would not gratify
the desire of the King, a persecutor, that desired to see him:

10. And the Apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they had
done. And he took them, and went aside privately into a desert place, belonging
to the city called Bethsaida.

10. Note; Had we the History of all the Apostles Miracles before and after
Christ's Resurrection, how large would it be!

11. And the people, when they knew it, followed him, and he received them, and
spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that had need of healing.

11. Note; Christ rejected none that followed after him, with desire and
diligent seeking him.

12. And when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve and said unto
him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country
round about, and lodge, and get victuals: for we are here in a desert place.
13. But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We have no more
but five loaves and two fishes, except we should go and buy meat for all this
people. 14. For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his
disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company. 15. And they did so, and
made them all sit down.

12, 13, 14, 15. See Matthew. 8. Then they obeyed, expecting some Miracle.

16. Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven,
he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to set before the
multitude. 17. And they did eat, and were all filled: and there was taken up of
fragments that remained to them, twelve baskets.

16, 17. See on Matthew. 14.

18. And it came to pass as he was alone praying, his disciples [were with
him:] and he asked them, saying, whom say the people that I am? 19. They
answering said, John the baptist: but some say Elias: and others say, That one
of the old prophets is risen again.

18, 19. Came to him. See Matthew. 16.15, 20.

20. He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter answering said, The
Christ of God. 21. And he straightly charged them and commanded them to tell no
man that thing.

20, 21. Q. What then was the Gospel which they were sent to preach, and which
he preached? Ans. Much like John Baptist's preaching that the Kingdom of God is
come; and moreover, that Jesus did such and such Miracles, as he told John's
Disciples; not directly saying, I am the Christ, but proposing those Evidences
from whence they were themselves to gather it: Because his Resurrection, etc.
was to make the Evidence full, before the Gospel was fully preached?

Q. But what then was the Baptism he used before his Resurrection, if men were
not to be told, and to profess that he was the Christ? Ans. Just answerable to
his preaching; and like John's Baptism; but much different from the following
Baptism in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Men were to profess
Repentance and hope of Salvation, by learning of Christ, and so lifted
themselves under him as his Disciples; but not yet to profess that He was the
Christ; which after was necessary.

22. Saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the
elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and be slain, and be raised the third
day.

22. All this is part of the Gospel which you must hereafter preach; and when
this is done, it will be seasonable to preach it.

23. And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself and take up his cross daily, and follow me. 24. For whosoever will save
his life, shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same
shall save it.

23.24. Carnal Self love, and the love of wordly prosperity, being man's lapsed
sinful state, it is from these that I come to save men; and therefore will save
none, but by saving them from these, and teaching them to deny their carnal
selves, and worldly prosperity.

25. For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose
himself, or be cast away.

25. See on Matthew. 10. and Mark 8. Alas th^^ (...) how little a part of this
vain World, do millions (...) their Souls!

26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son
of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory and in his Fathers, and
of the holy angels.

26. They that, to save their estates or lives, are ashamed now to own me and
the Gospel, I will reject them as ashamed to own them, or such as they, in the
day of Glory, and their Extremity, in Judgment.

27. But I tell you of a truth, There be some standing here which shall not
taste of death, till they see the Kingdom of God.

27. Note; All the three Evangelists prefixing this immediately before the
History of Christ's Transfiguration, do plainly tell us, that it was that
glimpse of his Glory which he meant.

28. And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, he took Peter,
and John, and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.

28. Matthew. 17.1. Says, after six days, not reckoning the two parts of the
foregoing and the last day.

29. And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his
raiment was white and glittering. 30. And behold, there talked with him two
men, which were Moses and Elias. 31. Who appeared in glory, and spoke of his
decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. 32. But Peter, and they that
were with him, were heavy with sleep: and when they were awake, they saw his
glory, and the two men that stood with him. 33. And it came to pass, as they
departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here;
and let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for
Elias: not knowing what he said. 34. While he thus spoke, there came a cloud
and overshadowed them and they feared as they entered into the cloud. 35. And
there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, hear him.

29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. See on Matthew. 17. I have largely opened all this
in my Book called, My Dying Thoughts.

Note; If this glimpse of Glory was so sweet, why do we fear to pass hence into
the blessed Vision and Fruition.

36. And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone: and they kept it
close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen.

36. For Christ so commanded.

37. And it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come down from
the hill, much people met him. 38. And behold, a man of the company cried out,
saying, Master, I beseech thee look upon my son, for he is mine only child: 39.
And lo, a spirit takes him, and he suddenly cries out, and it teareth him
that he foameth again, and bruising him, hardly departs from him. 40. And I
besought thy disciples to cast him out, and they could not. 41. And Jesus
answering, said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with
you, and suffer you? Bring thy son hither. 42. And as he was yet a coming, the
devil threw him down, and tare him: and Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and
healed the child, and delivered him again to his father.

37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. See on Matthew. 17.15, 16. Since I have my self known
one yet living, that had an old and violent Epilepsy, once, twice or thrice a
day, perfectly cured (near thirty years ago, and so continues,) after other
great means used, merely by fasting and earnest prayer, suddenly in the midst
of prayer the second day* I do the easilier believe that the Devil and ^atural
Disease, of which he is the Executioner, may consist together.

43. And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God: but while they
wondered every one at all things which Jesus did, he said unto his disciples.
44. Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for the Son of man shall be
delivered into the hands of men.

43, 44. Let not my Glory and Power put you into vain expectations of earthly
Dominion. Observe, and forget not that I tell you again and again, that I must
suffer (and rise again.)

45. But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they
perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying.

45. Note; Even the Apostles understood not that Christ must be crucified and
rise again, though he often told it them, and charged them that it might sink
down into their Ears. Therefore the belief of it was not then necessary to
Salvation, as it is now.

46. Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be greatest.

46. Note; Alas, that Pride and Ambition should begin so near to Christ, and
foretell the Calamity of the Church!

47. And Jesus perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child, and set him
by him 48. And said unto them, Whosoever, shall receive this child in my Name,
receives me: and whosoever shall receive me receives him that sent me: for he
that is least among you all, the same shall be great.

47, 48. Humility must be your greatness.

49. And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy
Name; and we forbade him, because he follows not with us. 50. And Jesus said
unto him, Forbid him not; for he that is not against us, is for us.

49, 50. See on Matthew. 12.30.

51. And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up,
he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem.

51. The time of his approaching Crucifixion, and his Ascension to Heaven.

52. And sent messengers before his face, and they went and entered into a
village of the Samaritans to make ready for him. 53. And they did not receive
him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem.

52, 53. Note; For the Jews and the Samaritans disowned each other upon their
Controversies about Worship.

54. And when his disciples, James and John, saw this, they said, Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as
Elias did? 55. But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what
manner of spirit ye are of. 56. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. And they went to another village.

54, 55, 56. That which you take for the Spirit of Elias, and Zeal for me
against sin, is a selfish, uncharitable, revengeful Spirit, and not that which
I will give you, which is a Spirit of Love and Gentleness: You know not your
own hearts, but take that for good in you, which is evil; and you know not me
as you should do: I come to save, and not to destroy men.

This is the third sin against Charity, recorded of John, who was after the
great Preacher of Love.

57. And it came to pass, that as they went in the way, a certain man said unto
him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. 58. And Jesus said unto
him, Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head.

57, 58. I have no entertainment for any but self-denying persons, that can
forsake all for me.

59. And he said unto another, Follow me: but he said, Lord, suffer me first to
go and bury my father. 60. Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead:
but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.

59, 60. The work of my Gospel, and God's Kingdom, must be preferred before the
burying of a Father.

Note; Christ fitteth his Answer to the disposition of those he spoke to. He
knew that this man was fitter to be put on, and the former to be stopped.

61. And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee: but let me first go and
bid them farewell that are at home at my house. 62. And Jesus said unto him,
No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God.

61, 62. If thou will be my Minister thou must be like a man plowing, who
looks still before him on the Furrow, and not behind him: The Kingdom of God
must be first sought, and all things that would hinder the true service of it,
must be put behind, and denied and forsaken: (Not that it dissolveth
Relation-duties, but puts all behind the works and interest of God, and
forsakes that which is against it.)

CHAP. X.
AFter these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two
and two before his face, into every city and place, whither he himself would
come. 2. Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the
laborers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would
send forth laborers into his harvest.

1, 2. As he had chosen twelve, with respect to the twelve Tribes; so he chose
seventy, according to the number of the great Council, it is like 70 being put
for 72, as an ancient Copy has it. By which it appears he settled a
disparity in his Ministers,

2. Note; Priests now are many, but Laborers few: What men are they that hate
and silence the faithfulest Laborers, suspecting that they are not for their
interest?

3. Go your ways: behold I send you, forth as lambs among wolves. 4. Carry
neither purse nor scrip, nor shoes, and salute to man by the way.

3, 4. I send you on such work, in which you shall suffer from wicked men as I
must do. Let not the care of provision, nor any matters of inferior concern;
as humane respects are, stop you in your work and undertaken Ministry, (not
that all Civility is forbidden.)

5. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. 6.
And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it
shall turn to you again.

5, 6. For the necessary capacity of the Receiver is implied as a condition of
the Effect. The same Benediction is effectual to a capable Receiver, and
uneffectual to another, (as is also the Sacrament.)

7. And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give:
for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. 8. And into
whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set
before you.

7, 8. Maintenance is your due, for your work.

9. And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, the Kingdom of God
is come nigh unto you.

9. This was the Gospel that they were to preach.

10. But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive ye not, go your ways
out into the streets of the same, and say, 11. Even the very dust of your city,
which cleaves on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding, be ye sure
of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.

10, 11. See Mat. 10.14.

12. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom,
than for that city.

12. At the Judgment. There will be some punished in hell more tolerably than
others.

13. Woe unto thee Chorazin: woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works had
been done in Tire and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great
while ago repented sitting in sackcloth and ashes.

13. The same means, which prevails not with some, would have converted
others that now perish.

14. But it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon, at the day of Judgment,
then for you. 15. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shall be
thrust down into hell.

14, 15. The loss of the greatest means and mercy, prepares for the heaviest
Judgment.

16. He that hears you, hears me and he that despises you, despises me:
and he that despises me, despises him: that sent me.

16. So far as you do my works, I will take what is done to you, as done to my
self.

17. And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are
subject unto us through thy Name. 18. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as
lightning fall from heaven.

17, 18. Satan shall be cast down from much of his Tyranny over Mankind, by me
and my Gospel.

19. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents, and scorpions, and
over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you.

19. Note; The Kingdom of Christ is set up against the Devil and his Kingdom,
and not against Kings as such.

2. It seems Serpents are used as Satan's Instruments to hurt man.

20. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto
you: but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.

20. Even wicked men may cast out Devils, but it is greater matter of joy to be
Saints that shall be said.

21. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes: even so, Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight.

21. That thou have revealed the heavenly Wisdom to those that are despised, as
unlearned in the World, rather than to men counted wise and learned for their
humane wit and knowledge. See Matthew 11.25.

22. All things are delivered to me of my Father: and no man knows who the
Son is, but the Father: and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the
Son will reveal him.

22. Christ is made the Lord of all; and he is perfectly known by none but God:
And there is no true knowledge of God the Father, but by the teaching of Christ.

23. And he turned him unto his disciples, and said privately, Blessed are the
eyes which see the things that ye see.

23. See Matthew. 13.17.

24. For I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those things which ye
hear, and have not heard them.

24. Such as David, Solomon, Isaiah, etc.

25. And behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

25. To try his skill.

26. He said unto him, What is written in the law? how read thou?

26. Note, They err who say, that the Law of Moses prescribed not the mean^ to
Eternal Life.

27. And he answering said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind,
and thy neighbor as thy self. 28. And he said unto him, Thou have answered
right: this do, and thou shall live.

27, 28. Note; This is not the same History that is mentioned, Matthew. 19.16.
there is much of the same, and yet much difference: There Christ repeateth the
Commandments particularly, but here the Lawyer repeateth them summarily. So
Mark 10.17. agrees with Matthew. But that in Luke 18.18. is the same with
this, and a distinct History.

Note; Whoever loves God sincerely, and his Neighbor as himself, shall be
saved. But this will never be done without Regenerating Grace.

29. But he willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus and who is my
neighbor?

29 Note; This overwillingness to justify our selves, is one of the de^^est
rooted commonest vices in corrupted Nature.

30. And Jesus answering, said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raim^^t, and wounded
him, and departed leaving him half dead. 31. And by chance there came down a
certain priest that way, and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.

32. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him,
and passed by on the other side. 33. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed,
came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, 34. And went
to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his
own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. 35. And on the
morrow, when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and
said unto him, Take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come
again, I will repay thee.

30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. The Priest and the Levite, who should be the most holy
and charitable, past by him without helping him; but a Samaritan, one contemned
by them as a Heretic, or profane Rustic, took him up, and helped him.

Note; They abuse the Text that say, by the Samaritan, is meant Christ, and by
two pence, the Two Testaments, etc.

36. Which now of these three, think thou, was neighbor unto him that fell
among the thieves?

36. Which of the^ to^^ the man for his Neighbor, and dealt as a Neighbor
with him?

37. And he said, He that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go,
and do thou likewise.

37. So do thou, and though he be a Samaritan, a Schismatic, a Heretic, use
him with such charity as thy Neighbor.

Note; Do they so, that ruin, hunt and destroy such, and better men?

38. Now it came pass as they went, that he entered into a certain village: and
a certain woman, named Martha, received him into her house. 39. And she had a
sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus's feet, and heard his word:

38, 39. Martha was the Housekeeper or Owner.

40. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him and said,
Lord, do thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? bid her
therefore that she help me.

40. The followers of Christ to be provided for, were many, and the work seemed
necessary.

41. And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful,
and troubled about many things: 42. But one thing is needful, And Mary has
chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.

41, 42. Thou troublest thy self more than needs, and unseasonably, about many
things of less necessity. But to learn the way of Salvation, and so to be
blessed in the Kingdom of God, is the one thing of absolute necessity. This
Mary has preferred, and so should thou, and have left serving to the second
place: And none shall deprive her of that better portion which she has chosen.

Note 1. Christ does not blame Martha for her car^ and work, but for not
preferring better: Nor speaks this so much to blame her, as to commend Mary,
and to teach us all what to prefer.

2. One thing only (in a comprehensive sense, as containing Salvation, and its
necessary means,) is of such absolute necessity to man, that all things else
should be put behind it.

3. Preferring things less necessary, though good, and troubling our selves
about need-nots, is a common fault, even of religious persons.

4. That is a fault out of its due time and place, which is a great duty in its
season.

5. They that prefer and choose the best, shall have the best, whoever is
against it.

6. Even godly persons and near, are apt upon cross Interests and Opinions, to
censure and accuse each other upon mistake, when the fault is in the accuser,
and that to Christ.

7. But Christ will justify the right.

CHAP. XI.
1. AND it came to pass that, as he was praying in a certain place, when he
ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his disciples.

1. It seems they had till now been too little and unskilful in prayer.

2. And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in
earth. 3. Give us day by day our daily bread. 4. And forgive us our sins; for
we also forgive every one that is indepted to us. And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil.

2, 3, 4. See the Exposition of the Lord's Prayer on Matthew. 6.9.

Note; It is evident that Christ gave them this prayer to be used both as a
Directory for Matter and Method, and as a meet form of words, when they pray
comprehensively and summarily, though not trying them always to use these very
words, nor to go through the whole Method, when occasion confines them to some
one branch, or requires them to insist most on it; much less obliging or
allowing them to use no other: And so the Apostles, and all the Churches,
understood it.

The small difference in words between Matthew and Luke, are not material; save
that Luke omitteth the doxology in the end.

By [ Debt] verse 4. is meant chiefly wrong or sin: For so the Syriack
signifies, in which Christ spoke: Though also our obligation to keep the Law
of Innocence on pain of death, or for Justification, is a Debt which God
remitteth by the Law of Faith and Grace, and accepts on our part Faith and
sincere Obedience, for the Merit of Christ, who fulfilled that perfect Law.

5. And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto
him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves; 6. For a
friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before
him: 7. And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not, the door is
now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. 8. I
say unto you, though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend:
yet because of his importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs.

5, 6, 7, 8. Though God be not as Man, that gives the importunate to be eased
of them, yet importunity also prevails with him, as it fits the Receiver for
his Gifts.

9. And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall
find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. 10. For every one that that
asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it
shall be opened.

9, 10. He that will spare for no labor, and take no denial, shall have no
denial finally: He that easily gives over his suit, and will not be at pains
and patience, forfeiteth mercy by contempt.

11. If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him
a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish, giv^ him a serpent? 12. Or if
he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion? 13. If ye then, being evil,
know* how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit unto them that ask him?

11, 12, 13. Note; God's Goodness is a great ground of hope that he will grant
our prayers; that is, as far as he has promised; 1. Grace and Glory certainly
to all penitent Believers. 2. And the things of this life on these three
conditions; 1. If they are such as are fit for the person. 2. And he be sit for
them. 3. And it be fit to subserve God's higher ends, his Glory, and the
public good, and do not cross them.

So much of his Spirit as is necessary to Salvation, he will give to all true
Believers: And the additional degrees and gifts, he gives on the terms
aforesaid.

14. And he was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to pass, when
the devil was gone out, the dumb spoke: and the people wondered. 15. But some of
them said, He casts out devils through Beelzebub, the chief of the devils.

14, 15. See Matthew. 12. They were so convinced of the fact of his Miracles,
that they had no plea for their unbelief left them, but to say, he did them by
Conjuration, which is the blaspheming of the Holy Ghost.

16. And others tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven. 17. But he
knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against it self,
is brought to desolation: and a house divided against a house, falls. 18. If
Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? because ye
say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub. 19. And if I by Beelzebub cast
out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out? therefore shall they be your
judges.

16, 17, 18, 19. Note; When Satan labors to divide the Church of Christ, it
is that he may destroy it: And should we do worse against Christ's Kingdom than
Satan will do by his own?

20. But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of
God is come upon you.

20. It is the approving work of God, to set up his Kingdon against the Devils.

21. When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace. 22.
But when a stronger then he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he takes
from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils.

21, 22. If I did not conquer Satan, I could not cast him out of his possession
of Bodies and Souls.

23. He that is not with me, is against me, and he that gathers not with me,
scatters.

23. See Matthew. 12.30.

24. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry
places, seeking rest: and finding none, he says, I will return unto my house
whence I came out. 25. And when he comes, he finds it swept and garnished.
26. Then goes he, and takes to him seven other spirits more wicked then
himself, and they enter in, and dwell there, and the last state of that man is
worse than the first.

24, 25, 26. But let him that is delivered from Satan's possession of Body or
Soul, take heed that he return not: For when Satan is cast out, he tries by
his Temptations to get Possession of some others: And when he has as^^^^ed
many, and is resisted and frustrate by the grace of God, he resolves again to
try his assaults, on him that was delivered; And finding him careless,
unwatchful, and ready to receive his Temptations, he suggesteth worse things to
him than those that he had renounced, and brings in on fair pretenses
sevenfold worse vices than he had before: And the end of that man is worse than
was his first captivity to Satan.

Note, It is some kind of rest to Devils to deceive and destroy Souls. As it is
to a malicious man to do mischief by revenge. Devils are not yet at their most
easeless state. See Mat. 12.43.

27. And it came to pass, as he spoke these things, a certain woman of the
company lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the paps which thou have sucked. 28. But he said, Yea, rather blessed
are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

27, 28. Note; Carnal persons most regard carnal Relations. 2. Christ accounts
them that hear and keep God's Word, as more amiable and blessed, than it would
be to have been his own Mother: And we must judge as he does: Though when God
makes the provision for our Families out duty, we must obey him as his
Stewards in our distributions; yet Grace is more amiable than natural Relations.

29. And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say, This is
an evil generation, they seek a sign, and there shall no sign be given it, but
the sign of Jonas the Prophet: 30. For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites,
so shall also the Son of man be to this generation.

29, 30. As Jonas, after three days abode in the Sea, was sent to preach; so
after my three days in the grave, I will rise and call the World to Repentance,
by mine Apostles and my Spirit, and save them as Nineve was saved.

31. The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this
generation and condemn them: for she came from the utmost parts of the earth,
to hear the wisdom of Solomon: and behold a greater than Solomon is here.

31. It shall appear that the Jews are worse than her, and deserve destruction
for being so much worse, and averse to Faith.

32. The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and
shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas: and behold, a
greater than Jonas is here.

32. See Matthew. 12.42.

33. No man when he has lighted a candle puts it in a secret place, neither
under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which come in may see the
light.

33. God would not have us hide his Truth, (much less silence it by Diabolical
Persecution.)

34. The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, thy
whole body is full of light: but when thine eye is evil, thy body also is full
of darkness.

34. The Light of Man is his true Understanding: As that is, so is the man, a
Child of Light or of Darkness.

35. Take heed therefore, that the light which is in thee be not darkness.

35. Take heed lest that Understanding be ignorant or erroneous.

36. If thy whole body therefore be full of light, having no part dark, the
whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle does give
thee light.

36. See Mark 6.26.

37. And as he spoke, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him: and he
went in, and sat down to meat. 38. And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled
that he had not first washed-before dinner.

37, 38. See Matthew. 7.3. Ma^th. 15.2.

39. And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of
the cup and the platter, but your inward part is full of ravening and
wickedness. 40. Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without, make that
which is within also? 41. But rather give alms of such things as you have: and
behold, all things are clean unto you.

39, 40, 41. True Cleanness is to be acceptable to God: Be charitable and
liberal, and your meat will be clean to you.

42. But woe unto you, Pharisees: for ye tithe mint and rue, and all manner of
herbs, and pass over judgment, and the love of God: these ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone.

42. See Matthew. 23.23. The Love of God, and Justice with Men, are far greater
matters than religious Rites and Ceremonies, or Church-Orders. God's Laws are
some far greater than others, though none to be violated.

43. Woe unto you, Pharisees: for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues,
and greetings in the markets. 44. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites: for ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over
them, are not aware of them.

43, 44. Note; Hypocrisy is Pride covered with formal Ceremonious* shows of
Religion, sometime unknown to the Hypocrite himself.

45. Then answered one of the lawyers and said unto him, Master, thus saying
thou reproachest us also. 46. And he said, Woe unto you also, ye lawyers: for ye
lade men with burdens grievous to be born, and ye your selves touch not the
burdens with one of your fingers.

45, 46. Note 1. Bad men can bear guilt, but not reproach for it. 2. Strict
Doctrine condemns loo^e and guilty Preachers.

47. Woe unto you, for ye build the sepulchers of the prophets, and your fathers
killed them. 48. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers*
for they indeed killed them, and ye (...) their sepulchers.

47, 48. See Matthew. 23.3^. H^^ocrites glory ^n the names and honor of d^ad
(...) and Saints, and kill the living.

49. Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and
apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute: 50. That the blood of
all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be
required of this generation;

49, 50. Your Forefathers sins, and yours, shall be revenged on you shortly.

51. From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between
the altar and the temple; verily ^ say unto you, it shall be required of this
generation. 52. Woe unto you lawyers: for ye have taken away the key of
knowledge: ye entered not in your selves, and them that were entering in, ye
hindered.

51, 52. Note; The just description of a wicked Clergy.

53. And as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees began
to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things: 54. Laying
wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might
accuse him.

53, 54. Their wrath set their wits on work to ensnare him.

CHAP. XII.
1. IN the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable
multitude of people, insomuch that they trod one upon another, he began to say
unto his disciples first of all, beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees,
which is hypocrisy.

1. Note; He disswadeth none from joining with them in any good, or hearing the
Law from them, but to avoid their Hypocrisy, and ceremonious covers of
iniquity, joined with malice against Christ.

2. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, neither hid, that
shall not be known. 3. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness, shall
be heard in the light: and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets,
shall be proclaimed upon the house tops.

2.3. Trust not to Secrecy and Deceit; for all secret sins shall be opened at
the last.

Note; O how many will that day shame! It is our wisdom, by due confession, to
take shame sooner to our selves.

4. And I say unto you, my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body,
and after that have no more that they can do. 5. But I will forewarn you whom
you shall fear: Fear him which, after he has killed, has power to cast into
hell, yea, I say unto you, Fear him.

4, 5. I give it you as the most friendly counsel, Take heed of too much fear
of man, lest it cause you to betray your Souls: They can but kill the Body: The
Soul overliveth it; and man's welfare or misery is after death: Persecutors or
Tyrants cannot reach or hurt you after death. But, as you love your selves,
fear God, whose Justice will be executed on the ungodly after death, and when
he has taken away their Souls, will cast them into Hell: Again, I say, be sure
to fear him.

6. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is
forgotten before God? 7. But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered:
fear not therefore, ye are of more value then many sparrows.

6, 7. God's Providence extends to a Sparrow, and to the smallest creatures;
(for he is omnipotent, and all-sufficient, and maintains all;) and much more
to you: There is not an hair of your heads not-caused, not known, and not
regarded by him: And does he disregard your lives or welfare, whom he has
raised above the rank of Brutes?

Note; God is as sufficient for every creature and event, as if he had but that
one to mind.

8. Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the
Son of man also confess before the angels of God.

8. Own me sincerely in the time of Trial, and I will own you before Angels,
where are your greatest concerns.

9. But he that denies me before men, shall be denied before the angels of God.

9. Without true Repentance.

10. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven.

10. To speak against me, as a man, is pardonable: But when I shall send the
Spirit of Miracles and Holiness to be my Witness in the World, they that will
not be convinced by this Spirit, but blasphemously say, It is the power and
work of the Devils, do sin against the last and great means of Conviction, and
being uncured, are unpardoned.

11. And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates and
powers, take ye no thought how, or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall
say: 12. For the holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour, what ye ought to
say.

11, 12. Let not the fear of your unready speech discourage you, but trust the
Spirit of God to help you.

13. And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother, that he
divide the inheritance with me. 14. And he said unto him, Man, who made me a
judge, or a divider over you?

13, 14. N. Whether the man would have had Christ taken on him an Authoritative
Decision, or only a free Arbitration, is uncertain; which ever it was, Christ
refuses it: A work of worldly Rule he disclaimed: And he would not be so
imprudent as to offend men by an Arbitration without need.

15. And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's
life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.

15. Take heed of being too desirous of wealth or plenty: For neither life, nor
the comfort of life, depends on plenty, but on the holy and obedient use of
what you have, and on the blessing and love of God.

16. And he spoke a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man
brought forth plentifully. 17. And he thought within himself, saying, What
shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? 18. And he said,
This will I do, I will pull down my barns and build greater, and there will I
bestow all my fruits, and my goods. 19. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou
have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry. 20. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?

16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Note; The damning folly of wicked men, is 1. In
over-loving the pleasure of the flesh, to eat, and drink, and be merry, and
live at ease. 2. To over-love Riches and Plenty, as provision for this fleshly
pleasure. 3. To flatter themselves with the conceit of long life, and to forget
the shortness of time, and their latter end. 4. To neglect a due dependence on
God for all things. 5. To neglect the due care of the Soul, and preparation for
another World, and to set less by Heaven than Earth; such are the most
miserable fools.

21. So is he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.

21. Such is every one, whose chief care and labor is, to have plenteous
provision for his own Body, and is not rich in Grace, nor uses his riches to
please God in good works.

22. And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought
for your life what ye shall eat, neither for the body what ye shall put on. 23.
The life is more then meat, and the body is more then raiment.

22, 23. Note; Luke brings in things spoken at several times, on several
occasions, for the matters sake. See Matthew. 6. Trust him for the less, who has
freely given you the greater.

24. Consider the ravens, for they neither sow nor reap, which neither have
storehouse nor barn, and God feeds them. How much more are ye better then the
fowls? 25. And which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one
cubit? 26. If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye
thought for the rest? 27. Consider the lilies how they grow, they toil not,
they spin not: and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory, was not
arrayed like one of these. 28. If then God so cloth the grass, which is to day
in the field, and to morrow is cast into the oven: how much more will he cloth
you, O ye of little faith?

24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Note; All this is against distrustful care and trouble,
and not diligent labor in a Calling, or prudent care to do our work, and avoid
evil. See Mat. 6.

29. And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink neither be ye of
doubtful mind. 30. For all these things do the nations of the world seek after:
and your father knows that ye have need of these things.

29, 30. Be not anxious or troubled. Note 1. The faithful must live quite above
the life of worldlings. 2. It should quiet a Child of God, that his Father
knows all his wants.

31. But rather seek ye the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added
unto you.

31. Seek first, etc.

32. Fear not, little flock, for it is you^ Fathers good pleasure to give you
the kingdom.

32. Note 1. Christ's Flock was then little, and will be so comparatively on
Earth, but not in Heaven. 2. They shall have a Kingdom. 3. By the gift of God's
good pleasure. 4. They that shall have the Kingdom of Heaven, should be above
distrustful fear on Earth.

33. Sell that ye have, and give alms: provide your selves bags which wax not
old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches,
neither moth corrupts.

33. See Matthew. 6.19, 20. The wisdom of Faith is to do all we can in this
World, in pre^aration for another, and at any rate, to make sure of Salvation.

34. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

34. Either by Desire, if you are uncertain to obtain it, or by Delight, if you
have Assurance or strong hope; or in full Joy when you possess it.

Note; A man's Treasure is that which he believes will make him most happy,
and loves and seeks it accordingly.

A dreadful Word to wordly men, whose hearts are not on Heaven.

35. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. 36. And ye your
selves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will return from the
wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately.

35, 36. Live in a constant prepared waiting for my coming, for your change;
and let not your preparation be to m^^e a^ last.

37. Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he comes shall find
watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to
sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.

37. Christ will do more for them than if he were a Servant to them.

38. And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and
find them so, blessed are those servants.

See Matthew. 24.45.

39. And this know, that if the good man of the house had known what hour the
thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be
broken through. 40. Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of man comes at an
hour, when ye think not.

39, 40. Every one would be awaked just at the time, if they foreknew the hour.
But God will conceal it, that ye may be always ready.

41. Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speak thou this parable unto us, or
even to all? 42. And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward,
whom his Lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them their portion of
meat in due season? 43. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes
shall find so doing. 44. Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler
over all that he has.

41, 42, 43, 44. I speak it to all so far as they are Gods Stewards of their
several trusts: But especially of those that are ruling Stewards over the
Churches, appointed to give the Children their due food in season: All such
shall be rewarded.

45. But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming, and
shall begin to beat the menservants, and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to
be drunken: 46. The lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not
for him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and
will appoint him his portion with the unbeleivers.

45, 46. Note, This dreadful threatening is also a prophecy of a worldly
persecuting sort that should arise under pretense of ruling and feeding the
household of Christ; both Civil and Ecclesiastical.

47. And that servant which knew his lords will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

47. The sins against knowledge are greater far than those of ignorance.

Note, There are degrees of pain in Hell.

Note, And wicked Clergy men and Teachers will have the greatest Torment.

48. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be
much required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the
more.

48. Some in hell have few stripes comparatively.

Note, Great gifts must be used with great diligence and great power, and
trust, and charges, are rather to be feared than ambitiously sought. Little do
the Great Conquerors of the World, or those that strive for Church-preferments
believe and consider what Duty or deep Damnation, they so much labor for.

49. I am come to send fire on the earth, and what will I, if it be already
kindled? 50. But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightned
till it be accomplishment!

49, 50. I come to do that work that will set the World on fire, and occasion
persecution: And it is already begun. And I am to lead the way in suffering,
and to go through these flames my self; And I am as in pain till it be
accomplished.

51. Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay but
rather division. 52. For from henceforth there shall be five in one house
divided, three against two, and two against three. 53. The father shall be
divided against the son, and the son against the Father: the mother against the
daughter, and the daughter against the mother: the mother in law against the
daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.

51, 52, 53. Some think that the Coming of the Messiah, will settle an
universal peace; but they are mistaken: I come to conquer Satan's Kingdom, and
save Souls from sin, which will not be without a conflict: I come to divide men
from sin and Satan, who possessed them in peace: And the Soldiers of Satan will
pursue those that by grace escape; natural kindred will not reconcile them.

54. And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise out of the west,
straitway ye say, there comes a shower, and so it is. 55. And when ye see the
south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it comes to pass. 56. Ye
hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth: but how is
it, that ye do not discern this time?

54, 55, 56. You have by experience learned to foretell the weather by the
winds; and why learn you not, by the signs in your own hearts and lives, to
foresee what is like to befall you; even the destruction that is at hand.

57. Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right?

57. Yea why do you not gather it from the nature of duty and sin, and of the
Justice of God?

58. When thou go with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the
way, give diligence that thou may be delivered from him; lest he hale thee
to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast
thee into prison. 59. I tell thee, Thou shall not depart thence, till thou have
paid the very last mite.

58, 59. Carry it toward God, as thou would do to one that has a just
action against thee at Law: Thou should make thy peace with him by all means,
before the Magistrate take the cause in hand, and judge thee to prison, till
thou have paid all the debt, and deliver thee to the jailer to that end: So
make thy peace with God by Christ, by timely and true repentance and faith,
before judgment pass on thee the irrevocable sentence.

Note, 1. This was spoken by Christ on another accusation, and Luke sets
various things together, like Solomans Proverbs; (unless it were spoken twice
by Christ.)

Note 2. Timely repentance must prevent too late wishes, and utter destruction.

Note 3. They err that hence gather that men in hell shall at last come out, by
paying the very last mite. The sense of similitudes must not be extended beyond
the designed end of him that speaks, upon any pretense of the strict sense of
the words.

CHAP. XIII.
1. THere were present at that season, some that told him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.

1. Some Pilate had killed for stirring up the People against the Romans
Government.

2. And Jesus answering, said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were
sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? 3. I tell
you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

2, 3. Note, We must not judge them the greatest sinners that suffer most here:
The Judge on the b^nch may do more wrong than the thief whom he hangs: And
famous conquerors, than robbers. The day is coming that must set all right.
These Jews after suffered much more.

4. Or those eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloe fell, and slew them, think
ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? 5. I tell you,
Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

4. Note. Worse did befall the other Jews.

6. He spoke also this parable: A certain man had a fig tree planted in his
vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. 7. Then said he
unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking
fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground?
8. And he answering, said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I
shall dig about it, and dung it: 9. And if it bear fruit, well: and if not,
then after that thou shall cut it down.

6, 7, 8, 9, Christ had three years preached to the obstinate Jews.

10. And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath. 11. And
behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and
was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her self.

10, 11. Satan was the executioner of her disease.

12. And when Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her, Woman,
thou art loosed from thine infirmity. 13. And he laid his hands on her, and
immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.

12, 13. By Divine Power.

14. And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation, because that
Jesus had healed on the Sabbath Day, and said unto the people, There are six
days in which men ought to work: in them therefore come and be healed; and not
on the sabbath day. 15. The Lord then answered him, and said, Thou hypocrite,
does not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall,
and lead him away to watering? 16. And ought not this woman, being a daughter
of Abraham, whom Satan has bound, lo these eighteen years, be loosed from this
bond on the sabbath day?

14, 15, 16. Note; It is the part of Hypocrites to set up Ceremony and
Circumstances against Moral Duties, (or necessary good Works) to Body or Soul,

17. And when he had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and
all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.

17. His Reason and h^s Miracle convinced the common people of the shameful
(...) that (...).

18. Then said he, unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I
resemble it? 19. It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and cast
into his garden, and it grew, and waxed a great tree: and the fowls of the air
lodged in the branches of it. 20. And again he said, Whereunto shall I liken
the kingdom of God. 21. It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

18, 19, 20, 21. Note; Though Christ's Flock was little at first, the Kingdoms
of the World were after to become his Kingdom, and Nations to be discipled and
baptized.

22. And he went through the cities and villages, teaching and journeying
toward Jerusalem. 23. Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be
saved? And he said unto them. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for
many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

22, 23, 24. Instead of enquiring, How many? do thou labor to be one: And
know, that the Gate is strait: A life of Faith and Holiness must cost men
sufferings in the flesh; therefore do not lazily wish and seek, but strive, and
spare no pains or cost: For many that seek erroneously, or slothfully, and, as
Hypocrites, give God but the second place, shall never be saved.

25. When once the master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door,
and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, crying Lord, Lord,
open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you
are: 26. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence,
and thou have taught in our streets. 27. But he shall say, I tell you, I know
you not whence you are: depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

25, 26, 27. All would be saved, and cry for mercy, when it is too late;
therefore strive without delay: And then all pretenses of familiarity with
Christ, or Clergy, or Church Priviledges, will save no unsanctified man.

28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out.

28. It will increase your torment to see those that never saw and heard what
you have done, to be in Heaven, and you thrust out to Hell for your unbelief
and wickedness.

29. And they shall come from the east, and from the west, and from the north,
and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. 30. And behold,
there are last which are first, and there are first which shall be last.

29, 30. The faithful shall be received from all parts of the Earth: And some
that shall be born and called long hence, shall be more excellent persons, and
have a more glorious Crown, than many that are called now; and when you Jews
are rejected, who were a Church before them.

31. The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get
thee out, and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee. 32. And he said unto
them, Go ye and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out Devils, and I do cures to day
and to morrrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.

31, 32. Note; He liken's Herod to a Fox for subtilty and cruelty. This Example
of Christ will not justify any contumelious Language against Kings; though
they, that are called to it, may plainly and humbly tell them of their sin and
danger, regarding their due honor. And Historians may truly describe them when
they are dead.

33. Nevertheless I must walk to day and to morrow, and the day following: for
it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.

33. Whatever Herod do, I shall do my work, and finish it; and shall not suffer
by Herod in Galilee, which is his Jurisdiction, but at Jerusalem, the place of
killing Prophets.

34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a
hen does gather her brood under her wings, and ye would not?

34. O sinful, miserable Jerusalem! How ost would I have gathered thy whole
City and Nation (old and young) into my bosom of Love, and my Church, by making
you my Disciples, as tenderly as a Hen does gather and love her Chickens, not
casting out your Children, but taking in your Nation, as God did before, if you
had not cut off your selves by unbelief, and obstinate rejecting the Grace
offered to your Nation?

35. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate: And verily I say unto you,
Ye shall not see me, until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord.

35. Your Temple, which you glory in, shall shortly be demolished, and your
City destroyed: And I tell you, that you shall not rejoice in the Salvation of
the Messiah, for whom you wait till you learn to honor me with Hosannah's, and
to welcome them that preach my Gospel to you.

CHAP. XIIII.
1. ANd it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the chief
Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched him. 2. And
behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy. 3. And Jesus
answering spoke unto the lawyers and Pharisees saying, Is it lawful to heal on
the sabbath day? 4. And they held their peace. And he took him and healed him,
and let him go:

1, 2, 3, 4. Note; Christ chose so usually to heal on the Sabbath, that it
seems he purposely chose that time, to show them what work should be preferred.
He would not forbear doing good, to avoid the offense of erroneous Hyp^crites.

5. And answered them saying, Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen
into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day? 6. And
they could not answer him again to these things.

5, 6. They could not confute his plain reason; (But the wranglers of this Age
can answer any thing.)

7. And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he marked how
they chose out the chief rooms; saying unto them, 8. When thou art bidden of
any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room, lest a more honorable
man then thou be bidden of him: 9. And he that bad thee and him, come and say
to thee, Give this man place: and thou begin with shame to take the lowest
room. 10. But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room, that
when he that bad thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher: then
shall thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee.

7, 8, 9, 10. Note; Christ disdained not to give Rules of Decency for civil
conversation, when the Virtue of Humility, or the Vice of Pride are concerned
therein.

11. For whosoever exalts himself, shall be abased; and he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted.

11. God will exalt the humble, and abase the proud; and therefore we must
humble our selves.

12. Then said he also to him that bad him, When thou make a dinner or a
supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy
rich neighbors; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee.
13. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the
blind: 14. And thou shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.

12, 13, 14. It is good in its season to make Feasts of Amity, and to rejoice
with Friends; but to avoid Prodigality, let thy most usual feasting be Feasts
of Charity; And in them it is the Poor that thou must feast, and from God that
thou must expect thy reward.

Note; Some hence infer, that there is no reward till the Resurrection: But in
Scripture the Resurrection is often taken for the Life after this, even before
the Resurrection of the Body.

Note; Christ often forbids things in absolute words, when he means but
comparatively: So here, feast not rich Friends, that is, not so much as the
Poor.

15. And when one of them, that sat at meat with him, heard these things, he
said unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.

15. They will be happy that shall live to see and rejoice in the Kingdom of
the Messiah when he comes.

16. Then said he unto him, A certain man made a great supper, and bad many:
17. And sent his Servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come,
for all things are now ready.

16, 17. Note; God sent his Son and the Gospel to the Jews, and invited them
into the Kingdom of the Messiah; and bade his Ministers tell them, that Christ
was come, and all is ready on his part. He is a sufficient Savior, and none
shall perish for want of the performance of his part (antecedent.)

18. And they all with one consent began to make excuse: The first said unto
him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it: I pray
thee have me excused. 19. And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen,
and I go to prove them: I pray thee have me excused. 20. And another said, I
have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.

18, 19, 20. All seemed to them sufficient Reasons. And so you Jews, that wish
for the Kingdom of God, prefer your worldly Interest, and for that, refuse it
when it is come, (And so do all ungodly men ^ndeed.)

21. So that servant came, and showed his lord these things. Then the master of
the house being angry, said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and
lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt,
and the blind. 22. And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou have
commanded, and yet there is room.

21, 22. God was angry with the Jews, and sent his Ministers to call the
Gentiles whom the Jews despised as profane.

23. And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the high ways and hedges,
and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.

23. Go to the most barbarous remote Nations, and call them into the Church,
and be importunate with them, and take no denial, that my Church may be
Catholic and enlarged.

24. For I say unto you that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of
my supper.

24. Those refusing Jews, that were first invited, shall not come into the
Church of Christ.

25. And there went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and said unto
them. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife,
and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot
be my disciple.

25, 26. If he love them not less than my Kingdom, and cannot for it forsake
them, as men do a hated thing.

Note; This disobligeth none from natural affection and duty; but Christ must
be preferred.

27. And whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my
disciple.

27. He that cannot suffer for me, and for Salvation, but sets more by his
life, can be no true Disciple of mine.

28. For which of you intending to build a tower, sits not down first, and
countteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? 29. Lest happily
after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that
behold it, begin to mock him, 30. Saying, This man began to build and was not
able to finish. 31. Or what king going to make war against another king sits
not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him
that comes against him with twenty thousand? 32. Or else, while the other is
yet a great way off, he sends an embassage, and desires conditions of peace.

28, 29, 30, 31, 32. All wise men will consider what it will cost them to
finish before they begin.

33. So likewise, Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be my disciple.

33. If he prefer not the Kingdom of Heaven before all worldly Interest, and
forsake it not all comparatively in esteem and resolution now, and in act when
he is called to it.

34. Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be
seasoned? 35* It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill, but men
cast it out. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

34, 35. Ye are the Salt of this corrupted World: But if you, my Disciples,
especially Preachers, should apostatize, you would be the vilest and most
hopeless men on Earth; despised, and cast out by God and Man. Therefore count
your cost before you undertake the Sacred Ministry, or Christian Profession.

CHAP. XV.
1. THen drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him. 2.
And the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This man receives sinners; and
eats with them. 3. And he spoke this parable unto them, saying, 4. What man
of you having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does not leave the
ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he
find it? 5. And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders,
rejoicing. 6. And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and
neighbors, saying unto them, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which
was lost.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Should not I do more for a lost Sinner, than you would do
for a lost Sheep?

7. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons, which need no
repentance.

7. The heavenly Society rejoice over one converted sinner, more than over many
that need no conversion from a state of sin, (though they ^eed daily sorrow for
daily failings.)

Note; More Joy signifies not more Love to that person: But Christ speaks of
the Angels after the manner of men, that are most affected with unexpected
things, and after sorrow most rejoice.

8. Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, does
not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it?
9. And when she has found it, she calls her friends and her neighbors
together, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece which I had lost.
10. Likewise I say unto you, There is joy in the presence of the angels of God,
over one sinner that repents.

8, 9, 10. Note 1. Oh what Love do we owe to Angels, Who so much love us? Why
do we not desire their company more, than that of this wicked World?

Angels Love is but a Copy of God's Love, And shall we distrust, fear, and fly
from Love it self? 2. Angels and good Men rejoice at a sinners conversion:
Devils and wicked men are against it. How contrary are these? 3. Do Angels
rejoice at the conversion of a sinner? What joy should the coverted themselves
then have in it? 4. Uncoverted sinners gratify Devils, and deny Angels the joy
of Love.

11. And he said, a certain man had two sons: 12. And the younger of them said
to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falls to me. And he
divided unto them his living. 13. And not many days after, the younger son
gathered all together, and took his journey into a far country, and there
wasted his substance with riotous living.

11, 12, 13. Note 1. Foolish sinners had rather have their concerns in their
own hands, than in God's. Note 2. When it is left to themselves, it is soon
wasted. Note 3. Ryotous flesh-pleasing is the destructive sin. Note 4. When
sinners go from God our Father, they go to destruction.

14. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land, and
he began to be in want. 15. And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that
country, and he sent him into his fields to feed swine. 16. And he would fain
have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave
unto him.

14, 15, 16. He hired himself a Servant to feed Swine, to prevent famishing;
and they would not let him fill his belly with the Cods of the Carabe Tree,
which was the Swines meat.

N. 1. Worldly Treasure will soon be spent. N. 2. Foolish sinners will submit
to the basest servitude, and be attendants of Swine, rather than return to God.
N. 3 All worldly hopes and helps will sail ungodly Prodigals at last.

17. And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants* of my
father have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger.

17. Note 1. Prodigal sinners are beside themselves. 2. Conversion is a man's
coming to himself, or his right wits. 3. It is consideration, specially of a
man's own safety and interest, which brings a man ^o himself. 4. Utter
distress and necessity is often needful to drive home sinners unto God, when they
see that there is no other way of hope. 5. And the consideration that the
poorest Christian is in a far better condition than the Prodigal: They have
all, and he has nothing.

18. I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, 19. And am no more worthy to be called
thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

18, 19. Note 1. Conversion begins in a purpose to return to God (though at
first constrained by necessity.) 2. It works by a penitent confession of sin,
and utter unworthiness 3. It would be glad of the lowest place in God's Church,
and of the lowest terms of Mercy.

20. And he arose, and came to his father: But when he was a great way off, his
father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed
him.

20. Note 1. True purposes will appear in practice and performance: They stop
not in sluggish wishes, but arise and go to God. 2. God is readier to meet and
receive sinners, than they are to return to him. 3. He surprizeth returning
sinners with kindness, and embraces them who expected frowns and wrath, and
uses them not after their desert. 4. Though necessity and self-love begin
conversion, God's Love meets such, and perfecteth it. 5. God is reconcilable
to the sinner, by his goodness, though not to his sin.

21. And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in
thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

21. Note; Our own humble and penitent confessions must go before God's
forgiveness and entertainment.

22. But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it
on ^^m, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet.

22. Note; God finds sinners in shameful rags, and misery, but clotheth them,
as his Children, with righteousness and holiness.

23. And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry.

23. Let us feast and rejoice for the return of a Prodigal Son.

24. For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.
And they began to be merry.

24. Note; The state of ^^n is a lost condition, and a converted sinner is
found and recovered; it is a dead condition, and conversion is a reviving. It
gives the life of Grace in order to the life of Glory.

God speaks of himself, as rejoicing in a sinners conversion. How little
cause then have such to doubt whether God will receive them? Q. How is God
called a Father to wicked Prodigals? Ans. As his Nature is Love it self, and as
he made man's Nature capable of happiness, and as he has conditionally
pardoned all through Christ.

25. Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the
house, he heard music and dancing. 26. And he called one of the servants, and
asked what these things meant. 27. And he said unto him, Thy brother is come,
and thy father has killed the fatted calf, because he has received him safe
and sound.

25, 26, 27. Thy Father has received him with joy.

28. And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father out, and
entreated him.

28 He envyed his Brother's Entertainment, and was offended with his Father's
Love and Mercy.

Note 1. The elder Brother is the Jew, (who not only in his unbelief despises
the Gentiles, but) when converted to Christ, is hardly brought to communion
with the Gentiles. And also all that have from their childhood served God, and
are ready to grudge at the Entertainment of wicked men-converted. Note 2. There
is in the best of us, though we need God's mercy our selves, a disposition to
envy his Grace to others. Note 3. God is put to bear with the faults of his
Children, and in mercy to stoop to them in their envy and quarrelsomness with
others. Note 4. There is a sinful esteem of their own goodness, that inclines
God's own Servants even to withdraw and separate from his House, because he
entertaineth returning Prodigals. Thus God is put to bear with all.

29. And he answering, said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve
thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment, and yet thou never
gave me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends:

29. Note; We be apt to overvalue our own service o^ God, and to undervalue his
Mercy.

30. But as soon as this thy son was come, which has devoured thy living with
harlots, thou have killed for him the fatted calf.

30. Note 1. Even good men are apt to grudge at God's Mercy to sinners, and
would not have him so gracious to them as he is; and they are not so ready to
forgive it, but upbraid others with sin, which God does not upbraid them with,
who hates it more than we can do. 2. Were we in the hands of our best
Brethren, we should speed worse than in God's hands.

31. And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is
thine.

31. N. 1. Obedient Children are always with God, and in his favor. 2. What
great happiness does it signify to say, All that I have is thine? that is, all
that thou art fit for, and that is fit for thee. 3. God gives suddener Joy
oft-times to returning Prodigals, than to his Children that have been true to
him from their youth. 4. Yet the constant safety, happiness and peace of those
long obedient Children is a greater blessing and good, than those sudden Joys
of converted sinners.

32. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother
was dead, and is alive again, and was lost, and is found.

32. Note; God is pleased to reason his forward Children out of their envious,
self-esteeming, censorious, separating, quarrelsom distempers, and not to let
them go, and take them at the worst. He that will pardon the wicked life of a
penitent Prodigal, will not rigorously despise a froward wrangling Child. And
Rulers and Pastors, that learn of God, will do so too, and not as Satan's
Ministers, abhor the faithful, and aggravate their infirmities, and cast them
out of the Church, while they connive at the ungodly, and encourage them.

This Parable is very instructive to bad and good, and very comfortable to the
truly penitent and converted: And speaks God's Mercy to the Gentiles, against
the froward self-esteeming Christian Jews.

CHAP. XVI.
1. ANd he said also unto his disciples, There was a certain rich man which had
a steward, and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods. 2.
And he called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee? give
an account of thy stewardship: for thou may be no longer steward.

1, 2. Note; We are all God's Stewards; our time and blessings are his goods,
of which we must shortly give account, and shall here be no longer Stewards.

3. Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? for my lord takes
away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed.

3. Note 1. Nature teaches all men, in danger and misery, to save themselves,
and study which way they may escape, and be provided for. 2. There is somewhat
for our selves to do for our own welfare. 3. We must think first, what is not
to be trusted to, and what way we must not take, before we think what way to
trust and take to. I cannot dig, etc. We cannot save our selves, and the World
cannot save us, therefore to trust to these, we are sure, will deceive us, and
is not the way.

4. I am resolved what to do, that when I am put out of the stewardship, they
may receive me into their houses.

4. I will make me Friends that will receive me when I am cast off.

Note 1, When we are sure no other way will save us, and have found the only
way that will, self-love and reason should soon resolve us what to do, and what
to trust to.

2. The way to be resolved on, is that which will help us when all others fail.

5. So he called every one of his lords debtors unto him, and said unto the
first, How much owe thou unto my lord? 6. And he said, An hundred measures of
oil. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write
fifty. 7. Then said he to another, And how much owe thou? And he said, An
hundred measures of wheat. And he said to him, Take thy bill, and write
fourscore.

5, 6, 7. Note; They were ready for their commodity to join in the fraud.

8. And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely: for
the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of
light.

8. Note; His Lord that hated his falsehood, yet commended his wit. 2. O that we
had as much wit, and care, and diligence for our Souls everlasting welfare, as
false worldly men have for this vain World!

9. And I say unto you, Make to your selves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations.

9. It is counsel of great importance to you, so to use your time and estates,
which worldly men abuse to sin, that when you must shortly and certainly die,
and leave all your wealth behind you, ye may be received into the everlasting
heavenly Mansions.

Note 1. The wealth, that by the wicked is abused to damnation, may, by
Believers, be used to salvation. 2. All this World will fail and forsake us. 3.
It is not those that we do good to, but yet it is God, for the good we do them,
that will receive us into Heaven. 4. This is a Testimony of the Soul's
Immortality, and of the Life to come: When we leave this World, we are received
into everlasting habitations.

10. He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: and
he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much.

10. God will much judge men according to their use of the little things of
this World, and will judge them meet for the great things of Glory, that have
used these well: But he will judge them* unmeet for heavenly felicity, that
could not use well the small things of this transitory life.

11. If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who
will commit to your trust the true riches?

11. Do you think God will judge you meet for Heaven, that were false in your
use of earthly things?

12. And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall
give you that which is your own?

12. And if ye have proved false and untrusty in your Stewardship, and use of
God's entrusted Mercies in this life of Trial, where you had no assurance to
stay an hour, do you think God will place such as Proprietors in the
Everlasting Kingdom.

13. No servant can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love
the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other: ye cannot
serve God and mammon.

13. A divided heart between God and the World, is false to God and to it self:
Ye cannot be true Christians and worldlings too.

14. And the Pharisees also who were covetous, heard all these things; and they
derided him.

14. Note; The love of Riches rises up against holy and mortifying Doctrine,
with hatred and scorn.

15. And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify your selves before men;
but God knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men, is
abomination in the sight of God.

15. You applaud one another, and keep up a worldly Reputation; but God sees
all the evil of your hearts; and he abhors the covetous, whom you bless, and
all proud and prosperous worldlings, when they are highest in men's esteem.

16. The law and the prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom of
God is preached, and every man presses into it.

16, Till John's days, the Law and the Prophets, that darkly foretold the
Kingdom of God as afar off, were the chief Teachers of the Church; but since
John's preaching that this Kingdom is at hand, multitudes gladly receive that
Tidings and crowd or press into it with earnestness.

17. And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle of the law
to fail.

17. The Law is God's true Word, and shall never prove false: The natural-moral
part shall continue; the Ceremonious part, the Types and Prophecies, pass not
away unfulfilled: They all pointed unto Christ, who fulfilleth them, though he
abrogate them.

18. Whosoever puts away his wife, and marries another, commits
adultery: and whosoever marries her that is put away from her husband,
commits adultery.

18. See Matthew. 5 32.

19. There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen,
and fared sumptuously every day.

19. Note; This is the description of a Sensualist that lives after the flesh,
to be clothed in Purple and Silk, and to have every day a costly Table of
delightful meat and drink. Sensual flesh-pleasing is the common damn^ng sin;
and Riches are the fuel of fleshly desires.

20. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate
full of sores: 21. And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the
rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.

20, 21. Note 1. It is like he had some relief there, else he would not have
layn there. 2. The worst men are not usually most afflicted in this life. 3.
Rich fleshly men make too great a difference between themselves and the Poor,
and think their superfluities, and sumptuous delicious fare, must be preferred
before the necessities of their poor Brethren. 4. Dogs help him, whom the rich
Sensualist would not help in any competent degree.

22. And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels
into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died and was buried.

22. Note; Though this be a Parable, Christ would not by it insinuate false
Doctrine: Therefore it shows, that the Soul does not die with the Body, but
goes to Joy or Misery. Abraham is there alive, and Lazarus in his bosom;
(before the final Resurrection.) 2. Death quickly levelleth Rich and Poor; the
voluptuous and the afflicted. 3. Angels that guard the Just in life, refuse not
at death to serve their Souls as their Convoy unto Happiness. 4. To be buried
in a Grave, and rot to dust, is the best that the pampered flesh of the wicked
can expect.

23. And in hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, and sees Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

23. Note 1. Such notice as Spirits have is called seeing. 2. The Souls of the
wicked pass to Hell torments. 3. Joyful, felicity is called Abraham's bosom, to
a Jew. Some think Nations are joined in happiness or misery hereafter, as
rewarded in the relations in which they did good or evil.

24. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am
tormented in this flame.

24. Note 1. The Parable speaks metaphorically, of Souls, as if they had
Tongues; which signified no more than they have a torment suitable to their
kind. 2. Voluptuous rich men would shorrly beg even for a very little, and that
of those whom they here despised, if they could help them. 3. By flame is meant
a means of torment.

25. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy
good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted and thou
art tormented.

25. Thou had that which thou did choose: Thou did prefer fleshly pleasure
before the hopes of Heaven, and thou have had them. And Lazarus submitted to
sufferings on Earth for the hopes of Heaven, which he preferred, and he has
now his choice.

Note 1. God does not damn any man for his being rich, but for being sensual,
and preferring self-pleasing before his Salvation: Nor does he save any for
having suffered in this World, but for preferring God and Heaven before
prosperity, and ease, and for suffering to attain Salvation. 2. The next life
will set all straight, and tell us who made the wisest choice, and were indeed
the happy men.

26. And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so
that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to
us, that would come from thence.

26. Heaven and Hell may have some knowledge of each others case, but no access
for converse: Damnation is a remediless state: The damned may wish for ease,
and help, and mercy, but shall have none.

27. Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou would send him
to my fathers house: 28. For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto
them, lest they also come into this place of torment.

27. O send him to my Brethren on Earth, to tell them what I suffer, and why,
that they may not come hither, who are yet recoverable, and in a state of hope,
though my case be desperate.

Note; Whether the damned retain any love to, and care of, their Brethren on
Earth, or whether this be spoken only to explain their condition here, is
uncertain.

29. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear
them.

29. The God of Wisdom and Power has determined of the way and means of
converting men, which is by his Word and Ministers, and not by Messengers from
the Dead. If they will be saved, it must be by God's appointed Means, and not
any other.

30. And he said, Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

30. Sure such an Apparition would convince them, and affright them to
Repentance.

31. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither
will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

31. (If it were so, God will not change his way of Salvation to persuade
wilful, sensual sinners.) But it is not so; for God's Word and Ministers are a
more suitable means of converting sinners, than a man would be from the dead:
God will bless his own Means: And affrighting men will not renew their Natures,
and kindle in them a Love to God and Holiness. And how little should we know
whether one from the Dead were a Devil, or a credible Messenger? and whether he
said true or false? Should he dwell with us as long as Ministers do, men would
again despise and persecute him: Should he come but once, it would not equal
the daily solicitations of God's Ministers. Will one from the Dead heal all
Diseases with a word, and raise the Dead, and send down the Holy Ghost on all
the Faithful, and give such proof of his Truth, as the Prophets, and Christ,
and the Apostles have done? Will his words have more Light and Power than God's
Word has? Or would not your fleshly Brethren accuse him of scandalizing and
slandering the Soul of their noble deceased Brother, for telling them he is in
Hell, and persecute him, if he were within their power.

Note; Christians, remember with thankfulness, that you have a far better means
for your Salvation, than one from the Dead would be; and use it accordingly.

CHAP. XVII.
1. THen said he unto his disciples. It is impossible but that offenses will
come, but woe unto him through whom they come. 2. It were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he
should offend one of these little ones.

1, 2. It is a thing that will certainly come to pass, and must be expected,
that diverse hindrances and oppositions will meet men to keep them from Faith
and Holiness, and that by diverse sorts of persons: But the sin of such
hinderers is heinous, tending to oppose the Gospel of Salvation, and to damn
Souls; and woe to them, that by their malignity do thus serve Satan against
Christ. 2. They may blindly flatter themselves by malice, or false reasoning,
or worldly interest; but their case is more miserable, than if they were
drowned in the depth o^ the Sea.

3. Take heed to your selves; If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him:
and if he repent, forgive him. 4. And if he trespass against thee seven times
in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou
shall forgive him.

3, 4. Take heed that you hinder not any man in the matters of his Salvation,
by persuasion, example, or persecution: But if any man offend you by sin, or
injury, reprove him; and if he repent, forgive him.

Note 1. The meaning is not that the mock-repentance of one that will seven
times a day commit gross sins, or injury, and say, I repent, when it is
notorious that he does not, should be forgiven for an hypocritical word: But
that True Repentance should be accepted, how often soever men offend.

Qu. Must we not forgive men, unless they confess and repent? Ans. There are
several degrees of forgiveness: 1. We must so far forgive the impenitent, as to
love them as men, and desire and endeavor their good, without revenge. 2. But
we must forgive none but the penitent so far, as to take them into the special
Love, which belongs to Christian Friends. But then it supposes that the
fault be gross sin, and not an injury by tolerable Error, which he is not
convinced of, nor can be.

5. And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.

5. Seeing it is by Faith that we must do Miracles, and must be saved, Give us
more Faith.

6. And the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say
unto this sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in
the sea, and it should obey you.

6. If your Faith be true, though but small, no difficulty shall prevail
against it, nor any Miracle be too hard, when God by his Spirit shall move you
to it, who will be the chuser of Miracles.

7. But which of you having a servant plowing, or feeding cattle, will say unto
him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat: 8. And
will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy
self, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken: and afterward thou shall eat
and drink. 9. Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were
commanded him? I trow not. 10. So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all
those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we
have done that which was our duty to do.

7, 8, 9, 10. But see that neither your Faith nor Miracles puff you up, or make
you think too highly of your selves: Nor must you desire it to make you
conspicuous in the World, but for your Masters service, which is your duty, and
by which you must not think that you are profitable to him, but obedient to him
for your own and other men's good. If you have Servants your selves, you will
not let them prefer themselves and their own interest, before you and your
commands: So you, when you have preached and cast out Devils, and done your
best, think not that you have profited God, and thereby deserve to be dignified
for the merit of your work; but say, we did but our duty, and the privilege
and benefit is our own and others.

Note 1. It Is hard to Analize Luke's words, because it is uncertain when he
sets them together that were spoken together; and when he joyneth words spoken
on diverse occasions.

2. When Christ judges the unprofitable Servant to utter darkness, and yet
here calls all unprofitable; the sense is, that no man can add any thing to
God, or profit him; nor is he a Receiver, but a Giver; no Angel can merit of
him in Commutative Justice. But we must be Profitable to one another, and our
selves, by improving God's Mercies: And Christ so loves his own, as that he
will reward this, as if it profited himself.

11. And it came to pass, as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the
midst of Samaria and Galilee. 12. And as he entered into a certain village,
there met him ten men which were lepers, who stood afar off: 13. And they
lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus, master have mercy upon us. 14. And
when he saw them, he said unto them, Go show your selves to the priests. And it
came to pass, that as they went, they were cleansed.

11, 12, 13, 14. Note; He intimated thereby a purpose to heal them: (And he bid
them use the ill-called corrupt Priests:) But whether he sent them to the
Priests, as those that were to judge of Leprosies before the cleansing, or to
show that they were cleansed, is doubtful; though the first seems to me most
probable.

15. And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a
loud voice glorified God. 16. And fell down on his face at his feet giving him
thanks; and he was a Samaritan.

15, 16. He judged it no breach of Christ's command to return first to him, and
glorify God, and give him thanks.

17. And Jesus answering, said, were there not ten cleansed? but where are the
nine? 18. There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this
stranger.

17* 18. This one man, accounted a Heretic by the Jews, is the only man of ten
that returns to glorify God for his Cure.

Note; Many receive Mercies, but few glorify God with true thanksgiving.

19. And he said unto him, Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole.

19. Note; This oft-used word of Christ, is against them, that say, that
because it is Christ that heals, or justifies, it is not Faith: As if the
Office of Christ, and of Faith, might not concur hereunto.

20. And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should
come; he answered them and said, The kingdom of God comes not with
observation. 21. Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there: for behold the
kingdom of God is within you.

20, 21. You know not what the Kingdom of God is: It is not Christ's apperance
in visible pomp, as earthly Princes reign: It is a Moral Spiritual Kingdom,
opposite (not to Monarchs, but) to the Kingdom of Satan: As Satan reigns not
visibly by himself, but by corrupt Princes and Teachers, to do his works, and
by his invisible suggestions and his baits; so the Kingdom of God is to destroy
Satan's Kingdom, and to sanctify and save men, not by Christ's visible pompous
reign, but by holy Rulers and Teachers, and by his Word and Spirit, and
promises and blessings to work on Souls.

22. And he said unto the disciples, The days will come when ye shall desire to
see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it.

22. Days of suffering are not far off, when you will wish for my presence to
deliver you (or, as some, when you shall wish for days, as easy and quiet, as
these are now,) or others think, though he spoke to his Disciples, it is the
Pharisees or the Jewish Nation that he spoke to them of.

23. And they shall say to you, See here, or see there: go not after them, nor
follow them. 24. For as the lightning that lightneth out of the one part under
heaven, shines unto the other part under heaven: so shall also the Son of man
be in his day.

23, 24. Believe not them that tell you a Deliverer or Christ is in such or
such a place. For my Kingdom shall not be managed by my personal appearance,
but by the Light of my Word and Spirit, which shall shine from one part of the
World to another, as Lightning from Heaven; [or, my last coming will be like
Lightning, sudden, and glorious to all men's sight.]

25. But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation.
26. And as it was in the days of Noe; so shall it be also in the days of the
Son of man. 27. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given
in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark: and the flood came
and destroyed them all.

25, 26, 27. See Matthew. 24. Whether the day of Christ be the day of his just
Destruction of the Jews, or of his Reign by the Gospel, joined with the Fall of
them and other Enemies, or his last coming, is doubted of by Expositors.

28. Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they
bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; 29. But the same day that Lot
went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them
all: 30. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed.

28, 29, 30. Christ's coming, (whether to destroy his Enemies, or to judge the
World,) will be sudden, unexpected, and terrible.

31. In that day, he which shall be upon the house top, and his stuff in the
house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the field, let
him likewise not return back. 32. Remember Lot's wife.

31, 32. Let all go, and be glad to save your lives: Look nor back with grief
for your losses, lest you speed as Lot's Wife did.

33. Whosoever shall seek to save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever shall
lose his life, shall preserve it.

33. Self-saving, by forsaking the Truth, will prove self-destroying; and
venturing and losing life for me, shall prove the surest saving way.

34. I tell you, In that night there shall be two men in one bed; the one shall
be taken, the other shall be left. 35. Two women shall be grinding together;
the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left. 36. Two men shall be in
the field; the one shall be taken, the other shall be left.

34, 35. I will carefully separate my own from the rest, and save them when
unbelievers perish, (whether at the end, or sooner.)

37. And they answered and said unto him, Where, Lord? And he said unto them,
Wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered together.

37. Where shall all these things be done? He said, where those designed to
destruction are, thither God*s Justice will send his Executioners. And where
his chosen are, there shall be deliverance. See Matthew. 24.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. ANd he spoke a parable unto them, to this end, that men ought always to
pray, and not to faint,

1. To hold on in earnest importunity and hope, and not to grow cold, and
slack, and heartless.

2. Saying, There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded
man. 3. And there was a widow in that city, and she came unto him, saying,
Avenge me of mine adversary.

2, 3. Note; Woe to the Land that has such Judges. She said, Do me Justice
against my Adversary.

4. And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself, Though
I fear not God, nor regard man, 5. Yet because this widow troubles me, I will
avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me.

4, 5. Note; Where there is no fear of God, yet avoiding clamor and shame for
injustice, may make a Judge do Justice to the oppressed. But they that come 10
Diabolical Malignity, will delight to do mischief, and destroy the Just, and
will take their wickedness for their glory.

6. And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge says. 7. And shall not God
avenge his own elect, that cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with
them? 8. I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the
Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?

6, 7, 8. Will importunity prevail with a wicked Judge? and will not
importunate prayer prevail with God to do Justice for his chosen, praying
people? I tell you, though the time seem long to you, he will make no delay to
do them Justice in due time.

Note; Importunity moved the man by wearying him; but it procures mercy from
God only, by making us fit Receivers of it. Men will despond by impatience,
before deliverance comes.

9. And he spoke this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they
were righteous, and despised others:

9. He thought meet to rebuke those who thought too well of their own goodness,
and were too censorious and contemptuous of those that seemed worse than they.

10. Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other
a publican. 11. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank
thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor
even as this Publican. 12. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that
I possess.

10, 11, 12. The Pharisees Prayer was a boasting of his goodness, and not a
humble bewailing of his sins and wants. All this was praiseworthy in it self,
but much more was necessary in him.

13. And the publican standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes
unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.

13. His Prayer was in ^he deep sense of his sin, a humble begging mercy of
God; (^ot with a purpose to go on in sin, but with pe^^tence and conversion,
resolving of a new life.)

14. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather then the
other: for every one that exalts himself, shall be abased; and he that
humbles himself, shall be exalted.

14. God took this for a juster or better man, for his penitent confession than
the Pharisee, for all that formal righteousness which he boasted of: For God
will exalt the humble, and abase the proud. (But this supposes the Publican's
Repentance to be a true Conversion, and not mere conviction and confessing in
fear.)

15. And they brought unto him also infants, that he would touch them: but when
his disciples saw it, they rebuked them. 16. But Jesus called them unto him,
and said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of
such is the kingdom of God. 17. Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not
receive the kingdom of God as a little child, shall in no wise enter therein.

15, 16, 17. See on Matthew. 10.14. Matthew. 19.13, 14, 15.

18. And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Master, what shall I do to
inherit eternal life? 19. And Jesus said unto him, Why call thou me good?
none is good save one, that is, God. 20. Thou know the commandments, Do not
commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Honor
thy father and thy mother. 21. And he said, All these have I kept from my youth
up. 22. Now when Jesus heard these things, he said unto him, Yet lackest thou
one thing: sell all that thou have, and distribute unto the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven, and come, follow me. 23. And when he heard this,
he was very sorrowful, for he was very rich.

18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. See Matthew. 19.20. and Mark 10.17.

Note, This renunciation of the World is not required by Christ, only to a high
degree of holiness; but to the obtaining of Eternal Life.

Note, Multitu^es of nominal Christians go not so far as this worldly Jew; in
believing a Life Eternal, and in a care to inherit it, and in doing so much for
it, from his youth.

24. And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said, How hardly shall
they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! 25. For it is easier (...)
a camel to go through a needles eye, then for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God. 26 And they that heard it, said, Who then can be saved?

24, 25, 26. See Matthew. 19.

Note, To enter into the Kingdom of God, and to be saved, was understood by the
hearers to be all one.

27. And he said, The things which are unpossible with men, are possible with
God.

27. Note, Possibility, though with great difficulty, must make us true seekers
and then we may attain to certainty.

28. Then Peter said, Lo, we have left all, and followed thee. 29. And he said
unto them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that has left house, or
parents, or brethren, or wife, or children for the kingdom of Gods sake, 30.
Who shall not receive manifold more in this present time, and in the world to
come life everlasting.

28, 29, 30. You shall be no losers by me.

Note, The blessings even of suffering Christians in this Life, are better than
all that they forsake for Christ.

31. Then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son
of man shall be accomplished. 32. For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles,
and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated and spit on: 33. And they shall
scourge him, and put him to death, and the third day he shall rise again. 34.
And they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from them,
neither knew they the things which were spoken.

31, 32, 33, 34. Note, We must not wonder if many of our Hearers then are dull
of understanding.

35. And it came to pass, that as he was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain
blind man sat by the way side begging: 36. And hearing the multitude pass by,
he asked what it meant. 37. And they told him, that Jesus of Nazareth passes
by. 38. And he cried saying, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me. 39.
And they which went before, rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: but he
cried so much the more, Thou Son of David have mercy on me. 40. And Jesus stood
and commanded him to be brought unto him: and when he was come near he asked
him, 41. Saying, What will thou that I should do unto thee? And he said, Lord,
that I may receive my sight. 42. And Jesus said unto him, Receive thy sight,
thy faith has saved thee. 43. And immediately he received his sight and
followed him, glorifying God: and all the people when they saw it gave praise
unto God.

35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. See on Matthew. 20.18, 19, 20. N. Faith
fitteth us to receive Mercy; and Mercy teaches us to glorify God.

CHAP. XIX.
1. ANd Jesus entered and passed through Jericho. 2. And behold, there was a man
named Zacheus, which was the chief among the Publicans, and he was rich. 3. And
he sought to see Jesus who he was, and could not for the press, because he was
little of stature. 4. And he ran before, and climbed up into a sycamore-tree to
see him; for he was to pass that way. 5. And when Jesus came to the place, he
looked up and saw him, and said unto him, Zacheus, make have, and come down;
for to day I must abide at thy house.

1 2, 3, 4, 5. Desire, and diligent seeking, prepare for Christ's acceptance
and abode with us.

6. And he made have and came down, and received him joyfully.

6. Note; He hoped but for a ^ight of him, and obtains more. Mercy exceeds
the seekers expectation.

7. And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, that he was gone to be
guest with a man that is a sinner.

7. Note; As if Christ were not holy and strict enough, because he went to
sinners for their Salvation.

8. And Zacheus stood, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man by false
accusation, I restore him fourfold.

1. Note 1. This proceeding from Faith in Christ, proved him a true Convert. 2.
False accusation was the Publican^ notable sin.

9. And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house, for so
much as he also is the son of Abraham.

9. Note 1. Where true Faith and Conversion comes, there Salvation comes. 2.
All true Believers are Children of Abraham, that is, of the Promise made to
Abraham and his seed.

10. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

10. To this end came I into the World, to redeem, convert, and save lost
sinners.

11. And as they heard these things, he added, and spoke a parable, because he
was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God should
immediately appear.

11. To take them off such expectations.

12. He said therefore, A certain noble man went into a far country to receive
for himself a kingdom and to return.

12. Christ was to go from Earth to Heaven, to receive his own Kingly glory,
and to reign there over Heaven and Earth, and to return to judge men according
to their works.

13. And he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said
unto them, Occupy till I come.

13. He gives men, that profess to be his Servants, his Gifts and Mercies, and
commands them to use them faithfully in his Service, and to do good in his
Church, and profit others, expecting his return.

14. But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will
not have this man to reign over us.

14. The Jews, to whom he first offered Grace, rejected him and his Government
with scorn.

15. And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the
kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had
given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading.

15. When he came to exercise Judgment over his Subjects and Servants, he
called first those that professed Christianity, to take an account how they had
used the blessings of the Gospel.

16. Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds.

16. Thy Grace and Gifts have been improved to the profit of many (...) ^o my
own increase in Holiness.

17. And he said unto him, Well, thou good servant: because thou have been
faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities.

17. Thou shall have a reward above others, according to thy service.

Note 1. Christ will praise his faithful Servants, and their Works. 2. He
rewards them, because they have been faithful, as the s^^^ral Qualification
of the Receivers; but not in Commutative Justice, nor in Distributive Governing
Justice, according to the Law of Innocence, or of Moses, but in Distributive
Paternal Justice, according to the Law of Grace and Faith.

18. And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound has gained five pounds. 19.
And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities.

18, 19. Their reward shall be answerable.

20. And another came, saying, Lord, behold, here is thy pound, which I have
kept laid up in a napkin: 21. For I feared thee, because thou art an austere
man: thou take up that thou layedst not down, and reapest that thou did not
sow.

20, 21. Here is thy own; I have wasted none of it: But thou art so severe,
that I durst not trade with it, lest I should lose it.

22. And he says unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou
wicked servant: thou knew that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid
not down, and reaping that I did not sow. 23. Wherefore then gave not thou my
money into the bank, that at my coming I might have required mine own with
usury?

22, 23. Note; Wicked men are apt to excuse their sloth, and accuse God's
strictness: But out of their own confessions and words shall Hypocrites, that
profess Christianity, be condemned.

Qu. What Usury is it which Christ by this Parable seems to countenance? Ans.
Such as God had not forbidden: To us now all Usury is sinful, that is against
either Justice or Charity, or the public good, and no other: For Moses's
Political Law binds not us.

24. And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and give it
to him that has ten pounds. 25. And they said unto him, Lord, he has ten
pounds. 26. For I say unto you, That unto every one which has, shall be given,
and from him that has not, even that he has shall be taken away from him.

24. Add it to his reward.

25, 26. He that has gained by his faithful industry shall be trusted and
rewarded with more; and he that unfaithfully neglected to use the mercy trusted
with him, shall be deprived of that mercy, gifts, time, etc. which he neglected.

27. But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither, and slay them before me.

27. Those Jews that hated and rejected me, and all such Rebellious Infidels,
shall be destroyed.

28. And when he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem.
29. And it came to pass when he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany; at the
mount called the mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, 30. Saying, go
ye into the village over against you, in the which at your entering ye shall
find a colt tied, whereon yet never man s^t: loose him, and bring him hither.
31. And if any man ask you, Why do ye loose him? thus shall ye say unto him,
Because the Lord has need of him. 32. And they that were sent, went their way,
and found even as he had said unto them. 33. And as they were loosing the colt,
the owners thereof said unto them, Why loose ye the colt? 34. And they said,
The Lord has need of him.

28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Note; Though Luke name only the Colt, that denies
not the Ass named by other Writers.

See Matthew. 21.1, 7, 8.

35. And they brought him to Jesus: and they cast their garments upon the colt,
and they set Jesus thereon. 36. And as he went, they spread their clothes in
the way. 37. And when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount of
Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice, and praised God
with a loud voice, for all the mighty works that they had seen, 38. Saying,
blessed be the king that comes in the name of the Lord, peace in heaven, and
glory in the highest.

37. See on Matthew. 21.9, 10, 11.

39. And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude, said to him, Master,
rebuke thy disciples. 40. And he answered and said to them, I tell you, that if
these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.

39, 40. They do but what God does cause them to do, and if they did not, God
would have it done, though by Miracle.

41. And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it; 42.
Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong to thy peace! But now they are hidden from thine eyes.

41. O that thou had known the things that are necessary to thy own peace and
safety, before the day of Grace be past. But by thy wilful sin and blindness,
they are unknown to thee.

Note; Christ, as Man, by weeping over self-destroying sinners, shows his
love and pity, though not equal to that which he exercises on hi^ Elect whom
he will save.

43. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, 44. And
shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they
shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not the
time of thy visitation.

34, 44 All this was done about thirty eight years after, by the dreadfullest
Siege, for Famine and Murder, that any History records.

45. And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold therein
and them that bought. 46. Saying unto them, It is written, My house is the
house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves.

45* 46. See Matthew. 21.12. Note; Christ showed his Authority by Reforming; and
his Zeal even for the Temple, while the Law stood.

47. And he taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests and scribes, and
the chief of the people sought to destroy him

47. It was the Priests and Rulers that were Christ's Enemies and Persecutors.

48. And could not find what they might do: for all the people were very
attentive to hear him.

48. They durst not lay hands on him, because the multitude hearing and
admiring him, were as his guard.

CHAP. XX.
1. ANd it came to pass that on one of those days, as he taught the people in
the temple, and preached the Gospel, the chief priests and the scribes came
upon him, with the elders. 2. And spoke unto him, saying, Tell us by what
authority do thou these things? or who is he that gave thee this authority?

1, 2. Such things are not to be done without Authority.

3. And he answered and said unto them, I will also ask you one thing, and
answer me. 4. The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? 5. And they
reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, from heaven, he will say,
Why then believed ye him not? 6. But and if we say, of men, all the people will
stone us; for they be persuaded that John was a prophet. 7. And they answered,
that they could not tell whence it was. 8. And Jesus said unto them, Neither
tell I you by what authority I do these things.

3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. They ought to have known his Authority by his Miracles. See
Matthew. 21.

9. Then began he to speak to the people this parable: A certain man planted a
vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen, and went into a far Country for a
long time. 10. And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they
should give him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat him and
sent him away empty. 11. And again he sent another servant, and they beat him
also, and entreated him shamefully, and sent him away empty. 12. And again he
sent the third, and they wounded him also, and cast him out. 13. Then said the
lord of the vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son: it may be
they will reverence him when they see him. 14. But when the husbandmen saw him,
they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir, come, let us kill
him, that the inheritance may be ours. 15. So they cast him out of the
vineyard, and killed him. What therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto
them? 16. He shall come and destroy these husbandmen, and shall give the
vineyard to others. And when they heard it, they said, God forbid.

9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. The Vineyard is the Land of Israel; the
Husbandmen are the Israelites; the Owner is God; the Messengers are the
Prophets; the Son is Christ, etc. See Matthew. 21.

17. And he beheld them, and said, What is this then that is written, The stone
which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner? 18.
Whosoever shall fall upon that stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever it
shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

17, 18. Whoever sins against Christ by unbelief, will perish in his sin: But
they that strive against him by malignity and opposition, will fall under his
victorious; Judgment, which will make them the most miserable.

19. And the chief priests and the Scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on
him, and they feared the people: for they perceived that he had spoken this
parable against them.

19. Note; That which is said against their sin, enrageth the impenitent, be it
never so true and needful to their conviction.

20. And they watched him, and sent forth spies, which would fain themselves
just men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver
him unto the power and authority of the governor.

20. Blood-thirsty Hypocrites would ensnare him, to get some word for which
they might accuse him, to the Romans Governor, as Treason against Caesar.

Note; How like in all Ages are the nature and ways of wicked men! Thus was
Naboth used by Jezabel, etc.

21. And they asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou say and teach
rightly, neither acceptest thou the person of any, but teach the way of God
truly. 22. Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Caesar, or no? 23. But he
perceived their craftiness, and said unto them, Why tempt ye me? 24. Show me a
penny: whose image and superscription has it? They answered and said, Cesars.
25. And he said unto them: Render therefore unto Caesar the things which be
Cesars, and unto God the things which be Gods. 26. And they could not take hold
of his words before the people, and they marvelled at his answer, and held
their peace.

21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Note; There is poison in the seeming kindness of cruel
Hypocrites; they flatter that they may hurt. Note; It is lawful to put off
bloody ensnarers with doubt^^l Answers.

27. Then came to him certain of the Sadduces, (which deny that there is any
resurrection,) and they asked him, 28. Saying, Master, Moses wrote unto us, If
any man's brother die, having a wife, and he die without children, that his
brother should take his wife, and raise up feed to his brother. 29. There were
therefore seven brethren, and the first took a wife, and died without children.
30. And the second took her to wife, and he died childless. 31. And the third
took her, and in like manner the seven also. And they left no children, and
died. 32. Last of all the woman died also. 33. Therefore in the resurrection,
whose wife of them is she? for seven had her to wife.

27, ^8, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Carnal men, from their own Error, do foolishly
cavil against the Truth which they understand not.

34. And Jesus answering, said unto them, The children of this world marry, and
are given in marriage: 35. But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain
that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in
marriage. 36. Neither can they die any more; for they are equal unto the
angels, and are the children of God, being the children of the Resurrection.

34, 35, 36. Note; Worthiness of that World, is such a qualification as is
required in God's Promise. Note; The Blessed shall be like the Angels, and with
them, and be immortal. Note; By the Resurrection here is meant the next Life,
even to separated Souls, and not only the Resurrection of the Body. O why do we
not long for such a change!

37. Now that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he
calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob. 38. For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living; for all live
unto him.

37, 38. See Matthew. 22. He is the Lord and Owner of the Dead and Living: But to
be Their God, signifies more, even to be their Governor and Protector, and
their End and Portion, and their All.

39. Then certain of the Scribes answering said, Master, thou have well said.
40. And after that, they durst not ask him any question at all.

39, 40. T^^y were out of hope of entrapping him by their Ques^^^ns.

41. And he said unto them, How say they that Christ is David's Son? 42. And
David himself says in the book of psalms* The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou
on my right hand, 43. Till I make thine enemies thy footstool, 44. David
therefore calls him Lord, how is he then his Son?

41, 42, 43 44. See Matthew. 22.

45. Then in the audience of all the people he said to his disciples, 46.
Beware of the Scribes, who desire to walk in long robes, and love greetings in
the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief rooms at
feasts, 47. Who devour widows houses, and for a show make long prayers: The
same shall receive greater damnation.

45, 46, 47. Note; The Character of formal Hypocrites, ^^ to be worldly, cruel,
unjust, proud, and to be devout in a ceremonious Religion and ^^p labor, to
quiet their Conscience, and keep their reputation. N. Though no doubt but some
Hypocrites can use long prayers extempore, it is most likely that the Scribes
and Pharisees was a Form or Liturgy.

CHAP. XXI.
1. ANd he looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the
treasury. 2. And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites.
3. And he said, of a truth, I say unto you, that this poor widow has cast in
more then they all. 4. For all these have of their abundance, cast in unto the
offerings of God; but she of her penury has cast in all the living that she
had.

1, 2, 3, 4. See on Mark 12.41, 42. God judges not of our Service by the bulk.

5. And as some spoke of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones, and
gifts, he said. 6. As for these things which ye behold, the days will come, in
the which there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be
thrown down.

5, 6. See Matthew. 24.

7. And they asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be? and
what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass.

7. Note; Corrupt Nature is more desirous to know things to come, than to
prepare f^r them by present duty.

8. And he said, Take heed that ye be not deceived: for many shall come in my
Name, saying, I am Christ, and the time draws near: go ye not therefore after
them.

8. Take you more care of your selves, than to know the time; and be not
deceived by false Christ's, and false Prophets.

9. But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified; for these
things must first come to pass, but the end is not by and by. 10. Then said he
unto them, nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. 11.
And great earthquakes shall be in diverse places, and famines, and pestilences,
and fearful sights, and great signs shall there be from heaven. 12. But before
all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you
up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers
for my Names sake. 13. And it shall turn to you for a testimony.

9, 10, 11, 12, 13. See Matthew. 24. Note; Christ did not draw in Disciples with
the hopes of prosperity. It shall be your Witness or Martyrdom, to divulge the
Gospel, and condemn unbelievers.

14. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall
answer. 15. For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries
shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist.

14, 15. Note; It is Christ in Heaven that gives Grace and Gifts to his
Servants on Earth by his Spirit.

16. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents and brethren, and kinsfolks, and
friends, and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. 17. And ye shall
be hated of all men for my Names sake. 18. But there shall not an hair of your
head perish.

16, 17, 18. Ye shall be no losers by all your sufferings; You shall be
preserved till you are ripe for your full reward.

19. In your patience possess ye your souls.

19. While you keep your Innocence and Patience, you keep your Souls from
danger and loss.

20. And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the
desolation thereof his nigh. 21. Then let them which are in Judea, flee to the
mountains, and let them which are in the midst of it, depart out, and let not
them that are in the countries, enter thereunto. 22. For these be the days of
vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled.

20, 21, 22. Jerusalem's Calamity shall be so great, that all that will be safe
must the from it.

23. But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those
days, for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this
people. 24. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away
captive into into all nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the
Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

23, 24. Till the Heathens be turned Christians themselves, (in Constantine's
days.) and then Jerusalem shall be restored, and be the dwelling of Christians.

25. And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars,
and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea and the waves
roaring, 26. Men's hearts failing them for fear, and and for looking after those
things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.
27. And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and
great glory. 28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh.

25, 26, 27, 28. See Matthew. 24. Judgment, though slow, is sure and terrible.

29. And he spoke to them a parable, Behold the fig tree, and all the trees,
30. When they now shoot* forth, ye see and know of your own selves, that summer
is now nigh at hand, 31. So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass,
know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.

29, 30, 31. The Kingdom of God is the Reign of the Messiah, destroying Satan's
Kingdom, beginning indeed at his Resurrection, but notable as Catholic, upon
the great conversion of the Gentiles, specially when Emperors owned Christ,
the Jews being partly destroyed, and partly converted; and at last perfected in
glory.

32. Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, till all be
fulfilled. 33. Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass
away.

32, 33. Till the Jews be destroyed, and the Gentiles begin to receive the
Gospel through the World.

34. And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. 35. For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on
the face of the whole earth.

34, 35. Either the ruin of the Jews shall suddenly come on all that Land; or
the day of Judgment on all the World: And our duty is to be always ready; and
therefore to avoid sensuality and worldliness, which is unreadiness.

36. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of
man.

36. A life of obedient watching against sin, waiting for Judgment, and
constant Prayer, is our Gospel-worthiness to escape God's Judgments, and our
preparation for a comfortable meeting our Judge.

37. And in the daytime he was teaching in the temple, and at night he went
out, and abode in the mount that is called the mount of olives. 38. And all the
people came early in the morning to him in the temple, for to hear him.

37, 38. Note; They could not silence him, 1. Because it was the Jews Law, that
Prophets and great Teachers should speak freely. 2. And the Romans limited
their Power. 3. And they feared the multitude of his hearers.

CHAP. XXII.
1. NOw the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the passover.
2. And the chief priests and Scribes sought how they might kill him; for they
feared the people.

1, 2. The feast of unleavened Bread, was the day of the Passover, and seven
days after.

3. Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the
twelve. 4. And he went his way, and communed with the chief priests and
captains, how he might betray him unto them.

3, 4. Note; There is more of Satan in sin, than sinners think: He has access
as a Tempter to the Imagination, and when his Temptation prevails, he gets
greater possession of the heart.

5. And they were glad, and covenanted to give him money.

5. Note 1. Wicked purposes or desires, use to meet with encouragement from
wicked men. 2. It is a heinous crime, when men dare covenant to sin for gain.

6. And he promised, and sought opportunity to betray him unto them in the
absence of the multitude.

6. To avoid tumult.

7. Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed.
8. And he sent Peter and John saying, Go and prepare us the passover, that we
may eat. 9. And they said unto him, Where will thou that we prepare? 10. And he
said unto them, Behold, when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man
meet you, bearing a pitcher of water, follow him into the house where he
enters in. 11. And ye shall say unto the good man of the house, The master
says unto thee, Where is the guest-chamber where I shall eat the passover
with my disciples? 12. And he shall show you a large upper room furnished,
there make ready. 13. And they went and found as he had said unto them: and
they made ready the passover.

7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Note 1. Christ knew what would befall them out of
sight. 2. Being made under the Law, he would keep even that part that typified
himself.

14. And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him.
15. And he said unto them, With desire I have desired to eat this passover
with you before I suffer.

14. Note; Christ earnestly desired the fulfilling of his undertaken work, and
holy Communion with his Servants.

16. For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled
in the kingdom of God. 17. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take
this, and divide it among your selves. 18. For I say unto you, I will not drink
of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come.

16, 17, 18. Till we meet in Heaven; or till I celebrate that Sacrament which
is the Christian Passover with you, in the holy Assemblies, where I will be
spiritually present.

Qu. How comes the Cup twice mentioned? Ans. The first was part of the
Passover. But Beza notes, that the 18th and 19th verses are not in the Syrian
Translation, which is most ancient: And in his very old Greek Copy now at
Cambridge, [ This do in remembrance of me,] is left out of the 19th verse; and
he conjectures some verses are transposed.

19. And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them*
saying, This is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me.
20. Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament
in my blood, which is shed for you.

19, 20. See Matthew. 26. Note; Seeing the Evangelists use not all the very same
words, it seems not of absolute necessity to use just the same still: Yet all
the substance must be retained; and it is safest repeating all set together
which they recite; and as Paul most fully recites them.

21. But behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the table.
22. And truly the Son of man goes as it was determined, but woe unto that man
by whom he is betrayed. 23. And they began to enquire among themselves, which
of them it was that should do this thing.

21, 22, 23. Note; How hard was Judas's heart, that took not this warning!

24. And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted
the greatest.

24. Note; This strife was before, Matthew. 20. But Luke keeps not to the order
of time.

25. And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over
them and they that exercise authority upon them, are called benefactors. 26.
But ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the
younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve.

25, 26. (I am not for parity among all my Disciples: You know I have chosen
you only to be Apostles: But though you be over the Churches, you must not be
Rulers of one another: And that sort of Preeminence which you have, must not be
like that of the Princes of the World, who Rule by the Sword, or outward Force,
and in worldly Pomp or State, constraining Subjects to flatter them with high
Titles; but it must be grounded in an excellency of Grace and Gifts, Love,
Meekness, Humility, being the most useful, and devoted to the good of all; as
Ruling only the voluntary, and therefore by the clearest Reason, and greatest
Love, and most exemplary profitable Lives: Strive and spare not, for this
Preeminence and Disparity.)

27. For whether is greater, he that sits at meat, or he that serves? Is
not he that sits at meat? but I am among you as he that serves.

27. Would you rule as greater than I? what has my Government of you been, but
to do you good, by Doctrine, Love, and good Example, without force?

28. Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. 29. And I
appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me:

28. As a reward for your faithful sticking to me in all my Trials and
Sufferings. I appoint, etc.

Note; This Promise is three ways expounded; 1. The aspiring Clergy say it is,
I make you Apostles the Chief Rulers of my Church, though in persecuting t^^es,
and your Successors shall be Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops, etc. and
over top Emperors and Kings.

2. Others say, that this lower World is but a shadow of the upper; and that
the Office of Angels, and the Titles in Daniel of [ M^^^^ your Prince] and so
of other Angels, shows thi^ ^e^e be Kingdoms in the Spiritual World above us,
answerable to all the Kingdoms on Earth, and incomparably more; and that
therefore Christ says, In my Father's house are many Mansions: And that there
the twelve Apostles have their Kingdoms, (at least over the twelve Trib^^) as
being equal with the Angels.

3. But most think that it is only an expression of the eminent Glory of the
Apostles after the Resurrection.

I see not but part of all three Expositions may be included, that is, you
shall be Chief in my Church on Earth, and equal with Angels after Death, but
specially after the Day of Judgment.

30. That ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

30. That ye may be feasted by me in Heaven with spiritual everlasting Joys,
and may be Superiors to the glorified Israelites, and in the mean time on Earth
may be the chiefest in my Church.

31. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you,
that he may sift you as wheat: 32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not? and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

31, 32. Satan has got leave to try and sift you all, and thee in special: But
I have by Prayer prevailed, that tho thou sin in denying me, thou may not
fall from sincere Faith: And when by Repentance thou art recovered from thy
fall, strengthen thy Brethren, who will forsake me also.

33. And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee both into prison,
and to death. 34. And he said, I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this
day, before that thou shall thrice deny that thou know me.

33. Note; Christ that knew Satan's Request, and knew the Event, knew Peter's
weakness better than he himself did.

35. And he said unto them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and
shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing. 36. Then said he unto them,
But now he that has a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip; and he
that had no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one. 37. For I say unto
you, That this that is written, must yet be accomplished in me, And he was
reckoned among the transgressors: for the things concerning me have an end.

35, 36, 37. When the People followed and applauded me for my Cures and
Miracles, I knew that they would receive you, and provide for you for my sake:
But now I am to be crucified and scorned as a transgressor, they will also cast
you off: Therefore now look for hard usage, and moderately provide for your
selves.

38. And they said, Lord, Behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them,
It is enough.

38. I do not mean that you should now fight for me, but that you take care of
your safety.

39. And he came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of Olives, and his
disciples also followed him.

39. It seems he used there to lodge out of doors on the ground, and his
Disciples with him.

40. And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray, that ye enter not
into temptation.

40. Prayer is the way both to escape Temptation, and in it to overcome.

41. And he was withdrawn from them about a stones cast, and kneeled down, and
prayed. 42. Saying; Father, If thou be willing, remove this cup from me:
nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done.

41, 42. N. For Christ in the first act by a simple Nolition to be unwilling to
suffer, was no sin, nor resisting God, but the property of Humane Nature: But
if he had been averse in the second comparative act, called Election, when he
knew it was God's Will, this would have been evil.

43. And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.

43. N. Had Christ, as Man, need of an Angels strengthening? What need then
have we in the approach of death and great sufferings? And may we not also
expect Angels help?

44. And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it
were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

44. N. This was not from the fear of death, but the deep sense of God's wrath
against sin, which he, as our Sacrifice, was to bear, in greater pain than mere
dying, which his Servants often bear with peace.

45. And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found
them sleeping for sorrow, 46. And said unto them, Why sleep ye? Rise and pray,
lest ye enter into temptation.

45, 46. N. We are apt to sleep when we have most need to watch and pray, and
have need to be awakened.

47. And while he yet spoke, behold, a mulitude, and he that was called Judas,
one of the twelve, went before them, and drew near unto Jesus, to kiss him. 48.
But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?

47, 48. N God permitted one so near Christ to betray him, to warn us how far
to expect evil from our professed friends.

49. When they which were about him, saw what would follow, they said unto him,
Lord, shall we smite with the sword? 50. And one of them smote the servant of
the high priest, and cut off his right ear.

49, 50. Self-defence is natural, but God's Law must rule it: They were the
more put to fly, because they had resisted.

51. And Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye thus far. And he touched his ear,
and healed him.

51. N. This Miracle, wrought for one that came to destroy him, neither melted
nor convinced hardened sinners.

52. Then Jesus said unto the chief priests and captains of the temple, and the
elders which were come to him, Be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords
and staves? 53. When I was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched forth no
hands against me: But this is your hour, and the power of darkness.

52, 53. This is the time which God has granted Satan to make use of you his
Instruments against me, and the Prince of darkness will seem to conquer.

54. Then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the high priests
house. And Peter followed afar off. 55. And when they had kindled a fire in the
midst of the hall, and were set down together, Peter sat down among them. 56.
But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon
him, and said, This man was also with him.

54, 55, 56. N. When Trial must come, Instruments will not be wanting.

57. And he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not.

57. N. Had he not been conscious of smiting with the Sword, he had not been in
so much danger of fear.

58. And after a little while another saw him, and said, Thou art also of them.
And Peter said, Man, I am not.

58. N. It was a Woman, here called Man only as one of Mankind, not to
distinguish the Sex.

59. And about the space of one hour after, another confidently affirmed,
saying, Of a truth this fellow also was with him; for he is a Galilean.

59. N. To belong to Christ, and follow him, is crime enough, when Enemies are
Judges.

60. And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou say. And immediately while he
yet spoke, the cock crew. 61. And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter; and
Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said unto him, Before the cock
crow, thou shall deny me thrice. 62. And Peter went out, and wept bitterly.

60, 61, 62. N. Christ's own danger did not make him forget a sinning Disciple.

63. And the men that held Jesus, mocked him, and smote him. 64. And when they
had blindfolded him, they stroke him on the face, and asked him, saying,
Prophecy, who is it that smote thee? 65. And many other things blasphemously
spoke they against him.

63, 64, 65. N. What is it that the ignorant Rabble will not say and do against
the best of men, when men called Sacred and Great encourage them?

66. And as soon as it was day, the elders of the people, and the chief priests
and the Scribes came together, and led them into their council, saying, 67. Art
thou the Christ? tell us. And he said unto them, If I tell you, you will not
believe. 68. And if I also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go.

66, 67, 68. It Is in vain to discourse with you; for you are resolved what to
do with me, and trust to force, and not to Truth.

69. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.

69. I shall shortly be advanced in Heaven as Man, to be Lord of all.

70. Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? and he said unto them,
Ye say that I am. 71. And they said, What need we any further witness? for we
our selves have heard of his own mouth.

70, 71. N. Though Christ answered not their other Accusations, he would not,
to save his life, by silence seem to fear to own his Nature, Dignity and
Office; else he that laid our Salvation upon our open confessing him in the
face of greatest danger, should have required more of us, than he would do
himself. Paul says, With the mouth confession is made to Salvation; and gives
Timothy Christ's Example, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession, Romans 10, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 6.13.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. ANd the whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate. 2. And they
began to accuse him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the nation, and
forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, That he himself is Christ a King.

1, 2. N. The last clause, which was true, gave a color to the former which
was false: They thought that Pilate could not believe that he could claim a
Kingdom, and not be against Caesar's Reign. And to this day the Devil's design
is to make Princes jealous that Christ's Kingdom is against theirs, when as
they have all their true power from him. No way seems so effectual to the
Diabolists to get down Christ's Kingdom, as to raise jealousy and enmity in
Kings against it.

3. And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he
answered him and said, Thou ^ayest it.

3 I am ^o; I will not deny my Office and Dignity, (But my Kingdom is not of
this World.)

4. Then said Pilate to the chief priest and to the people, I find no fault in
this man.

4. Though he call himself a King, he raises no War or Sedition against
Ca^sar; and so the Law will not reach him.

5. And they were the more fierce, saying, He stirs up the people, teaching
throughout all Jury, beginning from Galilee to this place.

5. His Preaching is seditious, disaffecting the people to the Government, and
to the public Peace.

6. When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilean. 7.
And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to
Herod, who himself was also at Jerusalem at that time. 8. And when Herod saw
Jesus, he was exceeding glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season,
because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped to have seen some miracle
done by him.

6, 7, 8. N. When the King of Glory, in the form of a Servant, was thus tossed
in triumph and scorn, from Ruler to Ruler, it was to show what we deserved, and
what we must expect.

9. Then he questioned with him in many words, but he answered him nothing.

9. N. As he was not over sollicitous to refel their Accusations; so he would
no accuse himself, nor give them matter against him out of his own mouth: He
would not have taken an ex Officio Oath, to answer whatever Question they
should ask him, though they told him not what.

10. And the chief priests and Scribes stood, and vehemently accused him.

10, N. Consecrated men are Satan's Agents with the King against Christ.

11. And Herod with his men of war set him at naught, and mocked him, and
arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate.

11. N. The King and his Soldiers thought they were far enough above a
despised unarmed Prisoner.

12. And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together; for before
they were at enmity between themselves.

12. N. They can agree in enmity and persecution of the just, who cannot agree
about their worldly interest.

13. And Pilate when he had called together the chief priests, and the rulers,
and the people, 14. Said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one
that perverteth the people, and behold, I having examined him before you, have
found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him: 15. No
nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him, and lo, nothing worthy of death is done
unto him. 16. I will therefore chastise him and release him. 17. For of
necessity he must release one unto them at the feast.

13, 14, 15, 16, 17. His accusation of Sedition is not proved to me, nor to
Herod: I will therefore scourge him, and so release him.

18. And they cried out all at once, saying, Away with this man, and release
unto us Barabbas,

18. N. A Murderer, or the most deboist, seems better than Christ himself, to
malignant Hypocrites.

19. (Who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder was cast in
prison.) 20. Pilate therefore willing to release Jesus, spoke again to them.
21. But they cried, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. 22. And he said unto them
the third time, Why, what evil has he done? I have found no cause of death in
him, I will therefore chastise him, and let him go.

19, 20, 21, 22. N. The malignant Jews are worse than the Heathens in
persecuting rage.

23. And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be
crucified: and the voices of them, and of the chief priests, prevailed. 24. And
Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.

23, 24. N. Wicked men dare deny God's importunity and mercy, but cannot deny
temptations from men's importunity and worldly interest.

25. And he released unto them, him that for sedition and murder was cast into
prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered Jesus to their will.

25. N. 1. It is the greatest means of bad men's ruin, to let them have their
wills. 2. God in flesh was not innocent enough in the eyes of wicked men, to
escape condemnation.

26. And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon a Cyrenian,
coming, out of the country, and on him they laid the cross, that he might bear
it after Jesus. 27. And there followed him a great company of people, and of
women, which also bewailed and lamented him. 28. But Jesus turning unto them,
said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and
for your children. 29. For behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall
say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps that
never gave suck.

26, 27, 28, 29. It is not my case that you have cause to lament, but your own
and your Childrens, for the dreadful destruction that is coming.

30. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us: and to the
hills, Cover us. 31. For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be
done in the dry?

30, 31. Dreadful will be the approaching vengeance: For if they thus use me
for my good works, what shall they endure, who by their heinous sin are as wood
dried for the fire.

32. And there were also two malefactors led with him to be put to death. 33.
And when they were come to the place which is called Calvary, there they
crucified him and the malefactors, one on the right hand and the other on the
left.

32, 33. Thus, for us, the Son of God was numbered with Malefactors, by the most
ignominious death.

34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. And
they parted his raiment, and cast lots.

34. Qu. Was this an absolute Prayer of Christ? If so, were they not all
forgiven, seeing he was always heard? And does not he himself foretell their
dreadful punishment? Ans. It is as if he said [I am dying to purchase pardon of
sin to all that repent and believe; I come not to destroy and condemn, but to
save: It is therefore my part to desire their Repentance and Salvation: Take
them not as unpardonable, for they do this in ignorance and unbelief: Tender
them forgiveness, and give them yet time of Repentance, and draw thine Elect to
effectual Faith, and condemn none for killing me, that do not after my
Resurrection obstinately reject thy offered mercy to the last.] This also was
the sense of Stephen's, Lay not this sin to their charge. But final unbelief
and rejecting grace, is the unpardonable sin, which retains all the rest.

35. And the people stood beholding, and the rulers also with them derided him,
saying, He saved others, let him save himself, if he be Christ, the chosen of
God,

35. O unthankful men* to turn so many Miracles of Love and Mercy into cruel
insulting scorn! Reader, behold in these Instances the Nature of fallen Man, and
be humbled, and fear thy self.

36. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him
vinegar, 37. And saying, If thou be the king of the Jews, save thy self.

36, 37. N. He came to save us, and not himself, till his Resurrection: How
glad would his Enemies shortly be to be saved by him? And how will their tune
be changed!

38. And a superscription also was written over him, in letters of Greek, and
Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

38. N. As the reason of his death, and scorn both of him, and all the Jewish
Nation

39. And one of the malefactors, which were hanged, railed on him, saying, If
thou be Christ, save thy self and us.

39. N. The Cross of Christ was the great scandal to all? They thought that he
could not be the Christ, that did not save himself; because they knew not the
use of his Sacrifice for Man's Redemption. But it shows the power of sin, when
even a Malefactor crucified shall go out of the World in such reproach.

40. But the other answering, rebuked him saying, Do not thou fear God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation? 41. And we indeed justly: for we
receive the due reward of our deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss.

40, 41. Will thou die in sin? Are not we justly suffering for it, when he
unjustly suffers, being innocent?

42. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom.

42. Lord, I believe that thou art the true Messiah, and the promised King:
Remember me a sinner with pardoning mercy and acceptance, when thou reignest in
thy glory.

43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with
me in paradise.

43. Trust my Promise: Thou shall this very day be with me in a celestial
Paradise of joy.

N. 1. This Example shows us what Election freely does in calling one, while
another is past by.

2. Christ would give this present proof of the virtue of his Sacrifice to call
and justify sinners.

3. True Conversion is never too late, to the obtaining of Mercy and Salvation.

4. True Faith and Repentance, how late soever, will have its fruits. This man
was not saved without good works. 1. He confessed his sin, 2. He confessed the
justness of his punishment. 3. He confessed Christ's Kingdom. 4. He justified
Christ's Innocence. 5. He reproved the Reviler, and taught him to repent. 6. He
prayed even to a crucified dying Christ. 7. He prayed not for present
deliverance, but for a place in Christ's Kingdom.

5. The departed Souls of the faithful go presently to Paradise.

6. This Paradise is where Christ will be with us.

Some Heretics, by gross perversion, join [ This day,] with [ I say] as if it
had been only the day of Christ's speaking this, and not of the man's being in
Paradise: But it is by falsification, contrary to the pointing of all Greek
Copies; and one Copy, says Beza, has [ That this day.]

44. And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness over all the
earth, until the ninth hour.

44. Over all the Land, from twelve a Clock till three, there was an unusual
degree of darkness, whether by an Eclipse, or extraordinary Clouds, is
uncertain: But it was not such darkness as is in the night.

45. And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the mids.

45. Some take the veil to be a hanging, but it is liker it wa^ a wall: For the
Temple was divided into three parts; 1. The outer Court, where the Gentiles
might come. 2 The Sanctuary, where the Jews came. 3. The inner Sanctuary, or
Holiest, where only the High Priest came once a year. If it was the wall that
enclosed the Holiest, then the rending signified the access we have now to God
by Christ: If it was the second wall, it signified the removal of the Mosaical
Separation of Jews and Gentiles.

46. And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit: and having said thus, he gave up the ghost.

46. N. The certain Glory that Christ expected, was by the way of Trusting his
Soul into his Fathers hands: And what otherways have we to die in hope and
peace, but to commit our Souls with Trust to our Father and our Redeemer, and
conjoyn the dying words of Christ and Stephen?

47. Now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying,
Certainly this was a righteous man.

47. See Matthew. 27.54. Though Matthew recite his words thus, [ Verily this was
the Son of God,] Luke's words are not contrary, but we may conclude that the
Centurion spoke both.

48. And all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things
which were done, smote their breasts, and returned. 49. And all his
acquaintance, and the women that followed him from Galilee, stood afar off,
beholding these things.

48, 49. N. Soldiers and common people were not so hardened as the Priests and
Rulers.

50. And behold, there was a man named Joseph, a counselor, and he was a good
man and a just:

50. O^e of the Council that governed.

51. (The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them) he was of
Arimathea, a city of the Jews (who also himself waited for the kingdom of God.)

51. Who having looked for the coming of the Messiah, believed that Christ was
he.

52. This man went unto Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus.

52. N. 1. He that concealed his Faith before, showed his Love to Christ when
he was dead. 2. The Body of the Son of God was at the disposal and power of a
Heathen, even his who was Lord of all the World.

53. And he took it down, and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a sepulcher
that was hewn in stone, wherein never man before was laid.

53. Prepared for himself.

54. And that day was the preparation, and the sabbath drew on: 55. And the
women also which came with him from Galilee, followed after, and beheld the
sepulcher, and how his body was laid. 56. And they returned, and prepared
spices and ointments, and rested the sabbath day, according to the commandment.

54, 55, 56. According to Moses's Law, which required Ceremonial Rest, it being
not then abrogated.

CHAP. XXIV.
1. NOw upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they came
unto the sepulcher, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and certain
others with them.

1. Obj. Did not Nicodemus and Joseph wrap his body in Spices at his Burial?
Ans. They laid it in haste in the dry Aloes and Myrrh, deferring the full
Embalming of it, with the added Ointments, till after the Sabbath.

2. And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulcher. 3. And they entered
in, and they found not the body of the Lord Jesus. 4. And it came to pass, as
they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in shining
garments. 5. And as they were afraid and bowed down their faces to the earth,
they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?

2, 3, 4, 5. See the reconciliation of the seeming differences of the
Evangelists herein, on Mat. 28. and Mark 16. and Joh. 20.

6. He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spoke unto you when he was
yet in Galilee, 7. Saying, The Son of man must be dilivered into the hands of
sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

6, 7. N. Luke says more of this Sermon of the Angels to the Women, than the
other Evangelists did.

8. And they remembered his words, 9. And they returned from the sepulcher, and
told all these things unto the eleven, and to all the rest. 10. It was Mary
Magdalen, and Joanna, and Mary the Mother of James, and other women that were
with them, which told these things unto the apostles. 11. And their words
seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.

8, 9, 10, 11. N. Here is much past by which the other Evangelists have: For no
one of them pretended to write all that was done.

12. Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulcher, and stooping down, he beheld
the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed, wondering in himself at
that which was come to pass.

12. Se^ t^is more fully in John 20.

13. And behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus,
which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs. 14. And they talked
together of all these things which had happened. 15. And it came to pass, that
while they communed together, and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went
with them.

13, 14, 15. Christ came to them but as unknown.

16. But their eyes were held, that they should not know him.

16. It Is like the cause was partly in them, and partly in the change of the
countenance of Christ.

17. And he said unto them, What manner of communications are these that ye
have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?

17. N. He was not ignorant of their discourse, but asked them, that he might
instruct them.

18. And the one of them, whose name was Cleopas, answering, said unto him, Art
thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the things which are
come to pass there in these days? 19. And he said unto them, What things? and
they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in
deed and word before God, and all the people:

18, 19, In Miracles, and Prophecy, and Doctrine.

20. And how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to
death, and have crucified him. 21. But we trusted that it had been he which
should have redeemed Israel: beside all this, to day is the third day since
these things were done.

20, 21. N. They still believed that he was a Prophet: For many Prophets were
murdered: But they now seemed to doubt, yea almost to give up their belief that
he was the Messiah.

22. Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which were
early at the sepulcher: 23. And when they found not his body, they came, saying
that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said that he was alive. 24.
And certain of them which were with us, went to the sepulcher, and found it
even so as the women had said, but him they saw not.

22, 23.24. And yet we know not what to think, but are under mere astonishment,
and further expectation; for certain Women, etc.

25. Then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the
prophets have spoken:

25. Were you not very ignorant Men, and of dull hearts, you would not be so
unacquainted with, and backward to believe, that which all the Prophets did
foretell.

26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
glory?

26. Have they not all foretold that Christ must thus suffer, and then enter
into the heavenly glory, where is his Throne, where he is to reign?

27. And beginning at Moses, and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in
all the scriptures, the things concerning himself.

27. N. Though it has not pleased God to give us down this Expository Sermon
of Christ, yet his Spirit, by his Apostles, has given us enough for our use.

28. And they drew nigh unto the village whither they went, and he made as
though he would have gone further.

28. N. Not by any false words, but by his carriage, concealing his purpose to
stay with them.

29. But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us: for it is toward
evening, and the day is far spent: and he went in to tarry with them.

29. N. Importunity is the means to prevail for Christ's presence, even when he
purposes to stay.

30. And it came to pass as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and
blessed it, and brake, and gave to them.

30. N. Not the Sacrament, but as the Master of the Family was wont to do; save
the peculiar holiness of his manner of doing it.

31. And their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of
their sight.

31. It Is like partly by God's change on them, and partly by Christ's more
discernible discovery, they knew him.

N. Though Christ rose in the same Body, and was not yet fully glorified, it
was greatly changed, so that he could appear and vanish when and where he
pleased, and be known or unknown to beholders.

32. And they said one to another* Did not our heart burn within us, while he
talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?

32. N. They told each other how they felt their hearts affected while he
preached to them.

33. And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the
eleven gathered together, and them that were with them, 34. Saying, The Lord is
risen indeed, and has appeared unto Simon.

33, 34. As soon as they came in among them, the eleven first told these two,
that the Lord was risen, etc.

35. And they told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of
them in breaking of bread.

35. Then the two also told the eleven, and the company what they had seen and
heard in the way, etc.

36. And as they thus spoke, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and
says unto them, Peace be unto you.

36. N. We need not feign that he opened the door, when he could appear and
disappear, when and where he would: He did not lie hidden in some corner, when
they saw him so seldom in forty days, but disappeared. N. 2. Peace is the voice
of a risen Savior, who purchased it so dearly, and gives it as the great
Peacemaker.

37. But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a
spirit.

37. If he had opened the door, and come in as other men, it is like they would
not have taken him for a Spirit.

38. And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in
your hearts? 39. Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self: handle me
and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. 40. And when
he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet.

38, 39* 40. Troubling thoughts are ready to surprise ignorant persons; but
Christ to suppress them, appealed to their senses: For man is apt to believe
what he sees and feels, but is hardly brought to believe any thing above
sense. N. Spirits have not flesh and blood.

41. And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them,
Have ye here any meat?

41. N. There was some belief called Hope, or else they could not have had joy:
But it is hard fully to believe great things which we desire, through the power
of fear, lest it should not prove true.

42. And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. 43. And
he took it, and did eat before them.

4^, 43. N. 1. They dieted skilfully: Broiling and Honey correct both the
pituitous frigidity, and the corruptibility of fish.

2. Eating proved Christ to be no mere Spirit. When Angels did eat, they first
took Bodies, or else seemed to do what they did not: Therefore glorified Bodies
eat not, because they are spiritual, though not mere Spirits, and have their
sustenance without eating.

44. And he said unto them, These are the words which I spoke unto you, while I
was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the
law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me.

44. N. This Testimony of Christ confirms the Law of Moses, the Prophets and
the Psalms, to be the true Word of God.

45. Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the
scriptures,

45. N. This was a greater effect of Divine Power, (to open men's
understandings,) than to appear without opening the door: The understanding of
man is shut up against the understanding of things spiritual, till Christ open
it. O pray for this opening.

46. And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:

46. This should not seem new or strange to you, which the Scriptures so fully
foretold.

47. And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name
among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. 48. And ye are witnesses of these
things.

47, 48. I have by Redemption purchased an Act of Grace and Oblivion, a free
universal pardon of sin to all that repent and will accept it, as my gift: This
must be preached to all Nations; and you must do it first by Office, who are my
Witnesses of the matter of fact.

49. And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the
city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.

49. And the great Promise of the Holy Ghost, for Miracles, Tongues, and
Holiness, as my Agent, Sea^ and Earnest, I will quickly pour out upon you. But
wait together at Jerusalem, till it be done, and you be endued with the
foresaid power from God.

50. And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lift up his hands, and
blessed them. 51. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted
from them, and carried up into heaven.

50, 51. Afterward, at the end of forty days, when he had often appeared to them,
and given them their Commission to go and Disciple all Nations, baptizing them
into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things that he had commanded them, promising to be with them to the end of the
World, Mat. 28.19.20. Mark 16.15, 16. See Acts 1.9.

N. Christ, that parted from Earth with a Blessing, will bless his Church here
and for ever.

52. And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy;

52. Note; Though their Lord was gone from them on Earth, they were now assured
that they had a King and Savior in Heaven* whence his influence would be most
extensive and efficacious.

53. And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.

53. As they worshipped their glorified Redeemer; so they continued together
assembled in the Temple, (not yet alienated from all Jewish Worship,) praising
and magnifying the Name of God, who had besto^ed a Savior and his Grace upon
them* and had given the Church so gracious and glorious a Savior and Head, and
done such wonders to confirm their Faith. Amen.

THE GOSPEL According to St. JOHN.
CHAP. I.
IN the beginning was the WORD and the WORD was with God, and the WORD was God.

2. The same was in the beginning with God.

1, 2. The WORD (which has been since incarnate) was in the Beginning before
the world was made; And this WORD was with God, yea the WORD was God, Thus this
same WORD was in the Beginning of Time, and causality with God, being God.

3 All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made.

3. He was a causal beginning to the whole Creation; for all things were made
by him: nothing was made without him by the Father, in creating or forming the
World.

4 In him was LIFE and the LIFE was the LIGHT of men.

4. Being GOD and one with the Father, he was especially LIFE, even in and with
the Father, the Infinite, Eternal, self-living God; and so he was Radically and
Communicatively LIFE to the World; even Intellectual Life, by which he is the
LIGHT of man, as Intellectual, and as Taught by Revelation; Note, It is usual
with the Scripture and School Divines to ascribe by some eminency of
attribution, LIFE and POWER to the FATHER, LIGHT and WISDOM to the Son, and
LOVE, JOY and PERFECTIONS to the Holy Ghost: yet so that the same also are
attributed to each person in Common: And so the WORD is said here to have LIFE
as one with the Father, and yet eminently to be this LIFE by the way of
Intellective LIGHT and Illumination.

5 And the LIGHT shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.

5 And this LIGHT shines communicatively unto this darkened World; which
receiving it but according to the mode and disposition of the receivers,
through their wilful resistance, receives the Illumination and Teaching so
defectively, as that most (in Judea and elsewhere) remain in darkness still.

6, 7, 8. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John: The same came for
a witness to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe.
He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.

6, 7, 8. God sent John Baptist before us, as Elias, to Preach Repentance and
Faith in the Messiah as ready to appear, and as a witness from God to prepare
and call the Jews to receive him that was the true LIGHT of the World (which
himself was not.)

9 That was the true LIGHT which lights every man that comes into the world.

9. He is the true LIGHT who gives all the world that Light which they do
enjoy: As the Lord and Spring of Nature, he gives all men their Intellectual
Natural Light, And as the Repriever and Restorer of blinded Intellects, he
gives all men that measure of moral and restored Light and Revelation which
they have.

10 He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the world knew him
not.

10. He was in the World (in a more excellent manner than the Soul is in the
Body, for) the world was made by him, and therefore maintained by him and he at
last appeared to the world incarnate: and yet the world knew him not in either
of his apparances.

11 He came unto his own, and his own received him not.

11. He came in flesh to his people the Jews, and they not believing him
received him not.

12 But as many as received him, to them gave he power, to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe on his Name:

12. But to as many as took him by unfeighed Consent for their Lord and
Savior, even to them that believing him to be the Son of God, and true
Messiah, did place all their trust in him for reconciliation with God and for
Salvation, to all these he gave Right to the State and dignity of Adoption
which he purchased, even to be the Sons of God as united to him, and Heirs of
the heavenly Glory.

13 Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.

13. Who (as Children have a like nature communicated from the Parents, so)
have a nature Holy and Divine, by spiritual Life, Light, and Love inclined to
do the will of God, and to desire things Holy and Heavenly, which nature is not
produced of mere natural generation, nor of fleshly appetite and senses, nor of
any mere humane Documents or Laws, but is the effect of Gods Grace by his
sanctifying Spirit.

14 And the WORD was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth.

14. And the word that made the World assumed humane nature in which he dwelt
as a better Tabernacle than that of shadows; and we saw his Glory appearing in
this Tabernacle in his Heavenly doctrine, Life, M^^acles and Transfigurations,
which showed him to be the only begotten of the Father, Glorious in the fullness
of Grace and Truth, which the shaddowy Tabernacle and Ceremonies did but
prefigure.

15 John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This is he of whom I spoke, He
that comes after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me.

15. John pointed to him saying, This is he: even the King of Israel: Though I
am before him in time in my Ministry, he is before me in Dignity, and was
before me in time also.

16 And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.

16. And as he is full of Wisdom and love, of grace and spiritual life, he as
our Head communicates so much as is meet for us, and we receive greater
meas^^e, than were given under the Law; even measures answerable to his new
appearance and Covenant.

17 For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

17. For though Moses delivered legal Precepts. Types and Ceremonies, it is by
Jesus Christ that we have Grace both for holiness and pardon* and by him are
the Real s^bstances which those shado^s typified. The meas^^e of Grace that the
^aithful had under the Law was through him, the promised Messiah and the fuller
measure under the Gospel, is by his fuller access and communication to us as
the Image on the Wax answers that on the S^gnet.

18 No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son who is in the bosom
of the Father, he has declared him.

18. How little should we have known of God whom no man ever saw, if his Son
that is in the bosom of the Father had not declared him and his will to man.

Note, I know not whether these words were the words of John the Baptist or the
Apostles

19 And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and Levites from
Jerusalem, to ask him, Who art thou? 20 And he confessed and denied not: but
confessed, I am not the Christ. 21 And they asked him, What then? Art thou
Elias? And he says, I am not. Art thou that Prophet? And he answered, No.

19. John constantly affirmed that he was not Christ nor Elias personally, nor
the Prophet mentioned Deuteronomy. 18.15. Qu. Does not Christ say, that John was
Elias. Ans. Not the person of old Elias, but the person prophested under that
name.

22 Then said they unto him, Who art thou that we may give an answer to them
that sent us? What say thou of thy self?

22. Tell us then what thou art, that we may give an account why thou
undertakes^ to Prophecy and Baptize.

23 He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness; Make straight the
way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias.

23. I am he that Isaiah prophesied of in these words, Isaiah 40.3.

24. And they which were sent, were of the Pharisees. 25 And they asked him,
and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor
Elias, neither that Proph^t 26 John answered them, saying, I baptize you with
water, but there stands one among you, whom ye know not, 27 He it is, who
coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy
to unloose.

24, etc. The Pharisees professed to reverence Prophets, and therefore were
inquisitive to know whether John was a Prophet or what he was, who presumed to
Baptize: But he told them, that it was his Office by baptizing with Water to
prepare them to receive him that already was among them unknown, who will
Baptize with the Holy Ghost, to whom he was unworthy to do the office of the
lowest Servant.

28 These things were done in Berhabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.

29 The next day John sees Jesus coming unto, him, and says, Behold the Lamb
of God, who takes away the sin of the world.

28, 29. The next day after the Pharisees questions, John seeing Christ gave
him personally this testimony: Behold this man is appointed to be Sacrificed to
God as the Lambs were under the Law to make expiation for the sins of the
world, that all that believe on him may be pardoned.

30 This is he of whom I said, After me comes a man which is preferred before
me for he was before me. 31 And I knew him not: but that he should be made
manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water.

30, 31. I knew that the Messiah was come, but I knew not that this was he,
till God made it known to me, and I saw the Holy Ghost come on him afterward;
But because he is come, I baptize men to prepare them to receive him.

32 And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like
a dove and it abode upon him. 33 And I knew him not: but he that sent me to
baptize with water the same said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit
descending, and remaining upon him, the same is he which baptizeth with the
holy Ghost. 34 and I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God.

32. N. John's testimony was both by Revelation and Vision of the descent of the
Spirit in some visible appearance. And whether John only heard the voice from
Heaven mentioned Mat. 3.17. ^ uncertain.

35 Again the next day after, John stood, and two of his Disciples. 36 And
looking on Jesus as he walked, he says, Behold the Lamb of God. 37 And the two
Disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.

37. Not followed him yet as his Disciples, but as enquirers after him, in
order to a closer following him.

38 Then Jesus turned and saw them following, and says unto them, What seek
ye? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master)
where dwell thou? 39 He says unto them, come and see. They came and saw
where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour.
40 One of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon
Peter's brother. 41 He first finds his own brother Simon, and says unto him,
We have found the Messiah, which is being interpreted, the Christ. 42 And he
brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the
son of Jona, thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation a stone.

38. Note, By all this it appears that when Peter and Andrew were after
called, and suddenly left all and followed Christ, it was not without some
previous notice of him and preparation thereto.

43 The day following, Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and finds Philip,
and says unto him, Follow me. 44. Now Phi^ip was of Bethsaida, the city of
Andrew and Peter. 45 Philip finds Nathaneel, and says unto him, We have
found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

43. The long expected Messiah is now come and, we have found him, he is Jesus
of Nazareth, etc.

46 And Nathaneel said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?
Philip says unto him, Come and see.

46. Do the Prophets tell us that the Messiah shall come out of Nazereth:
Galilee produces not Prophets. Philip says, come and see him, and then judge.

47. Jesus saw Nathaneel coming, to him, and says of him, Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom is no guile.

47. A sincere true hearted man. Qu. Were any unbelievers such? Answ. He was
not an unbeliever though yet he knew not Christ: For he had that Belief which
men were saved by before Christ's coming.

48. Nathaneel says unto him, Whence know thou me? Jesus answered and said
unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I
saw thee. 49 Nathaneel answered, and says unto him Rabbi, thou art the Son of
God, thou art the King of Israel.

48. Note, He judged that none but God, or by God, could know what men said and
did at such a distance. 2. It was well for Nathaneel that he came to see Christ
experience convinced him: And yet no doubt but Gods special Grace did it: For
the Pharisees saw more, and yet believed not.

50 Jesus answered, and said unto him, Because I said unto thee I saw thee
under the fig tree, beleivest thou? thou shall see greater things then these.

50. Does this much convince thee? I will do greater things then this to
convince the world.

51 And he says unto him, Verily, verily I say unto you, hereafter ye shall
see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending, and descending upon the Son
of man.

51. You shall see Heaven open, and the Angels owning me and ministering unto
me, epecially at my Ascension.

CHAP. II.
AND the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the mother of
Jesus was there. 2 And both Jesus was called, and his disciples to the marriage.

1, 2. Christ refused not that familiar converse which Marriage feasts are used
to.

3 And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus says unto him, They have no
wine 4 Jesus says unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is
not yet come.

3, 4. These words are not a breach of the fifth Commandment; but as much as to
say [I am not to do Miracles] by the direction of a Mothers Authority or by
man, but in the time and manner as by the Divine Wisdom shall be determined.
And by this and other passages, Christ seems to foresee how Papists would
overvalue his Mother.

5 His mother says unto the servants, whatsoever he says unto you, do it.

5. N. She believed his Power, though he represt her Presumption.

6 And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins a piece. 7 Jesus says
unto them, Fill the water-pots with water. And they filled them up to the brim.
8 And he says unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the
feast. And they bare it.

6, etc. Note, It is conjectured to be about 1000 eight hundred pounds or pints
o^ Wine that Christ made: which showed that the Guests were very many, or that
he was at such Festivals for freer drinking of Wine than is fit among us;
perhaps all their Wine was small, and not all of it then drunk: but this and
the like occasioned the Pharisees censure of him.

9 When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and
knew not whence it was, (but the servants which drew the water knew) the
governor of the feast called the bridegroom, 10 And says unto him, Every man
at the beginning does set forth good wine; and when men have well drunk, then
that which is worse; but thou have kept the good wine until now.

9. Marriages among the Jews were celebrated with great Feasting, where moderate
jocundity was thought seasonable: The reason Christ gives for his Disciples
not fasting, was because the Bridegroom was yet with them. When they had drunk
to temperate hilarity, small Wine was most suitable: (The vulgar Latin is [
when they are drunk] and perhaps with Drunkards that might be the custom, to
bring smaller Wine when they could not well distinguish them.)

11 This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested
forth his glory, and his disciples, believed on him.

11. By this he showed them his Divine Power, and convinced his Disciples that
he was the Messiah.

12 After this, he went down to Capernaum, he and his Mother, and his Brethen,
and his disciples, and they continued there not many days. 13 And the Jews
passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, 14 And found in the
temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the changers of money,
sitting. 15 And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all
out of the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen, and poured out the changers
money, and overthrew the tables; 16 And said unto them that sold doves, Take
these things hence; make not my Fathers house an house of merchandise.

12, etc. It seems probable, that Christ did thus cleanse the Temple twice: And
that this is not the same History with that, Matt. 21. though indeed its very
like it.

17 And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house
has eaten me up.

17. They believed, that his zeal for Gods house, might warrant this action in
the Messiah, as Ps. 69.9.

18 Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, what sign show thou unto us,
seeing that thou do these things?

18. These arbitrary actions require some extraordinary Commission to warrant
them; By what sign do thou prove that thou have such authority.

19 Jesus answered and said unto them, Des^roy this temple, and in three days,
I will raise it up. 20 Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple
in building, and will thou rear it up in three days. 21 But he spoke of the
temple of his body.

19, N. He told them enigmatically what should be after plainly expounded. Many
Prophecies written darkly, are not intended to be presently understood, but
when they are fulfilled.

22 When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he
had said this unto them: and they believed the scripture, and the word which
Jesus had said.

22. When this was performed by his Resurrection, his Disciples believed the
Prophesies of him, and his own words.

23 Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the feast day, many
believed in his name, when they savv the miracles which he did.

23. His miracles made many believe that he was the Christ, that yet were no
through Disciples.

24 But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knevv all men, 25
And needed not that any should testify of man: for he knevv what was in man.

24, 25. But Christ that knew the hearts of Men, and how many have but an
unrooted, mutable, uneffectual belief, would not trust himself into their hands
by familiarity

CHAP. III.
THere was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus a ruler of the Jews: 2 The
same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him Rabbi, we know that thou art a
teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou do, except
God be with him.

1, 2. Being a Ruler, he durst not be seen to come to Christ by day light, but
came by night, and said, Rabbi. I am come to learn of thee; for I know thou art
a Teacher sent by God; for no Man can do such miracles as thou do, but by
Gods Power; and God will not lend such Power to any whom he does not approve
and justify.

3 Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily verily I say unto thee, Except a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

3. As I could not do the works of God, by miracles and doctrine, unless God
were with me, so neither can any Man become a sound Believer, and do the works
of Faith and be saved, as a true Member of the Kingdom of God, unless by Gods
spirit he be begotten again, and have a new qualitative nature given him.

4 Nicodemus says unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter
the second time into his mothers womb, and be born?

4. Nicodemus grossly misunderstanding Christ, says How can, etc.

5 Jesus ansvvered, Verily, verily I say unto thee, Except a man be born of
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of of God.

5. I tell thee most certainly, that unless a Man have as it were, a new
nature, and be made a new Man, by being washed from his former sin and guilt,
and sanctified by the renewing work of Gods Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God: N. This is all signified and celebrated by Baptism; but it is
the washing, and sanctifying of the Soul only, that has the promise of
Salvation; But the Church on Earth being as the Porch, Womb or Seminary to
Heaven, it is not another kind of Faith, but that same which in the sincere is
saving, which is required to be professed in Baptism, for admittance into the
visible Church.

6 That which is born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is born of the
Spirit, is spirit

6. Men generate Men, but God makes Saints by a spiritual generation: Nature
begets but nature, but Gods Spirit gives a holy and heavenly Nature or
Inclination.

7 Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. 8 The wind blows
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence
it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.

7, 8. Count not this an incredible thing. Thou hear the sound of the wind,
and know certainly by the effects, that such a thing as wind there is, and
that it causes those effects, which thy sense perceives; but thou know not
fully the nature of this wind, nor whence it comes, nor whither it goes; and
so thou may know that Gods Spirit does this sanctifying work on Souls,
though thou can not comprehend the nature of the Spirit, nor the way of its
operation, nor why it works on one Soul and not on another that seems equal
to it.

9 Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be?

9. N. The reason of Man not yet illuminated is apt to be so confident in its
ignorance, as to take those spiritual things for incredible, which it
comprehends not: It lifts up it self against Christ's teaching with a How can
these things be?

10 Jesus answered and said unto him, Art tho^ a master of Israel, and know
not these things? 11 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we do know,
and testify that we have seen, and ye receive not our witness.

10, 11. It is a shame to thee that art a Master of Israel to be ignorant of
these things (without which all thy knowledge is but shells and shadows) I tell
thee, we spoke that which we certainly know, by intuition and experience on
holy Souls, and yet you carnal Jews believe us not, not knowing what your own
shadows do import.

12 If I have told you earthly things, and and ye believe not, how shall ye
beleve if I tell you of heavenly things?

12. When I tell you but what God does here on Earth on all that he will save,
and illustrate it to you by a similitude which your senses do perceive and it
is a thing that your Ceremonies signify, how shall you believe, if I tell you
the unseen things of Heaven, if you believe not things so evident as these.

13 And no man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
even the Son of man which is in heaven.

13. And if you will not believe me, what satisfying notice can you have of the
state of things in Heaven: for no Man has ascended up into Heaven, and can
tell you by sure notice what is there, but I that came down from Heaven, and so
came down by assuming flesh, as that yet I am now in Heaven in my Godhead.

14 And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son
of man be lifted up: 15 That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have eternal life.

14, 15. And the way of Salvation which God by me reveals to you, is this,
that as Moses in the Wilderness set up a brazen Serpent, that all that were
stung with Serpents might be cured, if they did look up to this: So I must be
lift up on the Cross as a Sacrifice for sin, that whoever truly believes in me
and trusts me as the Redeemer and Savior, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life.

16 For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

16. For God who is Love it self, so far loved, lapsed and lost mankind, as
that he gave his only begotten Son to be incarnate* and to be their Redeemer,
by his meritorious life, and death and Resurrection, and to make them this
promise, covenant and offer, that whoever truly believes in him, should have
his sin forgiven, and should not perish, but have everlasting blessed life.

17 For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the
world through him might be saved.

17. For if the World be condemned, they shall never have cause to lay the
blame on Christ: For it was not to condemn them that God sent him into the
World, but to be the Savior of the World; which his Doctrine Life and
Sufferings show.

18 He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God.

18. He that believes on him, is thereupon by him delivered from the
Condemnation that he was under, and shall be saved; but he that believes not
is not delivered from his Guilt and Condemnation, but is under the Guilt of a
severer punishment the Law of Grace it self Condemning him, because he has
rejected the Son of God, sent from Heaven with his Doctrine, his Grace and
offered Mercy; so that both the Law of Nature and of Grace condemn the
Neglecters of so great Salvation.

19 And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved, darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.

19. For the true cause of Men's Condemnation is (not that they have no Savior
or Ransom, being left as Devils to remidiless despair, but) that a Savior as
Light is come into the World, and Men love darkness rather than light, and so
reject him and his truth and grace, because they love and live in that sin
which cannot endure the light.

20 For every (...) that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the
light, least his deeds should be reproved,

20. For it is the part of ^ight to detect and shame Men's evil deeds: and
therefor Malefactors hate and avoid the Light, lest it reprove them and
condemn them.

21 But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest that they are wrought in God.

21. But Light is the honor of well doing, which is not afraid to be known;
and therefore he that does that which is truly good, loves the Light, and
comes to it, that his deeds may appear to be as they are, the work commanded
and approved by God: And therefore they will receive me that am the Light of
the World.

22 After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea, and
there he tarried with them, and baptized.

22. He by his Disciples baptized those that believed and repented.

23 And John also was baptizing in Enon, near to Salim, because there was much
water there; and they came, and were baptized.

24 For John was not yet cast into prison.

23, 24. John ceased not baptizing even when Christ baptized, nor till he was
imprisoned.

25 Then there arose a question between some of John's disciples and the Jews,
about purifying.

25. N. What the dispute was is uncertain.

26. And they came unto John and said to him, Rabbi, he that was with thee
beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest Witness: Beheld the same baptizeth, and all
Men come unto him.

26. On this occasion they told John how the People flockt to the Baptism of
Christ.

27 John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him
from heaven. 28 Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the
Christ, but that I am sent before him.

27. This does but confirm what I said of him: His Power is from Heaven: I
pretend to none such as his.

29 He that has the bride, is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the
bridegrooms voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled.

29. It is he that is the King and Savior of the Church: I am but his Friend
that rejoice in his Kingdom and Success.

30 He must increase, but I must decrease.

30. His Kingdom and Glory must increase to perfection, but my preparatory
Ministry will soon end.

31 He that comes, from above, is above all: he that is of the earth, is
earthly, and speaks of the earth: he that comes from heaven, is above all.

21. He came from Heaven, and therefore is above us all: We that are but Men,
inhabitants of Earth, (though so far as God inspires us we speak his word) yet
being of earthly mold, speak and do like our selves, in a human earthly manner:
But he that comes from Heaven does excel us all.

32 And what he has seen and heard, that he testifies; and no man receives
his testimony. 33 He that has received his testimony, has set to his Seal
that God is true.

32. We tell you what God teaches us in our several measures; but he tells
you that which he has seen and heard in Heaven: And yet the most reject his
Testimony but they that truly receive it by Faith, do in believing him, believe
God himself that cannot lie.

34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: for God gives not
the Spirit by measure unto him.

34. He that is thus s^nt from Heaven by God speaks Gods own Words fully and
infallibly, as fully known to him, and is not like us and other Prophets, that
have but our limited measures of the spirits for some particular revelation and
use.

35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.

35. The Love of the Father to the Son is transcendent; and he has delivered
lapsed Man, and all this World into his hand or power, as Redeemer, Lord and
Administrator of all.

36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life, and he that believes
not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.

36. He that believes Christ to be the Son of God and Savior of the World,
and with Trust gives up himself to be taught, ruled and saved by him, has a
right to everlasting Life by the Covenant of Grace, and the beginning of it, by
the Holy Ghost in him and shall shortly have the full possession. But he that
by Unbelief rejects Christ and his offered Grace, shall not see this blessed
Life, but the wrath of God for his unpardoned Sin and aggravated Guilt, abides
on him.

CHAP. IV.
When therefore the Lord know how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made
and baptized more Disciples than John, 2. (Though Jesus himself baptized not,
but his Disciples:) 3. He left Judea, and departed again into Galilee.

1. They knowing that which he knew would exasperate them, to avoid
Persecution, he removed to Galilee (till his time came.)

4. And he must needs go through Samaria.

5. Then comes he to a City of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the
parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his Son Joseph. 6. Now Jacobs well was
there, Jesus therefore being wearied with his Journey, sat thus on the Well;
and it was about the sixth hour.

4, 5.6. N. Christ traveled all on foot, and had a Body wearied with Travel;
the sixth hour was noon.

7. There comes a Woman of Samaria to draw Water: Jesus says unto her, give
me to drink. 8. For his Disciples were gone away unto the City to buy meat. 9.
Then says the Woman of Samaria unto him, how is it that thou beinq a Jew
ask drink of me, which am a Woman of Samaria? For the Jews have no
dealings with the Samaritans.

7* etc. N. Christ was not so much for separation, as the other Jew^.

10. Jesus ansvvered, and said unto her, if thou knevvest the gift of God, and
who it is that says to thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked of
him, and he would have given thee living Water.

10. N. It was usual to call a running spring (living water) Christ meant more;
but she understood him not.

11. The Woman says unto him, Sir, thou have nothing to dravv with, and the
Well is deep: From whence then have thou that living Water. 12. Art thou
greater than our Father Jacob who gave us the Well, and drank thereof himself,
and his Children, and his Cattle.

11. N. They made their Honor of Jacob the pretense for not going to
Jerusalem; he being before Solomon's Temple.

13. Jesus ansvvered and said unto her, whosoever drinks of this Water shall
thirst again: 14. But whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; But the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
well of Water springing up into everlasting life.

13. That which I call water, is the Spirit of Grace, which will give men
everlasting satisfaction and joy, and leave them no fleshly or unsatisfyed
desires.

15. The Woman says unto him, Sir, give me this Water that I thirst not,
neither come hither to dravv.

15. The ignorant mistaking Gods Grace to be what it is not, may ask it so for
carnal ends.

16. Jesus says unto her, go call thy Husband and come hither. 17. The Woman
ansvvered and said, I have no Husband, Jesus said unto her, Thou have well
said, I have no Husband. 18. For thou have had five Husbands, and he whom thou
now have is not thy Husband: In that said thou truly.

16. It was not deluso^y Equivocation that Christ calls [ well saying] but
meant only that Truth, not commonly known, it is like.

19. The Woman says unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a Prophet. 20. Our
Fathers worshipped in this Mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the
place where Men ought to worship.

19 20. I perceive by thy knowing secrets, that thou art a Prophet, tell me
then, whether you Jews, or we that follow our eldest Fathers be in the right
about the Place of Worship. N. This is the use of ignorant, carnal people, to
start some Controversy about Circumstantials or Ceremonies in Religion,
instead of great and needful things.

21. Jesus says unto her, Woman believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall
neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem Worship the Father.

21. Alas poor woman, have thou not greater matter than Ceremony, even the
Place of Worship to mind? Believe me that time is hard at hand, when Jerusalem
shall be destroyed, and you scattered, and a better way of Worship settled, so
that you shall no more keep up your Ceremonious Worship, either at Shiloh or
Jerusalem.

22. Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we Worship: For Salvation
is of the Jews.

22. You worship ignorantly and corruptly, you know not what ever since the
Captivity of the Ten Tribes; and you strive about the Place and Ceremonies,
when you have more need to learn who he is that you must worship. It is of the
Tribe of Judah, that the Savior comes, who must teach you how to worship God;
and this the Jews do rightly believe and own none in Worship but the true God.

23. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: For the Father seeks such to
worship him.

23. The time is now at hand, yea come, when true Worshippers shall not take up
with shadows, nor worship God by Mosaical Ceremonies or Samaritane Traditions,
but with that spiritual Worship which Types and Ceremonies did signify, even
from the Spirit of God within them as their Principle, and according to the
spiritual Law or Word, as their Rule, and not with bodily Exercise that
profits nothing.

24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
in Truth.

24. Acceptable Worship must be suited to the God you worship; and therefore
they that worship him must worship him spiritually, and not by Jewish Ceremony,
because he is a Spirit. N. Though [ Spirit] signify a Nature more excellent
than [ Body] yet that and all human Words are too low to speak the Essence of
God, any otherwise than Analogically or Metaphorically; for God is above all
our formal Conceptions or Expressions; but created Spirits, being the highest
created Beings known to us, and our souls of that nature, they are the clearest
Glass in which we can know God; and though the word [ Spirit] first signify
created Spirit, it does transcendently, eminently, signify the Infinite Father
of Spirits; and we can say nothing higher of Gods Essence than that he is this
Infinite, perfect, transcendent Spirit; what our best Conceptions of a Spirit
are I have opened in Methodo Theologiae, etc.

25. The Woman says unto him, I know that Messiah comes who is called Christ,
when he is come he will tell us all things.

25. N. Even the Samaritans expected the Messiah: But with misconceivings of
him.

26. Jesus says unto her, I that speak to thee am he.

26. N. Why did Christ tell that to this woman, which he forbad others to tell
abroad? Ans. He knew where and when it was seasonable, and would do more good
than harm.

27. And upon this came his Disciples and marvelled that he talked with the
Woman: yet no man said, what seek thou? or why talkest thou with her?

27. Tho they presumed not to ask him why? yet they thought it strange that he
should talk so long with one woman.

28. The Woman then left her Water-pot and went away into the City, and says
to the Men, 29. Come see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: Is
not this the Christ?

28. Telling her her secrets, persuaded her to believe him* saying, I am he,

30. Then they went out of the City, and came unto him, 31. In the mean time
his Disciples prayed him saying Master eat, 32. But he says to them, I have
meat to eat that ye know not of. 33. Therefore said the Disciples one to
another, has any man brought him ought to eat? 34. Jesus says to them, my
meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.

30. etc. N. The converting of one Soul was more pleasing to Christ than his
natural food; and so must it be to us. He that loves God and Christ, and the
Holy Ghost and the Church; must rejoice when there is one more converted, to
please and worship God, to honor Christ and his Spirit, to increase the
Church: He that loves his Country, must rejoice that one more is made a
blessing to it, when the wicked are it is enemies: He that loves Souls will
rejoice in that Grace which is better to them than all riches: He that loves
Gods Word will rejoice in it is success: He that loves Heaven will be glad that
there is one more to possess it: He that loves himself aright, will be glad
that there is one more made like him, to love him, and pray for him. And he
that hates Sin and Satan, will be glad that there is one less to serve him.

35. Say not ye, There are four months, and then comes harvest. Behold I say
unto you, lift up your eyes, and look on the fields, for they are white already
to harvest.

35. You rejoice that within four months it will be harvest: And shall not I
rejoice to see the harvest of my husbandry even at hand in the conversion of
many Souls to God?

36. And he that reapeth, receives wages, and gathers fruit unto life
eternal; that both he that sows and he that reapeth may rejoice together.

36. And as I sow the seed, so you that I shall sen^ out as Apostles shall see
and reap more plenteous fruit hereafter, and shall for your labor under me be
well rewarded: that I that have sowed and you that reap may rejoice together in
the success.

37. And herein is that saying true, One sows and another reapeth. 38. I have
sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor: Other men labored, and ye
are entered on their labors.

38. The Prophets and John and I after all, have sowed the seed and been at the
costliest labor, and yet it is you that must see the success in gathering the
universal Church, when I that labored and suffered am gone.

39. And many of the Samaritans of that City believed on him, for the saying of
the woman which testified, He told me all that ever I did.

39. N. That to believe in Christ by the means of men's credible testimony of
his Words and Miracles, is not (as many falsely say) to resolve our faith into
the credit of man and to make it a mere humane Faith. They that believe
Apostles who said they saw Christ's Miracles, Resurrection and Ascension,
believe by a divine Faith, on the same evidence that the Apostles were
convinced by, but not conveyed by the same means: what they received by their
eyes and ears immediately, we receive mediately by their report, living at a
distance: So that their testimony is not believed instead of Christ's, nor
instead of evidence of his truth, but as the conveyance of this evidence
instead of our mediate sight and hearing: so is it as to the Tradition of the
Bible, Baptism, Creed, etc. That Tradition does but deliver to us the same word
mediately which the first Churches received immediately from the Apostles. He
that cannot read may be saved by believing the Gospel translated and read, or
reported by the Preachers.

40. So when the Samaritans were come to him, they besought him that he would
tarry with them, and he abode there two days. 41. And many more believed,
because of his own words, 42. And said to the woman, now we believe, not
because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is
indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World.

42. Not so much because of thy saying. N. Yet this was the same sort of Faith,
though by the evidence diverse ways conveyed.

43. Now after two days he departed thence and went into Galilee. 44. For Jesus
himself testified, that a Prophet has no honor in his own Country.

43. He went into Galilee, not to Nazareth where he had lived, but to Cana: For
he had testified that a Prophet is despised in his own Country; where they have
seen his common Parentage and Education, but see not Gods Spirit in him: and
familiarity breeds contempt.

45. Then when he was come into Galilee the Galileans received him, having seen
all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast; for they also went unto
the feast.

45. His former and later Miracles caused these Galileans to receive him.

46. So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine,
and there was a certain Nobleman whose Son was sick at Capernaum. 47. When he
heard, That Jesus was come out of Judaea into Galilee, he went unto him, and
besought him that he would come down and heal his Son; for he was at the point
of Death. 48. Then said Jesus to him, except ye see signs and wonders, ye will
not believe. 49. The Nobleman says unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die.
50. Jesus says to him, Go thy way, thy Son lives. And the man believed the
word that Jesus had spoken to him, and went his way. 51. And as he was now
going down, his Servants met him, and told him, saying, Thy Son lives. 52.
Then enquired he of them, the hour, when he began to amend; and they said unto
him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. 53. So the Father knew,
that it was at the same hour, in which Jesus said to him, Thy Son lives: And
himself believed, and his whole house. 54. This is again the second Miracle
that Jesus did, when he was come out of Judea into Galilee.

46. etc. N. 1. Outward necessities which nature is sensible of, drived many to
seek to Christ. 2. Children speed the better for their Parents Faith: And if in
the Poly, why not in the Soul. 3. When the Rulers of Families believe, they
must endeavor the conversion of their whole Families. And God often blesses
such endeavors. 4. Bodily Mercies tend to the good of Souls, and should be so
improved.

CHAP. V.
1 AFter this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 2.
Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep-market, a pool, which is called in the
Hebrew Tongue Bethesda, having five Porches. 3. In these lay a great number of
impotent folks, blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. 4.
For an Angel went down into the Pool, at a certain season, and troubled the
water; whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in, was
made whole of whatsoever disease he had.

N. 1. Some few think that this was a Pond that the blood of the Sacrifices ran
into, and was stirred by a Messenger (not an Angel) at the time of the Passover
when the blood was newly run into it, and so healed, not Miraculously, but by
the ordinary virtue of the new shed Blood and that it is not all diseases that
are meant; and that it was not eight and thirty years that the man had waited
in that Hospital, but that he had so long been ill: So Dr. Hammond; others
think it was the Pond made by Hezekiah and healed by unaccountable Miracle.

5. And a certain man was there, which had an Infirmity thirty and eight years.

5. How great a Mercy is it to live eight and thirty years under Gods wholesome
discipline? How unexcusable was this man if he had been proud, or worldly, or
careless of his everlasting State? O my God I thank thee for the like
discipline of eight and fifty years, how safe a life is this in Comparison of
full prosperity and pleasure.

6. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that
case, he says to him, will thou be made whole. 7. The impotent man answered
him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled to put me into the Pool,
but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me. 8. Jesus says unto
him, Rise, take up thy Bed, and walk.

6. N. 1, When humane help fails Christ shows his love and power and
commands health at a word.

9. And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his Bed and walked: And
on the same day was the Sabbath.

9. The man showed them all that he was cured: And Christ chose the Sabbath for
this good work.

10. The Jews therefore said to him, that was cured, It is the Sabbath day: It
is not lawful for thee to carry thy Bed.

10. The Jews were stricter than Christ for Ceremony and Rites: but looser for
Charity, and pleaded that it was a breach of Moses's Law to carry his Couch.

11. He answered them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up
thy Bed, and walk.

11. I know not whom I should obey if not a man that can work so great a
Miracle.

12. Then asked they him, what man is he, that said unto thee, Take up thy Bed,
and walk?

12. Who is he that durst thus break the Law?

13. And he that was healed, knew not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed
himself away, a multitude being in that place.

13. Christ did it not for humane applause, and therefore was not known to be
the man.

14. Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said to him, Behold, thou
art made whole; sin no more least a worse thing come unto thee.

14. It was for thy sin that thou wast corrected: Beware of sin lest the next
be worse.

15. The Man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus, that had made him
whole.

15. He told them in the praise of Jesus that it was he that healed him.

16. And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to ^ay him, because
he had done these things on the Sabbath day.

16. O the blindness and madness of malignants, that will seek to kill men for
doing good and healing men.

17. But Jesus answered them, my Father works hitherto, and I work.

17. To save the a^licted is a work beseeming my Father and Me, whom you oppose.

18. Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, not only because he had
broken the Sabbath, but said also, that God was his Father, making himself
equal with God.

18. N. Malignants zeal fathereth even error and persecution on God.

19. Then answered Jesus, and said to them verily, verily, I say unto you: The
Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do: For what things
soever he does, these also does the Son likewise.

19. I t^ll you by condemning my Works you condemn my Fathers also: For I do
nothing but what I know he does and approves and he does them in and by me,
and I do nothing without him.

20. For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that he does:
and he will show him greater things than these that ye may marvail.

20. For the Fathers infinite Love communicates to the Son that Wisdom and
Power by which he does all that the Father does: and by which you shall see
greater things than these, and wonder.

21. For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them, even so the Son
quickneth whom he will.

21. As the Father is the Lord of Life, and gives and restores life at his
pleasure; so also does the Son.

22. For the Father judges no man, but has comm^tted all Judgment to the Son.

22. For the Father as mere Creator according to the Law of Innocence judges
no man: but has given up the Government of this World to the Son as Redeemer,
to judge them as ransomed, according to that Law and Measure of Grace which they
are under.

23. That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He
that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, who has sent him.

23. And so it is by honoring the Son, that the Father will be honored, and
by dishonouring him the Father is dishonored.

24. Verily, verily, I say to you, He that hears my word, and believes on
him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into condemnation,
but is passed from death to life.

24. I tell you if you hear my word obediently and shall believe on God the
Father, as sending me on the Office of a Savior you shall have everlasting
life by my Merits and Gift, and shall not be condemned.

25. Verily, verily I say to you, The hour is coming and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.

25. I tell you that the hour is coming, yea now is already come, in which it
shall appear that the Son of God has the power of Life and Death, Natural,
Spiritual, and Eternal; and that they that are dead in Sin and Unbelief, shall
hear his Gospel and be regenerate and made alive to God: and that natural Life
shall be restored by him* to some Bodies at his own Resurrection* and to all at
last, when he shall effectually call up all the dead to Judgment.

26. For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to
have life in himself.

26. As the Father is essential underived self-^se communicating life to
Creatures: So is the Son as God, and as Redeemer, has the power of giving Life
from himself to the redeemed.

27. And he has given him Authority to execute Judgment also, because he is
the Son of God.

27. And as Redeemer, being the Son of God in his Divine Nature, and his humane
Nature advanced into personal Union with the Divine, he has Authority given
him to Govern the World, and according to the Law of Grace to do justice for
the faithful, and against the impenitent unbelievers.

28. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in which all that are in their
Graves shall hear his Voice, 29. And shall come forth: They that have done good
to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to the Resurrection
of Damnation.

28, 29. Let not this seem incredible to you: For the hour is coming in which
the Bodies now turned to dust shall by the Souls return be revived, and hear
his voice that calls them up: And there shall be a Resurrection of the just and
unjust: They that have done good according to the tenor of that Law of Grace
which they were under, shall come forth to a life of happiness, and they that
have done evil violating the conditions of life in that Law, to the
Resurrection of damnation.

30. I can of my own self do nothing: As I hear, so I judge, and my judgment is
just, because I seek not my own will, but the will of the Father who has sent
me.

30. I am not to judge according to the weakness of humanity, as Princes
govern: I do nothing, but according to Divine infallible decree and
appointment, which I assuredly know: And my judgment is just, because I seek
not my own humane will, as my rule or end, but the will of my Father who sent
me; that is my Rule and End.

31. If I bear witness of my self my witness is not true. 32. There is another
that bears witness of me, and I know that the witness which he witnesses of
me is true.

31, 32. If I had no testimony but my own word, you were not to take it for
credible truth: But there is another, who gives you convincing evidences of
his truth; even my Father by his Voice from Heaven and by his Spirit and Works.

33. He sent to John and he bare witness to the truth: 34. But I receive not
Testimony from Man: But these things I say, that ye might be saved.

33.34. You sent to John, and he told you* of me as the Messiah. I need not his
or any man's testimony: But it nearly concerns your own safety to believe him.

35. He was a burning and a shining light; and ye were willing for a season to
rejoice in his light.

35. God set him up to be as a burning and shining light, to lead you out of
darkness to the Kingdom of the Messiah which you expected: And a while you
gladly heard that news and were baptized by him: Till you were told that I am
he, and then you turned back.

36. But I have greater witness than that of John; for the works which the
Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of me,
and that the Father has sent me.

36. N. For these works could not be done but by Gods power and will, who will
not be the worlds deceiver.

37. And the Father himself who sent me, has born witness of me; Ye have
neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. 38. And ye have not
his word abiding in you: For whom he has sent, him ye believe not.

37, 38. By a voice from Heaven God testified me to be his beloved Son: But
indeed you were not the persons that heard it: For you never heard his voice,
nor saw his appearance, nor understand or belive his Word: Else you would
believe on me that am sent by him.

39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they
are they that testify of me.

39. You own the authority of Moses and the Prophets, and look to have eternal
Life by keeping their word: search their Writings, and you will find that they
testify of me.

40. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.

40. And though they tell you that it is in, and by, me, that this Life must be
attained, ye will not believe in me and come to me that you may attain it.

41, 42. I receive not honor from Men: But I know you that ye have not the
love of God in you.

41, 42. It is not the applause of men that I seek for; but your own Salvation:
But I know for all your boasting of being the peculiar people of God, you are
indeed no true lovers and obeyers of God.

43. I am come in my Fathers Name and ye receive me not: If another shall come
in his own name, him will ye receive.

43. I come with testimony from Heaven of the mission and approbation of my
Father, and this prevails not against your prejudice to believe me. But when
a deceiver shall come with ostentation without any evidence from God, and shall
promise you a temporal Kingdom, you will take him for the Messiah.

44. How can ye believe who receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only?

44. How can you receive the Messiah sent from God, who do not seek and trust
to Gods approbation, and his way of saving you; but must have a worldly Kingdom
and be saved and advanced after the manner of worldly men, and look, for a
Savior suited to such ends.

45. Do not think that I accuse you to my Father: There is one that accuses
you; even Moses in whom ye trust. 46. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have
believed me, for he wrote of me. 47. But if ye believe not his writings, how
shall ye believe my words.

45, 46, 47. I say not all this as if I come to be your accuser to my Father:
Even Moses in whom you trust will accuse you; had you understood and believed
the Prophesies and Types of Moses, ye would have believed me: For it is me that
they all speak of and point you to: But if you will not be convinced by his
Writings whom you glory in, no wonder if you reject my words.

CHAP. VI.
1. AFter these things Jesus went over the Sea of Galilee which is the Sea of
Tiberias, 2. And a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles
which he did on them that were diseased.

1, 2. N. The first motives that draw men toward Christ are usually such as
nature it self is somewhat capable to esteem and judge of, such as Miracles are.

3. And Jesus went up into a Mountain, and there he sat with his Disciples. 4.
And the Passover, a Feast of the Jews was nigh. 5. When Jesus then lift up his
eyes and saw a great company come unto him, he says to Philip, whence shall we
buy bread that these may eat. 6. And this he said to prove him, for he himself
knew what he would do.

3. etc. N. Christ's relief of Bodies was in love to Bo^ies and Souls. 2.
Christ's questions were to instruct the hearers and not himself.

7. Philip answered him, two hundred penny worth of bread is not sufficient for
them, that every one may take a little.

7. N. Philips sense of the difficulty was a preparation to the value of the
Miracle.

8. One of the Disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's Brother, says to him. 9. There
is a Lad here which has five Barley Loaves and two small Fishes: but what are
they among so many?

8, 9. N. It was not delicious fare, but Barley Bread and two Fishes that
Christ used a Miracle about.

10. And Jesus said make the Men sit down: Now there was much Grass in the
place, so the Men sat down, in number about five thousand. 11. And Jesus took
the Loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the Disciples, and
the Disciples to them that were set down, and likewise of the Fishes as much as
they would.

10, 11. N. If Christ would not distribute Barley Bread and that Miraculously
till he had given thanks (not deterred by the suspicio^s of a Riot or
Conventicle) sure we should imitate him in our ordinary repast, and eat and
drink to the glory of God, in a holy thankfulness for his liberallity.

When they were filled he said to his Disciples, gather up the fragments that
remain, that nothing be lost. 13. Therefore they gathered them together, and
filled twelve Baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which
remained over and above to them that had eaten.

12, 13. N. To loose any of our useful food, is a sin against God: Where there
is the greatest plenty no fragments should be lost, while the poor do need it.
How much less should we lose Gods word or helps, or our time or any such
greater mercies.

14. Then those men, when they had seen the Miracle, which Jesus did, said,
This is of a Truth that Prophet which should come into the World.

14 N. A Miracle done upon five thousand at once, made a common Conviction of
them that Christ was the Messiah, or a great Prophet.

15. When Jesus therefore perceived, that they would come and take him by
force, and make him a King, he departed again into a Mountain himself alone.

15. N. When they would have made a Captain and visible Monarch of him, he
shunned it and avoided them.

16. And when Even was now come, his Disciples went down unto the Sea. 17. And
entered into a Ship, and went over the Sea, toward Capernaum. And it was now
dark* and Jesus was not come to them. 18. And the Sea arose by reason of a
great wind that blew: 19. So when they had rowed about twenty five or thirty
furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the Sea, and drawing nigh to the Ship, and
they were afraid. 20. And he says to them, It is I, be not afraid.

16, etc. N. This Miracle showed Christ to be above nature.

21. Then they willingly received him into the Ship, and immediately the Ship
was at the land whither they went.

21. N. They might well be glad to receive him that could rule Sea and Land.

22. The day following when the People, which stood on the other side of the
Sea, saw that there was none other boat there save that one, whereinto his
Disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his Disciples into the
boat, but that his Disciples were gone away alone. 23. (Howbeit there came
other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the Place, where they did eat bread, after
that the Lord had given thanks,) 24. When the people therefore saw that Jesus
was not there, neither his Disciples, they also took shipping, and came to
Capernaum, seeking for Jesus.

22, 23, 24. How earnest did these persons seem in following Christ?

25. And when they had found him on the other side of the Seas, they said to
him, Rabbi, when came thou hither? 26. Jesus answered, and said to them,
verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but
because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled.

25. N. It seems these were a very poor sort of people, that would follow
Christ for Barley Bread.

27. Labor not for the meat that perishes but for that meat which endures to
everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give you; for him has God the
Father sealed.

27. Labor first and chiefly for the food which endures to everlasting Life;
even the Spirit of Holiness renewing you by the Gospel, and an union with me
who am the Bread of Life; which I will give unto all true Believers; to which
use God has sent and sealed me by fullness of the Spirit and Power: But trust
God for bodily food while you labor for it, but in the second place. N. The
words have a comparative signification: Labor not, is Labor les^, or but
subordinately.

28. Then said they to him, what shall we do, that we may work the works of God?

28. What is that Labor for the everlasting Life which God requires of us?
What must we do for it?

29. Jesus answered, and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye
believe on him, which he has sent.

29. This is your first and great work which God requires that you believe on
me whom God has sent, and take me for your Teacher and Savior, that I may
guide and sanctify you, and teach you your further duty, in order to fit you
for everlasting Life.

30. They said therefore to him, What sign show thou then, that we may see
and believe in thee? what do thou work? 31. Our Fathers did eat Manna in the
desert, as it is written, He gave them Bread from heaven to eat.

30. If thou would have us believe in thee, convince us yet by further
Miracles? Can thou procure us Bread from Heaven as Moses did? N. 1. Strange!
that they should call for more Miracles when they newly came from seeing one?
2. It was a feeding Miracle that these expected; which might gratify their
flesh as well as their faith.

32. Then Jesus said to them, verily, verily, I say to you, Moses gave not that
bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. 33. For
the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life to the
World.

32. It was not Moses that gave you the true Bread from Heaven: Manna and other
Types did but foresignifie me who am the true Bread which my father gives you
from Heaven whence I come; called Bread, because I give life to the World.

34. Then said they to him, Lord evermore give us this bread.

34. N. Their carnal minds, had carnal desires, and understood Christ
accordingly.

35. And Jesus said to them, I am the bread of Life; he that comes to me shall
never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst.

35. As your bodies live by food, so he that comes to me by true Faith and is
united to me shall have by me true spiritual everlasting Life, and shall have
all his necessities of hunger and thirst satisfied.

36. But I say to you, that ye also have seen me, and believe not.

36. But I know your hearts, that many of you that have seen my Miracles, and
thus crowd after me* for the strangenes^ and novelty, yet are no true believers.

37. All that the Father g^veth me shall come to me, and him that comes to me
I will in no wise cast out.

37. All that the Father has given to me as fully resolved to save them shall
believe and take me for their Savior: I come not into the World upon an
uncertainty of success: I have undertaken the effectual saving of those that
are given me by the Father to be certainly saved: All those will come to me,
and I will refuse none that by obedient trust does come to me.

38. For I come down from heaven, not to do my own Will, but the Will of him
that sent me.

38. For I come not at random, or on any selfish temporal design, but to
fulfill my Fathers will, who will give the Kingdom to his selected Flocks

N. It is a troubling controversy, how Christ is said to come down from
Heaven: His humane Nature was never there, and his Divine, removes not thence,
and is every where. To pass by their opinion, who say it is a middle
super-angelical first created Nature, between the Divine and Humane that came
down: I answer, that the Divine is said to come down, not by a substantial
removal or change of place, but by a transcendent influx and operation, on the
Humane Nature of Christ: Men may talk in the dark how they please, but it is
certain that that Divine Essence is every where, without inequality or
existence: and is no more in Christ's Humane Nature as to essential presence
than he is every where: But as he is said to be in Heaven, because there he
operateth by glorious refulgency and love to the glorified, so he is more
eminently and peculiarly united to the Manhood of Christ, for and by a more
eminent and peculiar operation on the Humane Nature: As the Sun is more in the
Eye than in the Hand or Foot, more in the Plants that it quickneth than in the
Stones, so is the Godhead in the Humane Nature of Christ. And so the Godhead
came down from Heaven, as the Sun does when it shines in at our Windows, or on
a burning glass, or rather as it animateth Plants.

39. And this is the Fathers will, who has sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

39. And it is the special Commission which I have from my Father, that I
should effectually save all these his chosen, and raise them up to life
everlasting.

40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one who sees the
Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up
at the last day.

40. And it is my Fathers will, that every one by notice of the evidence of my
truth, truly believes on me, shall have everlasting Life, to which (first here
begun) I will raise him at the last.

41. The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came
down from heaven, 42. And they said, Is not this Jesus, the Son of Joseph,
whose Father and Mother we know? How is it then that he says, I come down from
heaven.

41. N. This difficulty stalled their Faith, not knowing the mystery of Christ's
Person and Incarnation.

43. Jesus therefore answered and said to them, murmur not among your selves,
44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him, and I
will raise him up at the last day.

43. The objections which you murmur on, do indeed require Divine Grace to
overcome them; and therefore none can sincerely believe and come to me as a
Christian, except the Father who sent me to save men, convince and draw them to
me to be saved, and all those I will raise to life everlasting.

45. It is written in the Prophets: and they shall be all taught of God. Every
man therefore, that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me.

45. As the Prophets speak of a Divine teaching, so it is those that are thus
taught of God that come to me.

46. Not that any Man has seen the Father, save he which is of God: he has
seen the Father.

46. Not by a Teaching by seeing him: For it is I only that come from him that
have seen him.

47. Verily, verily, I say to you, he that believes in me has everlasting
life. 48. I am the bread of life. 49. Your Fathers did eat Manna in the
Wilderness and are dead: 50. This is the bread that came down from Heaven, that
a man may eat thereof and not die. 51. I am the living bread which comes down
from Heaven: If any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever, and the bread
that I shall give him is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World.

47. I tell you, he that believes on me has that everlasting Life, which
Manna gave not, for they are dead that did eat it: I am the Bread that come
indeed from Heaven and give Life, not temporary but everlasting, not to a few,
but to the World, or universal Church: My sacrificed flesh shall purchase this.

52. The Jews therefore drove among themselves, saying, how can this man give
us his flesh to eat. 53. Then Jesus said to them, verily, verily, I say to you,
except ye eat the flesh of the S^n of Man, and drink his blood ye have no life
in you. 54. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and
I will raise him up at the last day. 55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed.

52. This seemed to them a saying not to be digested, and Christ at that time
would no further explain it to them, than by saying, I tell you unless that you
live by virtue of my Flesh and Blood received by Faith as food is by your
mouth, ye have no spiritual saving life: It is all they that thus by Faith
partake of my Sacrificed Flesh and Blood that have the Title and beginning of
Eternal Life, and I will at last raise them up to the full fruition of it: For
my sacrificed Flesh and Blood are truly enlivening and saving.

56. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me, and I in him.

56. He that by true Faith trusts in my sacrificed Flesh and Blood,
professes thereby to be united to me as digested food is to the body whereby I
also dwell in him, and I will give him the Spirit of Life, and he shall live by
influence from me.

57. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that
eats me, he shall live by me.

57. As the Father is Essential Self-life, and I live by Communication from
him; so he that is intimately united to me, and I to him as food is to the body
by digestion, by a covenanting lively Faith, shall live by me a life of Grace
and Glory.

58. This is the bread which came down from Heaven: Not as your Fathers did eat
Manna and are dead; He that eats of this bread shall live for ever.

58. I am the true Bread from Heaven, who give everlasting Life, when your
Fathers who did eat Manna died, and were not by that made immortal.

59. These things said he in the Synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.

59. N. Remember it was not those only that had followed him that he spoke this
to, and the following sharp passages; but to his auditors at Capernaum.

60. Many therefore of his Disciples, when they had heard this, said, this is
an hard saying, who can hear it.

60. N. Christ would not forbear this mysterious doctrine, though the hearers
could not digest it, but would make an ill use of it, to depart from him.

61. When Jesus knew in himself that his Disciples murmured at it, he says to
them, does this offend you: 62. What if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up
where he was before.

61. I will e're long ascend up visibly to Heaven: And will not that prove that
I came from Heaven?

63. It is the Spirit that quickneth: The Flesh profits nothing: The words
that I speak to you, they are Spirit and they are Life.

63. And as to your offense at my words of the eating of my Flesh, you know
that Flesh of it self would be a dead and senseless thing, were it not for the
Soul that is it is life: And so it is not my mere dead flesh that I say shall
give you life; but my Flesh as it is in dignity the Body of the Son of God,
purchasing life for the World, and as it is accompanied with the operation of
the Holy Ghost, which animaterh them spiritually who by Faith are united to me:
And thus not only my flesh, but the words that I speak to you, are by my Spirit
made the means of communicating to you Spirit and Life.

64. But there are some of you that believe not: For Jesus knew from the
beginning, who they were that believed not, and who should betray him.

64. But there are some of you that follow me, that are not true believers, and
therefore have not this quickening Spirit. For he knew their hearts, and knew
who would after betray him.

N. Though Christ knew Judas and other Hypocrites, he did not expel them, but
sent out Judas to Preach with the rest, to tell us how the visible Church will
be constituted and must be ordered.

65. And he said, therefore I say to you, that no man can come to me, except it
were given to him of my Father.

65. N. That the word [ Can] speaks not of Physical power, but partly moral
indisposition* and partly an hypothetical impossibility of event. 2. That
though Gods grace be the cause of faith, no man is deprived of that Grace but
by his own wilful sin, which makes him unexcusable.

66. From that time many of his Disciples went back and walked no more with him.

66. By forsaking him they showed that they were never sound believers.

67. Then said Jesus to the twelve, will ye also go away? 68. Then Simon Peter
answered him, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life.
69. And we believe and are sure that thou art the Christ the Son of the living
God.

67. N. 1. Christ puts none away, till they put away themselves. 2. He forces
none to stay. 3. It greatly fixes a Christians resolution to stick to Christ,
to know there is none else to go to: As it resolves us to look for happiness
to God and Heaven, because we are sure there is no other. 4. sound Faith may
attain assurance that Christ is the Son of the living God: It has always
objective certainty, and a prevalent certainty, and a prevalent confidence, and
may reach to a mental confirmed certainty.

name as willing followers to their own Salvation, and not drive men into the
Church or Heaven against their wills.

4. And when he puts forth his own sheep, he goes before them, and the
sheep follow him: for they know his voice.

4. And as the sheep using to find that their Shepherd hurts them not, but
feeds them and brings them to pasture, therefore follow him willingly as
one that loves them and is for their good; so do Christ's sheep believe that he
loves them and is their Savior, and therefore follow him and know his voice.

5. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know
not the voice of strangers.

5. And as Sheep (like our Dogs) have no such confidence in a stranger, but fly
from him in fear, so will true Christians do from false Christ's and from false
Pastors for their voice is strange to them, and contrary to the new nature that
is in them, and to their good.

6. This parable spoke Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things
they were which he spoke unto them. 7. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily,
verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. 8. All that ever came before
me, are theives and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. 9. I am the door,
by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find
pasture.

7. As my Fathers Mission and Witness is the door by which I enter, so I being
hereby made the Shepherd of the Flock am the door by which all others, Pastors
and Flocks must enter. All that before me pretended to be Christ's, were but
Theives and Robbers, and the chosen flock of God did not believe in them nor
follow them. I am the true Christ and Head of the Church: They that believe in
me and follow me, shall as my sheep be safe and plentifully fed.

10. The thief comes not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am
come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.

10. False Christ's and false Prophets have but sought themselves, and seduced
the people to destruction of Soul and Body: I am come to give men spiritual and
eternal Life, and to raise them higher in Light, Life and Love, than was
vouchsafed to the Church before my Incarnation.

11. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd gives his life for the sheep.

11. As he that keeps the sheep not as an hireling, but as his own will venture
himself to defend them from Theives and Wolves; so will I lay down my life for
my sheep.

12. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are
not, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flees: and the wolf
catches them, and scatters the sheep. 13. The hireling flees, because he is
an hireling, and cares not for the sheep.

12, 13. He that seeks his own worldly interest by deceit, will shift for
himself, and for that interest expose the people to destruction, as not seeking
their salvation but his vainglory.

14. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.

14. I known mine own, their persons, their hearts and all their concerns; with
the love and care of a good Shepherd: And my grace has taught them to know me
and my Word.

15. As the Father knows me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my
life for the sheep.

15. As my Father knows me with Love and I know the Father, so with a special
Love I lay down my Life for their Redemption and Salvation.

16. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one
shepherd.

16. And besides the Jews I have a chosen people among the Gentiles: Them I
must call and gather to me: and Jews and Gentiles shall be one Catholic Church
under me their only universal Head and Shepherd.

17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might
take it again.

17. N. 1. It is not unfit to assign causes in man of Gods Love. 2. Yet nothing
real in God is caused by any Creature. 3. But as Gods Love is taken for it is
Effects, our qualifications are a receptive cause or dispotion. 4. And so a
cause extrinsical of the Relative denomination of God himself. So Christ's
consent to do the full work of a Mediator, was the condition of his peculiar
reward, which is called the Fathers loving him for it.

18. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I
received of my Father.

18. N. 1. Christ foreknew his Death and Resurrection: 2. It was the Law of
Mediation proper to him, that he should consent so to die, and then Rise and
Reign as his reward.

19. There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings. 20.
And many of them said, He has a devil, and is mad, why hear ye him? 21. Others
said, These are not the words of him that has a devil: Can a devil open the
eyes of the blind?

20. When they understood not Christ, they said, the man is a distracted
demoniack: Why stand you to hear him: But others were better convinced both by
his Words and his Miracles.

22. And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter.

22. N. Christ refused not to be present at this solemn Feast, though appointed
but by Maccabeus for a thankful commemoration of the repairing of the Temple.

23. And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. 24. Then came the Jews
round about him, and said unto him, How long do thou make us to doubt? If
thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.

24. Put us out of doubt.

25. Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do
in my Fathers name, they bear witness of me.

25. Why ask you me to tell you, who believe me not: My Miracles done in the
Name and by the Power of God, are a more satisfying testimony than my words.

26. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you.
27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

26, 27, But no wonder that you believe not me; for you are not my chosen
flock, nor qualified to believe: Were you my sheep you would understand,
believe, and obey my Word.

28. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand.

28. To my true flock, I will give eternal Life, and they shall never be
condemned, lost or forsaken: Nor shall any power prevail against me who will
save them.

29. My Father which gave them me, is greater then all: and none is able to
pluck them out of my Fathers hand. 30. I and my Father are one.

29, 30. God my Father who gave them me to be saved is Almighty, and none can
overcome him, and take them from his saving love. And He and I being one they
are safe with me.

31. Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him. 32. Jesus answered them,
Many good works have I showed you from my Father; for which of those works do
ye stone me? 33. The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee
not, but for blasphemy, and because that thou, being a man, make thy self God.

31. N. No good work could secure the Lord himself from the rage of ignorant
men nor from their accusation.

34. Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your Law, I said, Ye are gods?
35. If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the Scripture
cannot be broken. 36. Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent
into the world, Thou blasphemest: because I said, I am the Son of God?

34, 35, 36. If they may be called Gods that are but Magistrates, and men in
dignity and power, how can you say, It is blasphemy for me to say, I am the Son
of God, who am by the Father sanctified to the office of Mediator and sent into
the World thereunto.

N. That Christ here by his pleading for his right to his Title only from his
office, does not deny his Title as from eternal generation, but only tell them
what they were then fit to hear.

37. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. 38. But if I do,
though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know and believe that
the Father is in me, and I in him.

37. If I do not such works as certainly signify Gods attestation, believe me
not: But if I do, believe what those works do surely evidence, and then you
will confess that God is in me and works them by me, and that I am in him and
approved and acted by him.

39. Therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their
hands. 40. And went away again beyond Jordan, into the place where John at
first baptized: and there he abode. 41. And many resorted unto him, and said,
John did no miracle: but all things that John spoke of this man, were true. 42.
And many believed on him there.

39. He avoided their persecution by flight: And in the Wilderness where John
first baptized many believed on him, seeing all fulfilled by him, which John
had foretold of him.

CHAP. XI.
NOW a certain man was sick, named Lazarus of Bethany, the town of Mary and her
sister Martha. 2. (It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and
wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick). 3. Therefore his
sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou love is sick.

N. 1. It Is a doubt whether Bethany be the name of a Town, or only of a tract
of ground where the Town was. 2. It is like that this Mary is not the same with
Mary Magdalen. 3. It is a word of comfort in all troubles, if we can say, it is
on one that Christ loves.

4. When Jesus heard that, he said, this sickness is not unto death, but for
the glory of God: that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.

4. Gods end in this sickness of Lazarus, is not to remove him by death from
this world, but to prepare an advantage for the glorifying of himself in me.

5. Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. 6. When he had heard
therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he
was. 7. Then after that says he to his disciples, Let us go into Judea again.

5. His love to them inclined him to help them: yet he moved not that his
advantage might be the greater, to show his Love and Power by raising the dead
(N. We must not misinterpret Gods delays).

8. His disciples say unto him, Master the Jews of late have sought to stone
thee, and go thou thither again? 9. Jesus answered, Are there not twelve
hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he
sees the light of this world. 10. But if a man walk in the night, he
stumbleth, because there is no light in him.

9. As a man that walks in the twelve hours of day light is kept from
stumbling by that light: So while my day of work continues I am safe.

11. These things said he, and after that he says unto them; Our friend
Lazarus sleeps; but I go that I may awake him out of his sleep. 12. Then said
his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. 13. Howbeit Jesus spoke of
his death: but they thought that he had spoken of taking of rest in sleep. 14.
Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. 15. And I am glad for your
sakes, that I was not there (to the intent ye may believe) nevertheless, let us
go unto him.

15. To raise him will more convince you, than it would have done, merely to
cure him.

16. Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellow-disciples, Let
us also go, that we may die with him.

16. Whether Thomas spoke this in mere passion, [Let us die with grief] or as
expecting Christ's death and theirs by the persecuting Jews, is to us uncertain.

17. Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lain in the grave four days
already. 18. (Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off).
19. And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning
their brother.

18. N. A furlong is six hundred foot.

20. Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him:
but Mary sat still in the house. 21. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou
had been here, my brother had not died. 22. But I know, that even now
whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee.

21, 22. N. She believed that Christ could have prevented his death, and could
yet raise him. 2. And that it must be by prayer to God.

23. Jesus says unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. 24. Martha says unto
him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day.

23. N. The Resurrection of the Body was then believed as an undoubted truth.

25. Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: 26. And whosoever
lives, and believes in me, shall never die. Believe thou this?

25. I am the principle and cause of Life and Resurrection. The dead that
believe in me shall be raised: And the living that believe in me shall live for
ever, their Souls first and their Bodies after raised to blessedness.

27. She says unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ the Son
of God which should come into the world.

27. Yea for I believe that thou art the Christ, and herefore have power of
life and death.

28. And when she had so said, she went her way, and called Mary her sister
secretly, saying, The Master is come and calls for thee. 29. As Soon as she
heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him. 30. Now Jesus was not yet
come into the town, but was in that place where Martha met him. 31. The Jews
then which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when they saw Mary
that she rose up hastily, and went out, followed her, saying, She goes unto
the grave, to weep there.

29. N. Faith, Love, and Necessity will make all have.

32. Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his
feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died.
33. When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came
with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled. 34. And said, Where have
ye laid him? they say unto him, Lord, come and see. 35. Jesus wept.

32, 35. N. Christ wept in compassion with his servants sorrows: And he loves
us no less now, than when he wept with mourners.

36. Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him.

36. Love can express it self by grief for the hurt of those whom we love.

37. And some of them said, Could not this man which opened the eyes of the
blind, have caused that even this man should not have died? 38. Jesus therefore
again groaning in himself, comes to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay
upon it. 39. Jesus said, take away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that
was dead, says unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he has been dead
four days.

39. N. How vile a thing will less than four days, show the body of man to be?
Is pride and vain pampering fit for such a body?

40. Jesus says unto her, Said I not unto thee, that if thou would believe
thou should see the glory of God.

40. N. The effect of Gods power is the Glory; and unbelief hinders the effect
in us.

41. Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid. And
Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me.
42. And I knew that thou heardst me always: but because of the people which
stand by, I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me.

41, 42. He looked up toward Heaven as the place of Gods glory, the spring and
end of earthly blessings: N. Christ knew before that God would do this Miracle
by him: but begged it by prayer to convince the hearers that it was of God. 2.
It Is our comfort that Christ's intercession is always heard:

43. And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come
forth. 44. And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with grave
cloths: and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus says unto them,
Loose him, and let him go.

43. N, It was not the loud voice, but the invisible power that revived him:
yet Christ would suit his voice thereto. 2. It Is vain to ask, how could he go
when his feet was bound? As if all sort of binding disabled from rising, or
Christ could not enable him who revived him.

45. Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which
Jesus did, believed on him.

45. This Miracle convinced many (and it is strange that it convinced not all.)

46. But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what
things Jesus had done.

46. Some hardened Spectators turned all this but to information against him to
the Pharisees.

47. Then gathered the chief Priests and the Pharisees a council and said, what
do we? for this man does many miracles. 48. If we let him thus alone, all men
will believe on him; and the Romans shall come and take away both our Place and
Nation. 49. And one of them named Caiaphas, being the high priest that same
year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all, 50. Nor consider that it is
expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole
nation perish not.

47. N. 1. The greater Christ's Miracles were the more they thought they ought
to destroy him, because the people would the more follow him: And still the
wiser and better any Minister of Christ is the mo^^ worldly wicked men
endeavor to destroy them, because the people follow them. 2. The fear of great
Men's power more than Gods causes wicked Politicians to destroy the best. 3.
But thereby they bring on themselves that very destruction which they thought
to avoid.

51. And this spoke he not of himself: but being high Priest that year, he
prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation: 52. And not for that nation
only, but that also he should gather together in one, the children of God that
were scattered abroad.

51. And though he meant this of saving them from the Romans though by
injustice, yet he being Priest that year (though by unlawful entrance by the
Roman Power) God honored the office so far as to make him utter those words,
which should be a just Prophecy as meant by God, though not by him: And should
signify that Christ's death should tend to the conversion also the chosen
people of God in all the Gentile world, who should thereby be made his
Children, and one Church.

53. Then from that day forth, they took counsel together for to put him to
death.

53. The greatest Miracle and good Work of Christ fixed their resolution to
murder him.

54. Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence unto
a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there
continued with his disciples.

54. N. Christ yet fled from persecution, and spent most of the three years and
a half of his public Ministry among remote poor people in Galilee or near the
Wilderness.

N. Qu. It Is strange that Matthew, Mark and Luke say nothing of this great
Miracle.

Ans. 1. No one was to say all: but altogether to say sufficient. 2. And John
tells us that even altogether, have said but little of all that Christ said and
did: but only so much as should be enough to convince unbelievers.

Qu. Where was Lazarus's soul while he was dead? If in heaven, was it not a
wrong to him to come thence? And did he remember what he saw there? and tell it
to any? If not, does it not make for the sleepy inactivity of Souls departed?
Ans. Souls go not to Heaven, by necessitation, as a stone descends; but are
disposed of by God as the Supreme Governor; those that are for Heaven to
Heaven, and those that serve Devils to the Devils: and those that are not yet
judged to either, but are to live presently again on earth (as Lazarus and
others raised) are reserved by God accordingly, whether yet in the body (as in
a swoun) or near it, or where God pleased, and vouchsased no other knowledge and
memory than is meet for such as are to revive and live yet on Earth.

55. And the Jews passover was nigh at hand: and many went out of the country
up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify themselves.

55. The legally unclean were not to celebrate the Passover.

56. Then sought they for Jesus, and spoke among themselves, as they stood in
the Temple, What think ye, that he will not come to the feast?

56. For all were bound to come to it, that were not unavoidably hindered.

57. Now both the chief Priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that
if any man knew where he were, he should show it, that they might take him.

57. N. 1. Christ's Ministers use Gods Ordinances to save men, and the Devils
Clergy use them for snares, mischief and murder. 2. They will not let the
people be neuters between God and the Devil, but force them to be informing
Persecutors.

CHAP. XII.
THEN Jesus, six days before the passoover, came to Bethany, where Lazarus was
which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead. 2. There they made him a
Supper, and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table
with him.

1. N. 1, Christ was not against festival entertainment. 2. This is the same
History mentioned, Luke 10. Where you may see more of it.

3. Then took Mary a pound of ointment, of spikenard, very costly, and anointed
the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled
with the odor of the ointment.

3. N. 1. It is not unlike that such an action was twice done, that is, by two
several Mary's; and that this is not the same with that Luke 7. But yet it is
very hard to judge where this was done: that it was thrice done is not
probable: And that it was done in the house of Simon the Leper other
Evangelists notify: yet here it seems to have been done in Martha's own
house, compared with Luke 10. I'ts most likely to me that Simon and Martha
dwelling in the same Village at Bethany joined their Purses and Labor and
feasted him in Simons house where this anointing was done: But that he was also
entertained at Martha and Mary's house, where that was done, which is recorded,
Luke 10.

4. Then said one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simons son, which should
betray him. 5. Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and
given to the poor?

4, 5. N. That as Piety is often pretended by hypocrites against Charity, so is
Charity here by Judas against Piety: And there is no work so good but may be
opposed by very fair pretenses.

6. This he said, not that he cared for the poor; but because he was a thief,
and had the bag, and bare what was put therein.

6. Judas being Purse-bearer, falsely pretended a care of the poor, for his
selfish covetousness.

7. Then said Jesus, Let her alone: against the day of my burial has she kept
this. 8. For the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always.

7. This which she gave shall be as it were for my funeral embalming; that may
be best on such an extroardinary occasion which ordinarily is not so. You may
always give to the poor.

9. Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there: and they came,
not for Jesus sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had
raised from the dead. 10. But the chief Priests consulted, that they might put
Lazarus also to death. 11. Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went
away, and believed on Jesus.

9. N. To be put to death by such wicked Priests and Rulers, is no dishonor or
note of guilt in the sufferer. 2. We see here how much Dives was deceived, Luke
16. That thought his brethren would have been persuaded by Lazarus sent from
the dead: It Is like they would have indicted him for a Scandalum Magnatum, or
put him to death again.

12. On the next day, much people that was come to the feast, when they heard
that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem. 13. Took branches of palm trees, and went
forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed is the King of Israel that
comes in the name of the Lord.

12, 13. They honored him by this applauding solemnity, as the Messiah sent
from God to be the King of Israel.

14. And Jesus when he had found a young ass, he sat thereon; as it is written,
15. Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy King comes sitting on an asses
colt.

14, 15. Thus Zach. 9.9. Was fulfilled.

16. These things understood not his disciples at the first, but when Jesus was
glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that
they had done these things unto him.

16. N. Many things are said and done by Christ, which shall not be presently
understood, but in their season.

17. The people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his
grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record. 18. For this cause the people
also met him, for that they heard that he had done this miracle.

17, 18. N. It was the people that had seen and heard of his raising Lazarus,
that there met him as King with Hosanna's.

19. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, perceive ye how ye prevail
nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.

19. N. They thought their danger immanent, that the people would proclaim him
King, and then the Romans would destroy their Country as Rebels; for they could
not trust God to save them from the Romans, though Miracles should have taught
it them.

20. And there were certain Greeks among them, that came up to worship at the
feast:

20. These Greeks were not the Jews of Alexandriae that used the Greek tongue,
(elsewhere called Greeks) but the Proselites of the Gates, who worshipped but
as Catechumens did with Christians.

21. The same came therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and
desired him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus. 22. Philip comes and tells
Andrew: and again Andrew and Philip told Jesus. 23. And Jesus answered them,
saying, the hour is come, that the Son of man shall be glorified. 24. Verily,
verily I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it
abides alone: but if it die, it brings forth much fruit.

21. When Greeks by the same of Christ's Miracles desired to see him, he tells
them, that indeed the time of his glory in the world by men's believing on him,
was at hand: But that he must die first, and then the Catholic Church should
be gathered. A grain of Wheat is said to die, because the dissolution and
change makes it no longer a grain of Wheat, but the seed of many new grains
with the Straw.

25. He that loves his life, shall lose it, and he that hates his life in
this world, shall keep it unto life eternal.

25. And, as it is with me it will be with you: He that so overloveth his life,
as that he cannot forsake it for my sake and his Salvation, shall lose it by
keeping of it: And he that casts it away as men do a hated thing, rather than
deny me and sin, shall live for ever.

26. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also
my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honor.

26. If any man will be a Christian let him not stick to do and suffer as I do;
but believe that he shall fare no worse than I, but if he die he shall be with
me where I am: For my Father will honor those that serve me.

N. 1. To be a Christian and to be one that serves Christ, are all one. 2.
Salvation is promised to all that serve Christ. 3. They that serve him shall be
with him where he is: therefore the spirits of the just made perfect are in
Paradise, and Heaven; for Christ is there. This is our great comfort in life
and at death: And we must then thus think of our godly departed friends: they
are all with Christ.

27. Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this
hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour, 28. Father, glorify thy name.
Then came there a voice from Heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again.

27.28. I am a man, and my Soul is troubled at the foresight of my death and
suffering and nature inclines me to say, Father save me from it: But I must
not take up with that natural desire; for I came on purpose thus to suffer:
Therefore my choice and prayer is, Father glorify thy Name: Then came there a
voice, etc.

29. The people therefore that stood by, and heard it, said that it thundered:
others said, An angel spoke to him.

29. They heard the sound but understood not the words.

30. Jesus answered and said, this voice came not because of me, but for your
sakes. 31. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all
men unto me. 33. (This he said, signifying what death he should die.)

30. This voice though spoke to me, was for your conviction, and not for my
sake only: For now the time is at hand when the wickedness of this world shall
be detected and punished, and Satan the Prince of this world cast out of his
possession by the gathering of my Church: And when I am lifted up from the
earth by Crucifixion, I shall be lifted up to Heaven in glory* and will by my
Word and Spirit draw many Nations to me their Savior: By being lift up he
meant his Crucifixion as in order to his Resurrection and Ascension.

34. The people answered him, We have heard out of the law, that Christ abides
for ever: and how say thou, the Son of man must be lift up? who is this Son
of man?

34. We have been taught that Christ dies not, but shall have an everlasting
Kingdom! who then is that Son of man that thou say must be lift up.

35. Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you; walk
while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks in
darkness, knows not whither he goes. 36. While ye have light, believe in the
light, that ye may* be the children of light. These things spoke Jesus, and
departed, and did hide himself from them.

35, 36. Though Christ abide for ever; he will not for ever abide visible with
you: It is but a little while that he who is the light will continue among you:
Obey the Light while you have it lest darkness surprise you: and he that
walks in darkness knows not whither he goes, nor whether he do well or
ill. Before I be taken from you, believe in me that ye may be illuminated
adopted, and enjoy the light.

37. But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not
on him. 38. That the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled, which he
spoke, Lord who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord
been revealed?

37. All his Miracles caused them not to believe: And so Isaiahs prophecy was
fulfilled in them, etc.

39. Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias said again. 40. He has
blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not see with
their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should
heal them. 41. These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory and spoke of him.

39. And no wonder that they believed not, for it could not be, it being
foretold by Isaiah that God would forsake them which Isaiah foreseeing Christ's
day by inspiration, did mean in that prophecy.

N. To understand this 1. We must distinguish between* a caused Necessity, and
a Necessity of Consequence in order of arguing. 2. Between men that have
forfeited Gods grace by rejection, and those that Grace is newly offered to.
And so 1. God is not the efficient cause of any sin. 2. But he dese^teth many
that abuse his Grace, and leaves them to their blindness and obstinacy, 3. And
for it, he causes their destruction 4. And he often foretells this. 5. And his
prediction makes the thing foretold hypothetically necessary, or a certain
consequence in order of arguing: It being impossible that God should lie: And
so all that is foreknown by God or man will come to pass; when foreknowledg
does not cause it, but prove it. 6. And deserted Souls have a moral impotency
to repent, that is, an indisposition which nothing in their depraved nature
will overcome.

42. Nevertheless, among the chief rulers also many believed on him, but
because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be put out
of the Synagogue. 43. For they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of
God.

42. Many of the chief Rulers had a secret belief, but not enough to make them
openly own and confess him, left they should be excommunicate and reproacht:
For the love of their reputation with men did prevail in them against their
love of Gods approbation.

44. Jesus cried and said, He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on
him that sent me. 45. And he that sees me, sees him that sent me.

44. To believe in me is not to take my own testimony, but Gods that sent me,
and so is ultimately to believe on him: And it is Gods power that you see when
ye see my works.

46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me, should
not abide in darkness.

46. The world is in darkness, and I am sent to be their Light and Teacher to
bring them out of it; even from the darkness of Atheism, Heathenisms,
Infidelity and unrighteousness.

47. And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not: for I came
not to judge the world, but to save the world. 48. He that rejects me, and
receives not my words, has one that judges him: the word that I have spoken,
the same shall judge him in the last day.

47. It is not the work that I came for into the world to accuse men as their
enemy for rejecting my Word: The final rejecters of it will be condemned, but
not so much by my accusation, as by the evidence of Truth and Divine
Attestation in the word which they rejected.

N. It is usual in the Gospel, for a comparative negation to be expressed
positively: as [I judge him not] that is, not chiefly; (care not: Labor not for
the food that perishes) that is, comparatively, let it be least and last. Many
such there are.

49. For I have not spoken of my self; but the Father which sent me, he gave me
a commandment; what I should say, and what I should speak. 50. And I know that
his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the
Father said unto me, so I speak.

49, 50. It is not the mere word of me as a man, but Gods word spoken by me by
his command, which I have preached: And his Word is the cause of and guide to
everlasting life.

N. Christ as man was under a peculiar Law of mediation, proper to himself.

CHAP. XIII.
NOW before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come,
that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own
which were in the world, he loved them unto the end.

1. The foreknowledge of his approaching departure to the Father, caused him in
this special manner to show his love to his disciples.

2. And Supper being ended, (the devil having now put into the heart of Judas
Iscariot, Simons son, to betray him.)

2. N. Sin is the offspring of a wicked heart and the devil together.

3. Jesus kowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that
he was come from God, and went to God: 4. He rises from Supper, and laid aside
his garments, and took a tower and girded himself. 5. After that he powered
water into a basin and began to wash the disciples feet, and to wipe them with
the towel wherewith he was girded.

3. Jesus knowing that he was presently to take possession of his universal
dominion, and return to God from whom he came, did humble himself to this work
of LOVE and SERVICE, for an example to them; He rises from Supper, etc.

N. What is meant by Christ's coming from God, is before opened.

6. Then comes he to Simon Peter: and Peter says unto him, Lord, do thou
wash my feet. 7. Jesus answered and said unto him What I do thou know not
now, but thou shall know hereafter.

6, 7. N. 1. We must not refuse Gods Mercies on pretense of humility or
unworthiness. 2, We must obediently submit to those commands and dealings of
God, the reason of which we cannot yet understand, because it is Gods will, and
we shall understand them hereafter.

8. Peter says unto him, Thou shall never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If
I wash thee not, thou have no part in me. 9. Simon Peter says unto him, Lord,
not my feet only, but also my hands and my head.

8, 9. N. 1. It was Peter's rashness to resolve against that which he understood
not. 2. Christ washes all that have part in him from the guilt and filth of
sin. 3. It Is lawful and a duty to change a purpose taken up upon mistakes, and
to break that word which did but express such a purpose: There are three sorts
of affirming words. 1. Assertious saying, This or that is true, or is not true:
To violate these wilfully is Lying; and in witness bearing it is a heinous Sin.
We must assert nothing but truth.

2. Promises: Which if made to God, are Vows: if to man, it gives them right
to what what we promise. These bind us as far as we had power to make them: And
if we had such power, and it be about lawful things, we may not break them:
without his consent to whom the promise was made, or some one that has full
power over him in that concern.

3. There is a Pollicitation, or rather, a bare utterance of a man's resolution,
As [ This or that I will do or give, etc.] This ever in all rational men
supposes many conditions, As [if God will] [if I live and be able,] [If the
change of things alter not my case.] If I find not my Reason mistaken, etc.] No
Christian may be supposed to say [I will do this whether God will or not:
whether I live or die: whatever befall me, or though I find that my Reason is an
error: As in all such cases it is a duty to change a resolution, so it is a
duty to go against that word by which we expressed our Resolution: to change
mind* word and work for the better, is a duty. So Peter does here.

10. Jesus says to him, He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet,
but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all. 11. For he knew who
should betray him; therefore said he, Ye are not all clean.

10, 11. The washing of the feet only may be as sufficient a ceremony to
signify your cleansing as if I had washed you all over. I have done this
according to the custom of this Country, where with going bare legged the feet
gather dust, to show you that as you have need of daily cleansing from the
pollution that you are liable to gather from this world, so I am he that
condescend to cleanse you from it, etc.

12. So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set
down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you? 13. Ye call me
Master, and Lord, and ye say well: for so I am. 14. If I then your Lord and
Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet. 15. For
I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you.

12, 13, 14, 15. Knowing what pride and uncharitableness man's nature is capable
of, and what must be the spirit and life of my Ministers, I have given you this
example to teach you to stoop to the feet of the lowest, to the lowest offices
of Love and Service: and now if you or any of my Ministers shall either disdain
this by pride, and instead of it domineer, and menace, or persecute the weak,
or by sloth or uncharitableness neglect such Ministerial offices of Love, my
example shall condemn all such.

16. Verily, verily I say unto you, The servant is nor greater then his lord,
neither he that is sent, greater then he that sent him. 17. If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them.

16, 17. Make not light of what I say to you; and pretend not your superiority
or Episcopal Power to excuse you from this Ministerial Service and
condescension to the lowest: you are not greater then I that send you: you are
but my servants, and this is your service. If you not only know this but do it,
you shall be blessed in your reward: But if you pretend learning and knowledge
and neglect this work, your guilt and misery will be double.

18. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen: but that the Scripture
may be fulfilled, He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel against
me.

18. I do not equal you by this speech: I know you all whom I have chosen to
follow me; and I know that in one of you that Scripture will be fulfilled, He
that eats bread, etc.

19. Now I tell you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye may
believe that I am he.

19. I tell you before that when you see that I know what will come so pass, it
may confirm your faith.

20. Verily verily I say unto you, He that receives whomsoever I send,
receives me: and he that receives me, receives him that sent me.

20. But you that are my faithful Messengers, shall not fail of success or of
reward: I will take the receiving of you and your Message, as the receiving of
my self, and as the receiving of God himself that sent me.

21. When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and tes^ified and
said, Verily verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.

21. Then Jesus with a troubled mind, in a just sense of the Traitors Sin and
Misery, and his own approaching sufferedg told them more plainly, that one of
them would betray him to death.

22. Then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spoke.

22. They were troubled, and were thinking who this should be.

23. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom, one of his disciples, whom Jesus
loved. 24. Simon Peter therefore beckened to him, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spoke. 25. He then lying on Jesus breast, says unto him,
Lord, who is it?

23. John at the desire of Peter asked him secretly, who it was.

26. Jesus answered, He it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped
it. And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot the son of
Simon.

26. Jesus told John secretly, it is he to whom I give the next piece of Bread
dipped: Which he did to Judas.

27. And after the sop, Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That
thou do, do quickly.

27. As his hypocrisy and thieving and coveteousness gave Satan power over him
before, so now upon his obdurateness after all warnings; he had greater power
to hurry him to the execution. And Christ by saying [what thou do do quickly]
intimated to him that he knew his mind.

28. Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spoke this unto him.

28. None of them (unless perhaps John) understood what he meant.

29. For some of them thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said
unto him, Buy those things that we have need of against the feast: or that he
should give something to the poor. 30. He then having received the sop, went
immediately out, and it was night.

29. Judas had the Purse, and that occasioned their mistake. 30. N. This
immediate going out, makes it unce^tain whether he received the Sacramental
part of the Supper.

31. Therefore when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in him. 32. If God be glorified in him, God
shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him.

31.32. Now is the time at hand that I shall be glorified by my Death and
Resurrection; and God shall be glorified in me: And because God is glorified in
me, he will glorify me speedily in my self.

33. Little Children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me, and
as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come: so now I say unto you.

33. Dear Children the time is now at hand, when I must depart from you, and
you cannot now follow me.

34. A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another, as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another.

34. And being to part from you, I leave this with you as my last and great
command in my Testament, that you truly love one another; even as I have loved
you who lay down my life for you.

35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one
to another.

35. It is not bare names and words that make men my true disciples, but
learning of me, and obeying me: And this is the great Lesson and Command which
you must learn as the Symbol of my Religion and Church, by which all must know
that you are my disciples, even by true practical effectual Love to all true
Christians.

N. To hate, malign, hurt and persecute Christ's servants, does as truly prove
men to be no Christians, as to deny the faith, how fair pretenses soever may be
their cloak.

36. Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither go thou? Jesus answered him,
Whither I go, thou can not follow me now: but thou shall follow me afterward.

36. Thou shall go to the same place in time, and the like way.

37. Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down
my life for thy sake. 38. Jesus answered him, Will thou lay down thy life for
my sake? Verily verily I say unto thee, the Cock shall not crow, till thou have
denied me thrice.

38. As confident as thou art of thy fidelity, I know thy heart better than
thou do, and I know that before Cocks crowing be past thou will thrice deny
thou know me.

CHAP. XIV.
LET not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. 2. In
my Fathers house are many Mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you; I
go to prepare a place for you.

1. Let not my departure trouble your hearts: trust God and trust me with your
Souls and Bodies. In my Fathers house there are Rooms enough to receive all
mine as well as me: If it were not so, I would not have drawn you to hope for
it in vain, but have told you the truth: I go before you to prepare for your
entertainment.

3. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

3. Fear not that I should leave you desolate: I do not prepare a place for you
in vain, but will come again and take you and all believers to my self as a
glorified Society. N. Did not many other Texts assure us of the Souls reception
to Christ at our death, this would be sad to us, and make us think he would not
take us to himself till his return to judgment. But it being then that our
felicity will be consummate, in the consummation of the whole Church in one
body, therefore Christ puts this promise of the fullest perfection for their
comfort.

4. And whither I go, ye know, and the way ye know.

4. And you are not utter strangers to the God and Place that I go to, or to
the way.

5. Thomas says unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go: and how can we
know the way? 6. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, and the truth, the life:
no man com^th unto the Father but by me.

5, 6. It is to the Father I am going: And think not carnally of the place or
state or way: I am your way and Guide, and I am the Truth signified by all
ceremonial shadows; and I am your Life both efficiently, directively and
finally: you must come to God as your end, by me as the only way, if ever you
will be happy.

7. If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also? and from
henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.

7. You see me in my bodily presence: But if you had known me better in my
spiritual Being, and in the works which I have done by my Fathers power; you
would better have known my Father also. But as you have seen him in me and my
works, so henceforth you shall know him more.

8. Philip says unto him, Lord, show us the Father, and it suffices us.

8. If we might but see the Father, it would satisfy us. N. Man in flesh would
fain live by sight as more satisfying to him than mere faith.

9. Jesus says unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou
not known me, Philip? He that has seen me, has seen the Fathet: and how
say thou then, Show us the Father? 10. Believe thou not that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me? The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of
my self: but the Father, that dwells in me, he does the works.

9, 10. God is invisible, and to be seen only in his works, effects and
appearances: And in what or whom can thou expect to see him more apparently
than in me? Have I been so long with you and have thou not seen and known me?
If thou have seen me, thou have seen the notifying appearance of the Father?
And what other sight of the Father can thou expect? Believe thou not that
God the Father is so in me and I in him, as that he appears to the world by
me? and (though his Greatness shine more conspicuously in Sun and Stars, Heaven
and Earth, yet) his Holiness, Wisdom, and ruling Will, and his saving Love to
sinful man show themselves most in me, in the words that I speak and the works
that I do, which it is the Father that works in me.

11. Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe
me for the very works sake. 12. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that
believes on me, the works that I do, shall he do also, and greater works than
these shall he do; because I go unto my Father.

11. If you will not believe my own testimony, believe me for my Works, that I
am in the Father and acted by him, and he is in me, and his Power acts by me.
And this Power shall be so manifested, that I will enable those that believe in
me, to do greater Miracles than I have done, when I ascend to my Father and
send down my Spirit on them, by which you shall see that I was acted by the
Power of the Father.

13. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father
may be glorified in the Son. 14. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will
do it.

13. And you shall find by experience in the answer of your Prayers, that I am
in God and actuate you by his Power; For whatever you ask in my name, which is
fit to be asked and received, I will do it as the Mediator between the Father
and you, that the Father may be glorified in and by the office of my Mediation
and Administration. When you find that asking in my name procures your desire,
you may know that it is by me.

15. If ye love me, keep my commandments. 16. And I will pray the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. 17.
Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall
be in you.

15, 16, 17. If you do but love me, and show it by sincere keeping my
commandments, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you the Holy Ghost in
an eminent peculiar manner, to be a Paraclet, or an Agent and Advocate, and
Intercessor between me and you, pleading my Cause with you and the World, and
pleading your Cause in Prayer with me and my Father; To which end he shall as a
vital Principle abide with you for ever. Even Gods Spirit of Truth, who shall
teach you the Truth, and confute the lying Deceiver; The World cannot receive
him as an Illuminater and Comforter, because not knowing him, and being
prepossessed with contrary malignant inclinations, it resists him: But he
has in some measure taken possession of you already, and ye know and obey him,
and he dwells with you, and shall be in you, as sent by me, and as my Witness.

18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you.

18. Let not my departure too much trouble you, I will not leave you as
destitute Orphantes, but I will rise and see you, and when Ascended I will come
to you by my Spirit, and at last come and take all the Church unto my Glory.

19. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more: but ye see me, because
I live, ye shall live also.

19. Though I shall shortly depart out of the sight of this World, yet ye shall
see me: For I am your Head and Principle of Life, and as I shall live with God
in Glory, so shall ye live by Communication of Life from me. Note, Here we have
security for the Souls Immortality, and Heavenly felicity. If Christ live we
shall live.

20. At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in
you.

20. In that measure that this Spirit of Life is from me communicated to you,
ye shall Experimentally find that as I am in the Father and act by his Power,
so you are in me acted by my Love and Power, and I in you thus acting you by my
Spirit.

21. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me:
and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
will manifest my self to him.

21. This Holy Spirit which I promise you, is the Spirit of Love: And he that
loves and keeps my Commandments, is he that truly loves me: And (though
with a Love of benevolence and beneficence I Love many Enemies to their
Conversions, yet) it is only they that thus Love me that shall be Loved of my
Father with Complacence and Felicitation. And I will delight, bless and
glorify them with my Love, and make my self fuller known to them.

22. Judas says unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou will
manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? 23. Jesus answered and said
unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

22, 23. The manifestation of my self, is not to be by Monarchical outward
Pomp, which the World expects, but by Spiritual Gifts and Comforts, and
Rewards: And none are prepared for these but they that love me and keep my
words: These my Father will Love, and my Father and I will come to him by the
Spirit, and make our abode with him for ever.

24. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings: and the word which you
hear, is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me.

24. But the World that Loves me not, keeps not my words: And it is the
Fathers word and not mine only which they reject.

25. These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. 26. But
the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name,
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.

25, 26. I tell you all these things with my own Mouth, while I am present with
you: But they shall be better understood, and take deeper rooting in your
Memory and Affections, by the work of the Paraclets, the Holy Ghost, whom my
Father will send in my Name, my Agent, Advocate and Witness; he shall more
fully teach you all things, and bring all things that ever I said to your
remembrances, that you may teach and record them to the World.

27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world gives,
give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

27. And taking my farewell of you, I do not only wish, but give and leave with
you my Grace and Benediction: Not such an uneffectual or delusory peace in Sin
as the World gives: But the beginning of everlasting Felicity. Therefore let
not your hearts be troubled or afraid at my departure as if ye were deserted

28. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If
ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my
Father is greater then I.

28. Ye have heard with trouble my words that I go away and come again to you.
If ye understood this aright, your Love to me would make you rejoice, because
as I told you, it is my Father that I go to. And he is greater than I whom he
has made Mediator; And the presence of his Glory is better than this base
wicked World.

29. And now I have told you before it come to pass, that when it is come to
pass, ye might believe.

29. I have foretold you of my departure, and my sending the Spirit, that when
its come to pass, your Faith may be helped by remembering my Predictions.

30. Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the Prince of this world
comes, and has nothing, in me.

30. I shall not speak much more to (...) my death: For the Devil the Prince of
the (...) and the Romish and Jewish Powers, his Agents are ready to Execute
what I came to suffer, but shall find in me no guilt or desert of suffering.

31. But that the world may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave
me commandment; even so I do. Arise, let us go hence.

31. But that I may show to Mankind, that my Love to my Father, and my perfect
Obedience to his Commands, are more Powerful in me than the love of this Life,
I shall willingly suffer for Man an undeserved cursed death. Arise, and let us
go to the place where I know Judas will come to apprehend me.

CHAP. XV.
I Am the vine, and my Father is the husbandman.

1. I am to you like the Vine that gives forth her Vital juice for Man's life
and delight: And my Father is as the Husbandman that planteth, owneth and
disposes of the Vine and Fruit. Note, Whether Christ spoke this before they
rose from Supper, or as they went by the way is uncertain.

2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away: and every branch
that bareth fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

2. All that manifest themselves Christians, and are Baptized and Grafted into
my Church, are to me as the Branches are to the Vine; as to Cove^ant-insition.
And every (...) ^hristia^ (...) is not sincerely fruitful (...) superfluous
branch: And the sincere and fruitful shall be pruned by Instruction, Discipline
and Correction, that they may be yet more fruitful.

3. Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. 4. Abide in
me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide
in the vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me.

3, 4. You are now in some measure cleansed and sanctified by my Word and
Grace: But do ye think that all your work is done, or all your danger over* it
must be still your care to abide in me by continued Faith and Love, and that I
may abide in you by my Spirit and Grace: For as the branch can bear no Fruit of
it self, but by virtue communicated from the Stock, and therefore must abide in
it: No more can you, except you abide in me.

5. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.

5. Your ^^^tion and continuance in me, must make you fruitful. ^or out of me
and without my communicated Spirit of Grace, you can do nothing that will save
you.

6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered;
and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.

6. He that being Grafted into my Church and me, and Apostatizeth, shall be
damned. Quest. Is this spoken of the sincere or of the unsound and Hypocrites.
If of the sincere, do they fall away to Damnation? If of others, would they not
be burned or damned if they should persevere, in their Hypocritical dead
Profession? Answ. First, Christ tells us how we may judge of them, We know them
not to be Hypocrites till they fall off and then we may discern their misery.
Secondly, The Sincere that shall never fall quite away, have need of Promises,
and Threatenings, Hopes and Fears to be the means of their perseverance: For God
fulfilleth his decrees by means. Thirdly, Whether there be not an initial
unconfirmed degree of Grace (like Adams) which may be lost, which else would
save (though confirmed Grace be never totally lost) is a Controversy so
ancient and among the wisest and best of men, as that it requires great
modesty in the Deciders.

7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will,
and it shall be done unto you.

7. If ye abide in me and my words abide practically in you, you shall be so
accepted with God for your Union with me and Interest in me, that for my s^ke
all your just ^equests shall be granted: But this privilege (...) interrupt.

8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my
Disciples.

8. It is not your barren Profession, but your greater Fruitfulness in doing
good, which is the honoring of God who is the Author of Religion, and must
prove you to be my true Disciples.

9. As the father has loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love.

9. As God the Father has set his special Love on me and sent me on his work,
so have I set my special Love on you, and chosen you for my Service: See that
you forfeit not my Love by forsaking me, or being unfaithful in my Service.

10. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love: even as I have kept
my Fathers commandments; and abide in his love.

10. The way to continue in my Love, is to keep my Commandments; for thus I
abide in my Fathers Love, even his Complacency in me as his Servant, by keeping
his Commandments.

11. These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and
that your joy might be full.

11. My end in all this Counsel to you is but that I may still have joy in your
Fidelity and Fruitfulness, and you may have fullness of Joy in me, and in the
Reward of your Fidelity.

12. This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.

12. The sum of my Command and Doctrine is Love; even that in your entire Love
to one another, and the Fruits and expression of it, you inmitate my Love to
you.

13. Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends.

13. Man's love of Friendship has no higher Expression, than laying down ones
life for his Friends.

14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

14. I lay down my life for you, and that as for my beloved friends who shall
enjoy my friendly Love for ever, if you prove my friends indeed: and that must
be by doing whatsoever I command you, and not by bare words and boasts of
friendship.

15. Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knows not what his
Lord does: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of
my Father, I have made known unto you.

15. Though you are my Servants, I have a higher name to call you by, even my
Friends: For mere Service signifies not that endeared intimacy which I have
used with you. LOVE and Friendship is higher than mere Service and Obedience. I
have made known to you the Mysteries of God, which signify my Love of
friendship.

16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that
whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.

16. You did not first begin in Love to me, and choose me for your Savior, but
I began in Love of benevolence to you, and chose you to be my Friends the
Objects of my Complacency: And ordained you to be my Apostles to Convert the
World, that you may see the Catholic Church gathered as the settled fruit of
your Labors. And that whatever Power you ask of God, by Miracles or other
Gifts to promote your Labor he may give it you.

17. These things I command you, that ye love one another.

17. I mention all this to you to enforce my last and great Command, that ye
love one another. Note, Alas how far are the Accusing, Slandering, Reviling,
Backbiting and Persecuting Teachers, Rulers and Sects, from the Nature and
Practice of this Love, which Christ so vehemently urges.

18. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.

18. When you meet with hatred from ungodly Men, remember that I that am the
Son of God and never sinned, was hated by them before you, and you do but
follow me, and suffer for and with me.

19. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you.

19. If you were mere ungodly Wordlings or Infidels, the World would not hate
you for Godliness or Faith, but love you for being like them. But they hate you
for that Christian Excellency in which my chosen ones excel them: And would
you not be Better and Happier than they, though you be hated for it.

20. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater then
the Lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: if they
have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.

20. If you take me for your Lord indeed, remember that I have told you that
you are not greater than I, and look for no better usage of the World than I
have found: If they have Persecuted me, they will Persecute you: And if the
unbelieving Part reject my Word, wonder not if they do so by yours, and if the
chosen only do receive it.

21. But all these things will they do unto you for my names sake, because they
know not him that sent me.

21. It is for my sake that they will Persecute you, because they know not God
and his Testimony of me.

22. If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now
they have no cloak for their sin.

22. If I had not spoken to them and confirmed my Word by my Works their sin
had not been so great, but had excuse ( Note, Here [not had Sin] a Positive is
put for a Comparative): Or if I had not come with sufficient evidence, it had
not been their sin not to believe me to be the Christ: But now their unbelief
and Persecution has no pretense.

23. He that hates me, hates my Father also.

23. The hatred that is against me, is consequently against God my Father, it
being his Word, Works and Witness which they reject.

24. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had
not had sin: but now have they both seen, and hated both me and my Father.

24. They had not been bound to believe me to be the Christ, if I had not
showed Gods Attestation, such works as no man else can do, or if any one had
done the like. Note, Yet it is a false inference of the Infidels, that
therefore none are bound to take him for the Christ, where he never came and
did such works: For History may as infallibly transmit the notice of his Works,
as Sight and Hearing could receive them.

25. But this comes to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written
in their Law, They hated me without a cause.

25. But the Word written in Psalm. 3.19. which in a large sense is part of
their Law is thus fulfilled.

26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father,
even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of
me.

26. But when the Holy Ghost my Advocate and your Comforter is sent down upon
you, whom after my Resurrection I will send to you, for his Eminent signal
Gifts, from the Father* even that Holy Spirit of Truth which proceeds from
the Father, he shall be my great Prevailing Witness both to you, and by you to
the World, and shall cause belief.

27. And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the
beginning.

27. And you on whom this Spirit shall come down, shall by his operation be
made my effectual Witnesses, of what I have said and done and suffered, because
you have been with me, as Eye and Ear Witnesses from the beginning of my
public Ministration.

CHAP. XVI.
THese things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. 2. They
shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea, the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service.

1, 2. I foretell you what you must expect, that when it comes you may not be
scandalized and turned back. They shall cast you out by Excommunication of
their Sacred and Civil Assemblys, as a reproach, yea they that kill you shall
do it as an acceptable offering or service to God. Note, How little do the
Religious pretenses of Persecutors deserve regard.

3. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father, nor me.

3. Did they know the Father and me, they would do otherwise: wilful Ignorance
is the cause.

4. But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may
remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you at the
beginning, because I was with you.

4. Remember* I foretold you all this: which I said not from the beginning,
because I was with you to encourage you, and your time of trial was not come
and at first you could not so well bear it.

5. But now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you asks me whither
go thou? 6. But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has
filled your heart.

5, 6. But now I am going to him that sent me, and though it be on your
business and for your interest, you ask me not whither and for what I go? But
sorrow oppresses you to hear of my departure.

7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away:
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I
will send him unto you

7. Believe it, my departure is for your benefit: For the Holy Ghost whom I
will then send will be better to you than my bodily presence on Earth.

8. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment: 9. Of sin, because they believe not on me; 10.
Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; 11. Of
judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.

8, 9, 10, 11. And it will be his work effectually to plead my cause. And first
to convince the World, of their sin in accusing, rejecting and murdering me, in
whom they should have believed, which he will do by his Gifts, Miracles, and
inward Operations: And, Secondly to convince them of the Truth and
Righteousness of my Person and Doctrine, and my Right to be the Head of the
Church, and the Righteousness of my Government of it; Because I go into Heaven
to take fuller Possession of my Plenipotency and Administration, and by my
Spirit in you and on the Hearers, shall more effectually convince Men and
gather my Church, than I did while I was with you: And Thirdly, He shall
convince them that God has Exalted me to the Power of Conquering Satan and his
Kingdom, and punishing Rebellious Adversaries, when they shall see that by my
Spirit the Kingdom of Satan falls, and the Powers that served him are partly
Converted, and partly confounded and destroyed.

12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.

12. I have many things more to make known to you, which you are not yet
prepared to receive.

13. Howbeit, when he the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that
shall he speak: and he will show you things to come.

13. But when the Holy Spirit of Truth is come upon you, he will make you
capable, and will guide you into all Truth, (which you must Preach and Record
for the Propagating and ordering my Church, Preaching to the Gentiles, laying
by the Mosaic Law, etc.) For he shall speak but that which is of God, and
things to come, and which you are not yet fit to receive.

14. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto
you.

14. It is this Extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost, which shall be my great
convincing Witness in the World that shall prove me to be the Savior: For it
is from me that he is sent, and my Word that he shall Teach you, whether it be
Remembering or Expounding what I have already spoken or Teaching you more by
Inspiration. What he says and does in and by you my chosen Apostles that I do
by him and you.

15. All things that the Father has, are mine: therefore said I, that he shall
take of mine, and shall show it unto you.

15. I say he shall take of mine: For the wisdom Grace and Gifts that come from
the Father, come from me; that which is his is mine, and the Spirit is sent by
the Father and by me.

16. A little while and ye shall not see me: and a^ain a little while and ye
shall see me, because I go to the Father.

16. As it is but a little while till I that am now with you* shall depart from
your sight, so it will be but a short time till I shall return from Heaven to
which I am Ascending (or as some Expound it [I shall be a little while dead,
and a little while with you after my Resurrection.]

17. Then said some of his Disciples among themselves, What is this that he
says unto us, A little while and ye shall not see me: and again, a little
while and ye shall see me: and, Because I go to the Father? 18. They said
therefore, What is this that he says, A little while? we cannot tell what he
says. 19. Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto
them, Do ye enquire among your selves of that I said, A little while and ye
shall not see me and again, a little while, and ye shall see me?

17, 18, 19. Jesus perceived that they understood him not.

20. Verily verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the world
shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy. 21. A woman when she is in travail, has sorrow, because her hour is come:
but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. 22. And ye now therefore
have sorrow; but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy no man takes from you.

20. You shall have a time of suffering Sorrow, while bad Men are triumphing
over you and rejoicing; but your Sorrow shall be turned into Joy; in the sense
of my Resurrection and the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and the success of your
labors, and your own Salvation. As a Woman delivered has joy in her Birth,
instead of the sorrows of her Travail. I my self will again see you, when I am
Risen, and finally glorify you: And then you shall have a Joy which none can
deceive you of or diminish.

23. And in that day ye shall ask me nothing: Verily verily I say unto you,
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. 24.
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive that your
joy may be full.

23, 24. You shall not then learn by asking me questions, as now: But you shall
Petition the Father in my Name, and he will give you what you need both for
your own Instruction and for your Ministry. You have not hitherto understood
and used my Intercession so fully as you must do hereafter, and have nor used
to ask in my Name so explicitly as you must do. But he^er^after you must ask
in my Name to be heard for my Merits and sake as your Intercessor: As thus by
fervent Prayer, and fuller answers and gifts shall cause your fuller Joy.

25. These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: the time comes when I
shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of the
Father.

25. I have hitherto spoken to you in Parables, letting in the Light by such
degrees as you were fit to bear. But when I send you the Holy Ghost, you shall
know more plainly the Mysteries of God.

26. At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I will
pray the Father for you: 27. For the Father himself loves you, because ye have
loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.

26, 27. You shall then put up all your Prayers in my Name, which I would not
have you so to understand, as if the Father himself did not Love you, but must
be moved to it by me: I say more than that I will Pray for you; even that the
Father himself, loves you, because ye have loved me, and believed in me, etc.
Note, First, I say not that I will Pray, is but Christ's ordinary use of a
Positive phrase for a Comparative: it is, I say not this only, but more.
Secondly, Our Love to Christ as well as our Faith is called the cause why God
loves us. Thirdly, But this [ Because] signifies no efficient cause of any
thing in God, but a Moral Qualification of the receiver, called a Material
dispositive receptive Cause.

28. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again I leave
the world, and go to the Father.

28. Note, I have before showed that this coming from the Father, signifies
not any local removal of of the Deity, but its Conjunctive Operation on the
humane Nature and its miraculous Conception or Production.

29. His Disciples said unto him, Lo, now speak thou plainly, and speak
no proverb. 30. Now are we sure that thou know all things, and need not
that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou came forth from
God.

29, 30. We now perceive that thou know the secrets of our hearts, and what
thoughts and doubts they were that troubled us; which thou have now plainly
resolved: Therefore we believe thou come from God.

31. Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe? 32. Behold, the hour comes, yea,
is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave
me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.

31, 32. As confidently as you speak, I tell you the hour is now at hand, in
which you shall every man be afraid to own me, and shall shift for your selves
and fly to your Houses, and shall leave me forsaken of you all alone: But I
will not call it alone; for the Father will not forsake me.

33. These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In
the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.

33. I have told you what is to befall you hereafter, that though you will be
grieved at my departure, you may fetch your Peace and Joy from the Assurance of
what I will do for you after my Resurrection. You shall have Tribulation to the
flesh in the World: But let not that dismay you; but take comfort in me, who
have overcome the World, even its flattering Tempations, and its malicious
Prosecutions. And my Victory is virtually yours, who shall overcome by my
Intercession, Spirit and Graces.

CHAP. XVII.
THese words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the
hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee.

1. This Prayer Christ made to his Father, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, to
teach us to look thither as the place whence God appears in Glory, Father the
hour of my death undertaken, for Man's Redemption is at hand: Glorify thy Son
by thy Attestation and his Resurrection, that his Glory may be the Glory of thy
Power, Wisdom and Love to Man.

2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as thou have given him.

2. As thou have advanced him to this Power, to be the Owner and Lord of all
flesh, for Disposals, Legislation, Judgment and Execution, to order all things,
so as may secure the Possession of an Eternal Life, of Happiness, to all that
thou have given him by effectual Decree to be certainly eventually saved: All
things being for the good of thine Elect.

3. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

3. And what is Life Eternal, but that perfect knowledge of thee, which fills
the Soul with Love and Joy and the knowledge of thy Glory, shining forth in thy
Son Jesus Christ with his Body the Heavenly Society. And the beginning of this
knowledge is the beginning and way to Perfection.

4. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do.

4. My Doctrine, Example and Miracles have here showed forth thy Glory: I am
near the end, and have almost finished that work on Earth for Man's Redemption,
which I undertook.

5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own-self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was.

5. As I have almost performed my part perform thou thy part of the Covenant of
my Mediation; and give me the Son of Man a due participation of that Glory,
which my Divine Nature had with thee from Eternity. Note, This Text is by
diverse diversely Expounded. First, Some say that* Christ's humane Soul was
Glorified before the Word was. Secondly, The Arians say that he had a
superangelical Nature only before the World was, which united it self to a
humane Soul (say some) or only animated a humane Body, (say others;) Thirdly,
Others of late say he has three Natures uniting it self to the Prime Created
Superangelical Nature; And this uniting it self to a humane Soul and Body (say
some) or to a humane Body alone (say others) Fourthly, But the plain Paraphrase
which I have given, is the Doctrine of the Orthodox universal Church.

6. I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world: thine they were, and thou gave them me; ad they have kept thy word.

6. I have made known thee and thy Will, to them whom thou gave me out of the
World, to be my peculiar Disciples: They were thine as their Creator, and thou
gave them me to be their Redeemer, and I have taught them thy word and they
have kept it.

7. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of
thee.

7. They have known this Fundamentally, that I and my Doctrine and Works are
all of thee.

8. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me; and they
received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me.

8. Note that Christ insisteth so much on this, because to believe that he and
his doctrine and Works are all of God, is virtually to believe, that they are
all true without searching after any other Reason of yours. For he is mad that
believes not that there is a God, and he believes not a God who believes him
not to be perfect, and therefore to be Just, Good and True, and not the
Deceiver of the World.

9. I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have
given me, for they are thine. 10. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine,
and I am glorified in them.

9, 10. It is out of special Love to them, for the Salvation and welfare of
these, that I now pray to thee, and not for the mere Worldlings and Enemies of
thy Kingdom, (though for them also I have such desires and Prayers as signify
my common Love; and the Elect among them yet unconverted, I have such requests
for, as are suited to their state.) But these that thou have given me
peremptorily to save, are the People of of thy peculiar Love as well as mine.
And all that I so Love thou love also, and it is in them that I am glorified
and my Person, Office and Grace is honored, which others do but Swinishly
despise.

11. And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world and I come
to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou have given
me, that they may be one, as we are.

11. And now I am leaving the Word, but must leave them in it to Trials and
Persecutions, while I am with thee. And seeing their Union, by one Faith and
Love is their Character strength and safety, without which they will fall into
Scandal and dissolution, O keep them by Concentring in thee and thy Will (and
not distracted by humane Devices and Interests) that they may be one in Faith,
Hope and Practice, as we are one,

12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that
thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition:
that the scripture might be fulfilled.

12. All that thou gave to be my adherent followers, I have kept in thy Name,
save the Son of Perdition, in whose Revolt and Treachery the Scripture is
fulfilled.

13. And now come I to thee, and these things I speak in the world, that they
might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

13. I Come to thee, but I leave them my Word, to fortify them with that joy
which they will need in their Afflictions.

14. I have given them thy word; and the world has hated them, because they
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

14. It is not all the World that will be saved by me, but a select People to
whom I effectually give thy Word, and the World hates them, because their
Doctrine, Mind and Life do differ from the World, and they are of another
Spirit and Society of which I am the Head.

15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
should keep them from the evil. 16. They are not of the world, even as I am
not of the world.

15. They have work to do in the World, from which I do not pray thou should
take them, but that thou keep them pure from the sins. Temptatations and Malice
of the World, as those that are separa-from it to obey thee, as I their Leader
am.

17. Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.

17. Qualify and separate them by thy Truth, to propagate thy Truth, even thy
Word which is Truth.

18. As thou have sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into
the world.

18. As thou sentest me for the work of a Redeemer into this sinful World, so
have I sent them, for the work of Apostleship.

19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth.

19. For their sakes I become a Sacrifice offered to thee, that they may by my
Doctrine, Example, and Spirit, be also totally devou^ed to serve thee.

20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on
me through their word:

20. But it is not for them only that I pray, but for all that by their
Ministry shall become true Christians.

21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that
they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou has sent me.

21. And the sum of my Prayer for them is, that as I am so united to thee, that
what thou speak I speak, and what thou Love I Love, and thy Works are my
Works, wrought by thee, so they may be one in us (and not in any incapable
Center of humane Invention and Usurpation) and may all speak the same thing
which they have heard from thee by me, and may Love what we Love, and do our
work and not their own: That by their concord in Faith, Love and Practice the
world may be won to Christianity and not scandalized by their Discord and
Fractions, or by forsaking the true Unity, and combining for wordly Interest on
worldly terms.

22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them: that they may be
one, even as we are one.

22. And as thou has glorified me in the World by the Power of working
Miracles, and gathering Sinners home to thee, I have glorified them by giving
them the same Power to work Miracles and to call and convert the World: that
they may be one Body, of one Mind and do one work, as I have done thy work
alone.

23. I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that
the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have
loved me.

23. That while I work in them, by my Word and Spirit, as thou workest in me,
they may be perfected into one concordant harmonious Body, united in Faith and
Love, that this Luster of their Excellency and Concord may convince the World,
that thou have sent me to restore them that are so much restored, and that thou
love them as thy Redeemed Sanctified ones, as thou love me their Redeemer.

24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am; that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me
before the foundation of the world.

24 Father as it was thy Covenant with me as my Reward for Redemption, it is
now my Will and Desire, that all that thou give me by Conversion as true
Christians, to be saved, may be after death with me where I am, that they may
see the Glory which thou give me, the sight of which is part of their
glorification: For thou love me before the Foundation of the World, and wilt
communicate Glory to them by me.

25. O righteous Father, the world has not known thee; but I have known thee,
and these have known that thou have sent me.

25. O Righteous Father, that world of Men whom thou have Created have not
known thee, but I that have known thee have declared thee to them, and these my
Disciples having known that thou have sent me, have believed my word concerning
thee.

26. And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

26. And I have by my Word and Works made thee and thy will known to them, and
will do so yet more; that the Holy Spirit of Love with which thou have filled
me, may be in them, and by that Spirit I may be in them.

CHAP. XVIII.
When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his deciples over brook
Cedron, where was a garden, into the the which he entered, and his Disciples. 2.
And Judas also which betrayed him; knew the place: for Jesus oft-times resorted
thither with his disciples.

1. This Sermon and Prayer being spoken after the Sacrament, Jesus went to the
Garden where he knew he should be apprehended: Judas knew the place, because
Christ often went thither, etc.

3. Judas then having received a band of men, and officers from the chief
priests and Pharisees, comes thither with lanterns, and torchees, and weapons.

3. Note, Judas was the Informer that led the Officers (such as Constables,)
and the Chief Priests and the Pharisees of their party were they that (like
Justices) furnished them with Commissions and Armed men.

4. Jesus therefore knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth,
and said unto them, Whom seek ye? 5. They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth.
Jesus says unto them, I am he. And Judas also which betrayed him, stood with
them.

5, 6. Note, Christ fled not when his hour was come. 2. What a stony heart had
Judas all this while.

6. As soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward and fell
to the ground.

6. Some of them went backward and fell. Note, This stopped not them or their
Companions.

7. Then asked he them again, whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth.
8. Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he. If therefore ye seek me, let
these go their way: 9. That the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke, Of
them which thou gave me, have I lost none.

7, 8, 9. Note, Christ was careful for the Bodily safety of his Disciples till
their hour came. 2. His words of Loosing none, are here Expounded as reaching
to the body as well as to the Soul.

10. Then Simon Peter having a sword, drew it, and smote the high priests
servant, and cut off his right ear. The servants name was Malchus. 11. Then
said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword unto the sheath: the cup which my
Father has given me, shall I not drink it?

10, 11. Note, Peter that before trusted too much to his own constancy, now
trusts too much to his Sword, without Commission. ^ Christ would not be
rescued from his undertaken sufferings by humane strength.

12. Then the band, and the captain, and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and
bound him.

12. The Colonel with his Soldiers and the Officers, bind Jesus as as a
Malefactor; being slavish Executioners.

13. And led him away to Annas first (for he was father in law to Caiaphas,
which was the high priest that same year.) 14. Now Caiaphas was he which gave
counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the
people.

13. The Power was in Caiaphas, but his Father in Law was made the way to him,
no doubt being a forward Actor.

15. And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another Disciple. That Disciple
was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the
high priest. 16. But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other
Disciple which was known unto the high priest, and spoke unto her that kept the
door, and brought in Peter.

15. Note, It seems acquaintance made them bear with John, and yet pretended
they knew him not to be a Disciple.

17. Then says the Damsel that kept the door, unto Peter, Art not thou also
one of this man's disciples? He says, I am not. 18. And the Servants and
Officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals (for it was cold) and they
warmed themselves: and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself.

17, 18. Note, Whenever we have business in bad Company, we should foresee what
Temptations, we may there expect, and be forewarned.

19. The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.

19. N. The Perversion and Confusion of this blinded World, Man Examineth and
Judges God: An ignorant High Priest who pretends to no honor, but to be an
Officer of God judges his Master.

20. Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world; I ever taught in the
Synagogues and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret
have I said nothing, 21. Why ask thou me? ask them which heard me, what I
have said unto them: behold, they know what I said.

20, 21. Note, Christ that came to die for our sins, yet would not accuse
himself but refe^^ed the ensnaring Prelate to his Auditors, and bid him p^oduce
his Witnesses if he had any thing to accuse him of: Giving us an Example how to
answer such malicious High Priests. Secondly, By [ in secret have I said
nothing] hemeaneth, I have not fraudulently concealed my Doctrine, Thirdly,
Christ did not separate from the Temple or Synagogue, and yet they could not
bear him while he put them but to prove their accusations; they expected that
his obedience to their demands should have furnished their Malice with matter
against him, while they were breaking Gods Commands.

22. And when he had thus spoken one of the officers which stood by, stroke
Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so?

22. Note, It is no wonder if wicked High Priests have wicked Officers, ready
to say and do as they. Rebels against God charge God himself for not obeying
them in iniquity; and expect more than due submission from Gods Servants while
they were against God himself.

23. Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but
if well, why smitest thou me?

23. If I have by my answer broken the Law, prove it: If not, why art thou
Executioner without Trial or desert.

24. (Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high Priest.) 25. And
Simon Peter stood and warmed himself: They said therefore unto him, Art not
thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not. 26. One of
the servants of the high Priest, (being his kinsman whose ear Peter cut off)
says, Did not I see thee in the garden with him? 27. Peter then denied again,
and immediately the Cock crew.

24, 25, etc. All this was done in Caiphas house whither Annas had sent Christ
bound. There Peter then denied Christ: Though one denial be here omitted.

28. Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas, unto the hall of Judgment: And it was
Early, and they themselves went not into the Judgement-hall lest they should be
defiled: but that they might eat the Passover.

28. Note, Thus That Hypocrite Priests make Conscience of a Ceremony, while
they are shedding holy Blood.

29. Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring you
against this man? 30. They answered and said unto him, If he were not a
malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.

29, 30. Note, The wicked Priests expected that Pilate should have taken their
bare word against Christ to Condemns him.

31. Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him and judge him according to your
Law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man
to death: 32. That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
signifying what death he should die.

31, 32. If he must be Condemned upon your bare word, be you the Judges of him
by your own Law: For the Rommans use not to Condemn men so unjustly.

Note, The Romans having Conquered the Jews, allowed them the use of their Law
for lesser punishments, but not for death (though some think otherwise:)
Crucifying was the Roman punishment.

33. Then Pilate entered into the judgment-hall again, and called Jesus, and
said unto him, Art thou the king of the Jews? 34. Jesus answered him, Say
thou this thing of thy self, or did others tell it thee of me?

34. I perceive thy question implies accusation: Who is the Accuser? Is it thy
self or any other.

35. Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation, and the chief Priests have
delivered thee unto me: What have thou done?

35. I am no Jew, nor Judge of your Prophesies, pretenses and quarrels; It is
thy own Nation and those that should best understand the matters of it, even
the High Priest that have delivered thee to me: How have thou offended them.

36. Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of
this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.

36. I know it is as the Usurper of the Crown against Caesar that they intend
to accuse me: But of that they have no just cause: For it is no Earthly
Kingdom that I claim; nor do I raise Men to fight for me, as I should do if I
claimed an Earthly Kingdom.

37. Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou
say that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into
the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: every one that is of the
truth, hears my voice. 38. Pilate says unto him, What is truth?

37. And art thou a King indeed. Jesus answered, I am a King, (though I claim
no man's Crown) it was to this end that I was born and came into the World, that
the Truth might Reign, and that I might Reign in the Minds of Men by the Light
of Truth: And every one that is thus enlightened to obey the Truth, obeys me:
Pilate said, in disdain, what is that Truth which thou pretendest to be thy
Reign.

And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and says unto
them, I find in him no fault at all.

38. I find not that he breaks any of our Laws, by any capital Crime.

39. But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the passover:
will ye therefore that I release unto you the king of the Jews? 40. Then cried
they all again, saying Not this man, But Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.

39. Note, Pilate derided Christ, but was loath to murder him, judging him
innocent.

Note, Whereas other Writers of the Gospel often tell us that Christ answered not
a word, and John tells us of his most pertinent Answers, it only signifies
that to many other Questions not here mentioned, he gave no Answer; and that he
forbore partly as seeing it was in vain with such unrighteous Men, and being
not over regardful of self defense, and partly that he might not give them
matter against him, wrested from his own words: But the answers omitted by
others John reeiteth.

CHAP. XIX.
THen Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. 2. And the soldiers
platted a crown of thorns; and put it on his head, and they put on him a purple
robe, 3. And said, Hail king of the Jews: and they smote him with their hands.

1, 2. Note, When the unjust Ruler had once led the way by Scurging him, all
the Rabble and Soldiers make great Sport in deriding and abusing him; such are
the frolicks of wicked ignorance.

4. Pilate therefore went forth again, and says unto them, Behold, I bring him
forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. 5. Then came Jesus
forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate says unto
them, Behold the man.

4. In Scorn.

6. When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out,
saying, Crucify him, Crucify him. Pilate says unto them, Take ye him, and
Crucify him: for I find no fault in him.

6. Thus Christ is the Football of Cruelty and Heathen Scorn. Pilate says,
let it be your own dowing if you will needs have it done, for by our Law he
deserves it not.

7. The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die,
because he made himself the Son of God. 8. When Pilate therefore heard that
saying; he was the more afraid; 9. And wenr again into the judgment-hall, and
says unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.

7, 8, 9. Note, The Name of the Son of God, was used by the Priests against
Christ to accuse and Murder him, and yet to a Heathen Judge caused fear and
further enquiry: And to this day it is matter of Scorn to such that the
Faithful are called the Children of God.

10. Then says Pilate unto him, Speak thou not unto me? know thou not
that I have power to Crucify thee, and have power to release thee? 11. Jesus
answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given
thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin.

10. Note, 1. Christ would not tell him whence he was by Words, that would not
know it by his Works. 2. Pilate thought that the power of Life and Death,
should have forced Jesus to answer him. And Christ says [whatever Proud men
may claim or pretend to, no man can have more Governing Right or Authority than
God the absolute Sovereign gives him (who gives none against himself)
Therefore the Arch-Priests that deliver me to thee to be Crucified, are so much
the greater Sinners that would turn Gods Ordinances of Magistracy against
himself.

12. And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out,
saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend, whosoever makes
himself a King, speaks against Caesar.

12. Then the Priests used that Argument with Pilate which he had not strength
to overcome; as if they would question his Life or Office, as a Traitor to
Caesar, if he would not Condemn Christ as such. Though Christ had told him that
he pretended not to a Kingdom of this World; yet for the Name of a King either
Christ must die as an Enemy to Caesar, or Pilate go for such. Thus though all
Royal Authority be of God, yet it is often the strength and most prevailing
Argument, that Wicked men use against God and his Law and Servants.

13. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat
down in the judgment seat, in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the
Hebrew, Gabbatha. 14. And it was the preparation of the passover, and about the
sixth hour: and he says unto the Jews, Behold your King. 15. But they cried
out, Away with him, away with him, Crucify him. Pilate says unto them, Shall
I Crucify your King? The Chief Priests answered, we have no King but Caesar.

13. When Pilate saw that there was no resisting them without danger to
himself, he sat in Judgment on Christ in a place called in the Syriack
Gabbatha.

Note, The Controversy of the day, (whether it was that called by us Friday or
Wednesday or Thursday) and that of the hour (whether it was the sixth hour (as
John says it was about,) or the third hour (as Mark says) and whether in
John it should he read the third (as Beza and some others think) are both too
hard for Vulgar Readers, and therefore I leave them to Controversal writers:
Much is said on both sides.

Note, 2. These Arch-Priests that at the heart were much against Caesar, yet to
murder Christ as a Rebel, pretend to be the greatest Caesarian Royalists.

16. Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be Crucified. And they took
Jesus and led him away. 17. And he bearing his Cross, went forth unto a place
called the place of a scull, which is called in the Hebrew, Golgotha.

17. He bare his Cross (till his strength failed and then they made Simon of
Cyrene to bear it) to a place called in Syriack Golgotha, or the place of a
Skul.

18. Where they Crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and
Jesus in the midst. 19. And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And
the writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.

18, 19. Note, The Title signified his accusation.

20. This title then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was
Crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and
Latin.

20. Written in Syriack or Chaldee words with Hebrew Letters, and in Greek and
Latin.

21. Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King of
the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews. 22. Pilate answered, What I
have written, I have written.

21, 22. The Title which Pilate made in Scorn, and God over ruled as real
Truth, displeased the Arch-Priests: but Pilate would not alter it.

23. Then the Soldiers, when they had Crucified Jesus, took his garments (and
made four parts, to every soldier a part) and also his coat: now the coat was
without seam, woven from the top throughout. 24. They said therefore among
themselves, Let us not rent it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that
the scripture might be fulfilled, which says, They parted my raiment among
them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the
soldiers did.

23. Not that the Prophecy made them do it, but was fullfilled by their doing
it.

25. Now there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers sister,
Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. 26. When Jesus therefore saw his
mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he says unto his mother,
Woman, behold thy son. 27. Then says he to the disciple, Behold thy Mother.
And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.

25, 26, 27. Note, Christ on the Cross had a care of his Mothers future comfort
in the World: which consisted in her Entertainment and Converse with his
beloved Disciple.

28. After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the
scripture might be fulfilled, says I thirst. 29. Now there was set a vessel
full of vinegar: and they filled a Sponge with Vinegar, and put it upon hyssop,
and put it to his mouth. 30. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he
said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.

28. As other Scriptures of him were fulfilled, so he would have that Psalm.
69.22. And having drunk the Vinegar, he said, my Sacrifice on the Cross is
performed, and the Prophecies of it fulfilled, and he bowed his Head and
resigned his Soul.

Many passages are omitted by John because written by others.

31. The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should
not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath Day (for that Sabbath Day was an high
day) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be
taken away. 32. Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and
of the other which was Crucified with him.

31, 32. Note, What day it was, whether the Seventh day Sabbath, or another so
called by the Jews Superstition Expositors varying, I have before said, I will
not trouble the Vulgar Reader with the Controversy.

33. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake
not his legs. 34. But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and
forthwith came there out blood and water.

33, 34. They made sure since that he was dead!

35. And he that saw it, bare record, and his record is true: and he knows
that he says true, that ye might believe. 36. For these things were done, that
the Scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken.

35, 36. John that saw it is a true Witness. And that Psalm. 34.20. which
speaks Gods care of all his People, was specially meant of Christ, whether
David so understood it or not.

37. And again another Scripture says, They shall look on him whom they
pierced.

37. Thus also that of Zach. 12.10. was fulfilled.

38. And after this, Joseph of Arimathea (being a disciple of Jesus, but
secretly for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate that he might take away the
body of Jesus: And Pilate gave him leave: He came therefore and took the body
of Jesus.

38. Joseph that duist not own Christ openly alive, begs and obtains his body
for burial.

39. And there came also Nicodemus (which at the first came to Jesus by night)
and brought a mixture of Myrrh and Aloes; about an hundred pound weight. 40.
Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen cloths, with spices, as
the manner of the Jews is to bury.

39. The Mirrh and Aloes were to keep the Body from Putrefaction: but it seems
they did for have (being late) but rudely lay them to the body with the
Clothes, deferring the full Embalming till the first day of the week, when the
Women came with Spices to have done it.

41. Now in the place were he was Crucified, there was a garden; and in the
garden a new sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid. 42. There laid they
Jesus therefore, because of the Jews preparation-day, for the sepulcher was
nigh at hand.

41, 42. It was Joseph's Sepulcher which he had prepared for himself, cleanness
and nearness made it convenient.

CHAP. XX.
THe first day of the week comes Mary Magdalene early when it was yet datk,
unto the Sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away from the Sepulcher.

1. Mary and other Women first see it.

2. Then she runs, and comes to Simon Peter, and to the other Disciple whom
Jesus loved, and says unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the
Sepulcher, and we know not where they have laid him. 3. Peter therefore went
forth, and that other Disciple, and came to the Sepulcre. 4. So they ran both
together: and the other Disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the
Sepulcher. 5. And he stouping down and looking in, saw the linen cloths lying;
yet went he not in. 6. Then comes Simon Peter following him, and went into the
Sepulcher, and sees the linen clothes lie; 7. And the napkin that was about
his head, not lying with the Linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by
it self. 8. Then went in also that other Disciple which came first to the
Sepulcher, and he saw, and believed.

2, 3, etc. Peter and John moved by Marys words, went and saw, etc.

9. For as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from the
dead.

9. Though the Scripture (and Christ himself often) foretold them his
Resurrection, they yet believed it not.

10. Then the Disciples went away again unto their own home. 11. But Mary stood
without at the Sepulcher, weeping: and as she wept, she stouped down and
looked into the Sepulcher. 12. And sees two Angels in white, sitting, the one
at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had layen: 13.
And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She says unto them, Because
they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.

10, 11, etc. Though some Evangelists mentioned but one Angel, that denies not
that there were two, which is here affirmed.

14. And when she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. 15. Jesus says unto her, Woman, why
weepest thou? whom seek thou? she supposing him to be the Gardener, says
unto him, Sir, if thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him,
and I will take him away. 16. Jesus says, unto her, Mary. She turned her self,
and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master.

14. Not, Whether her not knowing him was not by reason of distance, darkness,
or Christ's not appearing in full notoriety, is uncertain. Secondly, Christ's
first words are of Compassion to a weeping Sinner that loved him. Thirdly, Its
easy to think with what passionate Joy this sight and word surprised her.

17. Jesus says unto her, Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my
Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and
your Father, and to my God and your God.

17. I am not risen for such familiar Conduct and Converse as I had with you
before my Resurrection, but must Ascend to my Father where my Body shall be a
Glorified spiritual body. And though I will allow you as much familiarity as
shall convince you of my Resurrection, yet no more, nor such as formerly. But
go to my Disciples, and tell them, I take them as my Brethren, and am shortly
to Ascend where I shall be better to them than on Earth, even to him, that is
my Father (by Nature and Merit) and their Father, (by adopting, Grace and Union
with me through my Merit) to my God (as I am Mediator and Man) and their God
(through my Mediation.)

Note, All true believers should labor to get this most Comfortable text
deeply imprinted on their Minds, and never think of God or come to him but as
here described; My Father and your Father, My God and your God. And thus only
to think of Heaven, and our change at Death, we are Ascending to our ascended
Savior called our Brother, and to his Father and our Father, to his God and
our God.

Note, That there seems a great difference between the Evangelists in
describing these passages and appearances to the Women and Apostles: But it is
but because one leaves out what another mentions but not that they
contradict each other. And if you you take them altogether as one History, the
order seems to be this, First, Mary Magdalen, Johanna Mary of James, and
Sallome, having bought Spices, and going to Embalm the Body, said who will roll
away the Stone for us. Secondly, When they come they found that the Stone was
rolled away; for an Angel had done it, and with his appearing and Earthquake
affrighted away the Soldiers. Thirdly, That Angel with another says to the
Women fear not, I know you seek Jesus that was was Crucified: why seek ye the
living among the dead; he is not here, he is Risen, Come, see the place, etc.
4. Then the Women run and tell the Disciples, They have taken away the Lord we
know not where they have laid him. 5. Then Peter and John run to see: 6. Mary
being come back stood weeping at the Entrance and looked back and saw two
Angels, as John recites it. 7. Then Mary looked back and saw Christ, and at
first knew him not, and he spoke to her as here. 8. Then she runs and tells the
Disciples, that she had seen the Lord: 9. Either then or when she was gone
Jesus met the rest of the Women, and said to them All hail, and they laid hold
on his Feet and worshipped him; and he said fear not, Go tell my brethen etc.

Or perhaps we may make it shorter. As, 1. The Stone rolled away and the keeper
affrighted away. 2. Mary and the other women comes and find it so. 3. They go
in and miss the body. 4. Many runs and tells Peter and John. 5. They run to
see. 6. The women Staying see first one Angel on the Stone on the right side
and then two, one at the head and one at the feet of the place. 7. These Angels
say all that is mentioned, to Mary and the rest. 8. Mary sees Jesus and so do
the rest, who holding him by the feet he restrains further corporal contract,
and speaks to Mary and the rest all that is mentioned. 9. Then she and they
tell the Disciples that they had seen him, and what he said. This seems the
order of all togegether.

18. Mary Magdalene came and told the Disciples, that she had seen the Lord,
and that he had spoken these things unto her. 19. Then the same day at evening,
being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut, where the Disciples
were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and
says unto them, Peace be unto you.

18, 19. Note, Christ rose and first appeared on the first day of the week, If
any should question it by cavilling at the Text as doubtful; the practice of
the Universal Church, ever since observing that day without any Contradicting
Party, proves it past doubt to all that use sober reason in the case. 2.
Christ owned their private meeting, not reproving the Cautelous fears of
Persecutors. 3. The first word that he spoke to them together (or after his
words to Mary) was [peace be unto you] (Little understood by many Churchmen.)

20. And when he had so said, he shows unto them his hands and his side. Then
were the Disciples glad when they saw the Lord.

20. Several appearances are past by because mentioned by others.

21. Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father has sent
me, even so send I you. 22. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and
says unto them, Receive ye the holy Ghost. 23. Whose soever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them; and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained.

21, 22, etc. Peace is the sum of my Gift and Benediction to you, and the sum
of your duty to others; as my Father sent me into the World to Gather, Guide
and save his Church as their Head and Mediator, so I send you to Gather, Guide
and Save the Church as my Apostles: And breathing on them he said, As my Father
sent me not with a bare Title unfurnished for his work, but filled with the
Spirit of Life and Power, of Light and Wisdom, of Love and Goodness, so I will
give you the same Holy Spirit, and send you furnished with Power, Knowledge and
Love, (and not with mere names and Titles as Images): I give you Power to
Preach the Gospel so effectually as shall open men's Eyes, and turn them from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
really from God, and by Sacramental investiture in Baptism, from your Remission
of Sins, and right to the inheritance among the Sanctified by Faith in me: To
be the Guids of my Church entrusted with Witnessing and Recording my Doctrine,
Laws and Promises for their Government to the end of the World; And with the
Keys of Church order, as authorized Judges in your several charges, who is
capable of Church Communion, to be received by Baptism, restored by Repentance,
or as incapable Apostates cast out: Together with an extraordinary Power, to
inflict or to remit bodily Punishment by my rule; not at your pleasure, but as
it shall please the Holy Ghost, which he shall give you. And I do breath on you
to communicate now some beginnings of that Spirit which I will send down on you
after my Ascension; And so signify to you that it is a real Qualification and
Spiritual that I will give, (as God when he made Man breathed into him a
living Soul) that you deceive not your selves and the Church by dead Imaginary
and Powerless names: The witness of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, And of
Sanctification. And if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, by what name or Title soever he be dignified.

24. But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when
Jesus came. 25. The other Disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the
Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into
his side, I will not believe.

24. Note, All Christ's Disciples were not equally inclined to believe. 2. This
obstinate Resolution deserved a desertion yet Christ in mercy overcame it and
forsook him not.

26. And after eight days, again his Disciples were within, and Thomas with
them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be unto you.

26. The next first day of that week, they being assembled, etc. Note. Coming
in when the doors were fast shut whether he opened them (as some groundlesly
think) or not, was a Miracle, he whose Body was quickly to be a Glorious
Spiritual body when it came to that Glorious spiritual Region no doubt had
after his Resurection a change preparatory thereto, by which he could appear
and disappear and vanish from their sight, and come in when the door was shut,
and at last ascend to heaven: And the Carnal objections against this are all
vain.

27. Then says he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but
believing.

27. Note, Wonderful is the Condescension of Christ to those that he will save.

28. And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God.

28. Note, The convincing condescension of Christ turns unbelief into a Rapture
of adoration: Now Thomas cries My Lord and my God.

29. Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have
believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

29. I have condescended to thy sight and feeling: But this shall be the common
way to blessedness, but they that have not seen shall believe and so be happy.

30. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples,
which are not written in this book. 31. But these are written, that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might
have life through his name.

30, 31. These and many more not recited he did: And it being by believing that
Christ is the Son of God, and Savior that you must come to life, and by the
evidence of these Miracles that you must believe that he is the Christ,
therefore these Miracles are Recorded to convince you that you may believe.

CHAP. XXI.
AFter these things Jesus showed himself again to the Disciples at the sea of
Tiberias; and on this wise showed he him self: 2. There were together Simon
Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the
sons of Zebedee, and two other of his Disciples. 3. Simon Peter says unto
them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth,
and entered into a ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing.

1, 2, 3. Note, The Disciples went home to their Trades when Jesus was
Crucified: 2. Their unsucesfulness was to prepare for the Miracle.

4. But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore: but the
Disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

4. His appearance after his Resurrection was with some change from what he
appeared before.

5. Then Jesus says unto them Children, have ye any meat? They answered him
No. 6. And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship and ye
shall find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes.

5, 6. Christ takes occasion of their frustration to show his Power and help
their Faith.

7. Therefore that Disciple whom Jesus loved, says unto Peter, It is the Lord.
Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fishers coat unto
him (for he was naked) and did cast himself into the sea.

7. When the Miracle convinced him upon John's words that it was the Lord, he
put on his Fishers Coat and leapt into the Sea, to show that he trusted Christ
with his Life.

8. And the other Disciples came in a little ship (for they were not far from
land, but as it were two hundred cubits) dragging the net with fishes. 9. As
soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish
laid thereon, and bread. 10. Jesus says unto them, Bring of the fish which ye
have now caught. 11. Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land, full of
great fishes, an hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were so many,
yet was not the net broken.

8. Here are two Miracles conjoined: The Fish caught, and the Fish and Bread
and Fire prepared for them.

12. Jesus says unto them, Come and dine, And none of the Disciples durst ask
him: Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord. 13. Jesus then comes, and
takes bread, and gives them, and fish likewise.

12, 13. They knew him more by the Miracle than by his Visage. Though it be not
said tha the did Eat and Drink with them; it is not improbable though uncertain.

14. This is now the third time that Jesus shows himself to his Disciples,
after that he was risen from the dead.

14. This was the third time that he appeared to many of them together, or the
third that John Records, and the third day of his appearing, though the sixth
appearance made: And whether that on a Mountain in Gallilee, mentioned by
others was at this time is doubted.

15. So when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon Son of Jonas,
love thou me more then these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord; thou know that
I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my Lambs.

15. Thou did lately profess that if all men forsook me, yet thou would
not, as if thou had loved me more than all the rest. And yet did three times
deny me: Art thou now of the same Resolution more confirmed -- If thou be, what
Love thou have to me, show it by thy Ministerial Love and Labor, for the Souls
even of the lowest.

16. He says to him again the second time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me?
He says unto him, yea Lord; thou know that I love thee. He says unto him,
Feed my sheep.

16. Thou know the heart and therefore know that I love thee, etc.

17. He says unto him the third time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me?
Peter was grieved, because he said unto him the third time, Love thou me? And
he said unto him, Lord, thou know all things; thou know that I love thee.
Jesus says unto him, Feed my sheep.

17. N. Peter's threefold denial required a threefold Confession, and engagement
to future fidelity and obedience; and this told him what Discipline he was to
use by the power of Church Government toward others that so offend. 2.
Ministers that are to require Confession and Promises of obedience to Christ
from offenders in order to their Restoration, must lead the way in the same
themselves if they scandalously sin. 3. The great evidence of our Love to
Christ must be in serving the Church and Souls.

18. Verily, verily I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdest thy
self, and walkedst whither thou would: but when thou shall be old, thou
shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee
whither thou would not.

18, 19. Thou wast at thy free dispose, etc. But here, after others shall bind
thee, and carry thee to Prison against thy will, and also unto death. By these
words he signified that he should be Martyred.

19. This spoke he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when
he had spoken this, he says unto him, Follow me.

19. Follow me in labor and fufferings unto Glory.

20. Then Peter turning about, sees the Disciple whom Jesus loved, following;
which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord which is he that
betrayeth thee? 21. Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this
man do?

20. What shall become of John.

22. Jesus says unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? Follow thou me.

22. What is that to thee how long he shall live, if it were till my coming; or
if he live till he see my Catholic Church settled under my proper Government,
when the Jews Law and Policy are fully dissolved at the destruction of their
Temple and Nation.

23. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren that that Disciple should
not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die: but, If I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee?

23. Note, A false Tradition may pass amongst Christ's own Disciples by
misunderstanding in some things.

24. This is the Disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote these
things: and we know that his testimony is true.

24. This is John the Disciple who was an Eye and Ear witness of all this, and
who wrote this History of Christ; And whose testimony the Church does justly
receive as true.

Note, Though some take these words to be the Bishops of Asia that published
John's Gospel, (at whose request they say he wrote it about thirty two years
after Christ's Resurrection,) yet it is no less probable that the words are his
own, and that [we know] signifies only [its well known to the Churches.

25. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they
should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not
contain the books that should be written. Amen.

25. Though this History be written to Record diverse things which others have
omitted, yet altogether are far from containing all the Miracles that Christ
did: which were so many that should they all be written, the many and great
Volumns would as it were overload the World.

Note, 1. That therefore it is not to be matter of offense, if any one
Evangelist pass by diverse particulars.

2. That though multitudes of Christ's Words and Miracles may be unknown to us,
as much is Recorded as he would have taken as needful to the notice of the
Church through all Generations: And none of his Laws or Promises the objects of
our Obedience and Faith are omitted: yea all that is essential to Christianity
is contained in Baptism or a very narrow room.

3. It is in vain to pretend Oral Tradition for any needful thing omitted in
the Scripture Records, though the Essentials and greatest practical Matters of
Religion are most certainly delivered us both ways, even by the Scriptures, and
by the Universal public practice of the Churches.

THE ACTS of the HOLY APOSTLES.
Note, That this History written by Saint Luke is not to be supposed to contain
all the Miracles, Preaching and Success of all the Apostles; but only the
History of Peter and Paul and some few others their Companions, and that but
for a short space of time: not mentioning what the other ten Apostles and their
helpers did in other parts of the World; nor what Peter and Paul did to the end
of their lives (supposed to be ten years after the ending of this History:) yea
Peter's History is here Recorded but for a far shorter time than Paul's, with
whom Luke Traveled. And though this History of Luke have more infallibility
than other History of Church affairs since written, yet all other credible
notice of matter of Fact and Church Practice from the beginning, is of great
use to us, and not to be despised.

CHAP. I.
THE former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to
do and teach, 2. Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through
the holy Ghost had given commandments unto the Apostles whom he had chosen.

1. I wrote the Gospel History as a Record of Christ's Birth, Miracles and
Doctrine, reaching to the day of his Ascension, after he had by breathing on
his Disciples given them the Holy Ghost, and their Comissions.

3. To whom also he showed himself alive after his passion, by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to
the kingdom of God.

3. That their Faith should not waver but have full assurance, he showed
himself to them by unquestionable manifestation, at several times in the forty
days space, in which he abode on Earth before his Aseention, Instructing them
in the matters of his Kingdom.

4. And being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, says he,
ye have heard of me. 5. For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost, not many days hence.

4, 5. And when he was among them he bid them wait at Jerusalem for the great
Gift of the Father even the Holy Ghost, the Promise of which ye have heard of
me: which shall be your full solemn initiation into your Apostolical and
Extraordinary Ministry, and a few days hence you shall receive.

Note, The Holy Ghost given by Christ's breathing on them, was not a mere Title,
Name or Relation, bu^ yet it was not that full effusion which they were to have
after his Ascension; but a previous earnest of it, to show them from whom the
fuller Communication was to come, differing from this later, as his own
Resurrection Victory differed from his Ascension, Majesty and Kingdom. They
were not to set upon the Public Ministry without this necessary previous
qualification: nor should any now take up the ordinary Ministry, without holy
suitable qualifications by Christ's Spirit.

6. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord,
will thou at this time restore again the kingdom-to Israel?

6. They were now in hope of Earthly Dominion, and said, will thou now deliver
Israel from Captivity and reign in visible Glory over them, as the Messiah.

7. And he said unto them, it is not for you to know the-times or the seasons,
which the Father has put in his own Power. 8. But ye shall receive power after
that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: And ye shall be witnesses unto me, both
in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of
the earth.

7. Presume not to enquire into Gods secrets, of which this is one, at what
time God will advance you and his Israel to visible Reign and Glory. But such
Power as is fittest for you at present, ye shall receive by the coming of the
Holy Ghost upon you: by which you shall be enabled to declare your Testimony of
what you have seen and heard of me, throughout the Earth.

Note, It may seem strange that Christ confuteth not their conceit of an
Israelitish Kingdom restored, but only their demands about the season. But they
were so far in the Right, as that Christ would advance believing Israelites
with the rest of the Catholic Church, though not restore the Mosaic Policy,
nor set the Israelites over others in a local Monarchy at Jerusalem. Therefore
Christ intimates that they shall have better than they expected, which the
Spirit should teach them better to understand.

9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up,
and a cloud received him out of their sight.

9. Note, No doubt but Christ's body at its entrance in the Glorious Region of
Spirits, became glorious and spiritual eminently such as Paul says ours shall
be 1 Cor. 15.

2. The sight of Christ's Ascension must needs be as full an ascertaining of the
Apostles Faith as his Resurrection; And it must be no wonder that four
Evangelists mention it not, it being enough that any mention it, Gods Spirit
making their several Histories indicted by him to be as one Book.

10. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold, two
men stood by them in white apparel; 11. Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

10, 11. While they looked up after him two Angels in the likeness of Men, in
white stood by them, saying, ye Men of Galilee, gaze no more after the body of
Jesus ascended into heaven: Know ye not that he must there Reign in Glory, and
thence send you down the Grace and Blessings purchased by his life on Earth;
and yet he shall come again at the day of Judgment, attended with his glorious
Angels, and does not forsake you by his remove.

12. Then returned they unto Jerusalem, from the mount called Olivet, which is
from Jerusalem a sabbath days journey.

12. Note, Mount Olivet at the nearest part is but five Furlongs from
Jerusalem, (a Furlong is six hundred feet, and five Furlongs a thousand Yards.)
And Christ is said Luke 24. to lead them out as far as Bethany, which is said
to be fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem John 11.18. To understand thus some say.
1. That Bethany was the name of a large space of Ground (as Hackney where some
houses are far nearer London than other.) 2. And that Christ ascended not from
the nearest part of Mount Olivet, but from the top: And it is possible that
Christ might lead them as far as Bethany, and in the house of Lazarus instruct
them, and go forth again with them to the top of the Mount, and thence ascend.

13. And when they were come in, they went up into an upper Room, where abode
both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew,
and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother
of James. 14. These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication,
with the women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.

14. Note, The sight of Christ Ascending confirmed their Faith. 2. And that
Faith presently caused constant Prayer in Concord and Communion.

15. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples, and said,
(the number of the names together were about an hundred and twenty).

15 An hundred and twenty being assembled for Prayer and mutual encouragement
in Faith.

16. Men and brethren, This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the
holy Ghost, by the Mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas, which was
guide to them that took Jesus. 17. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained
part of this ministry.

16. Note, This [must needs signify no necessity or constraint put on Judas,
but a necessity Hypothetical, and of consequence, that is, i^ cannot but be
true which God foretells or foreseeth, 2. Judus, though a Thief and a Devil
had by Christ's own choice a part or office in the Apostolic Order: But not
after Christ's breathing on them and giving them the Holy Ghost for the proper
work of his universal Kingdom, as it began after his Resurrection, but only as
one sent to offer Grace to the twelve Tribes of Israel that mostly refused it
such may be Ministers to condemnation of them selves and others; and God may
bless their doctrine to his Elect.

18. Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling
headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

18 N. Mat. 27. Says he strangled himself: Some Expositers suppose stangling
was not by hanging himself but the rage of his Conscience and Passion did
suffocate or strangle him, and that he fell down and burst: or rather that he
cast himself headlong from some high place and burst: Others think that the
Rope or Bough break where he was hanged: And its possible without hanging he
might at once strangle himself with a Cord on the brow of some Precipice or
fall or cast himself down it.

19. And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that
field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of
blood.

19. This is commonly known, and the name of the field to this day is as a
Record of it.

20. For it is written in the book of psalms, Let his habitation be desolate,
and let no man dwell therein: and, His bishopric let another take.

20. What is said in Psalm. 69.25 and 109.8. is ultimately to be verified of
him: his Office another must take.

21. Wherefore of these men which have companied with us, all the time that the
Lord Jesus went in and out among us. 22. Beginning from the baptism of John,
unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a
witness with us of his resurrection.

21, 22. Note, Many besides the twelve did constantly accompany Christ. 2.
Quest. Why must the number of twelve Apostles be yet kept up, were not others
good witnesses without being chosen Apostles. Answ. The Israelitish Policy was
not utterly demolished till near forty years after Christ's Resurrection:
Therefore till then the Jews there were to be Preached to, and the twelve
Apostles, suited to the twelve Tribes; though after the number was changed by
Paul's Conversion, when the Gospel was to be principally sent unto the Gentiles.

23. And they appointed two, Joseph, called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus,
and Matthias. 24. And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which know the
hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have chosed, 25. That he may
take part of this Ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression
fell, that he might go to his own place.

23, 24, 25. Note, 1. The Apostleship was not only the qualification of Eye
Witnesses of Christ's works, but a special preeminent office of some of those
many who saw his works: All that saw them were not Apostles. Therefore Christ
did set diversity and disparity of Ministerial Offices in his Church

2. Peter's speech was to all the Disciples, ver. 15, 16. Its therefore to be
supposed that the two were chosen by all the Company, but by the Conduct of the
Apostles. And God by Lot chose one of the two, it being his Prerogative to make
Apostles. And I know no reason why the chief Pastors of the Church (at least in
cases of doubt) should not now be so chosen.

26. And they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was
numbered with the eleven apostles.

26. Note, How casual soever it seemed, God was the undoubted determiner of it.
But solemnly to appeal to his determination in ludricrous toys, or things
already determined by his word, is but profanely to take his name in vain.

CHAP. II.
ANd when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in
one place.

1. It is by most Expositors taken to be on the Lords day though some few
contradict it. 2. Christ chose the time to send the Spirit* when they were
unanimously assembled for his worship.

2. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind,
and it filled all the house where they were sitting.

3. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat
upon each of them:

2, 3. Note, It is likely it was only on the Apostle.

4. And they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.

4. They that were unlearned men, were all suddenly filled with the Holy Ghost,
who inspiring their minds with Sacred Light of Knowledge and fervor of
affection, caused them to utter these in various Languages, which they had
never learnt in the Praises of God and his works.

Note, As Baptism enters Men into the state of Christianity, this effusion of
the Spirit solemnly invested the Apostles in the full state and power of their
Offices.

5. And there were dwelling at Jerusalam, Jews, devout men, out of every Nation
under heaven.

5. Then were at Pentecost Jews out of many Nations where they were dispersed,
that came up to the Feast.

6. Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were
confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language. 7. And
they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all
these which speak, Galileans? And how hear we every man in our own tongue,
wherein we were born? 9. Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers
in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, 10. Phrygia,
and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya, about Cyrene, and strangers
of Rome, Jews and proselytes. 11. Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in
our tongues the wonderful works of God.

6, 7, etc. The word as of Christ and of his Gospel was that which they speak
in the Tongues of all these Countries.

12. And they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another, What
means this? 13. Others mocking, said, These men are full of new wine.

12, 13. Some derided them as Drunken.

14. But Peter standing up with the eleven, lift up his voice, and said unto
them, Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto
you, and hearken, unto my words: 15. For these are not drunken, as ye suppose,
seeing it is but the third hour of the day.

14, etc. It is but nine a Clock at which time Men use to pray fasting, (and
Drunkeness will not enable a Man to speak various Languages.)

16. But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel, 17. And it shall
come to pass in the last days, (says God) I will pour out of my Spirit upon
all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men
shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: 18. And on my servants,
and on my hand-maidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they
shall prophecy.

16, etc. This is the fulfilling of what Joel Prophesied of the times of the
Messsiah, etc,

19. And I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath;
blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke. 20. The Sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the
Lord come. 21. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name
of the Lord, shall be saved.

19, 20, 21, Many Prodigies in Heaven and Earth as if the frame of Nature did
shake or were altered, shall go before the destruction of the Temple and Nation
of the Jews, But faithful praying Christians shall be saved.

22. Ye men of Israel hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of
God among you, by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the
midst of you, as ye your selves also know: 23. Him, being delivered by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken and by wicked hands
have crucified and slain: 24. Whom, God has raised up having loosed the pains
of death; because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.

22, 23, 24. You deny not the fact of those Miracles done by Jesus, which are
the infallible works of Gods attestation: Gods determinate Counsel having
appointed him to die as a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, and he
foreknowing all that your wicked hearts do in it hereto, accordingly with
wicked hands you have murdered him (not at all excusable by the said decree or
fore knowledge of God.) But God raised him from the dead having loosed the
bonds of Death, it being impossible they should be held and conquered by it.

Note, The word translated Pains of death may be also translated bonds: But if
it must be read [ Pains] Death as a separation of Soul and Body is by privation
a Penal state, though not dolorous by positive evil; yet some think that the
Article of Descent into Hell signifies some positive penalty on Christ's soul,
called here The Pains of Death: But most think otherwise.

25. For David speaks concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my
face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved. 26. Therefore did
my heart rejoice, and my tongues was glad: moreover also my flesh shall rest in
hope. 27. Because thou will not leave my Soul in hell, neither will thou suffer
thine holy One to see corruption.

Note, Though David spoke this partly of himself, the Holy Ghost spoke it by
him of Christ, that God would not leave him in the state of Death, nor suffer
his body to be corrupted.

28. Thou have made known to me the ways of life; thou shall make me full of
joy with thy countenance. 29. Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of
the Patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with
us unto this day: 30. Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn
with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he
would raise up Christ, to sit on his throne: 31. He seeing this before, spoke
of the resurrection of Christ, that his Soul was not left in hell, neither his
flesh did see corruption.

30. Quest. How is Christ said to sit on David's Throne which was of a visible
Earthly Kingdom. Answ. It is that which was principally meant in the promise to
David, And the eminent and highest Reign contains the lower under its power.

2. The Article of Christ's descent into Hell is so largely handled by many,
that I will not here interpose any more of it, than to say that I take it to be
best expounded by A. Bishop Usher in his Answer to the Jesuits challenge. And
this Text speaking first of David and ultimately of Christ, seems to m^an no
other Hell for Christ, but what David meant of ^^^self: which is Hades, the
State of separated Souls as such.

32. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses. 33. Therefore
being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the
promise of the holy Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye now see and hear.

32. We being all Witnesses of his Resurrection (and Ascension) he being in
Glory in the fullness of his Power, and having promised thus to send down the
Holy Ghost, has performed his promise as ye see and hear. 1. To prove by this
Miracle the truth of his Power to convince Unbelievers, 2. And to enable us to
Teach the Gospel to the People of diverse Languages in the World.

Note, The Apostles were credible Witnesses of fact: 2. The Holy Ghost is the
infalible evidence that Christians mission and power is of God.

34. For David is not ascended into the Heavens: but he says himself, The LORD
said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, 35. Until I make thy foes thy
footstool.

34. David went not up to Heaven bodily as Jesus did, (but only his Soul) but
he Prophesied of Christ's Ascension and Glory.

36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made
that same Jesus whom ye have Crucified, both Lord and Christ.

36. All of you therefore believe these Divine attestations and know asuredly
that this Jesus whom you Crucified is in Glory exalted by God to be the Lord
King and Savior.

37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto
Peter, and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

37. These words accompanied with so great Evidence, and the work of the Spirit
now poured out, they could not resist, but their hearts convinced were pricked
or wounded with grief and fear, to find that they had Crucified the Messiah
whom they expected; And they cried out, is there yet no hope or remedy? If
there be what shall we do?

38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift
of the holy Ghost.

38. There is yet hope and remedy. Repent of this and all your sins, and give
up your selves by Faith to Christ in the Baptismal Covenant, and your sins
shall be remitted, and this Holy Ghost which you now admire shall also be given
unto you.

39. For the promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

39. For the Messiah with his Grace, of Remission and the Spirit is promised
and is offered to you that are Jews and your whole Nation and Children in the
first place, and shall be yours yet if you accept the offer: And not to you
only but to as many as God shall call of the Gentiles in the remotest parts of
the World: For Christ is now to be the Universal King and Savior of all
Nations and Persons that accept him.

40. And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save your
selves from this untoward generation.

40. And with many more Exhortations he persuaded them, to believe and repent,
and not to imitate the unbelieving, persecuting, hardened part of the Jews, lest
they perish with them.

41. Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day
there were added unto them about three thousand souls.

41. Then they that believed and gladly consented to be Christians were
baptized: And that day about three thousand were converted to Christianity.

1. These Jews were before instructed in much of the Law and Prophets* and
therefore their Baptism was not delayed so long as the following Churches
delayed the baptizing of the Gentile Catechumens. 2. Yet though all were
converted that day it is not certain that all were Baptized that day. 3. None
were Baptized that did not profess to believe the Essentials of the Baptismal
Covenant (that Jesus is the Christ sent of God to reconcile us to him, and give
us remission of sin and his Spirit and everlasting Salvation; and professed not
willing consent to the Covenant.

42. And they continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and
in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

42. And being thus Convinced, Converted and Sacramentally bound and devoted to
Christ, they continued united in Communion with the Apostles, in learning their
Doctrine, and in brotherly Communication, and Love, and in Celebration of the
Lords Supper and in conjunct Prayer. The Apostles conducting the Society in all
this.

43. And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were done by the
Apostles.

43. The wonder amazed all men, and the Miracles wrought by the Apostles
increased men's conviction.

44. And all that believed were together, and had all things common, 45. And
sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men as every man had
need.

44. The greatness of the thing raised them above the World, and the Holy Ghost
filled them with such Love as made every one to be to another as himself, and
so made all common, not by destroying Propriety, but Selfishness, and causing
Charity: And God that moved them to it, knew that they were quickly to be
driven from their Possessions in Judea.

46. And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking
bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart.

46. In the Temple was the meeting of the multitude, and from house to house
they had their lesser Meetings where they did eat together and Sacramentally
Communicate and all with great joy and singleness of heart.

Note, Breaking Bread sometime signifies common eating together, and sometimes
Sacramental Communicating. And it is likest here to signify both conjunct,
because there the Church used the Sacrament at the end of a meel, and not alone
as now.

47. Praising God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added to
the Church daily such as should be saved.

47. Praising God and applauded by all, (or in Charity to all): God daily added
to the Church new Coverts, saved from unbelief and sin, and to be saved by
further Grace and Glory.

CHAP. III.
NOw Peter and John went up together into the Temple, at the hour of prayer
being the ninth hour.

1. Note, They conformed to the Jews ordinary way of choosing the Temple for a
place of Prayer, and choosing the common hour.

2. And a certain man lame from his mothers womb was carried, whom they laid
daily at the gate of the Temple, which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them
that entered into the Temple. 3. Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the
Temple, asked an alms. 4. And Peter fastening his eyes upon him, with John,
said, Look on us. 5. And he gave heed unto them expecting to receive something
of them. 6. Then Peter said, Silver and Gold have I none; but such as I have
give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Rise up and walk.

2. Note, 1. They that have not Money may have much better: Holiness and
Spiritual Riches are found most with Poverty. 2. God gave this Cripple better
than he asked.

7. And he took him by the right hand, and lift him up; and immediately his
feet and Ancle-bones received strength. 8. And he leaping, stood, and walked,
and entered with them into the Temple, walking and leaping, and praising God.

7. Note, This and such Miracles were not at the mere will of the Aposties; but
when God would work them, his spirit by inspiration made it known to them and
put them on.

9. And all the people saw him walking and praising God. 10. And they knew that
it was he which sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the Temple: and they were
filled with wonder and amazment at that which had happened unto him.

9.10. He had so long used to be there begging that they well know him, and
wondered at the change.

11. And as the lame man which was healed, held Peter and John, all the People
ran together unto them in the Porch that is called Solomon's, greatly wondering.

11. The Miracle made the People crowd to gaze at them.

12. And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the People, Ye men of Israel, why
marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us as though by our own power
or holiness we had made this man to walk?

12. After all the Miracles that Christ himself did, why make you so strange a
matter of this: or why gaze you with wonder on us, as if you, thought we did it
by our own Power or Holiness.

13. The God of Abraham and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our Fathers has
glorified his Son Jesus; whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the presence
of Pilate, when he was determined to let him go. 14. But ye denied the holy
one, and the just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you, 15. And
killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised from the dead: whereof we are
witnesses.

13. This is the work of Jesus glorified, whom ye Murdered, though he was the
Holy One and Just, and the Lord of Life, now raised to Glory.

16. And his name through faith in his name has made this man strong, whom ye
see and know: yea, the faith which is by him, has given him this perfect
soundness in the presence of you all.

16, Quest. Whose Faith was it? The lame man showed no belief in Christ before
he was healed. Answ. 1. It was by the Apostles Faith, 2. And for the generating
of Faith in others.

17. And now brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your
Rulers.

17. Note, Ignorance is the Common cause of error and all sin: But some men's
ignorance is more willful than others and against more light, and has less
excuse: And so was the Rulers worse than the Peoples.

18. But those things which God before had showed by the mouth of all his
Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled.

18. God who decreed Christ's sufferings for man, foretold it and permitted your
sin that did it, and his Prophecies and Promises of our Redemption are thus
fulfilled.

19. Repent ye therefore, and he converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, 20. And
he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

19, 20. Repent therefore of your rejecting Jesus Christ, and be Converted to
true Christianity and Godliness, that your sins may be forgiven, and so found
to your comfort, when the time of Christ's glorious return, shall rejoice all
true believers, and God shall send Jesus visibly to justify and glorify them,
whom we now Preach to you, and was designed, to be our Savior.

21. Whom the heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of all
things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the
world began.

21. Who must be in the Heavens in Glory (not visible here) till the great and
blessed change shall come which God has Promised by all his Prophets, and sin
and curse shall be taken away, and the Creation shall be delivered from the
bondage of Corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and there
shall be a new Heaven and a new Earth in which shall dwell Righteousness: Even
the time of our actual, full, Redemption and Salvation.

22. For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A Prophet, shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you, of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all
things, whatsoever he shall say unto you. 23. And it shall come to pass, that
every Soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the
People.

22, 23. Note, Though Moses immediately spoke of the species of the Jewish
Government, by a Prophetical Theocracy, that God would not Rule them by
Elective or Hereditary Kings; but by Prophets or Men Prophetically called (till
they cast off this Theocracy,) yet the Holy Ghost here tells us that Moses
eminently Prophesied this of Christ, who must be Universally obeyed as our
Sovereign, and not to obey him will be sure Condemnation, of which the Jews
destruction was a fore taste.

24. Yea, and all the Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as
many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.

24. The sum of all the Prophets was to foretell the sufferings and the Kingdom
of Christ now begun,

25. Ye are the Children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which God made
with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham. And in thy seed shall all the kindreds
of the Earth be blessed.

25. According to the Flesh ye are the Posterity of the Prophetical Nation, and
first in that Covenant whch God made with Abraham pronouncing all Nations
blessed in his Seed, as thence deriving their blessedness.

26. Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you,
in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.

46. Accordingly God having raised up his Son, does first offer him and his
Grace to you before he be Preached to the Gentiles; we declare to you his
Miracles, Resurrection and Doctrine, that you may be turned from your unbelief
and other sins, and be a People first blessed as pardoned, and sanctified and
saved by his Grace.

CHAP. IV.
ANd as they spoke unto the People, the Priests and the Captain of the Temple,
and the Saducees came upon them, 2. Being grieved that they taught the people,
and Preached through Jesus the Resurrection from the dead. 3. And they laid
hands on them and put them in hold unto the next day: for it was now even-tide.

1. Note, The great Persecutors and Silencers were the Priests (who should have
been the holiest) and the Sadducees that believed no life but this, and next
the Soldiers that were mercenary. One would wonder what should make such
Bruitists as the Sadduces to be such furious Silencers and Persecutors: If
there were no life to come, what harm can other Men's hopes o^ it do them. But
in depraved Souls all Faculties are vitiated. A blind mind has a malignant
heart and a cruel hand. To this day, who Persecute Men more for Preaching and
seeking the heavenly Glory, than Atheists and Bruitists who believe there is
none such.

4. Howbeit, many of them which heard the word, believed; and the number of the
men was about five thousand.

4. The Assembly that owned Christianity was increased to above five thousand,
and that success grieved the Malignants.

5. And it came pass on the morrow, that their Rulers and Elders and Scribes,
6. And Annas the high Priest, and Caiaphas, and John and Alexander, and as many
as were of the kindred of the high Priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem.

5. Their Rulers, the High Priest and their consorts met in Council.

7. And when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power, or by
what name have ye done this?

7. Who gave you Power and Authority to set up as Miracle workers and Preachers
to the People.

8. Then Peter filled with the holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye Rulers of the
people, and Elders of Israel. 9. If we this day be examined of the good deed
done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole; 10. Be it known unto
you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, whom ye Crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him does
this man stand here before you whole.

8. It is Christ's Power that did the Cure, and to his Glory they proclaim it.

11. This is the stone which was set at naught of your Builders, which is
become the head of the corner. 12. Neither is there Salvation in any other: for
there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.

11, 12. He whom you rejected is made the Leader and Head over all: And it is
only by trusting and obeying him that man can be saved.

13. Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they
were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of
them, that they had been with Jesus.

13. When they perceived their freedom of speech, and that they had not been
bred up to Learning, but were vulgar persons untaught, they marvelled and took
notice that they had seen them with Jesus.

14. And beholding the man which was healed standing with them, they could say
nothing against it.

14. The Evidence of the fact silenced them at present, but did not cure their
heardened hearts.

15. But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they
conferred among themselves, 16. Saying, What shall we do to these men? for that
indeed a notable miracle has been done by them, is manifest to all them that
dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. 17. But that it spread no further
among the People, let us straightly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to
no man in this name.

15. Note, O their Blindness and Devilish malignity of these silencers of
Christ's Ministers, while they confess the miracle, and should consult how to
repent of their former wickedness, they go on to consult how to silence the
Preachers: And think the Apostles so cowardly, that their threatening would
serve to hinder them from preaching.

18. And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in
the name of Jesus. 19. But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether
it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge
ye.

18, 19. The hardened Wretches called them, and silenced them by their
pretended Authority, commanding them not to speak at all, nor teach in the name
of Jesus! But Peter and John answered, the miracle proves Gods attestation,
and we know it by his spirit, and dare you say that you are greater than God:
And that we should obey you against his command: None but an Atheist dare
affirm it.

Q. But may not Christian Rulers and Prelates silence Ministers, though the
Jewish might not? Ans. Either of them may silence Blasphemy and wickedness: But
sure Christian Rulers have no more power to fight against Christ and his
Gospel, and silence his Ministers than Heathens? but much more obligation to
encourage them.

Q. But must not Ministers, called by Men, obey Men that silence them, though
Apostles called by Christ, might not. Ans. They that are called justly by Men,
are called by Christ, who that way signified his Will: And Timothy that was
called by Men, is charged before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
Judge, etc. to Preach the word, and be instant in season and out of season,
etc. Which way ever Christ call Men, they are bound to be true to him.
Christian Rulers must be obeyed in the determination of Circumstances (as time
places maintenance, etc. which are left to them as Judges of Edification: But
not when they forbid Christ's Ministers the work to which they are vowed, and
consecrated, unless they be unable or forfeit their Commission. The Pastors or
Bishops Preached three hundred years against the Will of Emperors and Kings,
and long after against the Will of Christian Emperors, called Arians,
Eutychians, Monothelites, etc.

. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.

20. We are not so blind and hardened, as to go against all the Divine
Evidence, which we have seen and heard, and to silence what God bids us speak,
of which we have been the Eye and Ear Witnesses our selves.

21. So when they further threatened them, they let them go, finding nothing how
they might punish them, because of the people: for all men glorified God for
that which was done.

21. The common People were not so blinded, hardened and malignant as the Chief
Priests and Rulers, but glorified God for that which did but stir up the Rulers
malice. ^. God made the People a restraint to the Priests and Rulers rage.

22. For the man was above forty years old, on whom this miracle of healing
was showed.

22. For the case was past all doubt, the Man having been thus lame forty
years, Chap. 3.2.

23. And being let go, they went to their own company, and reporred all that
the chief Priests and Elders had said unto them. 24. And when they heard that,
they lift up their voice to God with one accord, and said,

23. Note, Not that all are supposed with conjunct voice to say just the same
words, but either some of them one part and some another; or some said these
words with others acclamations and consent: or they all spoke by turns to the
same sense.

Lord, thou art God which have made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that
in them is: 25. Who by the mouth of thy Servant David have said Why did the
heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? 26. The Kings of the Earth
stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against
his Christ.

24. God Prophesied by David, that the Rulers of the Nations, Gentiles and
Jews, should in vain join their Councels and Powers against Christ, his Gospel
and his Kingdom.

27. For of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both
Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were
gathered together, 28. For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy Counsel determined
before to be done.

27. All combined by their own wickedness to do that which God has
foredetermined: God foredecreed that Christ should be a sacrifice for sin; but
the wicked determination of their Wills that did it, God only foresaw and
permitted, but did not cause.

29. And now, Lord, behold their threatenings: and grant unto thy Servants, that
with all boldness they may speak thy word; 30. By stretching forth thine hand
to heal: and that signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child
Jesus.

29, 30. Note, 1 That threatenings of malignant People are a fit opportunity for
Gods Grace to his Servants. 2. Boldness to Preach when unjustly forbidden, is a
great effect of Gods grace to his Servants. 3. The gift of convincing miracles,
though promised, must be prayed for by them.

31. And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled
together; and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and they spoke the word
of God with boldness.

31. The Spirit caused them thus to pray, and more of the Spirit was poured on
them, in answer to those Prayers: giving the boldness which they asked, and
that with a signal shaking of the place.

32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and one Soul:
neither said any of them, that ought of the things which be possessed, was is
own, but they had all things common.

32. They were all of one mind, and will and practice, united in fervent Love,
which made all common to them.

Note, It was not a commonness by levelling Titles, but by voluntary fervent
love. 2. And the Spirit did this in the beginning to give the word an example
what true Christianity and the Spirits Operation is, even such fervent Love to
each other for Christ's sake, as destroys all sinful selfishness, and makes
others interest to be to us as our own, and so uniteth us in one Body.

33. And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the
Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them all.

33. And with evident miracles and wonderful gifts of the Spirit, did the
Apostles perform their Testimony of Christ's Resurrection: And the favor of God
and Man was upon them, or great charity prevailed among them.

34. Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were
possessours of land, or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the things
that were sold, 35. And laid them down at the apostles feet: and distribution
was made unto every man according as he had need.

34. This was neither to be the constant practice, nor yet was it an unwise
excess of zeal. But it was a present effect of the Spirit? to show what a
degree of Love all Christians should desire, and what self-denial and contempt
of Riches it should cause.

36. And Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas (which is being
interpreted, The Son of consolation) a Levite, and of the Country of Cyprus,
37. Having land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the apostles
feet.

36, 37. To signify his renouncing the World and selfishness in Love to Christ
and his Church; he himself being after to go abroad the World to preach the
Gospel.

CHAP. V.
BUt a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession, 2.
And kept back part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and brought a
certain part, and laid it at the apostles feet. 3. But Peter said, Ananias, why
has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the holy Ghost, and to keep back part
of the price of the land?

1. They pretended to give the whole price, but brought a part and said it was
all, -- Why have thou let Satan put so great a sin into thy, heart, as to think
to deceive the Holy Ghost in us Apostles, as if he knew not when thou lie.

Note, The sin consisted, 1. In Hypocrisy, pretending to give more than he
did. 2. In the remnant of a worldly distrustful mind, that could not trust God
with all. 3. In blasphemy against the Holy Ghost employed, as if he knew not the
heart. 4. In reserving what he pretended to devote, which was a kind of
Sacrilege.

4. Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not
thine own power? why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart thou have
not lied unto men, but unto God.

4. While it was unsold it was thy own and in thy power, and so was the money
when thou had sold it, why did thy heart conceive so great a sin, as to play
the Hypocrite and Lie? Did thou not know that it was to God who knew thy
heart?

5. And Ananias hearing these words, fell down and gave up the Ghost: and great
fear came on all them that heard these things.

5 Note, This was by part of the Apostolical Power, to [ retain sin] or punish
it, in the time and manner that the Spirit in them did choose; which made
Believers see that Christ has punishments and is to be feared, when mercy and
holy things are abused.

6. And the young men arose, wound him up, and carried him out, and buried him.
7. And it was about the space of three hours after when his wife, not knowing
what was done, came in. 8. And Peter answered unto her, Tell me, whether ye
sold the land for so much. And she said, Yea, for so much. 9. Then Peter said
unto her, How is it that ye have agreed together, to tempt the Spirit of the
Lord? Behold, the feet of them which have buried thy husband are at the door,
and shall carry thee out. 10. Then fell she down straightway at his feet, and
yielded up the Ghost: and the young men came in and found her dead, and
carrying her forth, buried her by her husband.

6. Note, This was to confirm the honor of the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, and
the certainty of their Testimony Sealed by him, And to do that which
Magistrates, by the Sword, afterward were to do. As the Prophetical Theocracy
under Moses and Joshua, differed from the Monarchy of Saul; so more did the
Apostles, punishing Men by the power of the Holy Ghost, from Christian
Magistrates who came after.

11. And great fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as heard these
things.

Note, Under the most joyful tidings of Love Mercy and Salvation, God sees
that some fear is needful.

12. And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among
the people; (and they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch.

12. A large Porch into the Temple, was the place of their unanimous assembling.

13. And of the rest durst no man join himself to them: but the people
magnified them.

13. Note, Though the Gospel invite all, it flattereth none; but will tell
Hypocrites and Liars of their danger, to drive them from entering deceitfully
into the Church. As there is most hope in the Church to the sincere, there is
more danger there to Hypocrites, than to those without.

14. And believers were the more added to the Lord, Multitudes both of men and
women.)

14. Yet these Judgments frightning away Hypocrites, hindered not the increase
of the Church; but the powerful works of the Holy Ghost, external and internal,
converted multitudes of both Sexes.

15. Insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them
on beds and Couches, that at the least, the shadow of Peter passing by, might
overshadow some of them.

15. As Nature taught them to desire the healing of their bodies, experience
taught them to expect miracles from the Apostles, and that the very shadow of
Peter should tend to heal them.

16. There came also a Multitude out of the Cities round about unto Jerusalem,
bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits: and they
were healed every one.

16. Note Reader, That all this was done as well for us at this day, as for
them then: All our hopes, comforts and holiness depends on our belief of the
promises of the life to come by Christ: The things are unseen and much above
us: Had we not Gods own Testimony from Heaven, by many uncontrouled miracles,
our reason would be puzzelled and in doubt, and our Faith might fail: But God
knows our weakness, and by all the miracles that they were then convinced by,
who saw them, we also are convinced, to whom, by infallible record they are
transmitted; as if we had stood by and seen all these things.

17. Then the high Priest rose up, and all they that were with him (which is
the sect of the Sadducees) and were filled with indignation, 18. And laid their
hands on the apostles, and put them in the common Prison.

17, 18. Note, So horridly corrupted was the Arch-Priesthood in those times,
that the Atheistical Brutish Sadduce^s, were their party; Priesthood and
Profane Brutists were as one body: Malignity filled these with Indignation,
and made them persecute and imprison the Apostles.

19. But the Angel of the Lord by night opened the Prison-doors, and brought
them forth, and said, 20. Go, stand and speak in the Temple to the people, all
the words of this life.

19, 20. God will be above Man: Angels can do more than Devils and Persecutors,
They can open the Prison doors, and say, go and fear not these proud Tyrants,
but preach to the People in the Temple, all the Doctrine of Christ's
Resurrection, and of our Resurrection and Salvation by him; and let Priests and
Sadducers, and Infidels, do their worst to you.

21. And when they heard that, they entered into the Temple early in the
morning, and taught. But the high Priest came, and they that were with him, and
called the Council together, and and all the Senate of the Children of Israel,
and sent to the prison to have them brought.

21. the Priest and his Council sent to have them brought out of Prison before
them.

22. But when the Officers came and found them not in the prison, they
returned, and told, 23. Saying, The Prison truly found we shut with all safety,
and the keepers standing without before the doors: but when we had opened, we
found no man within.

22. It was not long of the Keepers that they got out.

24. Now when the high priest, and the Captain of the Temple, and the chief
Priests heard these things, they doubted of them whereunto this would grow.

24. Note, They saw that God overcame their malice, and that the Gospel would
not be so easily suppressed as they imagined.

25. Then came one and told them, saying, Behold, the men whom ye put in
Prison, are standing in the Temple, and teaching the people. 26. Then went the
Captain with the officers, and brought them without violence: (for they feared
the people, lest they should have been stoned.)

26. Note, Its strange that they accused not the People of Sedition or
Rebellion or a Riot? And the Apostles of heading it.

27. And when they had brought them, they set them before the Council: and the
high Priest asked them, 28. Saying, Did not we straightly command you, that you
should not teach in this name? and behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your
doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood upon us.

27. Note, O the blindness and madness of proud Worms! What are your commands
against God? Did not God command you not, to murder, and them to Preach his
word? Did not you bring his blood upon your selves?

29. Then Peter and the other apostles answered and said, We ought to obey God
rather then men.

29. Note, This none of them durst deny: But it is conscience and obedience to
God that Diabolists fight against.

30. The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree.
31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for
to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

30. That God of our Fathers, whom you profess to obey, has raised up Jesus
whom ye crucified from death, and has exalted him by and at his right hand, to
be the Lord of all, and the Savior of his People, to give them converting
grace and repentance, and forgiveness of sins.

32. And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the holy Ghost,
whom God has given to them that obey him. 33. When they heard that, they were
cut to the heart, and took Counsel to slay them.

32. And of his Resurrection and Ascension we are entrusted Witnesses, and must
not silence our Testimony, and of his present Power and Glory, this gift of the
spirit is a full proof, whose effects you see your selves, and which God gives
to them that obey his Gospel.

34. Then stood there up one in the Counsel, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a
doctor of law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put
the apostles forth a little space, 35. And said unto them, Ye men of Israel,
take heed to your selves, what ye intend to do as touching these men. 36. For
before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be some body, to whom a
number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain, and all,
as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to nonght.

34. Note. This Pharisee is not so mad as the Beastly Sadduces, who this
Theudas was, we have no other notice, but by the words of Gamaliel.

37. After this man rose up Judas of Galilee, in the days of the taxing, and
drew away much

70. Jesus answered them, have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a
Devil 71. He spoke of Judas Iscariot the Son of Simon; for he it was that
should betray him, being one of the twelve.

70, 71. Even of you twelve whom I have chosen out of all the rest to be next
me, one is a Devil; that is Judas.

N. 1. Some men are so bad that they may be called Devils. Both as false
Calumniators whence is the name Diabolus; and as they are the very agents of
the Devil, and minded like him, and ruled by him, and do what he moves them to
do, in his three great works. Lying, or (Deceit) Hatred (or Malignity) and
^urtfulness and Murder. 2. Such may be latent in the holiest Society. 3. Which
yet must not be denominated by such.

CHAP. VII.
1. AFter these things Jesus walked in Galilee: For he would not walk in Jury
because the Jews sought to kill him.

N. 1. Christ's own example tells us, that it is no sinful cowardice to avoid
persecution, till our suffering or death be like to do more good than liberty
or life.

2. Now the Jews Feast of Tabernacles was at hand. 3. His brethren therefore
said to him, depart hence and go into Judaea, that thy Disciples also may see
the works that thou do. 4. For there is no Man that does any thing in secret,
and he himself seeks to be known openly: If thou do these things, show thy
self to the World. 5. For neither did his brethren believe in him.

2. etc. N. Christ's own Kindred believed not on him a long time: And censured
him for not appearing more publicly in the face of dangers and rulers, if he
were sent from God. Thus men will teach and reprove those of whom they should
learn. Foolish men will seem wiser than Christ and dislike his ways.

6. Then Jesus said to them; my time is not yet come: but your time is always
ready. 7. The world cannot hate you but me it hates, because I testify of it
that the works thereof are evil. 8. Go ye up to this feast; I go not up to this
feast; for my time is not yet full come. 9. When he had said these words to
them he abode still in Galilee. 10. But when his brethren were gone up, then
went he also up unto the feast, not openly but as it were in secret.

6. etc. N. 1. Christ ^^re also avoided perse^ution. 2. He trusted not (...)
his purpose.

11. Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, where is he. 12. And
there was much murmuring among the people concerning him: for some said, he is
a good man: Others said, nay, but he deceives the people. 13. Howbeit, no man
spoke openly of him, for fear of the Jews.

12, 13. The people divided in their judgments of him, did not openly speak
their minds, for fear of the Rulers that were most against him.

14. Now about the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the Temple, and
taught. 15. And the Jews marvailed, saying, how knows this man letters,
having never learned. 16. Jesus answered them and said, my doctrine is not
mine, but his that sent me. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of
the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

14. He that is sent of God may know more than he has learnt of man: God tells
me what to speak. And those that truly obey so much of the will of God as they
know, are prepared to know more, and to discern my doctrine to be of God: but
wilful sinners are not.

18. He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: but he that seeks
his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.

18. Did I seek vainglory or any private ends of my own, you might suppose
that I spoke my own words: But if I only seek the Glory of God and good of men
though to my own suffering, you have no cause to suspect me of deceit or any
ill design.

19. Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keeps the law? why
go ye about to kill me?

19. But how unfit are you to discern what doctrine is of God, who keep not the
Law of Moses which you boast of: For that Law forbids Murder, and yet you
seek to murder me.

20. The people answered and said, thou have a devil who goes about to kill
thee?

20. N. They supposed him distracted: And the distracted were usually taken for
Dem^^i^^.

21. Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all
marvel. 22. Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision, [not because it is of
Moses, but of the fathers] and ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man. 23. If a
man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses should not
be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on
the Sabbath day?

22. N. The History of his Cure and their Plotting his death for it, is here
past over and supposed: But Christ knew their malicious design.

24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

24. Judge not by outward shows and worldly men's opinions, but according to the
evidence of truth.

25. Then said some of them of Jerusalem, is not this he whom they seek to
kill? 26. But lo, he speaks boldly, and they say nothing to him: Do the
Rulers know indeed, that this is the very Christ?

25. Do they suffer him because they believe him to be Christ.

27. Howbeit, we know this man whence he is: but when Christ comes, no man
knows whence he is.

27. N. They knew his visible Originals, but they knew not his heavenly nature
and glory.

28. Then cried Jesus in the Temple as he taught, saying, ye both know me, and
ye know whence I am, and I am not come of my self; but he that sent me is true,
whom ye know not. 29. But I know him, for I am from him, and he has sent me.

28. Ye know my visible Originals: But you know not my Heavenly Father who sent
me: But I know him, for I, etc.

30. Then they sought to take him, but no man laid hands on him, because his
hour was not yet come. 31. And many of the people believed on him, and said,
when Christ comes, will he do more miracles than these which this man has
done.

30.31, His Miracles convinced some against all prejudices and objections.

32. The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning him;
and the Pharisees and chief Priests sent Officers to take him. 33 Then said
Jesus unto them, yet a little while I am with you, and then I go unto him that
sent me. 34. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither
ye cannot come.

32. etc. The Pharisees and Priests, thought persecuting necessary to keep
people from believing on him: And Christ told them, it is but a little while,
till I shall be out of the reach of your malice.

35. Then said the Jews among themselves, whither will he go, that we shall not
find him? Will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and teach the
Gentiles? 36. What manner of saying is this, that he said, ye shall seek me,
and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come?

35. Will he go to those Jews who are dispersed abroad the World, or what
means he?

37. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood, and cried,
saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. 38. He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living waters. 39. But this he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe
on him, should receive: for the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that
Jesus was not yet glorified.

37. In the last and great day of that Feast Christ proclaimed the promised
gift of the Spirit, under the name of Rivers of living Waters, to all that
should truly believe on him: That is, when he was glorified: for till then the
Holy Ghost for the operation of these eminent gifts was not given.

40. Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, of a
truth this is the Prophet. 41. Others said, this is the Christ: But some said,
shall Christ come out of Galilee? 42. Has not the Scripture said, that Christ
comes of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethleem, whence David was?
43. So there was a division among the people because of him.

40. His Words and Works inclined many to believe in him: but they could not
answer objections from his Originals.

44. And some of them would have taken him, but no man laid hands on him.

44. N. God hinders bad men from doing what they would do, and they know not
how he does it.

45. Then came the officers to the chief Priests and Pharisees, and they said
unto them, Why have ye not brought him? 46. The Officers answered, Never man
spoke like this man.

45, 46. God made Christ's words effectual at the present to convince and
restrain them from violence.

47. Then answered them the Pharisees, are ye also deceived? 48. Have any of
the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? 49. But this people, who
knows not the law, are cursed.

47. 48. N. The vain respect to men of reputation and power, is a usual cause
of unbelief and disobedience to God. 2. They rightly judged that ignorance is
the cause of error and deceit; but they falsely thought their literal knowledge
with prejudice and worldly minds, had been a safe state.

50. Nicodemus says unto them, [he that came to Jesus by night, being one of
them.] 51. Does our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he does?

50.51. Nicodemus bearing a good will to Christ stopped them by a common rule of
Justice, that by the Law no man should be condemned till he be heard speak for
himself, and the Case be well tried.

52. They answered and said unto him, art thou also of Galilee? Search and
look, for out of Galilee arises no Prophet. 53. And every man went into his
own house.

52. N. 1. They give him a scorn instead of a good answer. 2. And then how poor
a reason satisfies them against all the Miracles and Doctrine of Christ:
because Galilee was a contemned Country where Christ dwelt, though he was born
at Bethlehem, of David's line. 3. One man's words may sometimes divert a
persecution.

CHAP. VIII.
JEsus went unto the mount of Olives. 2. And early in the morning he came again
into the Temple, and all the people came unto him, and he sat down, and taught
them.

1. N. 1. He left the City at Night lest they should surprise him. 2. He chose
the Temple as a place of Gods Consecration and of best opportunity for
auditors. 3. The Jews used to let them teach, who professed themselves to be
teachers. 4. His sitting in teaching is not an obligatory example to us, but an
indifferent circumstance.

3. And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery,
and when they had set her in the midst. 4. They say unto him, Master, this
woman was taken in adultery, in the very act. 5. Now Moses in the law commanded
us, that such should be stoned: but what say thou?

3. N. That the last Verse of the foregoing Chapter, and the eleven first
Verses of this Chapter, were not in diverse of the old Books in the Greek; and
diverse of the most credible Fathers have them not, or take them for Apocryphal;
and so do many Protestants besides Beza: So that it is uncertain to us, whether
it be any part of Gods word: But we have enough besides of which we may be
certain.

Suppose the Text current, it seems they would have drawn Christ into a snare,
by getting him either to speak against the Law, or against Caesar who had taken
from them the power of putting offenders to death which the Law gave them.

6. This they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus
stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them
not.

6. Beza takes this Writing on the ground to be improbable and part of the
Apocryphal story: If it was otherwise, it signified but a discerning of their
snare, and a putting off the answer by a seeming neglect or disregard.

7. So when they continued asking him, he lift up himself, and said unto them,
he that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.

7. N. Thus he evadeth the snare of their question, as not belonging to him to
judge.

8. And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground. 9. And they which heard
it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at
the eldest, even to the last? and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing
in the midst.

8.9. N. It is so improbable that Christ should be left alone in the Temple
that this increases Beza's suspicion that it is Apocryphal: But if it be true,
it means that those went away who came to accuse the woman and left him with
his auditors and the woman.

10. When Jesus had lift up himself and saw none but the woman, he said to her
where are those thine accusers? Has no man condemned thee. 11. She said, No
man, Lord: And Jesus said to her, neither do I condemn thee: go and sin no more.

10.11. N. Those that hence take encouragement to connive at adultery must note
1. That the text it self is of uncertain authority. 2. If it were certain it
signifies not that Christ would have adultery unp^pnished: but that he
disclaimed the office of a Judge in matters of corporal punishment, as being no
Magistrate.

12. Then spoke Jesus again to them, saying, I am the light of the World: he
that follows me shall not walk in darkness but shall have the light of life.

12. N. Here begins the certain Text: q. d. I am that Teacher sent from God who
show all my followers that light that quickneth and leads to everlasting
life, and others live and walk in darkness.

13. The Pharisees therefore said to him? Thou bear record of thy self; thy
record is not true. 14. Jesus answered and said to them, though I bear record
of my self, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go,
but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.

13.14. Thy own testimony of thy self is not credible. Jesus said, Even my
testimony of my self is true and credible, because I know what I say, and
whence I come, etc. But your denial of it is not credible, because you know not
whence I come, etc. but speak against what you know not.

15. Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man. 16. And if I judge my judgment is
true, for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

15.16. You see no further than my fleshly part and originals; I do not so
rashly judge of any: But yet my judgment is true and credible for you have not
my bare word, but therewith the works of the power of my Father that sent me,
and his attestation.

17. It is also written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true. 18.
I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father that sent me bears
witness of me.

17.18. Your Law allows two Witnesses to be credible, I am one, who may be
allowed to witness about other men's interest, that I am sent by the Father to
save lost sinners; and the Father is the other, whose Voice and Works bear
witness of me.

19. Then said they to him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, ye neither
know me nor my father: If you had known me, ye would have known my father also.

19. Where is thy Father: Is not Joseph thy father? He said, you know neither
Me nor my Father: Had you by my Doctrine and Works known Me and my Office, I
should have taught you to know my Father.

20. These words spoke Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the Temple: and
no man laid hands on him, for his hour was not yet come.

20. N. Till Gods appointed time of trial and suffering, among the fiercest
enemies there is safety.

21. Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and
shall die in your sins: Whither I go, ye cannot come.

21. I came to you as a Savior, and ye reject me, and I will accordingly
depart from you and your sin shall bring destruction on you and I will send the
Gospel to the Gentiles* and will ascend to Heaven, whence your sin will exclude
you.

22. Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? because he says, Wither I go,
ye cannot come. 23. And he said unto them, ye are from beneath, I am from
above: ye are of this world, I am not of this world. 24. I said therefore unto
you, that ye shall die in your sins: For if ye believe not that I am he, ye
shall die in your sins.

22. Ye are of this lower World: I am of above and thither I go. And if you
believe not that I am the Christ, your Nation shall be destroyed for rejecting
me, and you shall die unpardoned in your sin.

25. Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus says unto them; even the
same that I laid unto you from the beginning. 26. I have many things to say,
and to judge of you: but he that sent me is true: and I speak to the world
those things, which I have heard of him.

25. Even the Messiah as I have always told you. I have much to say against
your Infidelity, but I will now only appeal to my Fathers testimony, whose
words I speak.

27. They understood not that he spoke to them of the Father.

27. N. Gross ignorance is the parent and nurse of unbelief.

28. Then said Jesus unto them, when ye have lift up the son of man, then shall
ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my self: but as my Father has
taught me, I speak these things.

28. When ye have crucified me, then I shall convince many of you by fuller
evidence that I am the Christ, and the rest shall feel it to their destruction;
and these my words shall be confirmed.

29. And he that sent me, is with me: the Father has not left me alone: for I
do always those things which please him.

29. My Father that sent me never deserteth me, for I do but fulfill his will,
and do what he appointed me.

30. And as he spoke these words, many believed on him. 31. Then said Jesus to
those Jews which believed on him, if ye continue in my word, then are you my
Disciples indeed. 32. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free.

30.31. I cannot take you for my disciples, unless your Faith be rooted so as
to persevere and proceed to learn what yet you have not learned. And if ye do
this you shall know more of that truth that will save you, and deliver you from
the greatest of your bondage.

33. They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any
man: how say thou? Ye shall be made free?

33. Some present answered him, we be Abraham's seed, and though the Romans
master us, we are no men's slaves: What then is the freedom which thou do
promise us.

34. Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you; whosoever commits
sin, is the servant of sin. 35. And the servant abides not in the house for
ever: but the Son abides ever. 36. If the Son therefore shall make you free,
ye shall be free indeed.

34, 35.36. Can you boast of your freedom who by your sinful practice show that
you are the servants of sin, and by it are liable to the judgment of God, as
slaves are to stripes: And if you have thus enslaved your selves to sin and to
Gods judgments, he may turn you out of his house you know not how soon: But the
Son and Heir is not turned away: Therefore if you will be free indeed from the
guilt of sin, and the wrath of God, and the malice of Satan, come in by the Son
and so you may be free.

37. I know you are Abraham's seed, but ye seek to kill me, because my word has
no place in you. 38. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do
that which ye have seen with your father.

37.38. I know that ye are the seed of Abraham by the flesh. But were you seed
as he is the Father of the faithful, you would not seek to kill me, and reject
my word. Even that word of truth which I have received of my Father, which you
reject, and obey the will of your father.

39. They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father, Jesus says unto
them, If you were Abraham's Children, ye would do the works of Abraham. 40. But
now ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the truth, which I have heard
of God: this did not Abraham.

39.40. If ye were Abraham's Children you would be like him, and do as he did.
But to seek to murder me for telling you the truth which I have heard from God,
is not like Abraham's works of Faith.

41. Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of
fornication, we have one Father, even God. 42. Jesus said unto them, If God
were your father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth, and came from God,
neither came I of my self, but he sent me.

4^. Ye show by your deeds whose nature you have, and so who is your father:
42. If God were your Father you would be like him, and then you would love me,
who came from him, as sent by him.

43. Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word.
44. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do:
he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there
is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie; he speaks of his own: for he is a
liar, and the father of it.

43.44. Why is my doctrine rejected by you, but because your corrupt natures,
and sin are contrary to it; To speak plainly to you, as the Child's nature is
like the Fathers from whom it is received, so yours is so like the Devils
nature, that I may say you received it from him and he is the father of it, and
so far of you. For you love to do that which he loves and desires: These are
his great Characters. 1. He was from the beginning A MALICIOUS MURDERER. 2. He
is A LIAR; a deserter of the Truth, and an enemy to it: His business in the
World is to Deceive by Lying; and when he thus lies and deceives he does
according to his corrupt nature: for he is a Liar and the Father of Lies.

N, 1. By these three Characters of LYING, MALIGNITY and MURDER or hurtfulness,
the devilish nature and seed is known: And no boasting of Abraham or
Christianity, is any disproof of it. 2. Devilisms is the universal pravity of
the malignant World: And it is no wrong or railing so to say: that the Devil is
their Father.

45. And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not.

45. Though nature love the Truth as Truth, yet because the Truth that I tell
you is cross to your prejudice and carnal minds and lusts, ye reject it as if
it were error.

46. Which of you convinces me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not
believe me.

46. If you know any falsehood or sin by me, prove it if you can: but if it be
Truth that I say, why does prejudice and malice hinder you from believing it.

47. He that is of God, hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them nor, because
ye are not of God.

47. The Children of God have a mind and nature like him: And therefore they
savor and love his word: Therefore your rejecting Gods word, does prove that
ye are not the Children of God.

48. Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not well that thou art a
Samaritan, and have a devil?

48. They said, do we not call thee as thou art, in saying, thou art a
distracte^ Samaritan heretic.

49. Jesus answered, I have not a devil, but I honor my Father, and you do
dishonor me. 50. And I seek not my own glory, there is one that seeks and
judges.

49. I am not a distracted Demoniak, (but you calumniators): My Doctrine and
Works honor my Father, and as for your dishonouring of me, though I can bear
it who seek not my own Glory, my Father will secure my honor and judge you for
your reproach.

51. Verily, verily I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see
death.

51. I tell you that reject my word, that to believe and keep it is the way to
everlasting life, and to be saved from death spiritual, temporal (by
resurrection) and eternal.

52. Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou have a devil. Abraham
is dead, and the Prophets: and thou say, If a man keep my saying, he shall
never taste of death. 53. Art thou greater than our father Abraham which is
dead? And the Prophets are dead: whom make thou thy self?

52, 53. Now we know that thou art a distracted demoniack: When thou talkest of
men's not dying, when Abraham and the Prophets are dead: Art thou so much
greater than all they.

54. Jesus answered, If I honor my self, my honor is nothing: It is my Father
that honors me, of whom ye say, that he is your God: 55. Yet ye have not
known him, but I know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I shall be a
liar like unto you; but I know him, and keep his saying.

54. It is not my own testimony that I plead with you, it is my Father that
honors me, whom you should believe because you call him your God. But indeed
you know him not, and therefore understand not his testimony: But I know him,
and should I deny his witness, and say I know him not, I should be a Liar like
you: But I know him and his word, and keep it.

56. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad.

56. Your Father Abraham joyfully believed the promise of the Messiah, and so
by Faith foresaw my coming and was glad.

57. Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have
thou seen Abraham.

57. They understanding all carnally, thought Christ spoke like a distracted
Fanatic.

58. Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I
am.

58. I tell you that before Abraham's days, (as I was from Eternity so) in time
I was the promised Messiah in whom Abraham in his days believed: I am not so
young as you imagine.

59. Then took they up stones to cast at him: But Jesus hid himself, and went
out of the Temple, going through the midst of them and so passed by.

59. At these words they took him for a Blasphemer, and attempted to stone him
to death: But he some way hid himself, and went out from among them.

N. That the last part of this Verse, is of uncertain authority, being not in
some ancient Copies.

CHAP. IX.
1. AND as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth. 2. And
his Disciples asked him, saying Master, who did sin, this man or his parents,
that he was born blind.

2. Was it for any foreseen sin that he would after commit, or for his original
sin or for any sin of his Parents? Or, it is commonly held that all punishment
is for sin: How could that be in this man? Not for his own sin, for he had none
besides his original sin: Not for his Parents; for God punishes not one for
another sin? What then, was it for.

N. 1. It Is improbable that Christ's disciples thought that this Soul sinned in
another body, and Christ not reprove them. 2. The Disciples knew that Adams
sin, and our Original pravity, or our Parents sin, might be punished with as
great a punishment as blindness. But they seemed to think that so miserable a
punishment must be for some extroardinary sin, which Christ denies.

3. Jesus answered, Neither has this man sinned nor yet his parents, but that
the works of God should be made manifest in him.

3. N. Christ meant not to deny. 1. That he had Original sin. 2. Or his Parents
had actual sin. 3. Nor that these were a cause of his punishment. 4. But it was
none of these that was the differencing cause why this man was punished rather
than others, q.d. Though all punishment be for sin, and this man's had such a
common cause, yet no sin was the reason why he was singled out for this
suffering: But God designed it for an advantage to glorify him in the man's
miraculous cure.

4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night
comes when no man can work.

4. God in this man gives me an opportunity to do the work for which he has
sent me, for the sealing of the Gospel and convincing the World: And I will
take the opportunity, for I shall shortly be gone hence: And hereby I give you
warning to work while you have day: for the night is at hand, when you shall on
earth have time to work no more; therefore take your present time.

5. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

5. God who made me the light of the World, will have me shine to it while I am
here.

6. When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the
spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay. 7. And said
unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam (which by interpretation, is Sent.) He
went his way therefore and washed, and came seeing.

6, 7. N. This dirty means* was no more than no means, as to the sufficienc^ of
Christ's commanding power; but he will have us use the unlikeliest means that we
may be fit receivers.

8. The neighbors therefore, and they which before had seen him that he was
blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged? 9. Some said, This is he:
others said, he is like him: but he said, I am he.

8. They were struck with admiration, and had much ado to believe that he was
the same man, till he himself told them that he was the man.

10. Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened? 11. He answered,
and said, a man that is called Jesus, made clay and anointed mine eyes, and
said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed; and I
received sight. 12. Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.
13. They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind. 14. And it was
the Sabbath day when Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes. 15. Then again
the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. He said unto them,
He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see. 16. Therefore said some
of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath
day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner, do such Miracles? And there
was a division among them.

10. etc. N. 1. They first attempted to disprove the matter of fact, and when
they could not do that, they pretended Go is Law to prove him a bad man and
consequently that it was not by God that he did his Miracles. 2. They that will
try the Spirits and Miracles by the Scripture, must not misunderstand the
Scripture.

17. They say unto the blind man again, What say thou of him, that he has
opened thine eyes? He said, He is a Prophet.

17. N. The benefit prepared the man to judge better than they. It is a double
sin if those should judge ill of Christ who have been delivered by him.

18. But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and
received his sight, until they had called the parents of him that had received
his sight. 19. And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who you say was
born blind? How then does he now see? 20. His parents answered them, and said,
We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind: 21. But by what means
he now sees, we know not, or who has opened his eyes, we know not: he is of
age, ask him, he shall speak for himself. 22. These words spoke his parents,
because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man
did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue. 23.
Therefore said his parents, He is of age, ask him.

18. etc. N. 1. Unjust Judges resolve first what to do, and enquire after. 2.
Though excommunication be Gods Ordinance, the Devil often uses it by wicked men,
against the just that own Christ and the Truth.

24. Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give God
the praise, we know that this man is a sinner.

24. They said, ascribe thy cure to God, but think never the better of this
man; for we know by his breaking the Sabbath that he is a bad man.

N. Wicked persecutors that speak against Gods servants, dare not directly
speak against God, but pretend to give him his praise, while they persecute his
servants.

25. He answered, and said, Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not: one thing
I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see.

25. Though you say you know him to be a Sinner, I know it not, nor am bound to
believe you: But I wel^ know he has cured me of my blindness.

26. Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? How opened he thine
eyes. 27. He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear:
Wherefore wo^ld ye hear it again? Will ye also be his Disciples? 28. Then they
reviled him, and said, thou art his Disciple, but we are Moses disciples. 29.
We know that God spoke unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know not from whence
he is. 30. The man answered, and said unto them; Why, herein is a mavelous
thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes.
31. Now we know that God hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of
God and does his will, him he hears.

27. Sure you do it not because you would be his disciples. 28. They took it
for a reproach to be Christ's disciples. 30. You are strangly ignorant that know
not whence a man is that does such Miracles: Reason and common consent tells
us, that God hears not the prayers of wicked men, so far as to signify his
approbation of them; but rejects them: But it is Godly worshippers of him,
and them that obey his will that he hears and approves. (This none that
owneth a God dare deny.)

32. Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one
that was born blind. 33. If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.

32. Never man did this before (much less by human power) He could never do it
but by Gods power and approbation.

34. They answered, and said unto him, thou wast altogether born in sins, and
do thou teach us? And they cast him out.

34. N. It Is the way of proud wicked men, to scorn to learn, but to Lord it and
revile and turn to violence on pretense of discipline, when they cannot answer
with reason.

35. Jesus heard that they had cast him out: and when he had found him, he said
unto him, Do thou believe on the Son of God? 36. He answered, and said, Who
is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?

35. N. Christ receives those whom false Church governors unjustly cast out.
2. Christ takes advantage of men's injuries to convert the persons injured. 3.
The man was willing to believe as soon as he could be instructed whom he should
believe in.

37. And Jesus said unto him, Thou have seen him, and it is he that talks
with thee. 38. And he said, Lord, I believe: and he worshipped him.

37, 38. He believed and bowed or fell down to him.

39. And Jesus said, For judgment am I come into this world, that they which
see not might see, and that they which see, might be made blind.

39. It is part of my judicial office in this World, to open the eyes of many
that are now ignorant and blind in sin, and to give up many to their wilful
blindness, who think themselves the wisest men, but resist the light of saving
truth.

40. And some of the Pharisees which were with him, heard these words, and said
unto him, Are we blind also?

40. N. Proud men (especially it Rulers or Teachers of others) cannot endure to
be told of their sin, especially of their ignorance and error.

41. Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye
say, We see, therefore your sin remains.

41. If your ignorance were as blindness is a necessary natural disease, you
would not be voluntary in your error and guilt of sin: Or, if you knew your
selves to be ignorant and erroneous, you would learn and be cured: But your
error being wilful, and you conceited of your knowledge, you are guilty and
unexcusable and settled in your sin,

CHAP. X.
VErily, verily I say unto you, He that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. 2.
But he that enters in by the door, is the the shepherd of the sheep.

1. I say to you who have cast out this man for believing in me, you take upon
you to be the true guides of the people, and you look for the Mesiah agreeable
to your minds: But Gods testimony and mission is the door to the Messiah, and
the Messiah is the great shepherd and the door to the inferior Pastors and the
Flocks: He that enters any other way, climbeth in as a thief: But the true
Shepherd (principal and Ministerial) comes in by the door.

3. To him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his
own sheep by name, and leads them out.

3. To the Messiah God will open the door, and to Sub-Pastors, they that by
office are door-keepers to the Church must open it, as to men sent of God; And
Gods Spirit teaches Christians to know the voice of Christ, and under him of
those that speak his Word: And as shepherds there regarded every sheep
distinctly and called them by several names (as Plow-men now do their Oxen),
and did not drive them with Clubs like Swine, but go before them and call them
to their Pasture by name, so does Christ and true Pastors now know every member
of their Flocks, and lead them by

people after him: he also perished, and all even as many as obeyed him were
dispersed.

37. This Judas pretended to be a Captain of the People against submitting to
the Roman taxing; which he called servitude and unsufferable.

38. And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for it
this Counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to naught:

38. By Gods Providence without your violence.

39. But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest happily ye be found even
to fight against God.

39. You will overthrow your selves and not it, if it be of God: Its madess to
fight against him?

Note, O that the Malignant World would but examine which cause God is for.

40. And to him they agreed: and when they had called the apostles, and beaten
them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let
them go. 41. And they departed from the presence of the Counsel, rejoicing that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.

40. Note, Causeless stripes were the Mercy of these Men. The Holy Ghost did
not work Miracles to revenge these injuries to the Apostles: But taught them to
rejoice in this reproach for Preaching Christ, as their great honor.

42. And daily in the Temple, and in every House, they ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ.

42. And no commands, threats or cruelties made them cease Preaching Christ
publicly and from house to house.

CHAP. VI.
ANd in those days, when the number of the Disciples was multiplied, there
arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows
were neglected in the daily ministration.

1. Note, Those Jews that understood the Greek Tongue, and used the Greek
Translation of the Scripture, were called Greeks: who were some at Jerusalem,
most at Alexandria, and some scattered abroad the World, 2. Even in the
greatest Exemplification of Christian Love, Concord and self denial, the
interest of the body, and its provisions, began a murmuring among this chosen
Flock that had all things common. And can we now expect to live without
murmurring at each other upon cross interests and bodily wants. The suffering
Party will think themselves injured, and will complain.

2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said,
It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables.

2. We must prefer the greater before the less; the Preaching of Gods word
before the charge of distributing to Love feasts and to the Poor; and we are
not sufficient for both.

3. Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full
of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom ye may appoint over this business.

3. Note, 1. This is the first call of Officers mediately by Men: yet the Holy
Ghost in the Apostles instituteth the office; but yet they give a reason for
it. A Divine Institution, and reason from necessity and convenience, well
agree. 2. The Apostles fix the number. 3. The Congregation must choose the
Persons. 4. God by his Spirit in the Apostles limiteth them to certain
qualifications: 1. Good Report. 2. Full of the Holy Ghost. 3. And of Wisdom.
The Chosen Persons must be appointed or authorized and directed by the
Apostles. Incapable Matter ma^^th both Election and Men's Ordination void. But
yet the Electors still are Trusted whom to Elect, and the Ordainers whom to
Ordain; And every Error is not a nullity, where there are the essential
qualifications.

4. But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of
the word.

4. Where ever God will bless his Church with Bishops indeed, this will be
their life and their description.

5. And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man
full of faith, and of the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor,
and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch.

5. The Reason of the motion, the Authority of the Apostles, and the Spirit of
God, made them all unanimously consent.

6. Whom they set before the apostles: and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands on them.

6. Prayer to God to accept and bless them, and the Authorizing them by the
sign of Imposition of hands, was the Apostles way of Ordination (supposing them
instructed for their Office.)

7. And the word of God increased; and the number of the Disciples multiplied
in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the
faith.

7. And the success of the Word increased, and the number of the Disciples in
Jerusalem grow very great, and a great Company of the Priests (or a great
Company, and of the Priests some) were obedient to the Doctrine of Christ by
believing

8. And Stephen full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among
the People.

8. Stephen having a great measure of the Spirit, was full of Faith and Power
and wrought great Miracles.

9. Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue,
of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia, and
of Asia, disputing with Stephen.

9. Jerusalem being the place where the scattered Jews of all Nations used at
certain times to worship, no wonder if several Countries had there several
Synagogues. Libertines are by most supposed to be Jews made free: Though some
derive the Name from a Country thinking one Letter is changed.

10. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which he
spoke. 11. Then they suborned men which said, We have heard him speak
blasphemous words against Moses, and against God.

10. Note, On such terms we dispute with Malignant men. When they cannot resist
the Truth they turn Diabolists, and suborn Men to swear to false Accusations:
Malignity, Bood-thirsty Cruelty, and Lying are the three Essentials of a
Diabolist. 2. It is next to a Miracle of Providence that no greater numbers of
Religious persons have been murdered in the World by the way of Perjury, and
pretense of Law, when so many thousands hate them, who make no Conscience of
false Oaths.

12. And they stirred up the People, and the Elders and the Scribes, and came
upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the Council;

12. Note, When Informers and Perjured Witnesses and Council or Judges were all
of a Mind, false Malignants, blood thirsty men, it was easy to foreknow the
sentence.

13. And set up false witnesses, which said, This man cease not to speak
blasphemous words against this holy place, and the Law. 14. For we have heard
him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change
the customs which Moses delivered us.

13, 14. Note, It is very likely that they heard Stephen say some words of
Christ's Abrogation of the Law, from which the Perjured gathered their
Testimony, and putting their own sense on his words made Blasphemy of them, and
did not think they were Perjured: And what man is there that Judges, Jury and
Witnesses may not Condemn, if they will but put their ownsence on their words:
Christ so suffered, before Stephen: And it is no wonder or dishonor to be
condemned as the greatest Malefactors by such men: Therefore judge of History
accordingly, where wicked Men are the Accusers and Judges.

15. And all that sat in the Council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face,
as it had been the face of an Angel.

15. With a a splendour which might amaze them, but did not change them; so much
was Dives in Hell deceived that one from the Dead would convert his sensual
Brethren, when it is like that if Lazarus had come to them as he prayed, they
would have put him to death again: For so they consulted to do by another
Lazarus whom Christ raised. But where are these Judges and Gentlemen now?

CHAP. VII.
THen said the high Priest, Are these thing so?

1. The Archpriest is the Arch-malignant, and with seeming Gravity does but
enquire after Sin.

2. And he said, Men, brethren, and Fathers heraken: The God of glory appeared
unto our Father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
Charran, 3. And said unto him, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy
kindred, and come into the land which I shall show thee.

2, 3. Obey me in forsaking thy Idolatrous Country and go to another, which I
will direct thee to.

4. Then came he out of the land of the Caldeans, and dwelt in Charran: and
from thence, when his Father was dead, he removed him into this land wherein ye
now dwell. 5. And he gave him none inheritance in it, no not so much as to set
his foot on: yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and
to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child. 6. And God spoke on this
wise, that his seed should sojourn in a strange land, and that they should
bring them into bondage, and entreat them ^vil four hundred years, 7. And the
nation to whom they shall be in bondage will I Judge, said God: and after that
shall they come forth, and serve me in this place.

4, etc. Note, Obedience to God must be performed by the hope of what he
promises though it be many hundred years after, and not only for present
Possession. 2. The four years began at the Birth of Isaak, and not at the going
into Egypt.

8. And he gave him the covenant of circumcision, and so Abraham begat Isaac,
and circumcised him the eighth day; and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat the
twelve Patriarchs. 9. And the Patriarchs moved with envy sold Joseph into
Egypt: but God was with him, 10. And delivered him out of all his affictions,
and gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh King of Egypt: and he
made him Governor over Egypt and all his house.

8. N. This History Stephen recites to convince them of the greatness of their
forefathers sin and theirs, in still hardening their hearts against Gods
Mercies.

11. Now there came a dearth over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great
affliction, and our Fathers found no sustenance. 12. But when Jacob heard that
there was corn in Egypt, he sent out our Fathers first. 13. And at the second
time Joseph was made known to his brethren, and Joseph's kindred was made known
unto Pharaoh. 14. Then sent Joseph, and called his Father Jacob to him, and all
his kindred, threescore and fifteen souls, 15. So Jacob went down into Egypt,
and died, he and our Fathers.

14. Gen 46, 27. Says they were but seventy: some say that Stephen includes
some born in Egypt with Joseph, and his sons and sons sons: Others say that the
Septuagint which Stephen followed, has a mistaken word which causes the
difference.

16. And were carried over into Sichem, and laid in the Sepulcher that Abraham
bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emor, the Father of Sichem.

16. Some difference from the Hebrew History here raises difficulty: The truth
seems to be Jacob was carried and buried in the Field of Macpelah bought by
Abraham of Ephron the son of Zoar, or of the Sons of Heth, Genesis 23.8. and
49.32. But Joseph's bones were carried from Egypt to Sichem, Jos. 24.31, 32. and
buried in the Field bought by Jacob of the Sons of Hemor; and in which place
his brethren were buried is uncertain.

17. But when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to
Abraham, the People grew and multiplied in Egypt. 18. Till another King arose,
which knew not Joseph. 19. The same dealt subtly with our kindred, and evil
entreated our Fathers, so that they cast out their young Children, to the end
they might not live.

17. Note, Man's cruelty and subtilty fighting in vain against Gods Providence
and Mercy to his People, is the common case of the World

20. In which time Moses was born, and was exceeding fair, and nourished up in
his Fathers House three Months: 21. And when he was cast out, Pharaohs
daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son.

20. See Exodus 2.

22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty
in words, and in deeds.

22. And being by Pharoahs Daughter Educated as her Son, he had the advantage
of getting all the Egyptian sort of Learning, in which he excel (...)

23. And when he was full forty ye^^^ (...) it came into his heart to visit his
brethren the Children of Israel. 24. And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he
defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian:

23. Note, Though Moses Age and Learning be not mentioned in the Old Testament,
it might be otherwise known. 2. And whether he was warranted to stay the
Egyptian by any special Revelation, is doubtful.

25. For he supposed his brethren would have understood, how that God by his
hand would deliver them: but they understood not.

25, What notice he had then of this purpose of God, we read not: But says
Doctor Hammond, [This lawfully he might do, in the defense of an innocent
persons life, against an unjust assault or violen^e which could not be averted
but by this means.]

26. And the next day he showed himself unto them as they strove, and would
have set them at one again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one
to another.

26. Note, Even while they are oppresed by the common Tyranny of the King, they
forbear not quarrelling and wronging one another.

27. But he that did his neighbor wrong, thrust him away, saying, Who made
thee a Ruler, and a Judge over us? 28. Will thou kill me, as thou did the
Egyptian yesterday?

27, 28. Note. 1. It Is the injuring party that is usually readiest to rise up
against Peacemakers: 2. He that will reconcile Peace-(...) and reprove the
injurious, must expect to be accused as a Peace-breaker, and injurious and
arrogant himself. 3. Self-avengers love not Rulers*

29. Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Midian,
where he begat two sons.

29. He knew then that the killing his Egyptian would be known to Pharaoh, and
therefore fled.

30. And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the
wilderness of mount Sina, an Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush.

30. The same appearance is said to be God and an Angel in fire: God speaking
by an Angel in fire.

31. When Moses saw it, he wondered at (...) sight: and as he drew nere to
behold it, (...) ^^yce of the Lord came unto him. 32. Saying, I am the God of
thy Fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
Then Moses trembled, and durst not behold.

31. If so small an appearing of God will make man tremble, why are not we
constantly awed by the belief of his Glory.

33. Then said the Lord to him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet: for the place
where thou stand, is holy ground.

33. Note, 1. The Holiness of Places is their separate relation to some holy
work of God, or some appearance of him. God will have outward bodily
expressions of inward Reverence, to him, and to that which is specially related
to him.

34. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt,
and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them: And now
come, I will send thee into Egypt.

34. Note, God is not ignorant or regardless of his peoples sufferings: 2. But
his usual season of deliverance, is when their sufferings are at the greatest.

35. This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a Judge?
the same did God send to be a ruler and a deliver, by the hands of the Angel
which appeared to him in the bush.

35. God sent by his Angel the same man to Rule and Deliver them, whom they
refused to be their Ruler and deliverer; even as you now have done by Jesus
Christ whom God has sent.

36. He brought them out, after that he had showed wonders and signs in the
land of Egypt, and in the red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years.

36. God wrought many Miracles by him for their deliverance, who had rejected
him (As he has done by Jesus for your deliverance.)

37. This is that Moses which said unto the children of Israel, A Prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me: him shall
ye hear.

37. This Moses of whom you boast thus prophesied of Christ, a Prophet, etc.

38. This is he that was in the Church in the wilderness with the Angel, which
spoke to him in the mount Sina, and with our Fathers: who received the lively
Oracles, to give unto us. 39. To whom our Fathers would not obey, but thrust
him from them, and in their hearts turned back again in Egypt. 40. Saying unto
Aaron, Make us Gods to go before us; for as for this Moses, which brought us
out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

38. This is he whose name you honor who was in the Congregation in the
Wilderness, who received the Oracles of God by voice which he gave you then as
the way of life (in subordination to Faith in his promises; whom yet your
Ancestors would not obey, but rebelled against him and refused him, and
unthankfully would have returned to that Egyptian Bondage, from which by so
many Miracles they were delivered; yea rebelled against God and turned
Idolators, and made Aaron make them feigned Gods to go before them.

41. And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the idol,
and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.

41. So sottish were they as to honor that as God which they had made
themselves.

42. Then God turned, and gave them up to worship the host of Heaven, as it is
written in the book of the Prophets, O ye House of Israel, have ye offered to
me slain beasts and sacrifices, by the space of forty years in the wilderness?
43. Yea, ye took up the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your God Remphan,
figures which he made, to worship them: and I will carry you away beyond
Babylon.

42. That the text Amos 5. means by Moloch and Rempham a Deifyed Egyptian
King, and Saturn. See Dr. Hammonds Annot. and other conjectures in Beza, etc.
whether this last Idolatry was included in the Golden Calf, or the Text only
meant they fell to it after Joshua's days is uncertain: Though the Hebrew say
beyond Damascus, and Lukes Greek Beyond Babylon the sense is the same. And Luke
writing in the Greek, it is like used not the same word as Stephen in Chaldee.

44. Our Fathers had the Tabernacle of Witness in the wilderness, as he had
appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the fashion
that he had seen.

44, These Ancestors had the Tabernacle of the Testimony, where was the Ark of
God that had the Tables of the Law, and where God used by signs to signify his
presence and give his Oracles: This Moses was to make according to the pattern
which God showed him.

45. Which also our Fathers that came after, brought in with Jesus into the
possession of the Gentiles, whom God drove out before the face of our Fathers
unto the days of David.

45. This Tabernacle our Fathers after brought into Canaan with Joshua, and it
continued till David's time.

46. Who found favor before God, and desired to find a Tabernacle for the God
of Jacob. 47. But Solomon built him an House.

46. Who being beloved of God, desired to have built him a Temple. But God
chose Solomon to build it.

48. Howbeit the most High dwells not in Temples made with hands, as says
the Prophet. 49. Heaven is my throne, and Earth is my footstool: What House
will ye build me, says the Lord? or what is the place of my rest? 50. Has not
my hand made all these things?

48, 49, 50. Temples are for Gods Worship, and not for Gods confinement or
necessary abode: Heaven is the place of his glory, and Earth of his lower
blessings, and all the world of his presence: He made all things, and needs
not your Temple, but may forsake it for your Sin.

51. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist
the holy Ghost; as yours Fathers did, so do ye.

51. Ye are an unruly obstinate People, whose hearts are unreformed and
uncircumcised, and your Ears stopped against the Truth, while you glory in your
Circumcision: you have in all ages resisted the Spirit and Word of God. And
while you disown your forefathers actions, you are like them and do the very
same.

52. Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? and they have
slain them which showed before of the coming of the just One, of whom ye have
been now the betrayers and Murderers: 53. Who have received the Law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it.

52, 53. You boast of the Law and the Prophets, and the expected Messiah: But
which of the Prophets, did not your Fathers persecute? And those that
Prophesied of the Messiah, they murdered: And so have you done now by the
Messiah himself, and out done all your Ancestors in wickedness; and the Law
which yo boast of delivered by Angels, you have neither understood nor kept.

54. When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed
on him with their teeth.

54. At these words their very hearts were enraged against him, etc.

Reproof which convinces and humbles them whom God Converteth, enrageth proud
obdurate sinners, and turns them to persecute the Reprovers: which presageth
their destruction

55. But he being full of the holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and
saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God. 56. And
said, Behold, I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the
right hand of God.

55, 56. God gave him so extraordinary a measure of the Spirit, as when he
looked steadfastly toward Heaven he had an appearance of the Glory of God and
Christ standing at his right hand, which in this Rapture he declared to them
all.

Note, Christ saw it meet by such a glorious Miracles sight to encourage and
honor his first dying Martyr. O who would fear suffering for Christ. Martyrs
may expect the Spirits greatest help, and afterward the most glorious Crown.

57. Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran
upon him with one accord, 58. And cast him out of the City, and stoned him: and
the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul.

57, 58. Note, Holiness and Miracles do but increase their rage: They will run
when malignity and the Devil instigates: Sinners are never so mad as against
Christ and Mercy and their own Salvation. They that were the Accusers for
Blasphemy were by the Law to cast the first stone as the Executioners.

59. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive
my Spirit.

59. Note, He that gave up himself to Christ in life and death might
comfortably expect to be received. 2. The Spirit lives after the bodies death:
And Christ receives it to himself. This is part of Christ's Office now in
Heaven. See my Printed Sermon on this Text.

60. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to
their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.

6. He died Praying, and that for his Persecutors as Christ did: And its like
the Conversion of Saul was an answer to this Prayer. Quest. How far may we pray
In Faith for wicked men, or others, and expect the thing prayed for. Answ. For
that which is absolutely promised we may pray accordingly in assurance: For
that which supposes a qualifying condition in the receiver, we must believe
that they shall have it if they are so qualified: For that which has no
promise to them, but is merely at Gods unrevealed Will, we must pray with
submission to that Will, and accordingly take the event for uncertain.

CHAP. VIII.
ANd Saul was consenting unto his death. And at that time there was a great
persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem, and they were all
scattered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the
Apostles.

1. Note, Saul's Persecution must be recorded before his Conversion. 2. The
purest Church was not free from the malice of wicked men. 3. God used Malignant
Persecutions for the spreading abroad his word.

2. And devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation
over him.

2. They made a Funeral for Stephen with solemn mourning.

3. As for Saul, he made havoc of the Church, entering into every House, and
hailing men and women, committed them to prison.

3. By halling people to Prisons out of their houses, Saul wasted the gathered
Church.

4. Therefore they that were scattered abroad, went every where Preaching the
word.

4. Note, It was a tolerable hurt to their bodies, which brought good to others
Souls, and so enlarged the Church by scattering it, as seed is scattered that
is sown. 2. All Christians may and must publish the Gospel where they come if
there be need, tho only called Ministers must make an office and calling of it,
as separated to it.

5. Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and Preached Christ unto them.

5. Philip the Deacon Preached at the City of Samaria, after by Herod called
Sebaste.

6. And the People with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip
spoke hearing and seeing the miracles which he did, 7. For unclean Spirits
crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with them: and
many taken with palsies, and that were lame were healed. 8. And there was great
joy in that City.

6. The Samaritans received the Gospel with great joy, convinced by Miracles,
and pleased by many Cures.

Note, The Gospel where ever it comes is cause of great joy.

9. But there was a certain man called Simon, which before time in the same
city used sorcery, and bewitched the People of Samaria, giving out, that
himself was some great one. 10. To whom they all gave heed from the least to
the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God. 11. And to him they
had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched them with Sorceries.

9. One Simon had long been reputed among them some great man, even the great
power of God, as he boasted of himself; because by Sorcery he had long
bewitched, and done some strange things among them: And they all admired and
regarded him.

Note, Deceivers have usually many followers.

12. But when they believed Philip, preaching the things concerning the kingdom
of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.

12. Note, This sudden Baptizing yet implies time for instruction, and
profession of all essential to Christianity.

13. Then Simon himself believed also: and when he was baptized, he continued
with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were done.

13. Simon saw the reality of Philips Miracles, being conscious of the fallacy
of his own, and he believed that Jesus was the Christ and was baptized into his
name, and stayed with Phillip admiring his works.

Note, 1. Simon had a Superficial opinionative belief, that was not clear and
sound, nor effectual to renew his Soul. 2. The Ministers of Christ baptized not
as Heart searchers, as knowing men's sincerity, but as taking their Profession
for their title to Baptism.

14. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John:

14. Note, As Peter or John were no Rulers of the rest of the Apostles, so the
rest sent not them as Rulers of them by Vote, but by brotherly request and
consent.

15. Who when they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the
holy Ghost. 16. (For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.) 17. Then laid they their hands on
them, and they received the holy Ghost.

15. Note 1. It was at first the eminent Privilege of the Apostles that the
Holy Ghost should be given by their Ministry: 2. Imposition of hands being an
usual act of Authoritative benediction was used as the sign herein. 3. Yet
Prayer to God must first prevail for his grant thereof, before the Sign was
used. 4. This gift of the Holy Ghost was not that which is Regenerating and
necessary to pardon and Salvation (else all these Baptized persons must be
supposed till so long after unpardoned;) but it was that extraordinary gift
which was for the first sealing and propagating the Gospel, of which others
could be discerning Judges, (such as Languages Prophecy Healing, Miracles,
etc.); which they were not of sincere inward holiness.

18. And when Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy
Ghost was given, he offered them money, 19. Saying, Give me also this power,
that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the holy Ghost.

18. Note 1. It was such a thing as Simon could see in the present effects: 2.
He desired this power in pride for his own advancement, and not for Christ and
Souls. 3. He overvalued Money, and blasphemously ^ilified God, as if he set his
gifts to sale.

20. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou have
thought that the gift of God may be purchased with Money.

20. Unless thou Repent thou shall perish with thy Money, for this blasphemous
thought of God.

21. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right
in the sight of God.

21. Though thou art Baptized, thou art no true Christian, nor have any part in
the Grace and Spirit of Christ: for thy heart is unsound and false in the sight
of God.

22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee. 23. For I perceive that thou art
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.

22. Presently Repent therefore of that wicked heart and blasphemous thought;
and pray to God for Mercy and forgiveness, while its possible to be obtained.

Quest. Is not the Prayer of the Wicked abominable? Answ. Yes, the wicked
Prayer of the Wicked; which is to serve his wickedness: And his best Prayers
are not qualified for any certain grant: But if he truly Repent he is no longer
wicked: And the Prayer a Common Repentance (like Ahabs and the Ninevites) may
tend toward better, and is better than none. Quest. Does Peter mean that
Simons heart was false at his Baptism, or that he received Grace and pardon
then, and lost it after by Apostasy. Answ. Simons sin made Peter newly perceive
that his heart was false before, though his body was washed; but not that it
now began to be false by a sudden Apostasy? 1 Pet. 3.21, 22. He was in the Gall
of bitterness and bond of Iniquity through the wickedness of his unsanctified
heart, even when he was Baptized. Yet all this Hypocrisy and Wickedness was
pardonable upon Repentance.

24. Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of
these things which ye have spoken come upon me.

24. Note, His sight of their Miracles and fear of destruction humbled him so
far as to beg their Prayers that the threatened Judgments might not befall him.
But whether the report of some old Writers be true, that after all this he
pretended to be God the Father, and had a conflict with Peter, and flying in
the Air fell down and was destroyed by his Prayers, and had a Statue at Rome
inscribed, Simoni Deo Sancto, etc. of this many doubt, though others believe
it: And if it was he that Paul, 2 These. 2. and John in the Revelation speak of
as the Man of Sin, etc. and the head of Heresies so much decryed by Paul (as
Doctor Hammond thinks) it is strange that neither Luke, nor Paul, nor Peter,
nor Jude, nor James, nor John, who all inveigh against Heresies would never
once name him, when Nicolaitans, Diotrephes, Hymenaus, Phile^us, etc. are named.

25. And they when they had testified and Preached the word of the Lord,
returned to Jerusalem, and Preached the Gospel in many villages of the
Samaritanes. 26. And the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying, Arise and
go toward the south, unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem unto Gaza,
which is desert. 27. And he arose and went: and behold, a man of Ethiopia, an
Eunuch of great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who had the
charge of all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship. 28. Was
returning, and sitting in his chariot, read Esaias the Prophet.

25, 26, etc. Note, God showed a notable proof in this of his free Electing
Crace.

2. Angels Minister toward the Conversion of Gods Elect.

3. He that was a Proselyte before and came so far to worship, was better
prepared for the Gospel than Heathens.

4. He that would lose no time, but was reading Gods word on his Journey in his
Chariot, was in Gods way for further Mercy, which was sent after him.

29. Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near, and join thy self to this
chariot.

29. By inspiration.] Note, the Chariot was driven slowly that he might read
and so Phillip on foot could accompany it. Gods Spirit directs his word to
the Elect.

30. And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the Prophet Esaias, and
said, Understandest thou what thou read? 31. And he said, How can I, except
some man should guide me? and he desired Philip that he would come up, and sit
with him.

30. Note, God directed him to the Text: And God gave him the sense of his own
ignorance and insufficiency to understand, and of his need of a Teacher. And
God gave him an humble mind, to condescend to ask a stranger on foot, to come
sit with him in his Chariot and teach him. All these were happy preparatives to
Christianity, and further Grace.

32. The place of the scripture which he read, was this, He was led as a sheep
to the slaughter, and like a Lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his
mouth: 33. In his humiliation his judgment was taken away: and who shall
declare his generation? for his life is taken from the Earth.

32. He suffered innocently and patiently by unrighteous Cruel men; He humbled
himself to undergo their unjust judgment: They wickedly triumph over him, as
cutting off his life from the Earth.

34. And the eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray thee, of whom speaks
the Prophet this? of himself, or of some other man? 35. Then Philip opened his
mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and Preached unto him Jesus. 36. And as
they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the eunuch said,
See, here is water; what does hinder me to be baptized?

34, 35. Note, 1. He first craveth instruction and then Baptism, and is not
forced to be Baptized against his will.

37. And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. And
he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

37. If thou believe with a serious well grounded resolved Faith, thou may be
Baptized and have the present remission of sin as a Christian.

Note, The belief that Jesus is the Son of God includes all the rest that is
necessary to Salvation, that is, That there is a God whom we offended to whom
he reconcileth us, and who gave him to us in love, and that his word is true,
and that by the Word and by the Holy Ghost he sanctifies and prepares us for
Heaven.

38. And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into
the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. 39. And when they
were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that
the eunuch saw him no more: and he went on his way rejoicing.

38, 39. The Angel or Power of God caught away Phillip.

Note, A Converted man has great cause of rejoicing. The Gospel proclaimed,
much more heartily received, is matter of great joy. 2. The Tradition of
Abassia (where is a great Empire of Christians) is that they received the
Christian Faith by this man who was the Queens Lord Treasurer. And some Learned
men conjecture that it was rather by Frumentius and Edesius, and that it was
Abassia that was by Historians miscalled India: But if these first brought in
Church Government by a Bishop, the Eunuch might bring Lay Christianity before.

40. But Philip was found at Azotus: and passing through, he preached in all
the cities, till he came to Cesarea.

CHAP. IX.
ANd Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of
the Lord, went unto the high Priest, 2. And desired of him Letters to Damascus
to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or
women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem.

1. Ignorant zeal made Saul set himself to destroy the Chrstians, and sought to
the High Priest for Power, and traveled toward Damascus to do it: that he
might find them out and bring them in Bonds.

3. And as he journeyed he came near Damascus: and suddenly there shined round
about him a light from Heaven.

3. God the father of Light; uses to show himself to man by Light, external
and internal, and so do his Angels when the Devil is the Prince of Darkness.

4. And he fell to the Earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me?

4. The Power of God went forth with that Light, and cast him to the ground,
etc. Note 1. Love and Mercy in Christ expostulate with a blinded furious
Sinner, in order to his Conversion. 2. But till Power had cast him down the
Expostulation came not: God can soon lay proud Prosecutors on the Earth, and
tame them and make them fear and hear. 3. Whatever is done against Christians
for any thing that Christ commands them, he takes as done against himself.
If we are bound by the Law of Christ to Preach, to Pray, to edify each other,
to live a Holy life, and we be reviled, scorned, called all manner of evil
names, imprisoned, fined, banished, or murdered for this Christ will judge the
doers of it as doing it against him.

5. And he said, Who art thou, Lord, And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest: It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

5. Note, Did wicked Prosecutors know Christ, it would restrain them from
persecution. (But the subtle Devil has taught Hypocrite Christians to
prosecute him as by his own Authority and Commission, and in his own name, and
for his Church (that is, themselves.) 2. Christ's Servants should no more doubt
of their seasonable vindication when persecuted for their duty, than if Christ
was pesonally persecuted in their stead 3. O how terrible will it at last prove
to Persecutors, that they have kicked with their bare feet against the Pricks or
Thorns of Gods displeasure? Who has hardened himself against him and has
prospered? Or who has Conquered the Almighty.

6. And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told
thee what thou must do.

6. Note, God can make the firercest Persecutor tremble: And then O how they
are changed, ready to do any thing that God will bid them, which before they
Persecuted. And if the change be true, this will hold and come to practice. 2.
O then what need have proud Persecutors to be cast down, and how great a mercy
to them it may prove?

7. And the men which journeyed with him, stood speechless, hearing a voice,
but seeing no man.

7. Note, In Act. 22.9. it is said, they that were with him saw the Light and
were afraid, but heard not the voice of him that spoke.] The sense of both is,
they saw the Light and heard the sound, which its like was a Thunder, or like
it; but heard not the voice or words of Christ, which in that sound were
uttered to him, nor saw any similitude of Christ. Though we have only Paul's
witness of this, his after life of labor, suffering and Miracles proves it to
be true.

8. And Saul, arose from the Earth; and when his eyes were opened he saw no
man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus.

8. This stroke of blindness, was to convince him of the blindness of his
Persecuting fury.

9. And he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink.

9. Note, This was some conformity to Christ's being three Days and Nights in
the darksom Grave.

10. And there was a certain Disciple at Damascus, named Ananias, and to him
said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord. 11.
And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is called
Straight, and inquire in the House of Judas for one called Saul of Tarsus: for
behold, he prays, 12. And has seen in a vision a man named Ananias, coming
in, and putting his hand on him, that he might receive his sight.

10. Ananias was a Christian appointed by God to this work on Saul. 2. Praying
was (next to resolved obedience and submission) the first fruits of Saul's
Conversion.

13. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much
evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem: 14. And here he has authority
from the chief Priests; to bind all that call on thy name.

13. Note, Ananias objecteth what he had heard of Saul's, as rendering his
conversion improbable.

15. But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me,
to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel. 16.
For I will show him how great things he must suffer for my names sake.

15. Obey me who know man, and my own decrees, and object not former things
against me, I have chosen him, etc.

17. And Ananias went his way and entered into the House; and putting his hands
on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord (even Jesus that appeared unto thee in the
way as thou came) has sent me, that thou might receive thy sight, and be
filled with the holy Ghost.

17. God has made known to me, what he did to thee by the way, and has sent
me that thou might be restored to thy sight and filled with the Holy Ghost,
for gifts necessary to the Ministry.

18. And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales; and he
received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized.

18. He was Miraculously struck blind, and Miraculously cured, and then
Baptized.

19. And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul certain
days with the Disciples which were at Damascus. 20. And straightway he Preached
Christ in the Synagogue, that he is the Son of God.

19, 20, Being strengthened with food, he conversed certain days with the
Christians at Damascus whom he purposed to have presecuted, and forthwith
Preached Christ in the Syoagogue to the Jews, that he is the Son of God, and
consequently all his Gospel true. (And then going into Arabia retured to
Damascus again before he went to Jerusalem.

21. But all that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that
destroyed them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that
intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief Priests?

21. The sudden change from being a destroying Persecutor to be a Preacher
made the People wonder.

22. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews which
dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ.

22. Proving Jesus to be the true Christ, infers all the rest to be believed.

23. And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took Counsel to kill him:

23. If one of the Leaders of the Persecutors or Malignant wicked Men should be
Converted and persuade his Companions to turn, they would but seek to kill him
also, till God Convert them.

24. But their laying await was known of Saul: and they watched the Gates day
and night to kill him. a5. Then the Disciples took him by night, and let him
down by the wall in a basket.

24. Note, It is lawful to avoid the violence of bloody Persecutors by secret
flight.

26. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the
Disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a
Disciple.

26. Note, 1. Conversion will show it self by joining with the Converted. 2.
Known Persecutors and wicked men are not too hastily to be trusted, when they
profess Conversion.

27. But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the Apostles, and declared unto
them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and
how he had Preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus. 28. And he was
with them coming in, and going out at Jerusalem.

27, 28. This evidence was satisfactory and they received him to their constant
Society of the Church,

29. And he spoke boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against
the Grecians: but they went about to slay him. 30. Which when the brethren
knew, they brought him down to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.

29, 30. He Preeached Christ boldly and confuted the unbelieving Jews that used
the Greek Tongue. But they sought to kill him, etc.

31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria,
and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of
the holy Ghost, were multiplied.

31. Saul being Converted who was a chief Persecutor, and he being removed whom
they afterward most maligned, the Christian Churches were quiet a while from
Persecution, and were edified in knowledge, and Holiness of Heart and life,
living in obedience to God, and in the Comfort of the inward Grace and outward
Gifts and Miracles of the Holy Ghost, by which they were multiplied.

32. And it came to pass, as Peter passed throughout all quarters, he came down
also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda.

32. Note, He was no Christian who was not a Saint, by Dedication to God and by
profession.

33. And there he found a certain man named Eneas, which had kept his bed eight
years, and was sick of the palsy. 34. And Peter said unto him, Eneas, Jesus
Christ makes thee whole: arise, and make thy bed. And he arose immediately.

33. Note, The length and nature of the Disease made the Miracle the more
notable and convincing.

35. And all that dwelt at Lydda, and Saron, saw him, and turned to the Lord.

35. The undeniable Miracle caused a general Conviction and Conversion of them.

36. Now there was at Joppa a certain Disciple named Tabitha, which by
interpretation is called Dorcas: this woman was full of good works, and
alms-deeds which she did: 37. And it came to pass in those days, that she was
sick, and died: whom when they had washed, they laid her in an upper Chamber.
38. And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa, and the Disciples had heard that
Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him that he would not
delay to come to them.

36. A laborious Charitable woman being dead, the Christians had Faith to
believe that by Peter's Ministry she might be raised to life, etc.

39. Then Peter arose, and went with them. When he was come, they brought him
into the upper Chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping, and showing
the coats and garments which Dorcas made while she was with them.

39. Note, Its like they were poor-Widows, that showed the fruit of her Labor
and Charity to them and others.

40. But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down and prayed, and turning him
to the body, said, Tabitha* arise. And she opened her eyes: and when she saw
Peter she sat up. 41. And he gave her his hand, and lift her up; and when he
had called the saints and widows* presented her alive.

40. Note, This was not a Miracle to be done without fervent Prayer: And it is
like Peter had assurance of raising her as an answer to his Prayer, before he
said Arise.

42. And it was known throughout all Joppa; and many believed in the Lord.

42. Thus Miracles made Christians, and fully sealed the Testimony of the
Apostles.

43. And it came to pass that he tarried many days in Joppa with one Simon a
Tanner.

CHAP. X.
THere was a certain man in Cesarea, called Cornelius a centurion of the band
called the Italian band.

1. In Cesarea the chief City of the Country about seventy miles from
Jerusalem, where was a Roman Garrison was one Cornelius Captain of an hundred
in the Italian Regiment or Legion.

A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms
to to the people, and prayed to God always.

2. A Proselyte that was a Godly man and fearing God, with all his househould,
liberal in giving Alms and constant in Prayer.

2. N. We must not think this man under mere common Grace, but in a state of
saving Grace, such as the faithful Jews had before Christ's incarnation; such
being prepared above others to believe in Christ personally, when he was come
and Preached to them. This is notifyed, 1. In that he was a Proselyte of
Justice though not Circumcised. 2. He is called a Godly man (or devout.) 3. He
kept no other in his house. 4. He was full of works of Charity. 5. And constant
in Prayer, with due fasting. 6. God testified his acceptance of him.

3. He saw in a vision evidently, about the ninth hour of the day, an Angel of
God coming in to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius.

3. Being fasting and at Prayer at three a Clock Afternoon, an Angel appeared
to him.

4. And when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord? And
he said unto him, Thy Prayers and thine a^ms are come up for a memorial before
God.

4. The sight of the Angel struck him with dread, etc. He said, Thy Prayers and
Alms coming from Faith and a sincere heart, are so acceptable to God, that he
has sent me to give thee this notice of it, and to reward thee with a farther
Blessing.

5. And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter:
6. He lodges with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the seaside: he shall
tell thee what thou ought to do.

5. Note, God will honor his appointed qualified instruments in the giving of
his Mercies,

7. And when the Angel which spoke unto Cornelius, was departed, he called two
of his houshold-servants and a devout soldier of them that waited on him
continually: 8. And when he had declared all these things unto them, he sent
them to Joppa.

7, 8. Note, O What a Blessing to a Family is a good Master, that will keep
such about him as he can trust, and also deserve his special Love. And what
happy society are such Familys. This man had even Godly Soldiers, who use to be
the worst of Men.

9. On the morrow as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the city,
Peter went up upon the housetop to pray, about the sixth hour.

9. Note, God does no great things usually, but by men of Prayer, at least
accepts no other.

10. And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made
ready, he fell into trance, 11. And saw Heaven opened, and a certain vessel
descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and
let down to the Earth: 12. Wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts, of
the Earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. 13. And
there came a voice to him Rise, Peter; kill, and eat.

10. The clean and the unclean, noted the Jews and Gentiles, and also the
abrogation of the Ceremonial Laws of Meats.

14. But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is
common or unclean. 15. And the voice spoke unto him again the second time, What
God has cleansed, that call not thou common. 16. This was done thrice: and the
vessel was received up again into heaven.

14. What Meats or what Persons God has cleansed, do not thou call polluted
and unclean to be rejected.

17. Now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had seen
should mean; behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius, had made enquiry
for Simons house, and stood before the gate, 18. And called, and asked whether
Simon which was surnamed Peter, were lodged there.

17. The same God directs both the Visions, and the Mess^ages of Cornelius to
concur.

19. While Peter thought on the vision, the Spirit said unto him, Behold, three
men seek thee. 20. Arise therefore, and get thee down, and go with them,
doubting nothing: for I have sent them.

20. Note. How this speaking of the Spirit was done and known, they only that
have it can fully conceive.

21. Then Peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from Cornelius;
and said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye are
come? 22. And they said, Cornelius the centurion, a just man, and one that
fears God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned
from God by an holy Angel to send for thee into his house, and to hear words of
thee.

22. God commanded Cornelius to send for thee to hear thee.

23. Then called he them in, and lodged them. And on the morrow Peter went away
with them, and certain brethren from Joppa accompanied him. 24. And the morrow
after they entered into Cesarea: and Cornelius waited for them, and had called
together his knismen and near friends.

23, 24. Note, This good man had a care that his Kindred and Friends, might all
be saved as well as he.

25. And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet,
and worshipped him. 26. But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up; I my self also
am a man.

25. Note, It was not a Divine Worship that Cornelius gave him; but yet Peter
would not accept of any that was so extraordinary, as was unmeet for an humble
man to own.

27. And as he talked with him, he went in and found many that were come
together.

27. Note, As evil as those times were, such Conventicles were then allowed.

28. And he said unto them, Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man
that is a Jew, to keep company, or come unto one of another nation: but God
has showed me, that I should not call any man common or unclean. 29. Therefore
came I unto you without gainsaying, as soon as I was sent for: I ask therefore
for what intent ye have sent for me?

28. God has satisfied me to come to you though Gentiles.

30. And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting until this hour, and at
the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and behold, a man stood before mein bright
clothing, 31. And said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had
in remembrance in the sight of God. 32. Send therefore to Joppa, and call
hither Simon whose surname is Peter; he is lodged in the house of one Simon a
Tanner, by the seaside; who when he comes, shall speak unto thee. 33.
Immediately therefore I sent to thee; and thou have well done that thou art
come. Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things that
are commanded thee of God?

30. I was thus commanded by an Angel of God to send for thee* and now I and my
friends are all here ready as in Gods presence obediently to hear what ever
message or command God sends by thee to us, (some Copies have [before thee]
not (God.)

34. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is
no respecter of persons: 35. But in every nation, he that fears him, and
works righteousness, is accepted with him.

34. I do by this instance more fully than before perceive, that God respects
not men for their Country sake, or any common worldly privileges, but for
their real goodness, and whatever Nation a man be of, if he so sincerely
believe in God and his Mercy, as to fear and serve him, or to work
righteousness or truly obey his Laws, he shall be mercifully accepted by him,
who is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

36. The word which God sent unto the Children of Israel, Preaching peace by
Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all) 37. That word (I say) you know, which was
published throughout all Judea, and began from Galilee, after the baptism which
John preached; 38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost, and
with power; who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of
the Devil: for God was with him.

36, etc. The word which God sent to the Children of Israel was not like Moses
Law confined to them, but it was the Proclaiming of Reconciliation to all Jews
and Gentiles that will believe in him, who is by Redemption Lord of all (and
not only of the Jews.) This word you cannot but have heard has been published
throughout all Judaea, etc. How God endued Jesus with the Holy Ghost and with
Power, who went about donig good and healing, etc.

39. And we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land of the
Jews, and Jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a tree: 40. Him God raised up
the third day, and showed him openly, 41. Not to all the People, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God, even to us who did eat and drink with him after
he rose from the dead.

39. We are Witnesses of his Doctrine and Miracles, and of his Resurrection,
and did eat and drink with him, being chosen to this Office.

42. And he commanded us to preach unto the People, and to testify that it is
he which was ordained of God to be the judge of quick and dead.

42. Judge of all that are alive at his coming, and that were dead before and
are then raised.

43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

43. All the Prophets foretold that, through the Merits of this the Messiah,
God by his Covenant of Grace would give Remission of sins, to all that truly
believe in him.

44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which
heard the word.

44. Even while Peter was thus speaking, the great miraculous gift of the Holy
Ghost, came down on all that heard, which broak out in the effects before them
all.

45. And they of the circumcision which believed, were astonished, as many as
came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of
the holy Ghost. 46. For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnified God.
Then answered Peter.

45. This was astonishing News to the Jewish Christians, to hear Gentiles speak
Tongues not learned, and to be rapt up in the praise of God.

47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we?

47. Can any reason be given, why these though Gentiles should not be Baptized,
when God has thus signally owned them by his miraculous gift of the Spirit, as
he has done us.

48. And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then prayed
they him to tarry certain days.

48. He caused them to be entered by Baptism into the Christian Covenant and
Church: and they prayed him to stay a while with them, to confirm and comfort
them.

CHAP. XI.
ANd the apostles and brethren that were in Judea, heard that the Gentiles had
also received the word of God. 2. And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they
that were of the Circumcision contended with him, 3. Saying thou wentest in to
men uncircumcised, and did eat with them.

1, 2. Note, 1. Even in the pure Apostolical first Church there were wrangling
contending Christians. 2. Even that which should have been their rejoicing was
their matter of censorious contention. 3. These weak ones charged sin on the
Apostle as if they had been wiser and holier than he. 4. It was the separating
and self honoring vice which caused this censorous contention.

4. But Beter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded it by order
unto them, saying, 5. I was in the City of Joppa praying; and in a trance I saw
a Vision, A certain Vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from
Heaven by four corners; and it came even to me. 6. Upon the which when I had
fastened mine eyes, I considered, and saw four-footed beasts of the Earth, and
wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. 7. And I heard a voice
saying unto me, Arise, Peter; slay, and eat. 8. But I said, Not so, Lord: for
nothing common or unclean has at any time entered into my mouth. 9. But the
voice answered me again from Heaven, What God has cleansed, that call not thou
common. 10. And this was done three times: and all were drawn up again into
Heaven. 11. And behold, immediately there were three men already come unto the
house where I was, sent from Cesarea unto me. 12. And the Spirit bade me go
with them, nothing doubting. Moreover, these six brethren accompanied me, and
and we entered into the man's house: 13. And he showed us how he had seen an
Angel in his house, which stood and said unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call
for Simon, whose surname is Peter: 14. Who shall tell thee words, whereby thou
and all thy house shall be saved.

4. Of all this we have spoken on the former Chapter.

Note, 1. God who has ordained the Ministry of men will use it for men's
Salvation. 2. How greatly should the Gospel and men's Preachtng it be valued,
when it is Gods means of saving men. 3. God used then to Covenant and save
whole houshoulds together. And it seems Cornelius's house was prepared for it.

15. And as I began to speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the
beginning. 16. Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John
indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost.

15, 16. I remembered Christ's promise of the Spirit, and saw that he owned them
by fullfilling it.

17. Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us who
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I that I could withstand God?

17. Seeing God so evidently owned them as he had done us, I was neither able
nor willing to oppose God in his way of mercy to the Gentiles, which should
rather be our joy.

18. When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentace unto life.

18. Note. 1. Go^s miraculous gift of the Spirit was an undeniable evidence of
his approbation. 2. Censorious separating Contention came from hafty rash
judging of things unknown, and before they heard what could be said. 3. When
contentious censorious Christians come to hear and know what may be said, they
may yield and charge their minds.

19. Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about
Stephen, traveled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the
word to none but unto the Jews only.

19. Note, The calling of the Gentiles was not yet well understand by them.

20. And some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, which when they were come
to Antioch, spoke unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus.

20. Note, Whether by the Grecians be meant the Jews that speak Greek or
Gentile Proselytes, is doubtful.

21. And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number believed, and
turned unto the Lord.

21. God blessed their Ministry to the Conversion of a great number to
Christianity.

22. Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the Church which was in
Jerusalem: and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch.

22. To confirm them and carry on the work.

23. Who when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted
them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. 24. For
he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost, and of faith: and much people
was added unto the Lord.

23. It rejoiced him to see what Gods Grace had done.

Note, Every Goodman will be glad at the Conversion of Souls and the increase
of the Church (As Diabolists are grieved at it and fight against it.)

2. Young Converts need Counsel and Exhortation to be confirmed and persevere.
3. Confirmation consists in a habitual fixed Resolution, or full purpose to
cleave to the Lord.

25. Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul. 26. And when he had
found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to pass, that a whole year
they assembled themselves with the Church, and taught much people; and the
Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.

25. Barnabas having sought Saul, and drawn him to Antioch for more public
service, they two did for a whole year, teach much People in the
Church-Assembly (which it seems was then but one:) And the Disciples were then
first called Christians, who before were called by Reprochers but Gallileans
and Nazarites: (and since by Heresy and by hereticating reproaches, are called
by a multitude of dividing and disgraceful names.

27. And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch. 28. And there
stood up one of them, named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit, that there
should be great dearth throughout all the world: which came to pass in the days
of Claudius Caesar.

28. In diverse Countries, especially in Judea, should be a death.

29. Then the Disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send
relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea. 30. Which also they did, and
sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

29, 30. The Famine being most in Judea (the Country being dry and poor) and
having frequent Famines, and many Converts to show the power of Love having
sold their Possessions heretofore for common use, the Christians of other
Countries, sent them relief, by Paul and Barnabas, to the Elders of the Church
to be justly distributed, as there was need.

Note, Whether by Elders here be meant the unordained Seniors of the People. Or
the Presbyters ordained as such. Or as Dr. Hamond thought, Diocesane Bishops,
who yet had never a Presbyter under them, and therefore were the single Pastors
of single Congregations; is sufficiently elsewhere considered.

CHAP. XII.
Now about that time Herod the King stretched forth his hands to vex certain of
the Church. 2. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword. 3. And
because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further, to take Peter also.
(Then were the days of unleavened bread.)

1. Note, 1. Kings bear the Image of Gods Dominion, and have their power from
him, and not against him, and above all men are bound to serve him to the
utmost. Therefore such Persecutors as Herod being the greatest Traitors against
God, no doubt have answerable punishment in Hell.

2. James that was one who sought to be Chief, was the Chief or first of all
the Apostles in Martyrdom, and drank of Christ's Cup and was Baptized with his
Baptism. 3. To please wicked men this King murdered Saints and displeased God.

4. The Holy days of unleavened bread or Easter are celebrated with the Murder
of Chrst first, and of James after. This the Hypocrites holiness.

4. And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to
four quaternions of soldiers to keep him, intending after Easter to bring him
forth to the people.

4, He set sixteen Soldiers to keep him, that after the Passover he might
Sacrifice him to the People.

5. Peter therefore was kept in prison; but prayer was made without ceasing of
the Church unto God for him.

5. The Church for so great a Minister in so great danger, betook themselves to
their great remedy, even constant importunate Prayer to God.

6. And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was
sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains; and the keepers before
the door kept the prison.

6. Just when the Tyrant intended hi Execution, etc.

Note, Chains and Keepers are nothing to God.

7. And behold, the Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the
prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up
quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands.

7. Note, O how Powerful are Gods invisible Agents in Comparison of Mortal
worms. 2. It was a gentle harmless stroke that the Angel gave him; and such are
Gods awakning strokes.

8. And the Angel said unto him, Gird thy self, and bind on thy sandals: And so
he did. And he says unto him, Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me. 9.
And he went out and followed him, and wist not that it was true which was done
by the Angel: but thought he saw a vision.

8. Note. Implicit obedience by following Gods call even when we know not
whither, is acceptable and safe.

10. When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto the iron
gate that leads unto the city, which opened to them of his own accord: and
they went out, and passed on through one street, and forthwith the Angel
departed from him.

10. Note, 1. Nothing can hold those that God will deliver. 2. Angels are
ministering Spirits for our good.

11. And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that
the Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod,
and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.

11. Note, We seldom understand what God is doing for us in the beginning of
our deliverances, as we do at last.

12. And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the
Mother of John, whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together,
praying.

12. When he considered what God had done for him, he went to the house of
Marks Mother, and there in the Night was a godly Conventicle of many Christians
met to pray (no doubt in a special manner for his deliverance.) God sent him to
them as answer to their Prayers.

13. And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken,
named Rhoda. 14. And when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the gate for
gladness, but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the gate.

13. This poor Maid that showed so much love to Peter by her joy, has her name
recorded in the Scripture.

15. And they said unto her, Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed that it
was even so. Then said they, It is his Angel.

15. Note, The word [Mad] does but express that they thought her grossly
mistaken as Mad folk use to be; only speaking it in such course phrase as men
use to speak to Servants. 2. Whether by his Angel they meant an Angel of God
representing him, or only a humane Messenger sent by him is uncertain.

16. But Peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the door, and saw
him, they were astonished. 17. But he beckening unto them with the hand to hold
their peace, declared unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison.
And he said, Go show these things unto James, and to the brethren. And he
departed, and went into another place.

16, God having first sent him to them that were Praying for him in Answer to
their Prayers, he first tells them to Gods Glory how he was delivered, and then
sends the notice of it to James (Christ's kinsman) and to the brethren for their
encouragement. Our mercies are not given us only for our selves.

18. Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers,
what was become of Peter. 19. And when Herod had sought for him, and found him
not, he examined the keepers, and commanded that they should be put to death.
And he went down from Judea to Cesarea, and there abode.

18. N. Whether it was Death or Imprisonment that the Soldiers were put to, is
doubtful in the Greek Text: But it tells us that the Innocent may be a prey to
Tyrants cruelty and injustice.

20. And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tire and Sidon: but they came
with one accord to him, and having made Blastus the Kings Chamberlain their
friend, desired peace; because their country was nourished by the Kings
Country.

21. And upon a set day, Herod arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his Throne,
and made an oration unto them. 22. And the people gave a shout, saying, It is
the voice of a God, and not of a man. 23. And immediately the Angel of the Lord
smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and
gave up the Ghost.

20, 21. Note, A lively instance of the case of worldly Tyrants. To day
Countries are crowching to them, and Flatterers applauding them, and the
persecuted fearing them, and to morrow they are the stinking food of worms: As
Gods to day, and as dung to morrow.

24. But the word of God grew and multiplied. 25. And Barnabas and Saul
returned from Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their ministry, and took with
them John whose surname was Mark.

24. Note. Both the deliverance of Peter, and the death of Herod furthered the
success of the Gospel

CHAP. XIII.
NOw there were in the Church that was at Antioch, certain Prophets and
Teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene,
and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetarch, and Saul.

1. The Church Assembled at Antioch, had then in it many Men of eminent Gift,
for Prophecy and Teaching.

2. As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereu^to I have called them.

2. Note, To whom the Holy Ghost manifested this, whether to many or to few is
uncertain.

3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they
sent them away. 4. So they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, departed unto
Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus. 5. And when they were at
Salamis, they Preached the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews: and they
had also John to their minister.

3. Note, This was not the first Authorizing of them to be Ministers by Office;
for they were called and Preached before. But it was their Call or Mission to
this Particular work* to go abroad Preaching to many Nations. To be separated
to the Ministry is to be done but once: But to be appointed to this or that
place, charge or flock, may be often done, and that by Fasting, Prayer, and
Imposition of hands. 2. They began their Preaching usually in the Jews
Synagogues in all Countries where there were such where they came, they being
Expectants of the Messiah.

6. And when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos, they Found a certain
sorcerer, a false Prophet, a Jew, whose name was Barjesus: 7. Which was with
the Deputy of the Country, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who called for
Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God.

7. Note, His prudence made him willing to be instructed, and to hear men that
said they were sent by God.

8. But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood
them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith.

8. Elymas (which signifies a Magician) opposed them to hinder the Deputys
Conversion.

9. Then Saul (who also is called Paul) filled with the holy Ghost, set his
eyes on him,

10. And said, O full of all subtily and all mischief, thou child of the Devil,
thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways
of the Lord? 11. And now behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou
shall be blind, not seeing the Sun for a season. And immediately there fell on
him a mist and a darkness; and he went about seeking some to lead him by the
hand.

9. The Holy Ghost inspired Paul to pass this sentence when he was resolved to
execute it: it came not by the will of man primarily.

12. Then the deputy when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at
the doctrine of the Lord.

12. Whether the Deputy was Baptized is uncertain, But being Converted to the
Faith we may say to his honor that Sergius Paulus was the first Christian
Magistrate (unless you will call the Jewish converted Priests, Magistrates:)
Constantine was not the first.) But he had no power to use Magistracy for
Christianity, save obliquely.

2. The Judgment of God on Elymas was for the Deputies Conversion: what he did
himself is unknown.

13. Now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos, they came to Perga in
Pamphylia: and John departing from them, returned to Jerusalem. 14. But when
they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the
Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and sat down.

13. Note. They began with the despised Jews still, as understanding each
others Languages, and as the most prepared to hear the news of the Messiah:
Miraculous Language was like Miraculous works: not constant and at the speakers
will, as if they still spoke by Miracles.

15. And after the reading of the law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the
Synagogues sent unto them, saying Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on.

15. Note, Thus were their Rulers like Church-Justices, that disposed of Order,
that were no Teachers themselves. 1. It was among the Jews allowed any man that
professed to be a wise man and a Teacher thoug not in Office, to Teach the
People by the consent of the Ruler of the Synagogue. 3. The reading of the Law
and Prophets was the chief part of their Liturgy.

16. Then Paul stood up, and beckening with his hand, said, Men of Israel, and
ye that fear God, give audience. 17. The God of this people of Israel chose our
Fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of
Egypt, and with an high arm brought he them out of it. 18. And about the time
of forty years suffered he their manners in the Wilderness. 19. And when he
had destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanaan, he divided their land to
them by lot. 20. And after that, he gave unto them judges about the space of
four hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the Prophet. 21. And afterward they
desired a King: and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe
Benjamin, by the space of forty years. 22. And when he had removed him, he
raised up unto them David to be their King; to whom also he gave testimony, and
said, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which
shall fulfill all my will.

16. etc. Note, The recital of the History of the Jews, was by Peter and
Stephen and Paul judged the meetest way to introduce the tidings of Christ as
come, it being that which the Jews believed and understood, and on which they
grounded their privileges and expectations.

23. Of this man's seed has God according to his promise, raised unto Israel a
Savior Jesus: 24. When John had first preached before his coming, the baptism
of repentance to all the people of Israel.

23. This Jesus is the Son of David whom you expect, and John by Preaching and
Baptizing foreshewed you.

25. And as John fulfilled his course, he said, Whom think ye that I am? I am
not he. But behold there comes one after me, whose shoes of his feet I am not
worthy to loose.

25. John told you that he was not the Christ, but that this Jesus was he.

26. Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among
you fears God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.

26. To you Jews and Proselytes who are prepared by the fear of God and
expectation of the Messiah, we are sent to tell you that he is come, that you
may believe in him to Salvation.

27. For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him
not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets which are read every sabbath day, they
have fulfilled them in condemning him. 28. And though they found no cause of
death in him, yet desired they Pilate that he shoul be slain. 29. And when they
had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him down from the tree,
and laid him in a Sepulcher. 30. But God raised him from the dead.

27, The chief of your Nation, not believing in him, nor understanding the
Prophets, fulfilled the Prophecy by killing him, but God raised him.

31. And he was seen many days of them which came up with him from Galilee to
Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people.

31. He showed himself to those that he chose to be his Witesses to the World.

32. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made
unto the Fathers, 33. God has fulfilled the same unto us their Children, in
that he has raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second Psalm,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

32. To you expectants we bring joyful news, the Messiah is come, the promise
of him is fulfilled to us, and Christ is risen.

Note, Seeing all men love glad Tidings, the Gospel should be welcome to all.

33, And as David the Type is called Gods begotten Son, because he Exalted him
to the Throne, so is that word fulfilled now on Christ, indeed begotten of God
and raised to Glory.

34. And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to
return to Corruption, he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of
David.

34. And this everlasting Kingdom which Christ is raised to, is that called the
sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55.3.

35. Wherefore he says also in another psalm, Thou shall not suffer thine holy
one to see corruption: 36. For David after he had served his own generation by
the will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers, and saw
corruption: 37. But he whom God raised again, saw no co^ruption.

35. This musr be meant of Christ, etc.

38. Be it known unto you therefore, men and breathren, that through this man
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: 39. And by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law
of Moses.

38, 39. By his Sacrifice and Merits and intercession and Kingly Power, all
sins shall be pardoned to all that truly believe in him, and take him for their
Savior and King; And by him all such are acquit from damning guilt and
punishment (initially now by his pardoning Law of Grace, and finally hereafter
by his Judgment and Execution) from which the Law of Moses can never justify
or acquit you; by all its Sacrifices, and your observances.

40. Beware therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken of in the
prophets, 41. Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work
in your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare
it unto you.

40. Take head lest your obstinate unbelief cause God to cast you off, and take
in the Gentiles in your stead.

42. And when the Jews were gone out of the Synagogue, the Gentiles besought
that these words might be preached to them the next sabbath.

42. Some dislike these words, but others especially Proselytes desired to hear
them again. By the same words is meant the same doctrine: Note, They grossly
mistake that say it is the Lords day, as such that is here called the next
Sabbath.

43. Now when the congregation was broken up, many of the Jews, and religious
proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas; who speaking to them, persuaded them to
continue in the grace of God.

42. Beginners newly convinced must be followed with persuasions to proceed and
persevere.

44. And the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear the
word of God. 45. But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with
envy, and spoke against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting
and blaspheming.

44, 45. Note 1. The Apostles did use to meet on the Jews Sabbath on their
Synagogues, and to observe the outward rest of them while they were among the
Jews, both to get an opportunity of Preaching to them, and to avoid their
offense, till the dissolution of their state had in fact cast down their Law
and Policy, which Christ had before abrogated.

2. The Crowds of Hearers and Multitude of Converts being hateful to Satan,
does usually stir up rage in his servants, and raise greater opposition.

46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the
word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from
you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles. 47. For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be
a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for Salvation unto the ends of
the Earth.

46, 47. God did appoint us to offer Christ first to you Jews, and he or we
rejected not you first: But seeing by your obstinate rejecting of Christ and
his Gospel you make and show your selves unworthy and incapable of so great
Mercy, we go to the Gentiles; for so is our Commission.

48. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word
of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.

48. Note, It is a Controversy what is here meant by [ Ordained to Eternal
life:] whether it be [ Ordained by Gods decree] or [ ordered by preparing
Grace:] But there is no doctrinal Controversy arising from either Exposition,
those being Proselytes or otherwise in the nearest disposition to believe, its
probable at the least were the persons here meant: But that God also does fore
decree whom he will effectually Convert and save, should be past doubt with all
sober Christians, the Perfection of God, and the words of Scripture making it
plain: and not only Augustine and Protestants, but almost all the Papists
Doctors and Schoolmen proving it. And Dr. Hammon confesses that this preparing
Grace is Gods Gift; which therefore he before purposed to give. But when he
opposes [ (...)
[ The absolute decree of destinating them whatsoever they do to Salvation.] It
is very ill done so to insinuate that this is the opinion of those that dissent
from him: who are so far from it that they hold that to destinate to Holiness
and Salvation is one and the same decree of God: Of this see my Catholic
Theoligie fully handling it: Alas for this sad Disease in Church Doctors.

49. And the word of the Lord was published throughout all the region. 50. But
the Jews stirred up the devout and honorable women, and the chief men of the
city, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out
of their coasts.

50. Note, Devout Women and Men in ignorance may be Adversaries to Christianity
and Truth, and Instruments of Persecution: And the chief and honorable are often
the chief herein. 2. Powerful successful Preaching uses to stir up violent
Persecuting, which often drives the Preachers to some other place where God has
some to call.

51. But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto
Iconium.

51. Note, As Excommunication was dismal to them that were cut off, so shaking
off the dust of their seet aganst them was a dismal signification of a forsaken
People.

52. And the Disciples werefilled with joy, and with the holy Ghost.

52. Note, Gods Grace and the Churches joy, may increase under Persecution, and
Expulsion by men.

CHAP. XIV.
ANd it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both together into the
Synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke, that a great multitude both of the Jews,
and also of the Greeks, believed. 2. But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the
Gentiles, and made their minds evil-affected against the brethren.

1, 2. Still the great success of the Ministry is attended with the greatest
Envy and opposition of bad Men.

3. Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave
testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done
by their hands.

3. Note, Long Preaching is needful to root that word which one or two Sermons
often leaves loose. 2. Miracles were the convincing cause of the Credibility of
the Apostles testimony.

4. But the multitude of the city was divided: and part held with the Jews, and
part with the Apostles.

4. Note, The Gospel causes divisions by saving some, or else all would perish
together in Concord.

5. And when there was an assault made both of the Gentiles and also of the
Jews, with their Rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them. 6. They
were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra, and Derbe, Cities of Lycaonia, and unto
the Region that lies round about: 7. And there they preached the Gospel.

5. Note, Still Persecution disperseth the Gospel.

8. And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a
creeple from his Mothers womb, who never had walked. 9. The same heard Paul
speak: who steadfastly beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be
healed, 10. Said with a loud voice, Stand up right on thy feet. And he leaped
and walked.

8. The Holy Ghost when he would do the Miracle made P^^l discern the Man's
Faith, and exciteth him to bid him stand up.

11. And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lift up their voices,
saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The Gods are come down to us in the likeness
of men. 12. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, because he
was the chief speaker.

11. They knew that such a Miracle must be a supernatural work, and done by
God; and they called them by the usual names of their Gods.

13. Then the priest of Jupiter which was before their city, brought Oxen and
garlands unto the Gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people.

13. The Priest of Jupiter, whose Temple or Statue was without the City,
brought Oxen to sacrifice to them.

Note, Such Men are readier for Idolatries, than to receive Gods word.

14. Which when the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul heard of, they rent their
clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out. 15. And saying, Sirs, why do
ye these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and Preach unto
you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made
Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and all things that are therein:

14. Note, 1. The number of twelve Apostles was fitted to the Jews Twelve
Tribes, to whom the Gospel was first to be Preached: But when Christ would
gather the Gentile Church, he increased the number, and Paul was commissioned
by a voice from Heaven, and he and Barnabas, by a special mission of Christ, by
the Holy Ghost. 2. The significant ceremony of renting the Cloths, is used by
these two Apostles. 3. All good Men hate Idolatry, and would not be Idolized
themselves. 4. The Devil would honor the ^inisters of Christ overmuch, when it
is to contradict their Doctrine.

16. Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. 17.
Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave
us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness.

16. He has long connived by patient permissions at the manifold Idolatries
and Vices of the World, not punishing them as they deserved: Yet his common
mercies to Men's bodies, did both signify, that he is the merciful Ruler and
Benefactor to mankind, and that he uses not sinful Man as the deserves, but
in mercy, obliges all to gratitude and repentance.

18. And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had
not done sacrifice unto them.

18. Note, So forward are Men to forbidden worship, who are backward to
spiritual and true.

19. And there came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who
persuaded the people, and having stoned Paul, drew him out of city, supposing
he had been dead.

19. Note, This is the levity of the vulgar; that one day will sacrifice as to
Gods, to those, whom after they would kill as male factors: So little trust is
to be placed in them. And though we know not whether most of the same Persons
were the Persecutors, its like that many were.

20. Howbeit, as the Disciples stood round about him, he rose up, and came into
the city: and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.

20. Note, Its like his recovery was a miracle; else stoning would have
disabled him to travel.

21. And when they had Preached the Gospel to that city, and had taught many,
they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch.

21. Note, Persecution made them not forsake the Plantations which they had
newly made.

22. Confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in
the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of
God.

22. Confirming them against the Temptation of Persecution, which must be
suffered by those that will be saved.

23. And when they had ordained them Eldets in every Church, and had prayed
with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed.

23. They settled the Christians that were converted in these several Cities, in
Church order, ordaining Elders in every Church, to be the Guides and Teachers
of the rest; and that with Fasting and Prayer, because of the great importance
of the work.

Note. 1. It is made a controversy, whether (...) signify [by suffrages] or
[by laying on hands] But it is of small importance: For it is certain, that the
Apostles forced no Elders on the People, but ordained them by the Peoples
choice or consent: And it is certain, that ordination was the Apostles Act.

2. And its a Controversy what is here meant by Elders; whether Diocesane
Bishops, or mere Presbyters, or Lay Elders, or Deacons also. The Scripture
calls all Church-guides and Teachers Elders, and here makes no distinction.
Its certain, that each Church here was but one small Assembly: And therefore,
if they will call the Pastor of one Assembly a Diocesane, its a nominal strife:
If they say, it is because they had Power to govern a Diocese of a multitude of
Churches when they were gathered. 1. They must prove that power given. 2. Then
they were no Bishops of those Churches, till they were indeed Churches. 3. And
its probable, that about those near Cities, that was not in their life time.

Though it be not certain, that by [ Elders in every City] is meant more than
one in each City, yet by the Phrase, it is most probable; specially,
considering what evidence there is of many at Corinth, Antioch and Jerusalem.

24. And after they had passed throughout Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia. 25.
And when they had Preached the word in Perga, they went down unto Attalia: 26.
And thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended to the
Grace of God, for the work which they fulfilled.

24. They returned to Antioch in Syria (not Antioch in Pisidia) to give the
Church an account of their success.

27. And when they were come and had gathered the Church together, they
rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how he had opened the door of
faith unto the Gentiles. 28. And there they abode long time with the Disciples.

27. Note 1, It was a Congregation, and not a Diocese of a multitude of
Congregations, that is called the Church, which they Congregated. 2. They
brought them the glad Tidings, that the Gentiles had received the Faith: Though
it was in the Jews Synagogues that they preached, at least for the most part.

CHAP. XV.
ANd certain men which came down from Judea, taught the brethren, and said,
Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.

1. Some Christian Jews thought and taught, that Circumcision and keeping the
Law of Moses is necessary to Salvation, both to Jew and Gentile Christians.

Note, 1. The sound Doctrine of Christianity was quickly corrupted be erring
Teachers. 2. The threatening of damnation, and making error seem necessary to
salvation, was used to affright timorous Christians into false ways.

2. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation
with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them,
should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about this question.

2. Note, To be Dissenters and Disputants against errors and tyrannical
impositions upon conscience, is no fault but a great duty.

2. Its but a groundless fiction of some that tell us that this was an appeal
to Jerusalem, because it was the Metropolis of Syria and Antioch: As if
Metropolitan Church Power had been then settled: When long after, when it was
devised indeed, Antioch was above Jerusalem: And its as vain a fiction that
this was an appeal to a general Council; as if the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem had been a general Council, when none of the Bishops of the Gentile
Churches were there, or called thither. It is notorius that it was an appeal to
the Apostles (taking in the Elders) as those that had the certainest notice of
Christ's mind, having conversed with him, and being entrusted to teach all
Nations whatever he commanded them, and had the greatest measure of the spirit;
and also being Jews themselves, were such as the Judaizing Christians had no
reason to suspect or reject.

3. And being brought on their way by the Church, they passed through Phenice,
and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great
joy unto all the brethren.

3. Note, By the Church that brought them on, is neither meant a Diocese of
Churches, nor the mere Clergy; but the chief Men of the Congregation of
Antioch. 2. The Gentiles conversation was joyful news.

4. And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and
of the Apostles and Elders, and they declared all things that God had done with
them. 5. But there rose up certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which believed,
saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the
law of Moses.

4. They first told them of their success on the Gentiles, and then of the
Doctrine of these Christians Pharisees.

Note, The error, as to the Jews, had a fair religious pretense; for Moses Law
was Gods own Law, and delivered by Angels, and confirmed be miracles; and
Christ had said that he came not to destroy it, etc. Therefore had not,
Apostolic Testimony, and the Authority of the Holy Ghost by miracles, proved
the abrogation, it would more hardly have been believed by good men, than the
substitute Canons of Bishops that have no such pretense. But the Gentiles were
never under Moses Law as such.

6. And the Apostles and Elders came together, for to consider of this matter.

6. Note, Gods inspiration made not consultation needless to themselves, or to
convince Gainsayers.

7. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up and said unto them,
Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago, God made choice among us,
that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe.
8. And God which knows the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the holy
Ghost, even as he did unto us: 9. And put no difference between us and them,
purifying their hearts by faith.

7. Those of the Pharisees way that came with Paul and Barnabas, were heard
disputing for their cause, and then Peter said, etc.

10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the
Disciples, which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear?

10. God never put this yoke on the Gentiles, and we Jews have found it a heavy
burden.

11. But we believe that through the Grace of the* Lord Jesus Christ, we shall
be saved even as they.

11. And it is not by the works of Moses Law, that we Jews are justified and
saved, but in the same way that is common to the Gentiles with us, even by the
Grace of Jesus Christ.

12. Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and
Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by
them.

12. The miracles and conversion of the Gentiles, was Gods approving Testimony
in the case.

13. And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying,

13. Note, They were not like the proud Magisterial Talkers, so full of
themselves, that they have not patience to restrain their list of speaking till
another has done, but stop and silence him by rude uncivil interruption, on
pretense that he is too long.

13, 14. Men and brethren, hearken unto me. 14. Simon has declared how God at
the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.
15. And to this agree the words of the Prophets; as it is written, 16. After
this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which is
fallen down: and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up:
17. That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles
upon whom my name is called, says the Lord, who does all these things.

13, 14. Note, Some think James means the prophecy of Simeon, Luke 2.32. A
Light to lighten the Gentiles: but its liker, (though not certain) that its
Peter here that he means.

18. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.

18. God that has prophesied of this calling of the Gentiles, decreed and
foreknew it. They are his works as well as we, and he is merciful to all.

19. Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them which from among the
Gentiles are returned to God: 20. But that we write unto them, that they
abstain from pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from things
strangled, and from blood.

19. Note, It is not agreed by expositors what these words mean, whether it be
only things indifferent that are here determined (as Beza and some other think,
and that only to avoid offense for a time: Or whether it be the precepts of
Noah imposed on the Proselites of the Gate as such, (as Doctor Hammond thought)
They that go the first way, think, that by [ Fornication] here is meant
Idolatry, that is, the countenancing of it by the use of things in themselves
indifferent: But most think, that by [ Fornication] is meant some controverted
sorts of it, as marrying within some prohibited degrees, or using Concubines,
or second Wives, which the Jews scrupled not. And others think that the
ignorance of Jews and Gentiles of the evil of Fornication, and some Heretics
pleading for it, made it, though not indifferent joined with the rest.

Those that go the second way, say, that to the Proselites of the Gate, the
seven precepts of Noah were necessary, and therefore, when they turned
Christians, not to be cast off: And by [ Blood] they think is meant [ Bloodshed
or Murder:] so the two first precepts (says Dr. Hammond) are, for worshipping
the true God: 2. And not Idols; both these are included in [ Abstaining from
Meats offered to Idols.] 3. Abstaining from Blood, is the fifth of those
precepts against Murder. 4. From things strangled is the seventh. 5. From
Fornication was the fourth. 6. And many ancient Greek copies add here [ Thou
shall not do to another what thou would not have done to thee] and that
contains that against theft and injustice, etc. Which ever of these be right
it makes no difference as to our obligation. By eating things strangled and
blood, can be meant no more than such beastly devouring, either of the blood it
self, or the blood in the strangled Creature, which signifies a bloody mind,
and may harden men in cruelty, and easilyer dispose them to shed Man's blood.
And if there be any more that is ceremonious in it, it was temporary to avoid
the Jews offense: But if any think any more to be unlawful, its lawful to
forbear it.

21. For Moses of old time has in every city them that Preach him, being read
in the Synagogues every sabbath day.

21. As for the Jews, the Law of Moses belongs to them, and we leave them to
it, till God shall dissolve their State and Policy (it is preached by the
reading of it in the Synagogues every Sabbath day.)

22. Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send
chosen men of their own company of Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas; namely,
Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren.

22. Though the Apostles were the infallible Deciders, the Elders and the whole
Church were unanimous Consenters, and to show the necessity of concord, and
that even infallible and miraculous Teachers, yet guide only Volunteers; They
sent some of their own Company (of the College that guided the Church at
Jerusalem; or as Doctor Hammond thinks Bishops of some single Congregations
in Judea) that contending parties might not be the only reporters of their
sentence.

23. And wrote Letters by them after this manner, The Apostles, and Elders, and
brethren send greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch,
and Syria, and and Cilicia. 24. Forasmuch as we have heard that certain which
went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying,
ye must be circumcised, and keep the law; to whom we gave no such commandment:

23, 24. Note, 1. If False Teachers pretended Apostolic Authority or mission
when they were near them, no wonder if they do it now when they are not so
ehsily confutted. 2. Tyrannical impositions on Conscience, do but trouble the
Church and subvert Souls, by pious pretenses.

25. It seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen
men unto you, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul; 26. Men that have hazarded
their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 27. We have sent therefore
Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things by mouth.

25. Thus far their Letters are Credential, to tell them that they may believe
the Messengers.

28. For it seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burden then these necessary things;

28. Note, 1. It is profaneness for any Bishops or Counsels to use these
words, who neither have assurance, nor can give any proof that the Holy Ghost
guides them. 2. The Holy Ghost is against imposing unnecessary things as
necessary. These things here imposed were necessary, at least all to those
Persons, and at the time, and most (if not all) continually.

29. That ye abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from
things strangled, and from fornication, from which if ye keep your selves, ye
shall do well. Fare ye well.

29. It is not Moses's Law that ye are bound to keep, but these commoner
precepts. Do nothing that scandalously favors Idolatry, or savoreth of
cruelty and bloodiness, not eating strangled Creatures in the gore blood, avoid
defilement, by any sort of forbidden fleshly lust and filthiness.

30. So when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: and when they had
gathered the multitude together, they delivered the Epistle

30. Note, The Multitude was one Assembly, not a Diocese, nor only the Clergy.

31. Which when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.

31. Note, Liberty from toylsome Ceremonies (tho God first instituted them) was
matter of joy to the Churches: But alas few Churches are allowed that joy, by
their Lordly Pastors.

32. And Judas and Silas being Prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren
with many words, and confirmed them.

32. Note, By [Prophets] is meant such as were inspir^ed by the Holy Ghost,
either by Revelation of any new thing, or by ability to explain and apply known
truth.

33. And after they had tarried there a space, they were let go in peace from
the brethren unto the Apostles. 34. Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide
there still. 35. Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and
Preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.

33. Note, The Church of Antioch had many excellent Teachers, and it is not
intimated, that any one was Bishop over the rest, or that Paul, Barnabas,
Silas, Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, etc. were subjects to any one.

36. And some days after, Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit
our brethren, in every city where we have Preached the word of the Lord, and
see how they do.

36. Note, Converted Souls and Planted Churches, must be further visited,
observed and watered.

37. And Barnabas determined to take with them John whose surname was Mark. 38.
But Paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed from them from
Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work. 39. And the contention was so
sharp bttween them, that they departed asunder one from the other: and so
Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus; 40. And Paul chose Silas, and
departed, being recommended by the brethren unto the Grace of God. 41. And he
went through Syria, and Cilicia, confirming the Churches.

37. Note, Apostles were not infallible in all things, even about the fitness
of their Helpers. 2. Small differences even to sharpen contention, may stand
with Christian Love and Unity. 3. There was then no Judge of such
controversies, either Bishop or Synod to avoid and end them. 4. But God turned
this to good, for the better spreading of the Gospel.

CHAP. XVI.
THen came he to Derbe and Lystra: and behold, a certain Disciple was there,
named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a Jewess, and believed;
but his Father was a Greek. 2. Which was well reported of by the brethren that
were at Lystra and Iconium. 3. Him would Paul have to go forth with him; and
took and circumcised him, because of the Jews which were in those quarters: for
they knew all that his Father was a Greek.

1. Timothy's Mother being a Jew, he might be circumcised, though his Father
was a Greek: And because uncircumcised, he might not be admitted to converse
with the Jews, he circumcised him, the Jews being yet permitted to use the Law
of Moses: which he would not have done, had both Parents been Gentiles.

4. And as they went through the Cities, they delievered them the decrees for
to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem.
5. And so were the Churches established in the faith, and increased in number
daily.

4, 5. They delivering them the Apostles Decrees; freed the Church from the
doubts which the Judaizers had raised, and so they were quieted and settled in
Judgment, Faith and Concord, and daily increased.

6. Now when they had gone through Phrygia, and the region of Galatia, and were
forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia,

6. Forbidden by some Revelation or Inspiration.

7. After they were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the
Spirit suffered them not. 8. And they passing by Mysia, came down to Troas.

7. The invitation or inspiration of Gods Spirit diverted them.

9. And a vision appeared to Paul in the night: There stood a man of Macedonia,
and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.

9. Note, Gods differencing grace plainly appears in sending his Gospel to
some Countries, rather than to other.

10. And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavored to go into
Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the
Gospel unto them.

10. Note, It is the duty of Ministers to follow Gods call; though all have not
visions, all have some notifications of Gods will, by Men's necessity,
opportunity, invitation, etc.

11. Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a straight course to
Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis; 12. And from thence to Philippi,
which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in
that city abiding certain days.

11. Note, The Apostles did choose Populous Cities to Preach in, because there
was most matter to work on: Its best fishing in the Sea. Besides that, the Jews
Synagogues were mostly in such places.

13. And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a Riverside, where prayer
was wont to be made; and we sat down, and spoke unto the women which resorted
thither.

13. Note, Whether here was an Oratory or Chapple, or only the open Field, is
uncertain: And whether the Assemblies were Proselites of the Jews, or Jews with
such, or the better sort of Gentiles, is not certain: But the first is likely,
because they kept the Sabbath.

14. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of
Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she
attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.

14. 1. Note, Its like she was a Proselite. 2. They that worship God are best
prepared for further Grace: 3. Gods opening the heart makes the word
effectual. 4. Diligent regardful attention to the word, is the beginning of
Conversion, or a great preparation.

15. And when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us, saying, If
ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide
there. And she constrained us.

15. Note 1. It was the ordinary way of Apostles to Baptize Households: Not that
they could be sure they were all true Believers, or that the Rulers could make
them such. But it was the Rulers duty to devote all in their Power to God; and
therefore to do their best to persuade them to a true consent; and to rid their
house of all unnecessary Persons that refused: And God used to bless their
endeavors, and their interest and power might do much.

2. Converted Persons have so much love to Christ's Ministers who converted
them, that they greatly desire their Company and further help.

16. And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain Damsel, possessed
with a Spirit of divination, met us, which brought her Masters much gain by
sooth saying:

16. One possessed with a deluding foretelling Devil, who thereby brought him
gain for Divination.

17. The same followed Paul, and us, and cried, saying, These men are the
servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation.

17. Note, God constrained the Devil to confess Christ against his will.

18. And this did she many days. But Paul being grieved, turned and said to the
Spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he
came out the same hour.

18. Note, 1. Satan must be dispossessed of Body, Soul or Nation, whenever Christ
commands it,

19. And when her Masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they
caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the marketplace, unto the Rulers.

19. Note, Its like her Masters being more then one, were some Heathen Priests,
however we see, the love of Money is the root of Persecution and all evil.

20. And brought them to the magistrates, saying, These men being Jews, do
exceedingly trouble our city, 21. And teach customs which are not lawful for us
to receive, neither to observe, being Romans.

20, 21. They brought them to the Roman Officers, under whose Government they
were, and accused them as being Jews, of a contrary Religion, and by their
unlawful Doctrines, causing Sedition and disturbing the public peace. Note,
Covetous malignants use the accusation of Sedition to hide their malice.

22. And the multitude rose up together against them: and the magistrates rent
off their clothes, and commanded to beat them. 23. And when they had laid many
stripes upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jayler to keep them
safely. 24. Who having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner
prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.

22, etc. Note, Rulers and Rabble, nnd most were for the DevIl against Christ
and their own Salvation: And the innocent Servants of Christ are imprisoned and
used as Rogues, merely for seeking Men's welfare.

25. And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God: and the
prisoners heard them.

25. Note, Persecution does not disoblige us from joyful praise to God, nor
destroy believers comforts.

26. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the foundations of the
Prison were shaken: and immediately all the doors were opened, and every ones
band were loosed.

26. Note, Luke that wrote this was one of their Company in the City, when this
was done: Gods Power is invincible.

27. And the keeper of the Prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the
Prison-doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself,
supposing that the Prisoners had been fled. 28. But Paul cried with a loud
voice, saying, Do thy self no harm; for we are all here.

27. He would have killed himself to prevent punishment, in the rage of his
passion.

29. Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell
down before Paul and Silas; 30. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must
I do to be saved?

29. Note, When Gods dreadful Judgments and his Grace join together, no heart
can resist them.

31. And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved,
and thy house.

31. Note, 1. He was resolved to do whatever they required, knowing by this
miracle, that they were sent by God. 2. Believing in Christ, includes all the
essentials of Christianity. 3. His house would not be saved for his Faith,
without any of their own. But it is supposed, that God would bless his
endeavors to convert them.

32. And they spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his
house.

32. They instructed him and his Household, that they might indeed believe and
be saved.

33. And he took them the same hour of the night; and washed their stripes; and
was baptized, he and all his straightway.

33. He presently showed his Repentance and Faith: For he that had scourged
them, washed their sores to heal them; and he and all his Household were
presently Baptized, as having professed their resolved Faith in Christ.

Note, The Apostles delayed not Baptism, when serious profession gave them
right: but in doubtful cases of ignorant or unresolved Men, it ought to be
longer delayed.

34. And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and
rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.

34. Note, 1. True Conversion changes Men's thoughts of Gods Servants, and
causes men to love and honor them. 2. Conversion puts Men into a joyful state.

35. And when it was day, the magistrates sent the Sergeants, saying Let those
men go. 36. And the keeper of the Prison told this saying to Paul, The
magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore depart, and go in peace. 37.
But Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans,
and have cast us into Prison; and now do they thrust us out privily? nay
verily; but let them come themselves and fetch us out.

37. Note, It is lawful to plead our right by Law against unjust Magistrates,
Paul was a Roman by enfrauchisment (though a Jew)

38. And the sergeants told these words unto the magistrates: and they feared
when they heard that they were Romans.

38. Note, The Roman Laws forbad all such base usage of any that was of Roman
freedom.

39. And they came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired them to
depart out of the city. 40. And they went out of the Prison, and entered into
the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brethren, they comfo^ed them,
and departed.

39. They spoke them fair, for fear, and entreated them to depart, 40. They
visited, comforted and confirmed their converts.

CHAP. XVII.
NOw when they had passed through Amphipolis, and Apollonia, they came to
Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews. 2. And Paul, as his manner was
went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures, 3. Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and
risen again from the dead: and that this Jesus whom I Preach unto unto you, is
Christ.

2, 3. Note, Paul began his Prea^hing usually in the Jews Synagogue, because
they were most prepared by expectation of the Messiah, and understood his
language: for it is not certain, that the miraculous gift of unlearnt tongues,
was it which he used in his ordinary Preaching, and not only on extraordinary
inspirations.

4. And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas: and of the
devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few.

4. And being convinced by proof out of the old Testament, that Christ must
suffer and rise again, many believed; some Jews, but more of the Proselites and
chief Women.

5. But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain
lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on
an uprore, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to
the people.

5. Note, The rabble are fit instruments for persecution; for they have
sufficient ignorance and malignity, and will rage against reason: But its
Legalists that incite them.

6. And when they found them not, they drew Jason, and certain brethren, unto
the Rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the world up side down
are come hither also? 7. Whom Jason has received: and these all do contrary to
the decrees of Caesar, saying, That there is another King, one Jesus.

6, 7. Note, 1. Were it not for the false pretense of Sedition against Rulers,
to engage their safety, and honor in jealousy against Christ and Religion,
the Devil would be posed in his Accusation of the Faithful. 2. The name of King
Jesus falsely Expounded, is it that is used to engage Princes against Christ.

8. And they troubled the people, and the Rulers of the city, when they heard
these things. 9. And when they had taken security of Jason, and of the other,
they let them go.

8. Note, So Solicitous are men of their own safety, from the Rulers power,
that all puts them into trouble, which seems to bring them into any danger.
Fears raise Commotions.

10. And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea?
who coming thither, went into the Synagogue of the Jews.

10. Note, 1. It is good to reserve Persecuted Ministers for further work, when
Satan would destroy them. 2. Again the Apostles make the Jews Synagogue their
Preaching place.

11. These were more noble then those in Thessalonica, in that they received
the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether
those things were so.

11. These were more ingenious rational sober Jews, and did not meet the Gospel
with rage, but thought it worthy their serious enquiry, whether the Scriptures
did foretell of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and whether Paul's proofs
of Christianity were valid.

12. Therefore many of them believed: also of honorable women which were
Greeks, and of men not a few.

12. This preparation of a sober enquiry after truth, is a reason rendered, why
many of them believed. As did many Men and Women of note.

13. But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was
Preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stired up the people.

13. Note, Satan sends about his Messenger as Christ did his: To stir up the
People.

14. And then immediately the brethren sent away Paul, to go as it were to the
sea: but Silas and Timotheus abode there still.

14. Note, Not because Paul was more fearful than the rest, but that he was
more useful and more maliced.

15. And they that conducted Paul, brought him unto Athens: and receiving a
Commandment unto Silas and Timotheus, for to come to him with all speed, they
departed.

15. Paul passing by many Countries between, was conducted to Athens, the great
Seat or University of Philosophy, to Greece and all the Learned World.

16. Now while Paul waited for them at Athens; his Spirit was stirred in him,
when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.

16. He was much moved, to see such abundance of Statues, Images and Altars in
the City.

17. Therefore disputed he in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout
persons, and in the Market daily with them that met with him.

17. Therefore he did not only dispute for Christianity in the Sinagogue with
the Jews, and devout Worshippers (who when converted, were usually the first
Members of the Churches) but also with the Heathens where he met them, against
their Idolatry.

18. Then certain Philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoics,
encountered him: and some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He
seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods? because he Preached unto them
Jesus, and the Resurrection.

18. The Epicureans a loose sensual Sect, and the Stoics a stricter Sect
encountered him; and some of them despising him as an unlearned Babbler: Others
thought that he Preached some God (by the Name of Jesus and the Resurrection)
not known to them before, Note, The Athenians were not only for liberty for
every one to worship what God he would, but thought it the height of Religion
to take in and worship the Gods of all Nations: And to please them all, and
build them Altars.

19. And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know
what this new doctrine, whereof thou speak, is? 20. For thou bring
certain strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things
mean.

19. They brought him to the Court of Judicature, who were to be Judges, before
any new God was to be received, that they might hear what God it was that he
Preached.

21. (For all the Athenians, and strangers which were there, spent their time
in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing.)

21. The very learning and daily business of the Athenian Philosophers,
Students and Sojourners, was but to know News, and tell it, whether Speculative
or Historical: (And what else is all learning, that serves not to Holiness and
Heaven.

22. Then Paul stood in the midst of Marshill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I
perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.

22. Ye are on pretense of being very Religious, addicted to worship multitudes
of Gods.

23. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this
inscription, TO THE UNKOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye^ ignorantly worship, him
declare I unto you.

23. Whatever was the occasion of that Inscription, you confess you worship an
unknown God, I would therefore make known to you that only God, whom you must
worship.

24. God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of
Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands: 25. Neither is
worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing seeing he gives to
all life, and breath, and all things;

24, 25. Bring not down that God that made and owneth all the World,
imaginarily to your Temples and Images, or think that he needs, or you can
give him any thing, who gives us all things.

26. And has made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the
face of the Earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation:

26. And has made all Men of one human nature (propagated from one root) and
ordered them into their several Countries, and bounded habitations determined
by him.

27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feell after him, and
find him,

27. Making it their duty to seek to know him as their Maker by his works, and
as their Benefactor by his Mercies, which palpably declare him, that they might
serve love and worship him, as their God.

27.28. Though he be not far from every one of us: For in him we live, and
move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we
are also his offspring.

27, 28. He is as near us as our Souls are to our Bodies; Being indeed more than
a Soul to all the World: For it is In him that we live and move and have our
Being; As your Poet Aratus faith, For we are his offspring: for of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, and no Parent so much causes us as God
does, nor does the Soul so much to our life, motion and being as God does.

29. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that
the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art and man's
device.

29. Our Souls being the best Image of God our Maker, we must not so much
debase him as to make Images of him of Gold, Silver or Stone, as if he was like
such shapes.

30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commands all men
every where to repent:

30. And as man seems by forbearance a while to connive at faults, so God
has not in the time of this ignorance, either punished the World as such
deserves, nor sent them from Heaven that notice of his displeasure, and that
call to Repent and amend as now he does, but left them mostly to the Light of
Nature and the discoveries of his Works and Providence: But now in hatred of
Sin and Mercy to Sinners, he has sent a special Messenger to the World, to
call all to Repentance, and offer them pardon thereupon.

31. Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

31. For he has certainly determined to judge the World with Righteousness, by
that Man whom he has ordained to be the Savior of the Faithful and the Judge
of all which (though it seem incredible to most, that a man should be so
advanced to be King and Judge of all the World, yet) God has given certain
proof of, by evidence sufficient to evince it to true reason, in that he has
raised him from death to life, (and taken him up to Heaven.)

32. And when they heard of the Resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and
others said, We will hear thee again of this matter. 33. So Paul departed from
among them.

12, 13. Note, The Resurrection seemed so incredible that some ( Epicureans its
like) scoft at it.

Note, Paul did wisely in Preaching the true God to them first, and reproving
their Idolatry, and only concluding with the notice of Christ. And yet no sort
of men more contemned his Doctrine than the Learned Athenians. Self-conceit and
the prepossession of their vain though extolled Learning most powerfully kept
out the Truth: And it did not please God there to work Miracles to convince
them.

34. Howbeit, certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was
Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

34. This famous University yielded few Converts: But those few were precious
to God.

CHAP. XVIII.
AFter these things, Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth; 2. And
found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with
his wife Priscilla, (because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart
from Rome) and came unto them.

2. That Claudius banished all Jews from Rome is certain: but the cause is
uncertain. Suetonius says, It was their Tumults by the impulse or imitation of
Christ (or some read it of one Crestus.) It is not unlike that the Jews rage at
Rome against the Gospel made them Tumultuous against Christians: and thereupon
both sorts were banished under the name of Jews: And so there could then be no
Church left and tolerated at Rome, but Gentiles only. For it is doubtless that
the Christian Jews were banished.

3. And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought (for
by their occupation they were Tent-makers.)

3. Note, Men separated to the Ministry of the Gospel, may labor for their
Living, if needful.

4. And he reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded the Jews, and
the Greeks.

4. Note, Still the Jews Synagogue was his Preaching place to gather the
beginnings of a Church.

5. And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in
Spirit, and testified to the Jews, that Jesus was Christ.

5. He was extraordinarily moved in Spirit more openly and earnestly to
testify to the Jews that Jesus is the Christ, to leave them without excuse.

6. And when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his raiment, and
said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads; I am clean: from hence forth
I will go unto the Gentiles.

6. And when they gainsayed and railed and blasphemed Christ, he renounced and
deserted them by the Ceremony of shaking off the dust as a witness, that their
destruction was of themselves and not by his neglect to convince them. And
thencefore he resolved to leave their Synagogue and teach the Gentiles.

7. And he departed thence, and entered into a certain man's house, named Justus,
one that worshipped God, whose house joined hard to the Synagogue.

7. Note, Its like this Justus was a Proselyte: If not he was one that had
learnt at least to worship the true God.

8. And Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the Lord with all
his house: and many of the Corinthians, hearing believed, and were Baptized.

8. Note, 1. Still we see households are Converted and Baptized together; the
Rulers power and Gods blessing prevailing with them. 3. Though the Synagogue
drove away Paul, the Ruler followed him.

9. Then spoke the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but
speak, and hold not thy peace: 10. For I am with thee, and no man shall set on
thee, to hurt thee: for I have much people in this city.

9. Note, It is an ungrounded Exposition of them that say that these were Gods
People as pious men before (though some Proselytes might be such,) or that God
only foreknew their Conversion, and did not decree to cause it. God had many
there whom he decreed to Convert; and therefore will have Paul to Preach to
them, and will secure him from Persecutions.

11. And he continued there a year and six months, teaching the word of God
among them.

11. Note, 1. Great works must have answerable time and labor. 2. There is
mention of Paul, Silas, Timothy, Aquila, Luke* and many other such at Corinth:
but of no one that was sole Bishop over the rest.

12. And when Gallio was the deputy of Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with
one accord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat,

12. They carried him by force before the Roman Proconsul to be judged.

13. Saying, This fellow persuades men to worship God contrary to the law.

13. Note, Who would think but these men were very godly men themselves who
were so zealous against worshipping of God contrary to the Law. And yet they
were mere blind ungodly malignant Pesecutors.

14. And when Paul was now about to open his mouth, Gallio, said unto the Jews,
If it were a matter of wrong, or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that
I should bear with you: 15. But if it be a question of words and names, and of
your law, look ye to it; for I will be no judge of such matters.

14. The Roman Law enabled not Gallio to decide the Jewish Controversies, but
to punish men that wronged one another, or committed any Wicked lewdness.

Note, If Christian Magistrates were all as wise as these Heathens and would
not lend fiery Legallists their Swords, nor become the Executioners of the fury
of blind proud zealots, the business would be soon over, and be but a scuffle
among themselves.

16. And he drove them from the Judgment Seat. 17. Then all the Greeks took
Sosthenes, the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, and beat him before the
judgment seat: and Gallio cared for none of those things.

16, 17. Note, Its like these Greeks were Christian Converts: They did ill in
exercising revenge.

18. And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and then took his
leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla and
Aquila: having shorn his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow.

18. Note, It is uncertain whether it was Paul or Aquila, that is said to cut
his hair: but it seems liker to be Aquila. The Vow of Nazarites was not to
cut their Hair, sometime during life, and sometime for a certain time: when it
was ended they cut their Hair.

19. And he came to Ephesus, and left them there: but he himself entered into
the Synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.

19. Note, His renouncing the Jews at Corinth, was not a forsaking them
elsewhere.

20. When they desired him to tarry longer time with them, he consented not:
21. But bade them farewell, saying, I must by all means keep this feast that
comes, in Jerusalem: but I will return again unto you, if God will. And he
sailed from Ephesus 22. And when he had landed at Cesarea, and gone up and
saluted the Church, he went down to Antioch.

22. He went up from Caesarea to Jerusalem and after returned to Antioch.

23. And after he had spent some time there, he departed, and went over all the
Country, of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the Disciples.

23. To instruct and encourage those before Converted, as well as to gather
more.

24. And a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and
mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus. 25. This man was instructed in the
way of the Lord; and being fervent in the Spirit, he spoke and taught
diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the Baptism of John.

24, 25. He was well acquainted with the Scriptures, and believed so much of
Christ as John had Preached, and was Baptized with his Baptism, but wanted yet
much of the further knowledge of Christ, and of the Christian Baptism.

26. And he began to speak boldly in the Synagogue. Whom when Aquila and
Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of
God more perfectly.

26. Note, An Eloquent Teacher mighty in the Scriptures, yet disdaineth not to
be better instructed by a Tent-maker and his Wife.

27. And when he was disposed to pass into Achaia, the brethren wrote,
exhorting the Disciples to receive him: who, when he was come, helped them much
which had believed through Grace.

27. They wrote to them to entertain and encourage him; who when he was come
proved a great helper to them that already by the Grace of God were made
Believers.

28. For he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the
Scriptures, that Jesus was Christ.

28. For by the advantage of great acquaintance with the Scriptures, and his
Eloquence, he was too hard for the contradicting Jews, and clearly proved to
them from the Sciptures which they own, that Jesus is the true Messiah or
Christ.

CHAP. XIX.
ANd it came to pass, that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed
through the upper coasts, came to Ephesus: and finding certain Disciples. 2. He
said unthem, Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said
unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost. 3. And
he said unto them, Unto what then were ye Baptized? And they said, Unto John's
Baptism.

1. He found some that owned the Christian Profession. 2. Note, John's Preaching
was, that the Messiah is now come, and those that Repented and Believed this he
Baptized, though they knew not that Jesus was he: But to many he also pointed
to Jesus and said, This is he. And these Disciples its like were such: and had
learned no more.

4. Then said Paul, John verily Baptized with the Baptism of repentance, saying
unto the People, That they should believe on him which should come after him,
that is, on Christ Jesus. 5. When they heard this, they were Baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus.

4. Paul said John Baptized those who professed Repentance and Faith in the
Messiah as just now at hand who indeed was Jesus Christ. When these Disciples
heard that, they were expressly Baptized (again) into the name of the Lord Jesus.

6. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them and
they spoke with tongues, and prophesied. 7. And all the men were about twelve.

6, 7. And* the miraculous signal gift came on these men, when Paul had laid
his hands on them.

Note, The opinion of Matnixius and Beza that verse. 5. was the speech of Paul
concerning John's Converts, that they were Baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus. 1. Is forced and therefore to be suspected: 2. It is contrary to the
Context: For [They in verse. 3. and and They in verse. 5. and Them in verse. 6.
all plainly speak of the same persons. 3. It is contrary to the History of
John's Baptism, who Baptized multitudes of the common People, Soldiers,
Publicans and Pharisees upon a mere profession of Repentance and belief of the
Messiah at hand, and is never said to have Baptized any into the Name of the
Lord Jesus. 4. Their reason for it is contrary to the Doctrine of Christianity,
as if John's Baptism were so much the same with Christ's that it is not to be
perfected by the later. If any one then or now were Baptized only by John's
Baptism, he ought to be Baptized again. It is essential to Christian Baptism,
to be Baptized into the Name of the Father and of the Son (as buried and risen
with him) and of the Holy Ghost. But John's Baptism had not all this; Therefore
it is not the (now) Christian Baptism.

8. And he went into the Synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of three
months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the Kingdom of God.

8. Note, The Gospel is the Doctrine of Gods Reign by the Messiah.

9. But when diverse were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that way
before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the Disciples,
disputing daily in the School of one Tyrannus.

9. The Ears of Christians being unfit to bear their reproaching and
blaspheming of Christ, he separated the Disciples from the public Synagogue of
the Jews to a private School.

10. And this continued by the space of two years; so that all they which dwelt
in Asia, heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.

10. By two years Teaching and Disputing the Gospel was spread through all Asia
proconsular.

11. And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul: 12. So that from
his body were brought unto the sick, handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases
departed from them, and the evil Spirits went out of them.

11, 12. So Many and great were the Miracles and Cures done by Paul's means,
that his corporal presence could not serve all, but by Clothes sent from his
Body they at a distance were cured.

13. Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over
them which had evil Spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you
by Jesus whom Paul Preaches. 14. And there were seven sons of one Sceva a Jew,
and chief of the Priests, which did so.

13. Seven Sons of one of the Jews Chief Priests, being Vagabonds Exorcists
that pretended to Conjure out Devils, seeing Paul's Miracles had (like Simon
Magus) a desire to do the like, and thought that saying the same words would
serve without the same Faith and Grace (as Hypocrites do in the matters of
Salvation.

15. And the evil Spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but
who are ye? 16. And the man in whom the evil Spirit was, leapt on them, and
overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house
naked and wounded.

15. Words without Faith would not work to cast out Devils, and Christ would
not give power to his Name used as a Charm: but Satan strengthened the Man to
wound and shame them.

17. And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus;
and fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

17. This being commonly known, the name of Christ was more reverenced and
honored.

18. And many that believed came and confessed, and showed their deeds.

18. Many Converts openly confessed their former evil deeds

19. Many also of them which used curious arts, brought their books together,
and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found
it fifty thousand pieces of silver. 20. So mightily grew the word of God, and
prevailed.

19. To show the truth of their Repentance by the Renunciation of their former
delusions, and that no men else might be hurt by their ill Books or make an ill
use of them, they would not sell but burn their Books of Magic and Charms and
Idolatrous Rites and Divinations: though the price amounted to a very great sum
(not pretending as Judas that this Money might have been given to the poor.)
This showed the power of Gods Word and Grace, which so prevailed against
Delusions and the love of Money.

21. After these things were ended, Paul purposed in the Spirit, when he had
passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have
been there, I must also see. Rome. 22. So he sent into Macedonia two of them
that ministered unto him, Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself stayed in Asia
for a season.

21. Intending to go to Jerusalem he sent two that were as Servants to him in
attending and helping him in his Ministry.

23. And the same time there arose no small stir about that way. 24. For a
certain man named Demetrius, a silver-smith, which made silver shrines for
Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen. 25. Whom he called together
with the Workmen of like occupation, and said,

23, 24. One whose Trade was to make either Medals that had the Image of the
Temple of Diana, to sell* or else little Boxes in which the Image of Diana in
her Temple was carried about in Procession by them.

Note, It is wordly interest and commodity, and love of Money that causes
Enmity and Persecution against the Servants of Christ, who must Preach the
Gospel contrary to this interest.

25. Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth. 26. Moreover, ye see
and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul
has persuaded and turned away much People, saying, that they be no Gods which
are made with hands: 27. So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set
at naught; but that also the Temple of the great goddess Diana should be
despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia, and the
world worshippeth 28. And when they heard these sayings, they were full of
wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

25, 26, 27. Note, Arguments from Wealth and Interest are unanswerable with
blinded Worldlings; and raise the rage of the Rabble against Reformation. Here
we may see what resists Reformation in the Church of Rome? Can it be hoped
that any Truth or Reason should persuade the Pope and Cardinals, and all their
worldly Prelates to give up their Wealth, Grandeur, Power and Dominion, and all
their Lay Chancellors to surrender with repentance their gainful Usurpation of
the Power of the Keys? And all their Courts (called) Ecclesiastic, Officials,
Commissarie^, Surrogates, Archdeacons, and all the multitude of their
sub-Officers, to become poor by giving over their Trade of Money-catching? and
all their Inquisitors to vomit up there blood and gain? And all the Crowds of
Jesuits and Friars to lose their Revenues and Life of Ease, and their worldly
Clergy who live in lazy Ignorance, and fleshly ease and pleasure, and railing
at truth and serious Godliness, to become poor and base by renouncing their
Usurpation, and their maintenances and domination, which they get by pretending
to watch and rule for the saving of the Peoples Souls. What power but Gods can
overcome all this.

29. And the whole city was filled with confusion: and having caught Gaius, and
Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel, they rushed with one
accord into the Theater. 30. And when Paul would have entered in unto the
People, the Disciples suffered him not.

29. Interest caused rage and confus^on.

31. And certain of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto him,
desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the Theater.

31. The Theater was the place where they met to judge Offenders and cast them
to Wild Beasts: And some of the Priests or Heathen Masters of those Executions
favored Paul and dissuaded him from coming.

32. Some therefore cried onething, and some another: for the assembly was
confufed, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.

32. Note, What Reason or Justice is to be Executed where the ignorant Rabble
are up and rage.

33. And they drew Alexander out of the mu^titude, the Jews putting him
forward. And Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made his defense
unto the people. 34. But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice
about the space of two hours cried out Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

33. Note, Its like but not certain that this Alexander was he that Paul tells
Timothy did him much evil: Whether he were a Jew or a Christian by Religion is
uncertain.

35. And when the town clerk had appeased the people, he said, Ye men of
Ephesus, what man is there that knows not how that the city of the Ephesians
is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the Image which fell down
from Jupiter? 36. Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against, ye
ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly. 37. For ye have brought hither
these men, which are neither Robbers of Churches, nor yet Blasphemers of your
goddess.

35. Note, It is the Office of Rulers to appease the Rabbles rage by reason and
Authority. 2. It seems the Christians in wisdom had asserted Christianity
without saying much against Diana, which would have en^aged the People against
them.

38. Wherefore if Demetrius and the craftsmen which are with him, have a matter
against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies; let them implead one
another.

38. If they have any Action let it be tried fairly at the Judicatures by Law,
and not thus by Tumult.

39. But if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall be
determined in a lawful assembly.

39. If beside matters of wrong you have any Accusation of more public
concern, it must be tried in a greater Assembly and higher Judicature. Note,
The higher Judicatures consisted of fuller Assemblys than the lower.

40. For we are in danger to be called in question for this days uprore, there
being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse. 41. And when
he had thus spoken, he dismised the Assembly.

40. Our Superiors are justly jealous of Tumults, and we are in danger to be
questioned for this, and can give no just reason to excuse it.

CHAP. XX.
ANd after the uprore was ceased, Paul called unto him the Disciples, and
embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia. 2. And when he had gone
over those parts, and had given them much exhortation, he came into Greece, 3.
And there abode three months:

1. Note, He spared no labor to save Souls and gather Churches.

And when the Jews laid vvait for him as he was about to sail into Syria, he
purposed to return through Macedonia. 4. And there accompanied him into Asia,
Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius
of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus. 5. These going
before tarried for us, at Troas.

3. Note, The Jews though nearer in Religion than the Heathens, yet persecuted
the Christians, when the Heathens gave them liberty of Religion (till Nero's
time) even as the Papists do the Reformed whom Turks tolerate. 2. Timothy was
not now fixed Bishop of Ephesus, who traveled with Paul.

6. And we sailed away from Philippi, after the days of unleavened bread, and
came unto them to Troas in five days, where we abode seven days. 7. And upon
the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread,
Paul Preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his
speech until midnight.

7. On the Lords day when the Christians met as they used to do, to Eat a
Supper together, and the Lords Supper after it, Paul being to depart on the
morrow, was the longer in Preaching to them, even till Midnight.

8. And there were many lights in the upper Chamber where they were gathered
together. 9. And there sat in a vvindovv a certain young man named Eutychus,
being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long Preaching, he sunk down
with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead. 10.
And Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him, said, Trouble not
your selves; for his life is in him.

8. Note, This accident was to prepare for his delivery.

11. When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and
talked a long while, even till break of day, so he departed.

11. Note, Grace with Persecution made Christians willing of long Exercises of
Religion.

12. And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted.

12. Note, Had he dyed some would have said, This is the effect of
Christianity; Others, this is the fruit of Conventicles, and night Meetings;
Others, this is the fruit of long and and unseasonable Preaching: and they
would have been hardened by the scandal.

13. And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Assos, there intending to
take in Paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to go a foot.

13. Note, It was these poor laboring foot Preachers that Planted the
Catholic Church, and not Mitred Pompous Princes and Lords, or the worldly crew.

14. And when he met with us at Assos, we took him in, and came to Mitylene.
15. And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios; and the
next day we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium; and the next day we
came to Miletus.

16. For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the
time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem
the day of Pentecost. 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the
Elders of the Church.

17. Note, They that tell us that by the Elders of the Church is meant all the
Diocesane Bishops of Asia, should tell us, 1. Why Luke would not tell us so? 2.
Why all Asia is called a Church in the singular number when we never find the
Churches of Judea, Gallatia, or any other Country so called one Church? 3. Why
the Churches of all Asia are summoned as the Church of Ephesus? 4. What proof
there is of Metropolitan Churches singlularly named in those days? 5. How it
would stand with Paul's great have to Congregate all the Bishops of Asia? And
whether it was done in a day or two? 6. Whether Paul that stayed two or three
years at Ephesus did Preach through all Asia from house to house, warning every
one night and day with tears? 7. Whether this be not good evidence of many
Elders then at Ephesus alone? 8. Why there is no word of making some one the
Ruler of all the rest as their Bishop?

18. And when they were come to him, he said unto them; ye know from the first
day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all
seasons, 19. Serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears,
and temptations which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews.

18. Ye know at what rates of danger and suffering I have served God for your
salvation, humbly bearing all, etc.

20. And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed
you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house,

20. Not fraudulently concealing any thing profitable to you, nor teaching
unprofitable things; but instructing you both in the public Assemblys and from
house to house as I had opportunity.

21. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

21. The sum of my Preaching has been to draw all men, to Repent and turn from
sin and vanity to God as their God, by a lively Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
as the way to the Father.

22. And now behold, I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the
things that shall befall me there: 23. Save that the holy Ghost witnesses in
every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me.

22. And now I am going to Jerusalem, by the mission of Gods spirit who
directs my way, in expectation of bonds; not knowing just what and how I
shall suffer, but that where ever I come, the Holy Ghost in others that are
Prophets tells me that bonds and afflictions must befall me.

24. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my
self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I
have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

24. But the expectation of suffering shakes not my Faith or Resolution: For
it can but amount to their taking away my life: And I account not my life dear,
if I may lay it down in so good a cause, and for so great a benefit, as is the
finishing of the race or course of Life which God has assigned me to with joy,
as one that is past danger and ready to receive the Crown, and the full
performance of the Commission which I have received of the Lord, to proclaim
and testify the Gospel of Grace for the gathering of the Church and saving of
souls.

Note, 1. Suffering must not shake the trust or resolution of a Christian,
especially a Minister of Christ. 2. We should not only endeavor to finish our
course of Christianity and Ministry with Fidelity, but also with joy. 3. Good
beginnings are not enough without well finishing our Course. 4. Life must not
be thought too dear to lay down for so desirable an end. 5. Martyrs may end
their course with joy.

Quest. How should we finish our course with joy? Answ. 1. Take God and
Heavenly Glory for your all or only happiness, and believe it firmly. 2. Give
up your selves wholly to his Love and Service without reserves. 3. Live on the
Mediation of Christ by Faith.

25. And now behold, I know that ye all among whom I have gone Preaching the
Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.

25. Note, O hear your Teachers as those that shortly shall see their Faces on
Earth no more.

26. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of
all men. 27. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.

26. You are my Witnesses, that if any perish it is not long of me, for want of
Teaching; for I have not concealed from you any Truth necessary to your
Salvation committed to my trust.

28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over the which
the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood.

28. Use your greatest care and watchfulness and labor, first about your
selves (that your judgments may be sound, your hearts holy, and your lives
exemplary) and then for all the Flock (that one Flock at Ephesus) over which
the Holy Ghost, by his inward qualifying and exciting you, and by his outward
call, by the Flock and the Ordainers, has made you so many Bishops or
Overseers: spare for no diligence to feed and guide this Church of God, which
Christ the Son of God has so much loved, as to purchase it with his own Blood.

Note, 1. The work of the Ministry is not Imperiousness and Idleness, but a
great care and labor for our own Souls and all the Flock, whose great danger
and necessities require it. O, woe, woe, woe, to idle worldly ungodly Treacherous
Bishops and Ministers! 2. He is no true Minister as to his own Conscience and
Salvation, who is not made such by the Holy Ghost, though his acts may be valid
to the guilty People. 3. Christ's Blood has purchased the Church in a fuller
sense then he is said to die for all. 4. The blood of Christ may be called the
blood of God. 5. The reason before mentioned make me think that it is the one
Church of Ephesus, and not all in Asia that had all these Bishops. Its called
here the [Flocke and the Church] in the singular number; and I remember not
that any Church under the Gospel is so called, save only a single Church, and
the Universal Church, and not a Collection of many Churches.

29. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the flock.

29. I foreknow that dangerous Heretics and Tyrannical Dominerers will enter,
who as Wolves, may be known by the mischiefs which they do to the Flock.

30. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
away Disciples after them.

30. Even out of your own Church (if not of you Bishops that hear me) shall
some arise, that shall vend unsound and novel Doctrines, purposely to draw
Di^ciples to admire and follow them: O then, what Church can be secure from
such hurtful Ministers and corruptions.

31. Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased
not to warn every one night and day with tears.

31. Remember my example and imitate it, left it condemn you, etc. Note, Did
Paul warn every one night and day with Tears, in a Diocese of many hundred
Parish Churches.

32. And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.

32. And now Brethren, I have no greater Benediction for you, nor Counsel to
you, but that God may be your God, your All, your Guide, Protector and Reward,
and the word of his Grace may be your Rule, your Employment, and your Trust;
which is sufficient in its kind, by the help of the Spirit to build you yet
higher in Faith, Love and Comfort, and to secure you of the Inheritance among
the Sanctified which it promises.

33. I have coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or apparel.

33. Note, The worldly self-seekers that cannot say this, are not such as
Christ will own or bless.

34. Yea, you your selves know, that these hands have ministered unto my
necessities, and to them that were with me.

34. Note, Worldly Labor for worldly Love is sordid in a Minister, but in
necessity it is l^udable,

35. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to support
the weak; and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more
blessed to give then to receive.

35. Note, This laboring of Paul is exemplary to Ministers when necessary. 2.
If Ministers must labor to have to give to the relief of others, how much more
others that have not such Avocation as the Ministerial work. They live wickedly
like Sodomites that live idly without any labor profitable to others, merely
because they are rich and in no need themselves.

3. It is uncertain whether Paul cite this saying of Christ, as verbally told
him, though not written, or whether he spoke it only as the sense and not the
words which are recorded. 4. To be a Giver is more honorable than to be a
Receiver.

36. And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed with them all.

36. Note, Prayer is a meet way of parting with our Friends, and showing our
love to them, commending them to God. All things are sanctified by it.

37. And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him, 38.
Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his
face no more. And they accompanied him unto the ship.

37. Note, Thus love causes sorrow here, and thus we part at last with our
Friends with tears and grief, with whom we lived with joy. But we shall meet
again with greater joy, and never part.

CHAP. XXI.
ANd it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them; and had lanched, we
came with a straight course unto Coos, and the day following unto Rhodes, and
from thence unto Patara. 2. And [finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we
went aboard, and set forth. 3. Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on
the left hand, and sailed into Syria, and landed at Tire: for there the ship
was to unlade her burden. 4. And finding Disciples, we tarried there seven
days: who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to
Jerusalem.

4. Note Was the Spirit in Paul and in them contrary? No, but the Spirit in
them told them in what danger he would be at Jerusalem, and then they in
kindness, as Men, dissuaded him, but not that the Spirit forbid him, but
carried him on to it, and therefore he went on.

5. And when we had accomplished those days, we departed and went our way, and
they all brought us on our way, with wives and Children, till we were out of
the city: and we kneeled down on the shore, and prayed.

5. Note, The loving Communion of Saints and Prayer, are the mark of true
Disciples. Beza conjectureth that they are called Disciples as mere Christians,
not ordered into a particular Church State: And that they are called the
Brethren, when associated in Church order.

6. And when we had taken our leave one of another, we took ship, and they
returned home again. 7. And when we had finished our course from Tire, we came
to Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day. 8. And the
next day we that were of Paul's company departed, and came unto Cesarea; and we
entered into the house of Philip the evangelist (which was one of the the seven)
and abode with him.

6. Note, Luke who was one of Paul's ordinary Company makes no mention of
himself and his own actions and labors, as if he were nobody.

9. And the same man had four daughters, Virgins, which did prophecy.

9. Note, Though Women were not to speak as Teachers in the Assemblies, they
might have the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, and speak by inspiration and
prediction.

10. And as we tarried there many days, there came down from Judea a certain
prophet named Agabus. 11. And when he was come unto us, he took Paul's girdle,
and bound his own hands and feet, and said, Thus says the holy Ghost, So shall
the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owes this girdle, and shall deliver
him into the hands of the Gentiles.

11, Note, God foretells his Servants sufferings* not as bidding them avoid
them, but as warning them to prepare.

12. And when we heard these things, both we and they of that place, besought
him not to go up to Jerusalem.

12. Note, As Men, they persweded him to avoid the danger.

13. Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart? for I
am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the
Lord Jesus.

13. You do but become your selves the Author of my sufferings: What are Bonds,
and what is Life, that I should not cheerfully entertain them for the name of
Jesus my Lord?

Note, The condolence and temptations of compassionate Friends, are often more
grievous than persecution.

14. And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the
Lord be done.

14. We saw by his resolution and unperswadableness that it was Gods will; and
we submitted to it.

15. And after those days we took up our carriages, and went up to Jerusalem.
16. There went with us also certain of the Disciples of Cesarea, and brought
with them one Muason of Cyprus, an old Disciple, with whom we should lodge. 17.
And when we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.

15. Muason lodged us, and the Church gladly owned us.

18. And the day following Paul went in with us unto James; and all the Elders
were present.

18 Note, They that say, all the Elders were all the Bishops of Judea, do
without proof, fain Paul to have sent word before of his coming, and desired a
Council to be gathered to entertain him; or else they take all the Bishops of
Judea to be very gross Nonresidents, that were all found the first day, so far
from their Flocks;

19. And when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what things God had
wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry. 20. And when they heard it, they
glorified the Lord.

19. They rejoiced and thanked God for the success of the Gospel on the
Gentiles, and scattered the Jews abroad.

20. And said unto him, Thou see, brother, how many thousands of Jews there
are which believe, and they are all zealous of the law. 21. And they are
informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews which are among the Gentiles
to forsake Moses, saying, that they ought not to circumcise their Children,
neither to walk after the customs.

20, 21. They are told, that thou teach not only the Gentiles, but the Jews
to forsake Circumcision, and Moses Law and the Customs.

22. What is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together: for they
will hear that thou art come. 23. Do therefore this that we say to thee: we
have four men which have a vow on them; 24 Them take, and purify thy self with
them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may
know that those things whereof they were informed concerning thee, are nothing,
but that thou thy self also walk orderly, and keep the law.

22. The Multitude of Christian Jews will hear of thy coming, deliver them thus
from this offense; we have four Men that made the Nazarites vow to abstain from
some things a certain time, which is now expired, and they are to shave
themselves ceremoniously in the Temple: Go thou with them, and perform there
the Legal Ceremonies of Purification, and be at the cost of this solemnity on
them, that the People may know, that the report of thee is not true, but that
thou being a Jew do thy self keep the Law.

Note, The Law was by Christ abrogated as to the use of the Types and
Ceremonies, as signifying him that was to come, The Political part ceased when
their policy was dissolved by their ruin: And the moral natural part Christ
continued as his Law. And the Abrogation of the rest was not fully made known
at first, but by degrees; and the exercise of it long tolerated to the Jews.

25. As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written and concluded,
that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep themselves from
things offered to idols, and from blood, and from strangled, and from
fornication.

25. We intend not this for the Gentiles, nor would bring them under the yoke
of Moses Law, etc.

26. Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them,
entrod into the Temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of
purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.

26. Paul did as they advised him, and performed all the Ceremonies required,
and came to the Temple to make it known, that the days of Purification were
accomplished, till they were to offer.

27. And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia,
when they saw him in the Temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on
him, 28. Crying out, Men of Israel help: this is the man that teaches all men
every where against the people, and the law, and this place: and further,
brought Greeks also into the Temple, and has polluted this holy place. 29.
(For they had seen before with him in the city, Trophimus an Ephesian, whom
they supposed that Paul had brought into the Temple.)

27. Note, Some think that God let out this affliction on Paul, for complying
so far to please the People; as if it had been carnal Council which he
followed. But that is not to be supposed; that both the Apostles and Elders,
and he himself, who was guided by the Spirit, should herein err and be misled:
This would leave us uncertain of the truth of their writings. But it was the
way of fulfilling Gods decree; and tells us what a task it is to have to do
with such Men: Whether they be pleased or not, we must suffer by them.

30. And all the city was moved, and the people ran together: and they took
Paul, and drew him out of the Temple: and forthwith the doors were shut.

30. In blind rage they dragged him out of the Temple as a Profaner of it.

31. And as they went about to kill him, tidings came unto the chief captain of
the band, that all Jerusalem was in an uprore.

31. This sort of zeal makes Men think it no sin but a serving of God, to
murder the best of Saints, as a Sacrifice to their Holy Temple and Ceremonies.

32. Who immediately took Soldiers, and centurions, and ran down unto them:
and when they saw the chief Captain and the Soldiers, they left beating of
Paul.

32, Note. 1. Even a Heathen Government is better than the Popular rage of
blind ceremonious superstitious Zealots. 2. Heathens are often the Protectors of
Christians, against the blind rage of those that profess devotion to the same
God.

33. Then the chief Captain came near and took him, and commanded him to be
bound with two Chains; and demanded who he was, and what he had done? 34. And
some cried one thing, some another, among the multitude: and when he could not
know the certainty for the tumult, he commanded him to be carried into the
Castle.

33, 34. A Heathen would hear the cause before he judges it, when superstitious
Zealots execute before they try or hear.

35. And when he came upon the stairs, so it was that he was born of the
Soldiers, for the violence of the people. 36. For the multitude of the people
followed after, crying, Away with him.

35. The Heathen Soldiers were fain by force, to carry and guard him from these
Hypocrites.

37. And as Paul was to be led into the castle, he said unto the chief Captain,
May I speak unto thee? Who said, Can thou speak Greek? 38. Art not thou that
Egyptian which before these days made an uprore, and leddest out into the
wilderness four thousand men that were murderers?

37, 38. The tumult about him made him suspect him to be an Incendiary that had
lately raised sedition.

39. But Paul said, I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a citizen of no mean
city: and I beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people. 40. And when he
had given him license, Paul stood on the stairs, and beckened with the hand
unto the people: and when there was made a great silence, he spoke unto them in
the Hebrew tongue, saying.

39, 40. When he had given him leave to speak, and procured silence and
audience by his Authority, which else the Multitude of Legal Zealots would not
have granted him, he spoke to them in the Chaldec Tongue than called the
Hebrew, because it was understood by a greater number than the Greek. This
shows that Greek was not then most common.

CHAP. XXII.
MEn, brethren, and fathers hear ye my defense which I make now unto you. 2.
(And when they heard that he speak in the Hebrew tongue to them, they kept the
more silence: and he says,) 3. I am, verily a man which am a Jew* born in
Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city, at the feet of
Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers,
and was Zealous toward God, as ye all are this day.

1. I am a Jew brought up a Disciple of Gamaliel, under the same Laws and
customs, and as zealous for God in your way, as you now are.

4. And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and dilivering into
prisons both men and women.

4 And as you are affected with zealous cruelty now against Christians, so was
I then, and persecuted them even to death, binding and delivering them into
Prison, both Men and Women.

5. As also the high priest does bear me witness, and all the estate of the
elders: from whom also I received letters unto the brethren* and went to
Damascus, to bring them which were there, bound unto Jerusalem, for to be
punished.

5. The High Priest and all the Council of Elders (called the Sanedrim) know
this) from whom I had Letters authorizing me to bring them Prisoners to
Jerusalem to be punished.

6. And it came to pass, that as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto
Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about
me. 7. And I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me?

6, 7. I saw a Light, and h^ard a Voice, etc.

Note, When Christ will speak in Power and Terror, he will cast down the
proudest Persecutor. 2. Christ takes the persecuting of his Servants, and
striving against his Gospel, as persecuting himself, it being against his
Friends and for his Cause.

8. And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said unto me, I am Jesus of
Nazareth whom thou Persecutest.

8. Note, Did Persecutors know Christ aright, and know that it is him in his
servants whom they persecute, they durst not, they would not do it.

9. And they that were with me, saw indeed the light, and were afraid; but they
heard not the voice of him that speak to me.

9. They saw the Light, and heard the sound (like Thunder) but saw no man, nor
heard the voice and words that were spoken to me, and which I heard.

10 And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go
into Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which are
appointed for thee to do.

10. I will not this way by voice from heaven, tell thee thy duty, I have
stablished the way of notifying it by my Ministers and Spirit: Go to Damascus,
and I will send thee a Teacher.

Note, Souls duly humbled are ready to do any thing that God would have them
do.

11. And when I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by the
hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus.

11. Note, God made the Light it self to blind him, as an Emblem of his
persecuting blindness.

12. And one Ananias, a devout man according to the law, having a good report
of all the Jews which dwelt there, 13. Came unto me, and stood, and said unto
me, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him.

12. Ananias a zealous Jew, tho a Christian, well spoken of by the Jews
themselves, was sent to restore my sight, etc.

14. And he said, The God of our fathers has chosen thee, that thou should
know his will, and see that Just one, and should here the voice of his
mouth. 15. For thou shall be his witness unto all men, of what thou have seen
and heard.

14, 15. It is the free grace and will of God that has chosen thee to see
Christ (whom thou persecutest) and to hear his voice from Heaven, and to be his
witness of what thou have seen and heard.

Note, Paul is a full instance of Gods special electing grace.

16. And now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins,
calling on the name of the Lord.

16. Delay not, but presently repent and believe in Christ, and give up thy
self to him in his baptismal Covenant, and as the Water washes this body, his
pardoning grace through the merits of his blood and righteousness, shall wash
away the guilt of thy sins; and call on the Lord for Mercy and for his Spirit.

17. And it came to pass* that when I was come again to Jerusalem, even while I
prayed in the temple, I was in a trance; 18. And saw him saying unto me, Make
haste, and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem: for they will not receive thy
testimony concerning me.

17. Note, God that foreknew that the Jews would obstinately reject Paul,
directed his Ministry from them elsewhere.

19. And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned, and beat in every synagogue
them that believed on thee. 20. And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was
shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept the
raiment of them that slew him.

19, 20. Lord, Sure they will hear me without prejudice, who have so hotly
persecuted they Servants as they do.

21. And he said unto me, Depart: for I will send thee far hence unto the
Gentiles.

21. I have other work for thee to do elsewhere with more success.

22. And they gave him audience unto this word, and then lift up their voices,
and said, Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he
should live.

22. Note, 1. Of how little credit is the judgment of blinded wicked Men, of
Gods Servants? when they judge them unfit to live on earth, it signifies no
guilt in them, but their own madness.

23. And as they cried out, and cast of their clothes, and threw dust into the
air. 24. The chief captain commanded him to be brought into the castle, and bad
that he should be examined by scourging: that he might know wherefore they
cried so against him.

23, 24. Note What usage Gods Servants must look for in the world: The
Legalists rage as the Devils Bedlams, and the Heathen judge who was just, and
preserved him, yet would scourge him on presumption before he heard his cause,
but there is at hand a final judgment, where all these Bedlams and Tyrants
shall be cast.

25. And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that stood
by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?

25. As they prepared his Body to be scourged, he said, Is it not against your
Law to scourge a Man uncondemned, who is a Denizon of the Roman privileges.

26. When the centurion heard that, he went and told the chief captain, saying,
Take heed what thou do; for this man is a Roman. 27. Then the chief captain
came, and said unto him, Tell me art thou a Roman? He said, Yea. 28. And the
chief captain answered, with a great sum obtained I this freedom. And Paul
said, But I was Freeborn.

26. Art thou a Roman Denizon. Note, Tarsus was a City that was enfranchised
with the Roman privileges.

29. Then straightway they departed from him which should have examined him:
and the chief captain also was afraid after he knew that he was a Roman, and
because he had bound him.

29. Note, The fear of Man's Laws has more power with worldly Men, than the
fear of God.

30. On the morrow, because he would have known the certainty wherefore he was
accused of the Jews, he loosed him from his bands, and commanded the chief
priests and all their council to appear, and brought Paul down, and set him
before them

30. He would hear him and them together.

CHAP. XXIII.
ANd Paul earnestly he holding the council, said, Men and brethren, I have
lived in all good conscience before God until this day.

1. Quest. Did Paul persecute with a good Conscience? Ans. He went according to
his Conscience, though in sinful ignorance.

2. And the high priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him, to smite him
on the mouth.

2. Note, The usual Justice of proud Archpriests, whose will is instead of
reason and equity.

3. Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: for
sit thou to juge me after the law, and command me to be smitten contrary
to the law? 4. And they that stood by, said, Revilest thou Gods high Priest?

3. Note, The gross injustice of the Archpriest, is not blamed by them, but
Paul taken as criminal for reproving it.

5. Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high Priest: For it
is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.

5. Note, Some think that Paul confesses himself guilty of rashness or
passion: But others rather think that he spoke but Ironically, Ananias being
indeed no High Priest but an Usurper; but yet it was not prudence for Paul
openly to say so: q. d. [I knew not that he was the true High Priest [for he
was not:] and I confess it a Sin to revile Rulers, for it is forbidden:] But
its no sin to vindicate innocence, and declare the unrighteousness of
Oppressors, and Prophetically to foretell Gods Judgments against them. Christ
said more who never sinned, and was made under the Law, Rulers are not
unreprovable.

6. But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees, and the other
Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the
Son of a Pharisee; of the hope and resurrection of the dead, I am called in
question.

6. He took the advantage of their own differences, to draw the Pharisees to
favor him, and to turn their opposition against each other. He spoke nothing
but the Truth, but he left out one half of the truth and so it was a sort of
Equivocation: which is a sepaking part of the truth concealing another part,
knowing that the hearer will thence misunderstand it: This is a fault when we
are obliged to declare the whole, or when its injurious to the Hearers or to
the Truth, but by concealment to occasion other Men's error or deceit* is not
always a sin.

7. And when he had so said, there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and
the Sadducees: and the multitude was divided. 8. For the Sadducees say that
there is no resurrection, neither angel nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess
both.

8. How bad a State was the Jewish Church in, when Men that believed no life
but this had equal power with the rest in Priesthood and Government. 2. What
Hypocrites were these Pharisees that could thus embody with damnable Heretics,
and yet could not endure Christians, but silenced and murdered them like the
Papists Prelates who can endure Jews and Atheists, while they burn or silence
Protestants.

9. And there arose a great cry and the scribes that were of the Pharisees part
arose, and strove, saying We find no evil in this man: but if a spirit or an
angel has spoken to him, let us not fight against God.

9. Note, See how partiality will change Men's Judgment according to the
interest of a party or faction.

10. And when there arose a great dissension the chief captain fearing lest
Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them, commanded the soldiers to go
down, and to take him by force from among them, and to bring him, into the
castle. 11. And the night following, the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of
good cheer, Paul: for as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou
bear witness also at Rome.

11. Note, Gods encouragements accompany his commands and faithful service.

12. And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and bound
themselves under a curse saying, that they would neither eat nor drink till
they had killed Paul.

12. Note, Seeing the Pharisees now spoke for him, it seems all or most of these
furious men were Sadducees; who were then the strongest Party. And even to this
day, those that believe no life to come, are the most cruel Enemies of
Believers: And what should deter such from bloody Vows, Conspiracies and
Perjuries? When yet only Devilish malice does provoke them.

13. And they were more then forty which had made this conspiracy. 14. And
they came to the chief priests and elders, and said, We have bound our selves
under a great curse, that we will eat nothing until we have slain Paul. 15. Now
therefore ye with the council, signify to the chief captain, that he bring him
down unto you to morrow, as though ye would enquire something more perfectly
concerning him: and we, or ever he come near, are ready to kill him.

13. O what a Clergy was this, that must head a confederacy of murdering
Sadducees.

16. And when Paul's sisters Son heard of their lying in wait, he went and
entered into the castle, and told Paul. 17. Then Paul called one of the
centurions unto him, and said, Bring this young man unto the chief captain: for
he has a certain thing to tell him. 18. So he took him, and brought him to the
chief captain, and said, Paul the prisoner called me unto him, and prayed me to
bring this young man unto thee, who has something to say unto thee. 19. Then
the chief captain took him by the hand, and went with him aside privately, and
asked him, What is that thou have to tell me? 20. And he said, The Jews have
agreed to desire thee, that thou would bring down Paul to morrow into the
council, as though they would enquire somewhat him more perfectly. 21. But do
not thou yield unto them: for there lie in wait for him of them more then
forty men, which have bound themselves with an oath, that they will neither
eat nor drink till they have killed him: and now are they ready, looking for a
promise from thee.

16, Note, 1. No Conspiracies are kept secret from God, who can detect and
frustrate them 2. No doubt but these Men that could Vow to satisfy rage, did
brake it rather than famish.

22. So the chief captain then let the young man depart, and charged him, See
thou tell no man that thou have showed these things to me, 23. And he called
unto him two centurions, saying, Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to
Cesarea, and horsemen threescore and ten, and spearmen two hundred, at the
third hour of the night. 24. And provide them beasts, that they may set Paul
on, and bring him safe unto Felix the governor.

Note, Thus God raised forces of Heathens to defend his Servant.

25. And he wrote a letter after this manner 26. Claudius Lysias, unto the most
excellent governor Felix, sends greeting 27. This man was taken of the Jews,
and should have been killed of them: then came I with an army and rescued him,
having understood that he was a Roman. 28. And when I would have known the
cause wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth into their council: 29.
Whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their law, but to have nothing
laid to his charge worthy of death or of bonds. 30. And when it was told me,
how that the Jews laid wait for the man, I sent straightway to thee, and gave
commandment to his accusers also, to say before thee what they had against him.
Farewell.

Note, This Colonel, that by a band of Soldiers rescued him; judges him
guiltless as to the Roman Law.

31. Then the soldiers as it was commanded them, took Paul and brought him by
night to Antipatris. 32. On the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him,
and returned to the castle. 33. Who when they came to Cesarea and delivered the
epistle to the governor, presented Paul also before him. 34. And when the
governor had read the letter, he asked of what province he was. And when he
understood that he was of Cilicia: 35. I will hear thee, said he, when thine
accusers are also come. And he commanded him to be kept in Herod's judgment-hall.

35. Note, A place called Herod's Hall: Not that he was there. Thus God carried
on Paul toward Rome to fulfill his Will and Work.

CHAP. XXIV.
ANd after five days, Ananias the high Priest descended with the Elders, and
with a certain orator named Tertullus, who informed the Governor against Paul.

1. Note, Tertullus was the malignant Lawyer or Orator, who was to plead their
charge against Paul, if not of mere ma^ice, at least for his Fee. The
Accusation is given in and hotly prosecuted by the High Priest and Elders: Dr.
Hummond thought that the word [Elders] in the Christian Church never signified
any but Bishops (such as we now call Diocesane] And it is undoubted that the
Church borrowed that Title from the Jews Elders, and therefore meant some
similitude of Offices (allowing the difference of materials and Law) And then
it would follow that the Jews Elders that made their Council, were the Jewish
Bishops of several distant Cities gathered together at Jerusalem: And so that
it was the Jews Archbishop and all the Bishops under him, that were these
malignant Diabolica Accusers and Persecutors: But the Jewish Elders were not
such City Bishops, but a Conjunction of Laymen and Priests in a supreme Council
at Jerusalem, and inferior Councils in Cities, where were Synagogues.

2. And when he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Seeing
that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto
this nation by thy providence, 3. We accept it always, and in all places, most
noble Felix, with all thankfulness.

2, 3. To win the Judge by flattery, has ever by false Accusers been taken for
the surest way for success.

4. Notwithstanding, that I be not further tedious unto thee, I pray thee, that
thou would hear us of thy clemency a fevv words. 5. For we have found this
man a pestilent fellovv, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout
all the world, and a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarene:

5. We have found this Man a very plague, etc.

Note, This part of the Accusation is, 1. In general that he was a very walking
Pestilence O what Diabolism is it to judge thus of the Preachers of Love, and
Mercy and Salvation! 2. Particularly. 1. a mover of Sedition among all the Jews
through the Roman Empire: So Christian Reformation must be called Sedition, to
stir up Rulers against it, as Defenders of the common Peace: And this to Faelix
was a Potent argument, for he had been put to conquer and destroy one Eleazar,
that came out of Egypt as a pretended Prophet, and gathered an Army of
Seditious Cut throats that endangered the Peace. 2. The second accusation was,
that he was a Leader of a Sect or Schism, calling the Christians Nazarens in
scorn, from Nazareth where Christ dwelt.

6. Who also has gone about to profane the Temple: whom we took, and would
have judged according to our law.

6. The third part of the Accusation was profaning the Tepmle: Note, Would not
these infidels be thought Holy Men: They were zealous for Temple, Law and
Ceremonies, against Christianity, Holiness, Innocence, and the lives of the
best of Men.

7. But the chief Captain Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took him
away out of our hands.

7. N. To save the innocent from the violence of wicked Priests, is accused a^
violence even in a Governor.

8. Commanding his accusers to come unto thee: by examin^ng of whom, thy self
may take knowledge of all these things whereof we accuse him. 9. And the
Jews also assented, saying, That these things were so.

8, 9. Note, Seeing the judgments of Men are so contrary, that he is a
seditious Plague and Sectary to one, that is, one of the best on earth to
another, alas, How shall the People know who to believe? The History of Liars
are stufft with lies: And how can Strangers and Posterity know who were the
Liars? This is a great shake to the credit of most History. But the haters of
Holiness are seldom to be believed.

10. Then Paul, after that the Governor had beckned unto him to speak,
ansvvered, Forasmuch as I know that thou have been of many years a judge unto
this nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for my self: 11. Because that thou
may understand, that there are yet but twelve days since I went up to
Jerusa;lem for to worship.

10. Thou know their customs, had I been such a one as they accuse me to be,
what should move me to come so far from other Countries but twelve days ago, to
keep the Feast of Pentecost, and to worship at Jerusalem.

12. And they neither found me in the Temple disputing with any man, neither
raising up the people, neither in the Synagoue, nor in the city: 13. Neither
can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me.

12. I was only worshipping in the Temple, and deny that I did any thing to
move Sedition, as they accuse me-

14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresy,
so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in
the Law and the Prophets.

14. I am not ashamed to own it, that I worship God as a Christian, in the way
that they call a Heresie^ or Sect; for I believe the Law and the Prophets who
teach it me.

15. And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.

15. The Resurrection of Christ confirms my belief of the Resurrection of the
dead, etc.

Note, 1. The Doctrine of a Resurrection of the just only was not then owned by
the Jews, 2, It seems by this time the Pharisees joined in his Persecution*
though before they excused him in contention with the Sadducees.

16. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward men.

16. And in this hopes of a Resurrection and the Christian Faith, my daily care
and exercise is, to keep my self from offending God or Man by any sin, that my
conscience may not be my Accuser.

17. Now after many years, I came to bring alms to my nation, and offerings.

17. To bring Alms and Offerings is no profaneness or sedition, etc.

18. Whereupon certain Jews from Asia, found me purified in the Temple, neither
with multitude, nor with tumult. 19. Who ought to have been here before thee,
and object, if they had ought against me.

18, 19. These Asian Jews falsely thought that I had brought Trophinus into the
Temple: And it being they that are the first Accusers and Witnesses, they
should have been here.

20. Or else let these same here say, if they have found any evil-doing in me,
while I stood before the council, 21. Except it be for this one voice, that I
cried standing among them, Touching the Resurrection of the dead, I am called
in question by you this day.

20. As to any thing that I did in the Council let them witness what they can
against me? They have nothing to charge me with, but that I said, touching the
Resurrection of the dead, I am accused: I meant Christ's Resurrection as the
cause and pledge of ours.

Note, Some think that Paul here confesses it a fault, that he equivocated to
set them together by the Ears, as being an act of Carnal Wisdom, and an
obscuring of his confession of Christ. But most expositors rather think that he
spoke this ironically, as if he had said, unless they will make it a fault,
that I said I am called in question about the Resurrection, they can charge me
with none there.

22. And when Felix heard these things, having more perfect knowledge of that
way, he deferred them, and Said, When Lysias the chief Captain shall come down,
I will know the uttermost of your matter.

22. He said, when I have got a more perfect knowledge of this way of
Christianity, and how far it is against your Law, and when I have spoke with
Colonel Lysias of the tumults, I will judge the cause, which yet I cannot do.

23. And he commanded a centurion to keep Paul, and to let him have liberty,
and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister, or come unto
him.

23. To secure him as a Prisoner at large.

24. And after certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, which was
a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ. 25.
And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix
trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient
season, I will call for thee.

24, 25. Note, Foelix is noted by the Historians of those times to be specially
guilty of two crimes; Injustice through Covetousness and Incontinence, taking
another Man's Wife. (This Drusilla the Niece of Anthony and Cleopatra) And so
the Subject moved his conscience to make him tremble.

Note, O the strength of sin, that will live, even when Men tremble for fear of
judgment.

46. He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that he might
loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed with him.

26. Note, All his trembling overcame not the love of Money. Money is the
worldlings great Mediator.

27. But after two years, Porcius Festus came into Felix room: and Felix
willing to show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.

27. His carnal respects to Man and Fame, and to please the malicious Jews,
prevailed against his Conscience, and leaves Paul a Prisoner to be judged by
Festus his Successor, when Paul had been two years kept a Prisoner.

CHAP. XXV.
NOw when Festus was come into the province, after three days he ascended from
Cesarea to Jerusalem. 2. Then the high priest, and the chief of the Jews
informed him against Paul, and besought him, 3. And desired favor against him,
that he would send for him to Jerusalem, laying wait in the way to kill him.

1, 2, 3. The malicious Priests and Rulers continue their murderous design, and
cannot get a heathen Ruler to be so bad as they.

4. But Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Cesarea, and that he
himself would depart shortly thither. 5. Let them therefore, said he, which
among you are able, go down with me, and accuse this man, if there be any
wickedness in him. 6. And when he had tarried among them more then ten days, he
went down unto Cesarea, and the next day sitting in the Judgment Seat,
commanded Paul to be brought.

4. After ten days he went down and they with him.

7. And when he was come, the Jews which came down from Jerusalem, stood round
about, and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul, which they could not
prove; 8. While he answered for himself, Neither against the law of the Jews,
neither against the Temple, nor yet against Caesar, have I offended any thing at
all.

7. The Diabolists did pretend that he broke their Law, profaned their Holy
Temple, and disturbed the peace as a seditious breaker of Caesar's Law: All
which he denied and they could not prove.

Note, Its strange that the Devil had not attained to what he has done in this
age, to enable them to prove any thing by perjured Witnesses!

9. But Festus willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, and said, Will thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me?

9. The pleasing of the Priests and Multitude being more of the Rulers carnal
Interest, than doing Justice for one poor Man, he would thus have sacrificed
him to them.

10. Then said Paul, I stand at Cesars Judgment Seat, where I ought to be
judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very well know. 11. For if
I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to
die: but if there be none of these things whereof these accuse me, no man may
deliever me unto them. I appeal unto Caesar.

10. Note, Having the Roman privileges, he might appeal to the Roman Laws,
which then had not condemned Christianity. But doubtless the Jews would call
this Hethenish, for him to choose rather to be saved by Heathens, than to be
murdered by Jews. As at this day he that had rather be saved from murder by a
Mohammedan than Murdered or Tormented by a Papist shall be said to be for
Mahometism. And here let them that grudge at Christ, for requiring us to deny
our lives for him and for the Heavenly reward, consider that even
Church-Tyrants require as much, and that for nothing without any such reward:
If under their Inquisitions, or other persecutions, Men do but as every living
Creature will do, strive to escape their malice and to live, and do not die
without any reluctance, they call them Rebels; yea, if they do but groan and
complain, it goes for Sedition to feel when they are hurt; when it is the holy
Church that does it: Christ does not thus condemn sense and natural Love of
Life, in his hardest laws of self-denial.

12. Then Festus, when he had conferred with the Council, answered, Have thou
appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shall thou go.

12. Note, They might have constrained him to be judged there: but God over
ruled it, to spread abroad the Gospel.

13. And after certain days, King Agrippa and Bernice came unto Cesarea to
salute Festus. 14. And when they had been there many days, Festus declared
Paul's cause unto the King, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by
Felix: 15. About whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the
Elders of the Jews informed me desiring to have Judgment against him.

13. Note. This Agrippa was the Son of that Herod that was eaten to death by
Worms, and Bernice was his Sister, the Wife of Polemon King of Cilicia, who
left her Husband and lived with his Brother.

16. To whom I answered, It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man
to die, before that he which is accused, have the accusers face to face, and
have license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him.

16. The Jewish Religious Tyrants had overcome and cast off this Law of Nature,
which the Heathens kept.

17. Therefore when they were come hither, without any delay on the morrow I
sat on the Judgment Seat, and I commanded the man to be brought forth. 18.
Against whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation of such
things as I supposed: 19. But had certain questions against him of their own
superstition, and of one Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.

17, 19. Note, These things he made light of as not understanding them.

20. And because I doubted of such manner of questions, I asked him whether he
would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these matters. 21. But when Paul
had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be
kept till I might send him to Caesar.

20. I would have had him tried by the Jews who understood their own Law, etc.

22. Then Agrippa said unto Festus, I would also hear the man my self. To
morrow, said he, thou shall hear him. 23. And on the morrow when Agrippa was
come, and Bernice, with great pomp, and was entered into the place of hearing,
with the chief Captains and Principal men of the city, at Festus commandment
Paul was brought forth. 24. And Festus said, King, Agrippa, and all men which
are here present with us, ye see this man, about whom all the multitude of the
Jews have dealt with me, both at Jerusalem, and also here, crying, that he
ought not to live any longer.

24. Note, The lives of Gods best Servants are a grief to the Malignants.

25. But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and that
he himself has appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send him.

25. Note, what an odious scandal did these Priests cast on Gods Law, to make
it seem worse then Heathens Laws.

26. Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my Lord. Wherefore I have
brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, O King Agrippa, that
after examination had, I might have somewhat to write. 27. For it seems to me
unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not with all to signify the crimes laid
against him.

26. Note, Justice is a part of the Law of Nature known to all.

CHAP. XXVI.
THen Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to spoke for thy self. Then
Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself,

1. Note, It was the custom by the motion of the hand to give notice when one
was beginning to speak, to procure silent audience.

2. I think my self happy, King Agrippa because I shall answer for my self this
day before thee, touching all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews: 3.
Especially, because I know thee to be expert in all customs and questions which
are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently.

2. Its a great favor for Great men so much as to hear an innocent good Man
speak for himself.

4. My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among mine own
nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews. 5. Which knew me from the beginning (if
they would testify) that after the most straitest sect of our Religion, I
lived a Pharisee. 6. And now I stand, and am judged for the hope of the promise
made of God unto our Fathers, 7. Unto which promise our twelve tribes instantly
serving God day and night, hope to come for which hopes sake, King Agrippa, I
am accused of the Jews.

4. Note, He supposes Agrippa acquainted with the Jewish affairs, of their
expectation of the Messiah and the Preaching of Christianity, and the stirs
about it. And if the hopes of a Messiah be Sedition, all the Jews are guilty of
it, that pray for it continually. Quest. Did the Ten Tribes pray for it, who
were carried away by the Assyrians and Idolators put in their Country? Answ. 1.
In such Captivating Transplantations, they never carry away all the poor People
that must Till the Ground, but the Rulers, Soldiers, great Men and Men of Note;
else it would be the Conquerers loss: So it has been here, at the Conquests
made by the Romans, Saxons and Deans and Normans: The greater number of the
Country People still staid as Tenants or Servants to the Conquerers. 2. The
Neigbourhood of the Jews, did by degrees shame away much of the Idolatry of the
Israelites: As Josiabs power extended to pull down their Idols and Altars, and
burn men's bones on them. 3. And afterward the Israelites Country wanting some
Inhabitants, the Jews by degrees possessed much of their Country. And the
speech of the Samaritan Woman, John 4. Shows that they commonly expected
Christ to come, and tell them all things.

8. Why should it be thought a things incredible with you, that God should
raise the dead.

8. The great point of our Controversy now is, Whether Christ rose from the
Dead? And why should this seem an incredible thing to you? Is it too hard for
God who upholdeth all the World, and gives life to all that live.

9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to
the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

9. I once was of your mind, and did not only set light by the Name of Jesus,
but thought I ought to set my self against it, and oppose them that Preached
and Professed it.

10. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the saints did I shut up
in Prison: having received authority from the chief Priests; and when they were
put to death, I gave my voice against them.

10. In this blindness I was a Persecuter of the Saints.

11. And I punished them often in every Syangogue, and compelled them to
blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto
strange Cities.

11. Note, Whether Paul prevailed with any to Blaspheme Christ through fear, or
only endeavored it, is uncertain. 2. He now knew that his Persecution was from
exceeding madness, when yet before he took it for his duty? So blind are
Persecutors Judgments.

12. Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the
chief Priests; 13. At midday, O King, I saw in the way a light from Heaven,
above the brightness of the Sun, shining round about me, and them which
journeyed with me. 14. And when we were all sallen to the Earth, I heard a
voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

12. I was Convinced by this Miracle and voice from Heaven. Ignorant man? Do
thou know whom thou persecutest and why? It will prove to thee but like
spurning at Thornswith thy bare feet.

Note, Here we find that all Paul's Company fell to the ground with him. Which
is not mentioned Chap. 9. or 22.

15. And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest.

15. It is me in my cause and servants that thou Persecutest.

16. But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for I have appeared unto thee for this
purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou
have seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee;

16. My appearing to thee is to make thee a Preacher of that thou have
Persecuted; to witness what thou now have seen, and what I shall further tell
the by my Spirit and works.

17. Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I
send thee, 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me.

17.18. Delivering thee both from the Jews and Gentiles, to whom now I command
thee to Preach; to open the Eyes that are blinded in gross ignorance and
Idolatry, and to turn them from that darkness to the light of the saving
knowledge of God and their Redeemer, from the Power of Satan whom thy serve by
sin, to the Belief, Love and Obedience of God, that they may hereupon receive
the forgiveness of all their past sin, and right to the inheritance among the
Sanctified: which is here begun in Holiness and Communion with God and his
Saints, and hereafter perfected in Glory; and all this believing, trusting and
obeying me, and my Gospel (or by being Christians).

Note, These words were omitted by Luke in Chap. 9. and 22. Here is a Promise
to be trusted, and a Command to be obeyed.

19. Whereupon, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the Heavenly vision:

19. I did not, I durst not Rebel against such a Vision and a Command from
Heaven.

20. But showed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout
all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and
turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.

20. And the Gospel which I Preached at Damascus, etc. is, that men should
Repent and turn to God, and show the sincerity of their Repentance by a Holy,
Righteous, Charitable and sober Life, (and all this in hope of Glory, purchased
and promised by Christ who thus sent me.)

21. For these causes the Jews caught me in the Temple, and went about to kill
me.

21. This is the true cause why the Jews would have killed me, as crossing
their unbelief,

22. Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day,
witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things then those which
the Prophets and Moses did say should come: 23. That Christ should suffer, and
that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should show
light unto the people, and to the Gentiles.

22. God has kept me through many dangers to this day, while I testify this
Gospel to all, which is but what was Prophesied that Christ should dye for our
sins, and rise first from death and Convert the Gentiles.

24. And as he thus spoke for himself, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul,
thou art beside thy self: much learning does make thee mad.

24. Thou art a crazed Fanatic: much Learning or Bookishness has distracted
thee.

25. But he said, I am not mad; most noble Festus; but speak forth the words of
truth and soberness. 26. For the King knows of these things, before whom also
I speak freely: for I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from
him; for this thing was not done in a corner.

25, 26. I am not mad, but soberly speak that truth which I suppose the King
knows; I do not think that the fame of Christ's Miracles, Death and
Resurrection, no nor of this Vision of mine, is unknown to him, being things
openly done and famed abroad.

27. King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? I know that thou believe.

27. If thou believe the Prophets, thou may see that they Prophesied this of
Christ.

28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.

28. A little thou perswadest, etc.

Note, It is uncertain whether he spoke this seriously as inclining to believe
in Christ? Or in contempt, Thou would persuade me that I am almost a Christian.

29. And Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear
me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds.

29. Note, True Ministers thirst for men's Conversion and Salvation.

30. And when he had thus spoken, the King rose up, and the Governor, and
Bernice, and they that sat with them. 31. And when they were gone aside, they
talked between themselves, saying, This man does nothing worthy of death, or
of bonds. 32. Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man might have been set at
Liberty, if he had not appealed to Caesar.

30. Thy acquit him, but discharge him not.

CHAP. XXVII.
ANd when it was determined that we should sail into Italy, they delivered Paul
and certain other prisoners, to one named Julius, a Centurion of Augustus band.
2. And entering into a ship of Adramytrium, we lanched, meaning to fail by the
coast of Asia, one Aristarhcus a Macedonian, of Thessalonica, being with us. 3.
And the next day we touched at Sidon and Julius courteously entreated Paul, and
gave him liberty to go unto his friends to refresh himself.

3. Heathen Soldiers are less cruel than Jewish superstitious Priests and
Hypocrites.

4. And when we had lanched from thence we sailed under Cyprus, because the
winds were contrary. 5. And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and
Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lysia. 6. And there the Centurion found
a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy, and he put us therein. 7. And when we
had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Cuidus, the
wind, not suffering us, we sailed under Creet, over against Salmone. 8. And
hardly passing it, came unto a place which is called the fair havens, nigh
whereunto was the city of Lasea.

Note, God caused these difficulties to manifest his merciful Providence.

9. Now when much time was spent: and when sailing was now dangerous, because
the fast was now already past, Paul admonished them. 10. And said unto them,
Sirs, I perceive that this voyage, will be with hurt and much damage, not only
of the lading and ship, but also of our lives.

9. At the time of the Jews yearly Fast of Expiation which was in part of our
October, sailing used to be very dangerous on those Seas.

11. Nevertheless, the Centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship,
more then those things which were spoken by Paul 12. And because the Haven was
not commodious to winter in, the more part advised to depart thence also, if by
any means they might attain to Phenice, and there to winter, which is an Haven
of Creet, and lies toward the South-west, and North-west.

12. Note, Phaenice a Haven-Town is described to distinguish it from the
Country called Phaenice.

13. And when the South Wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained
their purpose loosing thence they sailed close by Creet. 14. But not long after
there arose against it a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon. 15. And when the
ship was caught, and could not bear up into the wind, we let her drive. 16. And
running under a certain Island which is called Clauda we had much work to come
by the boat? 17. Which when they had taken up, they used helps, under girding
the ship, and fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, struck sail,
and so were driven. 18. And being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next
day they lightened the ship 19. And the third day we cast out with our own
hands the takling of the ship.

Note. They cast away all to save themselves: All that a man has will he give
for his life. And yet the ungodly sell their souls for nothing.

20. And when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and no small tempest
lay on us, all hope that we should be saved was then taken away.

20. All hope that could be grounded on visible probability.

21. But after long abstinence, Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and
said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from Creet,
and to have gained this harm and loss.

21. To have escaped this loss.

22. And now I exhort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no loss of
any man's life among you, but of the ship. 23. For there stood by me this night
the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve 24. Saying, Fear not Paul, thou
must be brought before Caesar, and lo, God has given thee all them that sail
with thee.

23. Note, 1. God uses his Angel for the safety and comfort of his Servants.
2. Paul mentions God in his Relations to us. 1. He is our Owner, whose we
are: 2. Our Ruler [ whom we serve] and its employed, Our Father, and Protector,
In whom we trust.

3. Many bad Men fare the better, for one good Man that is among them.

25. Wherefore Sirs, be of good cheer: for I believe God, that it shall be even
as it was told me. 26. Howbeit, we must be cast upon a certain Island.

25. I trust my God and would have you trust him.

27. But when the fourteenth Night was come, as we were driven up and down in
Adria about midnight, the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some country.
28. And sounded, and found it twenty fathoms, and when they had gone a little
further, they sounded again, and found it fifteen fathoms. 29. Then fearing
least we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast four ancres out of the stern,
and wished for the day.

29. They stopped the Ship and durst go on further.

30. And as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let
down the boat into the sea: under color as though they would cast Anchors out
of the foreship. 31. Paul said to the Centurion and to the soldiers, Except
these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved.

30. Note, God that decreed that they should not perish, decreed also that the
skilful Seamen should abide in the Ship* Means and End are in the same decree.

32. Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off; 33.
And while the day was coming on Paul besought them all to take meat, saying,
This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued fasting,
having taken nothing. 34. wherefore I pray you to take some meat, for this is
for your health: for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you.

33. Note, Not that they had eat nothing in fourteen days: But say some
Expositors, no set meal, or so little as was next to nothing; But others more
probably say [you have eaten nothing all this (one) day, expecting the
fourteenth day as Critical.

35. And when he had thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to God in
presence of them all, and when he had broken it, he began to eat.

35. Note, If those in England that scorn at open Thansgiving to God even at
Noble Tables and great Feasts, (and think it deserves a Prison for more than
four to be present at such a Religious Exercise) had been in this Ship, or in
Jonas's fear might have taught them better.

36. Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took some meat. 37. And we
were in all in the ship, two hundred threescore and sixteen souls.

37. Note, And though Paul Preached to them, the honest Heathens accused him not
for a Conventicle; what shall we think the Priests would have done had they
been now among them.

38. And when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out the
wheat into the sea.

38. Note, Even future provision is cast away to save life at present. That is
a duty in such a case of necessity; which in other cases would have been a
great sin.

39. And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they discovered a certain
Creek with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were possible, to
thrust in the ship. 40. And when they had taken up the ancres, they committed
themselves unto the Sea, and loosed the Rudder bands, and and hoysed up the
main sail to the wind, and made toward the shore. 41. And saling into a place
where two Seas meet, they ran the ship a ground, and the forepart stuck fast,
and remained unmovable, but the hinder part was broken with the violence of
the waves.

39. This was a shallow near a neck of Land called an Istmus where the Sea is
on both sides it. The Malthasses call it to this day St. Paul's Landing place.

42. And the Soldiers Council was to kill the Prisoners, lest any of them
should swim out, and escape.

42. Note, Lest they should have been punished for letting them escape, they
would have killed them.

43. But the Centurion willing to save Paul, kept them from their purpose, and
commanded that they which could swim, should cast themselves first into the
Sea, and get to land. 44. And the rest, some on boards and some on broken
pieces of the ship, and so it came to pass that they escaped all safe to land.

4. Note, God gave them their lives for a prey.

CHAP. XXVIII.
ANd when they were escaped, then they knew that the Island was called Melita 2.
And the barbarous people showed us no little kindness: for they kindled a fire,
and received us every one, because of the present rain, and because of the cold.

1. Note, There are two Islands of this Name: And it is a Controversy which is
meant: But Beza and others show great probability that it is that called
Maltha, now possessed by Christians, as a Fort against the Turks.

3. And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire,
there came a viper out of the heat and fastened on his hand.

3. Note, Not that Paul carried the Adder or Viper amon the sticks into a
Chimney; but they made the fire in some open place where the Adder lay, and was
forced out by the heat.

4. And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand they said
among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he has escaped
the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live.

4. Note, Even these Barbarians believed God to be the Revenger of Murder: And
yet the Priests took the Murder of Christ and his Disciples for a Meritorious
work, and zealously pursued it.

5. And he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm. 6. Howbeit they
looked when he should have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after
they had looked a great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their
minds, and said that he was a God.

5. Note, So mutable is vulgar Judgment.

7. In the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the Island, whose
name was Publius, who received us and lodged us three days courteously. 8. And
it came to pass that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody
flux: to whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed
him. 9. So when this was done, others also which had diseases in the Island
came, and were healed: 10. Who also honored us with many honors, and when we
departed, they laded us with such things as were necessary

7. Note, If we could pray as Paul did and heal all the Sick by it; Quest.
Whether men would imprison us for it? Answ. The sick or the healed would not,
but its not unlike that Jewish Priests would do it; for so they did.

11. And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had
wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Pollux. 12. And landing at
Syracuse, we tarried there three days. 13. And from thence we fetched a compass,
and came to Rhegium: and after one day the south wind blew, and we came the
next day to Puteoli: 14. Where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry
with them seven days: and so we went toward Rome.

14. Note, It appears by this that the Gospel had been received before Paul's
coming thither, in the Italian Country about Rome? Whether these Brethren
entertained all the Soldiers and Prisoners seven days, or Paul and his Company
only as trusted by the Centurian to come after him, is uncertain.

15. And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as
far as Appii-forum, and the Three Taverns: whom when Paul savv, he thanked
God, and took courage.

15. Note, By this it appears also that Paul found a Church in Rome. No doubt
these Brethren lived not without Assembling to worship God, being then not
forbidden. But who first brought Christianity thither, or Planted a Church, or
was their first Pastor, no History tell us; but its most probable that it was
neither Peter nor Paul. Circumstances have persuaded me, that Christianity came
first into England by Christian Soldiers that were in the Roman Army, (such as
built the Church called St. Martins near Canturbury, which Beda mentions.)
And it is more probable that such as Cornelius being Converted in Judea, and
having their dependence on Rome, and business there, were like to be the first
introducers of of Christianity there (As such were in Helvetia.)

16. And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the
captain of the guard: but Paul was suffered to dwell by himself, with a
soldier that kept him.

16. One Soldier was his Guard.

17. And it came to pass, that after three days, Paul called the chief of the
Jews together. And when they were come together, he said unto them, Men and
brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people or customs of our
fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the
Romans. 18. Who when they had examined me, would have let me go, because
there was no cause of death In me. 19. But when the Jews spoke against it, I
was constrained to appeal unto Cesat; not that I have ought to accuse my nation
of.

17. Note, Though Paul Preached against the Gentiles subjection to Moses Law,
yet to the Jews he only spoke against the imposing it as necessary on others,
and against its justifying Power without Christ. 19. I appealed in my own
necessary Defense, and not as an Accuser of the Jews.

20. For this cause therefore have I called for you, to see you, and to speak
with you: because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.

20. It is for Preaching that Messiah who has long been, expected and prayed
for, as the Hope of Israel that I am come hither a Prisoner in this Chain.

21. And they said unto him, We neither received letters out of Judea
concerning thee, neither any of the brethren that came, shevved or spoke any
harm of thee. 22. But we desire to hear of thee what thou think: for as
concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.

21. We have had no Accusation of thee: but that we may be able to judge of
thee, we would hear thee our selves, what it is that thou hold and teach.
For Christians are every where spoken aganist as an evil Sect.

Note, He that would know how far to regard common fame against any man or
party, must know what sort of people they be that report it, whether Men of
truth, sobriety and conscience, or debaucht, ungodly, malignant s^oundrils; And
by what motives they are set on work, whether by Gods word and will, or by
Carnal interests, and flattery of Great and ungodly Worldlings, or enmity to
Holy Doctrine and Practice: And what Eviedence they give to prove their
Accusations.

23. And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his
lodging to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, persuading them
concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and out of the prophets, from
morning till evening.

23. He proved to them out of the Law and Prophets, that Christ was the
Messiah, whose Kingdom is spiritual, and is now begun as foretold, upon his
Resurrection and Ascension, and gathering an Universal Church by the Miracles,
Gifts and Grace of the Holy Ghost.

24. And some believed the things which were spoken, and some believed not.
25. And when they agreed not among themselves, they departed, after that Paul
had spoken one word Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet, unto our
fathers, 26. Saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and
shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive. 27. For the
heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and
their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and
I should heal them.

26. You verify the words of the Prophets, being like your fore fathers, of
whom Isaiah says, that though they have their Natural faculties of seeing,
hearing and understanding, yet they have wilfully so indisposed and corrupted
them, that as to the knowledge and obedience of God, they are as if they had
neither Eyes, Ears* or Understanding, from whence it is that my resisted and
rejected Grace does not Convert and heal them.

28. Be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is sent unto
the Gentiles, and that they will hear it.

28. Be it known to you that the Christ whom you reject shall be Preached to
the Gentiles, and they will believe in him and receive him for their Savior;
And Christ will set up among them the Catholic Church, and Kingdom of God,
which you reject and shall therefore be none of yours, that boasted in your
expectations of it.

29. And when he had said these words, the Jews departed, and had great
reasonings among themselves*

29. Note, But so many of them believed both at Rome, Jerusalem and many
Countries as were a considerable part of the Christian Church at that time: And
within four hundred years, Christianity was the professed National Religion in
Judea.

30. And Paul dwelled two whole years in his own hired house, and received all
that came in unto him, 31. Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those
things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence no man
forbidding him.

30. And Paul was so free a Prisoner, that he was allowed to live in his own
hired house, and there for two years received all, how many soever great or
small, who came to him, Preaching even in Imperious Rome the Kingdom of God, as
Ruling Souls to Salvation by the Redeemer, Teaching all the Doctrines and
Practices of Christianity, (the History of Christ his Person, Office, Acts,
Grace and Glory;) and this with all boldness and freedom, NO MAN FORBIDDING
HIM, silencing him, or condemning them for Conventicles, or any way hindering
him, even in Proud, Powerful, Heathen Rome: When the Religious Jewish Priests
and Rulers, hunted Christ's Ministers as Bloodhounds, forbidding them to Preach
to the Gentiles that they might be saved, and so wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost, as it will in due time on all that imitate them.

Note, 1. What Paul Preached: not vain jangling, or envious railing, but the
Kingdom of God, and the things concerning Jesus Christ and Salvation.

2. Where: In Rome, and in his own hired house.

3. To whom: To all that come to him.

4. How long: Two years, at that time.

5. How: with all confidence, openness and boldness.

6. How tolerated: No man, Emperor or Senate or inferior Officer* Soldiers or
Magistrates, Priests or People hindering or forbidding him, in the Capital
Heathen City of the World, which yet was devoted to Idolatry, and capvated the
Church of God both Jews and Gentiles. But had Paul Preached immorality,
Rebellion, abusive injury to others* no doubt they would have punished him: And
verily many Preachers whose Doctrine is tolerable, are so abusive in false
reviling Application, that we may say, some Orthodox Churches have need of
Church Justices to keep the peace.

The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the ROMANS.
The INTRODUCTION.
FOr the understanding of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, it is necessary, I. To
understand his main Design and Subject. II. To that end, to know what Parties
he had to do with. III. And what their several Errors were, or their
Temptations to Error. IV. And by what Arguments he opposes them, and what he
grants them.

I. Paul's great Design is to establish the Roman Christians in the Faith of
the Gospel, and in Holiness of Life, and in mutual Love and Concord against all
the Temptations which then assaulted them.

II. The Adversaries of their Stability, and his Design, whom he notes, are,
1. The Roman Heathens, especially the Learned sort. 2. Especially the Jews, and
the Judaizing Christians. 3. Some Erroneous Heretical Christians, who were
inclined both to Libertinism, and to Divisions.

III. The Errors opposed by him were, I. The Heathens, who while they scorned
the Faith of a Crucified Christ, showed how little they were to be regarded by
their Sins against the Light of Nature.

II. The Jews had all these following Errors. 1. Because God had made them a
peculiar People, by special Privileges and Promises, they were over-proud of
it, as if they had been the only Servants that God had in World, and that none
but Jews and their Proselytes were saved. 2. And so, that their Law was to be
received by all the World. 3. That this Law, given to, and by Moses, for their
Government as a peculiar Republic, was so excellent, because thus Divine, that
the keeping of it was the sufficient and only way of Salvation. 4. Herein they
overlooked the Promise which was before the Law, and presupposed in the Law, as
its Foundation, and its very Life; both the Common Promise made to lapsed
Mankind in Adam and Noah, and the spiritual part of the Special Promise made to
Abraham. 2. And they overlooked the signification of their Types and
Ceremonies; and looked at the Law merely as a Law of Works, rewarding or
punishing for the doing or not doing it.

5. Therefore they mistook the promised Messiah to be a King of David's Line,
who was to restore their Commonwealth, and subdue the Nations to it, and rule
them in earthly Glory by that Law; and so made him subservient to Moses's Law,
as to be restored by him.

6. And so they thought that this Law must endure for ever, and that to talk of
its abrogation was Blasphemy against God.

III. The Judaizing Christians conjoined Christianity and the Law, and thought,
that though Christ's Miracles, Resurrection, and Spirit proved him to be the
Messiah, who died for their Sins, yet he came not to change their Law, but to
establish it: And first, they were long before they could be convinced, that it
was not necessary to the Gentiles to be Proselytes to it: And when they were
forced to grant that, they still held, that it was necessary to all the Jews.
And therefore they kept up their Ceremonies, and separated too far from the
Gentile Christians: And the Gentile Christians too much despised these.

IV. Besides these, there were some that Heretically took it to be a part of
their extraordinary Knowledge, to hold, That Christianity delivered Men not
only from the Jews Law, but from subjection to Men, and from necessary
strictness in outward Actions: And they made a Party for these Opinions.

V. The Apostle, I. deals but briefly with the Heathens, and argues against
them from their own Errors and Crimes; 1. Telling them of the Light of Nature,
and then of their odious Sins against it; that the Christians might not be
moved by the scorns and opposition of such a blinded incapable sort of
Adversaries.

II. But the chief Work of his Epistle is to confute the Jews and Judaizers,
and to establish the Gentile Christians against their Errors and Opposition.
To which end, he proves all these things.

1. That the Gentiles are not bound to receive the Law of Moses, and become
Jews. 2. That they may be justified and saved by the Faith of Christ, as well
as the Jews. 3. That God foretold their Calling by the Prophets, and the
Promise to Abraham extended to them, as the Spiritual Believing Seed or
Children. 4. That if this were not true, none could be justified or saved,
because by the Deeds of the Law, as such, no man can be justified. The Jews
themselves must be justified by Faith, or not at all. 5. That the Law of Moses,
as such, came long after the Promise, and the Justification of Abraham by
Faith, and therefore could not null that Promise, or way of Life. 6. That the
Law required such a degree of Works, or strict Obedience, as no man kept; and
therefore none could be justified by it. 7. That the Law was given but to the
Jews, and God is not only the God and Governor of the Jews, but of the
Gentiles also. 8. That the Law forbids Sin, and curses the Sinner, and
condemns him, and therefore does not justify him. 9. That the Law, as such,
gives not Grace and Strength to keep it, but supposes Ability: But the Grace
and Spirit of Christ enableth. 10. That the Law by accident irritateth Lust,
and increases it, and does not mortify and overcome it. 11. That the Law was
given to another end, than to justify the Sinner by its bare Works; even to
convince Men of Sin, and the need of Grace, and as a Schoolmaster to lead them
to Christ, who is the End of the Law. 12. That Pardon, Justification, and
Salvation must needs be God's free Gift to the Guilty and Condemned, and not
the Reward of Meritorious Works of the Law; nor can any pretend the Title of
Innocence or Debt. 13. That Christ is designed to gather a more large and
excellent Church than the Jewish Nation, even a Catholic Church through all
the World, and that more spiritual and holy; into which the Jews, if they will
believe, shall be all graffed, which will be to them a higher Privilege than to
live under the Mosaic Polity. 14. That the Jewish Law was so operous,
shadowy, burdensome, and terrible, that it is part of the Office of a Savior to
deliver men from it, and to bring them under a far better Law and Covenant of
Grace.

By many such Arguments he confuteth the Jews, and Judaizing Christians.

III. How he confuteth the Censorious Dividers, who agreed in the Essentials of
Christianity, but differed about some Jewish Rites; and also the Erroneous,
that inclined to Licentiousness, and unjust Separation from the Orthodox, will
be sufficiently shown in the particular Expositions.

IV. But the Apostle denies none of these following Truths, but implies some,
and expressly asserteth others of them, as Concessions.

1. According to the Promise made to Abraham, the Israelites were a holy
Nation, and a peculiar People, separated to God out of all World.

2. God's Gvoernment first settled over them was eminently a Theocracy, the
Supremacy being exercised by extraordinary Revelation, by Angelical or Signal
Notices, and by Prophecy.

3. Their Law was eminently Divine, the Law of God; their Princes being but
Executioners, and not having Power of Legislation, to add, abrogate, or
diminish.

4. This Law was wholly Political; that is, The Rule of the Subjects Obedience,
and the Rewards and Punishments, to be exercised by God as Supreme, and by
Magistrates as his Officers, in the Government of that People as a Holy
Commonwealth. Even the Decalogue and Ceremonies were such Laws of Polity.

5. But this Law supposed the Law of Nature, and the antecedent Law of Mercy
made to saln Mankind in Adam and Noah, and the special Promise made to Abraham,
and all the Nations of the Earth in his Seed: And the Jews ought not to have
separated any part of their Law from these, which were as its very Life and
Soul, and principally respected things spiritual, and heavenly, and everlasting.

6. The Law presupposing these, and being given to men that had Immortal Souls,
and bound to know so much, does not much mention such matters of the Life to
come, as being presupposed; and Moses adding specially the distinguishing Laws
of Jewish Government.

7. The breach even of a Political Law, where God was the Legislator, deserved
future everlasting Punishment, though as Men were the official Executioners, it
was but corporal Punishment that it inflicted.

8. The Sacrifices were Obsignations of that Law of Grace which was elder than
Moses, and so they should have been understood.

9. The sincere keeping of that Law, while it was in force, was the Material
part of the Jews Obedience as they were under the Law of Grace.

10. Even the Decalogue it self, as Mosaical and Political, delivered in Stone
to the Jews only, is done away with all the rest by Christ, their peculiar
Commonwealth being ended: But as it is, 1. the Law of Nature, 2. and the Law of
Christ, it still continues.

There are three Controversies that I will here briefly speak to, rather than
by inserted Annotations afterward. I. Whom Paul describes in the first and
second Chapters. II. What Law it is that he speaks of. III. How he means,
that Faith is imputed to Righteousness and Justification.

1. A late Writer has labored hard to persuade us, that Romans 1. and a great
part of the Epistles speak of the Gnostics, which have usually been otherwise
expounded. Of this Chapter I think otherwise, (and of many other Texts)
because, 1. The Philosophers, and other Heathens, were so much more potent,
numerous, and famous Adversaries to Christianity, that we have great reason to
suspect, that Paul does not so much pass them by, to pelt at a few Heretics,
as this Writer imagined.

2. The Text agrees more to the Heathens. It was to them that the Gospel was a
matter of shame, and counted foolishness. It was not by the Works of Creation
chiefly that the Gnostics pretended to know God, or should have known him; but
this was the only Book to the Heathens. The Gnostics were unexcusable, as
Professors of Faith; but it was the Heathens that were left without excuse by
the mere Works of God's Creation. The Heathen Philosophers were they that
professed the greatest Wisdom, deriding all Christians as Fools. It was the
Heathens that were the Authors of all that Imagery and Idolatry, named ver. 23.
The Gnostics were but for involuntary Compliance in case of danger: They
renounced worshipping the Creature more than the Creator. The Sodomy, and all
the other Sins by which they are described, belong far more to the Heathens
than to the Gnostics. Chap. 2. Paul distributeth them that he speaks of, into
[ Jews and Gentiles], and so does the whole scope of his Discourse, 1 Cor. 1.
and 2. It is the same sort that he there speaks of, as the Wise, and Great,
and Noble of the World, who counted the Wisdom of the Gospel Foolishness, and
whose Wisdom was Foolishness, which God would confound and bring to naught,
etc. which is the plain Description of the Philosophical Heathens. A great deal
more such Evidence is at hand.

3. The Writers of Church History and Heresies tell us of many sorts of
Heretics in the beginning, that went before those called Gnostics; yet none
of these are named in Scripture, but the Nicolaitans, and the Woman Jezebel,
Rev. 2. and 3. And why should we think then that the Gnostics are meant more
than they?

4. Those that Paul often singleth out, seem to be them mentioned Acts 15.
against whom he reasons to the Galatians, etc. Had he meant others, as their
Crimes were greater, he would have as plainly notified them. Indeed, 2 Pet. 2.
and Jude, seem to mean the Nicolaitans as much like the Gnostics; but Paul had
much more to do with the Heathen Opposition.

II. Some have thought that it is the Law of Innocence made first to Adam,
which Paul means, when he speaks against Justification by the Works of the
Law. Their chief Reasons are, 1. Because it says, Cursed is he that does not
all things written, etc. And hence they gather, That the Jews Law was of the
same tenor. 2. But others give this Reason, Because the Jews Law was a Covenant
of Grace, and therefore could not be that here described,

But it is evident all along, that it was Moses's Law that Paul here means.
It would be tedious to cite the Proofs all along visible. And as to the Reasons
for the contrary, 1. It is certain, that the Law of Innocence was not then in
being and force, but ceased with Man's Innocence, upon Adam's Fall; not by
mutability in God, but in Man. God's Law is the present Obligation of his Will
to Duty or Punishment. Shall we imagine God to say to the sinful World, 1. I
command thee, that art a guilty Sinner, to be sinless? (contrary to the
hypothetical necessity of Existence.) 2. And, thou shall be rewarded, if thou
be innocent, (when he is guilty already.) 3. And, if thou be a sinner, thou
shall die, (when he is a Sinner already, and the Conditional is become
Absolute, and past into a Sentence of Judgment.)

2. The Law of Moses grants Sacrifice and Pardon for many Sins; but the Law
of Innocence pardons none.

3. The meaning of [ Cursed be he that does not all things] is not, Cursed be
he that has any Sin; but, he that keeps not all this Law: (And only the
Jews were under that Law, and its Curse.) And this Law of Moses was so operous
and strict, that no man did perfectly fulfill it: And if they had, it would not
procure their Pardon for the common Sin of Nature, nor merit any thing of God,
by the benefit he received by their Works.

2. And as to the other Objecters, It Is true, that Moses's Law was given to
them as a material peculiar part of the Law of Grace: But those, that Paul
disputed against, had in conceit separated the Law, as such, from the Promise
or Covenant of Free Grace, and thought to be justified by the Merit of their
Obedience to it.

III. Perverse Engagement against one another Opinions, as dangerous, has
made Paul's Doctrine of Faith and Justification seem much more difficult than
it is. 1. It is certain, That by [ Faith] he means no one single Act only,
as is [The believing that Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us], as if we
were not justified by believing in God the Father, or the Holy Ghost, or
trusting the Promise of Glory, or believing that Christ died for our Sins,
rose, ascended, intercedeth, reigns, and will judge us, and glorify us, or
by consenting to his Covenant of Grace, accepting offered Mercy, etc. Faith is
a Moral act, containing many Physical acts of Understanding and Will; like a
Covenant-consent to a King, a Husband, a Physician, etc. It is all that is
essentially required in Baptism, to the Collation of the Grace there given. It
is Christianity in consent.

2. This Faith is commanded by God, and Grace and Glory promised to them that
by believing obey this Command; which makes it the Condition, or Moral
receptive Qualification for this Gift. And though God's Grace cause Men to
believe, yet the Command and Conditional Promise are the Means by which God
works this Effect. And that the Promise be Conditional, joined with
threatening to Disobedience, is no more needless than the Command or Preaching
is.

3. Hence Men may claim Pardon upon believing; but none can claim Faith by
virtue of any absolute Promise of God, before he have it.

4. Though no Creature can merit of God in Commutative Justice, as giving him a
Benefit, yet they may merit of him as in Governing Justice, or Distributive:
But this is various, as the Governing Law is.

According to the Law of Innocence no man meriteth; nor Justification according
to the Law of Moses; save Christ alone. Christ's Merit was in the fulfilling
the undertaken Mediatorship, which was fulfilling the Law of Innocence, (which
he only was capable of) and Moses's Law, and the peculiar Acts of a Mediator:
This Merit of Christ is the valuable, procuring, meritorious Cause of all our
Deliverance, (Pardon, Justification, Adoption, etc.) of which our own Habits or
Acts are no Parts, nor are at all to be judged to be in stead of any part of
the Office of Christ.

5. But we are not Lawless, but under a Pardoning and Justifying Law, or
Covenant of Grace, which gives Grace and Glory (as is said) to them that
believe and repent; that is, pardons them, and gives them the in-dwelling
Spirit of Love, and right to Life, if they sincerely trust Christ's Mediation
and Promise for it, and give up themselves for that end to God their reconciled
Father, to Christ as their Savior, and his Spirit as their Sanctifier.

And because God will not give us the free Gift of Christ, and Life with him,
but as first qualified by this Condition of Faith, therefore Faith is said to
be imputed to us for Righteousness: that is, This Acceptance of his free Gift
in Christ, is all that the Law of Grace, by which we shall be judged, requires
of us that we may be accounted Righteous, without Innocence, or the Works of
Moses's Law, or any that make not the gift of Pardon and Life to be of free
Grace. To have Righteousness imputed, is to be accounted Righteous.

6. To call Faith a Justifying Instrument, is an unapt Speech of Man's vain
invention; but may be tolerated, if they mean but [ A Moral receptive
Disposition], unfitly called A receptive Instrument: But not in proper sense.

7. But though Christ is our Surety and Vicarius poenae in some sense, and
properly a Sacrifice for our Sin, and merited all that we have by his
Righteousness; yet it subverteth the Gospel and Christianity, to teach, as some
do, That Christ did so properly personate every one of the Elect, that in the
sense of God and the Law (though not Physically) they all perfectly fulfilled
the Law of Innocence in and by him, and so are justified by that Law, as
imputatively being sinless: As if that Law had said, [ Thou or thy Surety shall
die if thou sin] and we are justified by the same Law that condemned us; and no
Death, or Suffering, or permitted Sin were any Penalties on us: And as if we
were at once reputed sinless from Birth to Death, and yet must have a Christ to
die for our Sin, and must daily beg forgiveness of it.

CHAP. I.
1. PAul a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the
Gospel of God,

1. ^y an immediate appearance of Christ from Heaven, by Voice and Inspiration,
s^^t to publish the glad tidings of Redemption and Salvation by Christ.

2. Which he had promised before by his prophets in the holy scripture.

3. Concerning his son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the Seed of David
according to the flesh.

4. And declared to be the son of God with power, according to the spirit of
holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead.

3. Having his Humane Nature from his Mother of David's line.

4. But the Power of God which owned him, by the Spirit of Holiness, and his
Resurrection from the dead, did demonstrate that he was not a mere Man, but
Gods own Son, sent from Heaven, and miraculously incarnate.

5. By whom we have received grace and Apostleship for obedience to the faith,
among all nations, for his name.

5. By whose own heavenly mission I received this favor and honor, to be his
special Messenger, sent to call all Nations to believe and obey the Gospel, and
proclaim the Glory of his Name.

6. Among whom are ye also, the called of Jesus Christ.

6. Of whom God has vouchsafed you to be a part, being the called followers of
Jesus Christ.

7. To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints, Grace be to
you, and peace from God our father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

7. To all in Rome that are the beloved of God, called out of the World, into
the Holy Christian state, I salute you by this Benediction and Prayer, that the
Grace of God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and that true Peace and
Welfare which is its special Fruit, may be yet more upon you.

8. First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is
spoken of throughout the world.

8. And first, I thank my God through Jesus Christ, that (as you dwell in that
City which is most eminent in the World, which is an advantage to the luster
and communication of your Faith, so) your profession of that Faith is so
illustrious, as to be famous throughout the World.

9. For God is my witness whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his son,
that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers.

10. Making request, if by any means now at length, I might have a prosperous
journey by the will of God to come unto you.

9. For God, whom I serve with a devoted Soul, does know, that this your
honorable profession of the Christian Faith, does make me the more constantly
remember you in my Prayers.

10. And request of God, if it seem good to him, that I may come to you, for
the furtherance of my joy, and your edification.

11. For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to
the end you may be established. 12. That is, that I may be comforted together
with you, by the mutual faith both of you and me.

11, 12. For I long to see you* that by communicating to you what God has
given to me, you may be further established, and you and I may be comforted in
the mutual manifestation of our Concordant Faith.

13 Now I would not have you ignorant brethren, that often times I purposed to
come unto you, but was let hitherto, that I might have some fruit among you
also, even as among other Gentiles.

13. I would have you know, that as God has called me to be an Apostle to the
Gentiles, I often purposed to come to you, (though hitherto hindered) that I might
reap some fruit of that my Office among you, as well as among other Gentiles.

14. I am a debtor both to the Greeks and the Barbarians, both to the wise and
to the unwise.

14. By this my Mission and Office, it is my duty to Preach the Gospel, both to
the learned Greeks and Romans, and to unlearned Barbarous Nations.

15. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that are
at Rome also.

15. Therefore, if it be the Will of God, that I shall come unto you, I am
ready as the Apostle to the Gentiles, to exercise mine Office, by Preaching to
you as I have done to others.

16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: For it is the power of God
to salvation, to every one that believes; to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek.

16. For though a Crucified Christ be to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Gentiles foolishness, I am not ashamed most openly to own and Preach this
Gospel: For the Power of God, by this called weakness and foolishness by Men,
is manifested in it, and by it, in the Conversion, Comfort, and Salvation of
every true Believer, whether Jews, with whom it began, or Greeks to whom it is
now preached.

17. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed, from faith to faith, As
it is written, The just shall live by faith.

17. For that sort of Righteousness, which God has made the necessary and
acceptable way to Salvation, is therein revealed to the World; even
Righteousness by Faith, is revealed to beget Faith in Men; by which it is that
Men must be justified and saved, as was foretold.

18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.

18. For that Gospel which pardons Penitent Believers, does reveal Gods wrath
against the Impenitent and Unbelievers, who by the love of Sin, resist and
reject the Truth, and continue in ungodliness and unrighteousness.

19. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God has
showed it to them.

19. For they may know much of the nature and attributes of God, as manifested
by the light of Nature in them, and by the Providence of God among them: by
which God shows it unto them.

20. For the invisible things of him, from the creation of the world, are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made; even his eternal
Power and Godhead, so that they have no excuse.

20. For though God and Heavenly things be invisible, even his Eternal Power,
and his Godhead, yet are they clearly to be seen in the Glass of his Works; so
that their sin against God, thus revealed, leaves them without all just excuse.

21. Because, that when they knew God, they glorified him him not as God,
neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened. 22. Professing themselves wise, they became fools. 23. And
changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds and four-footed beasts, and creeping things.

21. Because, when by his Works, and the light of Nature they were forced to
confess the Divine perfections, they yet lived, not to his Glory, or in holy
thankfulness to the God whom they acknowledged, but dishonored him, and
corrupted their Minds by vain Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts were
darkened by gross errors. 22. And professing themselves to be the Learned
Philosophers, and Wise Men of the World, and contemning others as Ignorant and
Barbarous, they showed by their practice that they were Fools. 23. For when
their Tongues acknowledged the glory of the incorruptible God, they worshipped
him as in and by the Images of Corruptible Men, and of Birds, Beasts, and
creeping things; as if God had been like these.

24. Wherefore God gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own
hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves. 25. Who changed the
truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the
creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen.

24. Wherefore as a just punishment for their wilful sins God lest them to the
lusts of the Flesh, to base unnatural uncleanness. 25. Seeing they confessing
the Perfections of the True God, yet represented him in the Image of vain
shadows and Creatures, and so offered their worship to such Creatures, and to
the Stars, rather than to the True and Blessed Creator whom they acknowledged.

26. For this cause God gave them up to vile affections, for even their women
did change the natural use, into that which is against nature. 27. And
likewise, also the men leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their
lust one toward another, men with men, working that which is unseemly, and
receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which is meet.

26, 27. For this Sin, God gave them to base lusts against Nature, who in their
Religion sinned against the light of Nature; both Women and Men burning in
worse than beastly unnatural lusts toward those of their own Sex, and by being
left to that unnatural filthiness, were justly punished for their unnatural
Idolatry.

28. And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave
them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which were not convenient.

28. And as their wicked Hearts refused to obey and honor God practically,
though they did in words acknowledge him; God gave them over to a reprobate
Mind, to do those things which the light of Nature and common Reason do condemn.

29, 30, 31. Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity,
whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despightful, proud, boasters, inventers
of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding,
covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful.

29. So far is their Learning and Arts from making them just and happy, that
they abound with all manner of odious shameful Sin (here named.)

32. Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are
worthy of death, not only commit the same, but have pleasure in them that do
them.

32. And all their knowledge (of Good and Evil) is so far from Justifying or
Sanctfying them, that they live in the practice of that which they know God
does condemn, and in their Societies and Conversation make it their delight.

CHAP. II.
1. THerefore thou art unexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, that judge;
for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that
judge do the same things.

1. Therefore thou that think highly of thy self, for thy Knowledge, and
basely of others, as ignorant or barbarous, art so far from being justified by
this, that it aggravateth thy Sin, and leaves thee without excuse: For thou
live in as great Sin, as those whom thou condemnest as Ignorant.

2. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth, against
them which commit such things.

2. But we know that God will judge all Men in Truth and Righteousness,
according to their Works; and will condemn evil doers, whatever their Knowledge
and Profession be.

3. And think thou this, O man, who judge them which do such things, and
do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God?

3. Is it not then thy manifest error, to think that thy Knowledge, and
condemning Sin in-others will justify and save thee, that live in Sin?

4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance, and long
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance. 5.
But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up to thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. 6.
Who will render to every man according to his deeds.

4, 5, 6. While thou boastest of Wisdom and live in Wickedness, thou show
the more contempt of God, even of the Riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long-suffering, not knowing Practically, that the goodness of God which
thou do acknowledge in Words, should lead thee to Repentance, and forsaking
of Sin. 5. But thy Heart being hardened in impenitency, by Sin against
Knowledge, thou do but treasure up certain punishment against the Day when
God will show his Righteousness by his Judgment; 6. And will judge and use Men
according to their Deeds.

7. To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life.

7. To them, who by a life of true obedience, and patient waiting for his
Reward, do seek first for future Glory and Honor, and Immortal Happiness, he
will give Eternal Life.

8, 9. But to them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every
soul that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentiles.

8, 9. But to them that resist the Light, and contend against the revealed
Truth, and obey it not, but live in the Practice of Uunrighteousness, while
they boast of Knowledge, God will pour forth his Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish, even on every one that lives in Sin and Wickedness,
first on the Jews, who sin under their boasting of their Peculiarity, Law, and
Jewish Knowledge; and the Greeks and Romans, who sin under their boasting of
Learning and Philosophy, and conceited Wisdom.

10, 11. But glory, and honor, and peace to every man that works good, to
the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. For there is no respect of persons with
God.

10, 11. But Glory, Honor, and Peace, to every Man that lives a life of true
Obedience and well doing; to the Jew first, according to their
Covenant-Prerogative, and also to the Gentiles, as being in the same Covenant
of Grace, for God saves not Men partially, for their outward Privileges, or
their barren Knowledge and Profession.

12. For as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law; and
as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law.

12. For all Men shall be judged according to the Obl^gations which they were
under. They that sinned against the Law of Nature and commmon Mercies, and were
never under the Mosaical Law, or Supernatural Revelation, shall be condemned by
the Law which they sinned against, and not by that which was never given them.
But the Jews that sinned under Moses's Law shall be judged by it.

13. For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the
law shall be justified.

13. For no Law of God, does justify Men merely for having it, and hearing it,
but for doing it, so far as they do it.

14. For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves. 15.
Which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing
one another.

14, 15. For when the Gentiles, which have not the Jewish, or any written Law
of God, do by Nature that which that Law commands, these having not that
supernatural written Law, have Gods Law of Nature in themselves; and show the
effects of this Natural Revelation written in their Hearts, their Consciences
naturally having some Conviction of Gods Sovereign Government and Man's duty,
tells them as a Witness whether they do well or ill; and their Reason accusing
or defending them accordingly.

16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ
according to my Gospel.

16. I mean not by any mistaken self judging in this World; but even at the Bar
of Christ, when God shall open all men's secret Acts, and rectify all mistaken
judgings, as I have preached in foretelling that judgment of Christ.

17. Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and make thy boast
of God, 18. And know his will, and approvest the things that are more
excellent, being instructed out of the law, 19. And art confident that thou thy
self art a guide to the blind, a light of them that are in darkness, 20. An
instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which have the form of
knowledge, and of the truth in the law.

17, 18, 19, 20. And that you may know that the Law will justify no man for
having or knowing it, but for doing it, consider that it is but self-deceit to
think that thou shall be justified for being called a Jew, and resting in the
Divineness and perfection of your Law, and boasting that you are Gods peculiar
People and that his Will and excellent things are known by you which the world
knows not, and that it is you that by that Law must be the Lights and Guides
of the Dark and Ignorant, to whom all others as Children should come to School,
because you have the only True Knowledge by the means of your Law.

21, 22, 23. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self?
Thou that preachest, a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say,
a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou that
abhorrest idols, do thou commit sacrilege? Thou that make thy boast in the
law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God?

21, 22, 23. Will the Law justify thee, that condemnest thy self by breaking
it while thou boastest of it? Will teaching others justify thee, who teach
not thy self? Will it justify a Thief to Preach against Stealing, or an
Adulterer to Preach against Adultery, or the Sacrilegious to abhor Idols?

24. For the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is
written.

24. For as the Prophets truly told your forefathers, I may tell you, that you
are so far from keeping your Law to Justification, that the scandal of your Sin
occasioneth the Gentiles to speak evil of your Law, and blaspheme God that made
it.

25. For circumcision verily profits if thou keep the law: but if thou be a
breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.

25. Indeed God made not the Law in vain: To keep it is required of the Jews as
the matter of their Obedience: And if you keep it as the Covenant of
Circumcision obliges you, you shall not lose the promised Reward. But if you
are breakers of the Law, you will be no more justified than the Uncircumcised,
but more condemned for violating your Duty and Covenant with God.

26, 27. Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law,
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? And shall not
uncircumcision, which is by nature, if it fulfill the law, judge thee, who by
the letter and circumcision do transgress the law?

26, 27. Therefore it being Performance which the Law requires, if
Uncircumcised Persons do that good which the Law requires, it is them that the
Law will so far justify; and such obedient Uncircumcised Persons, that by
obeying the Law of Nature, perform the Matter of your Laws, shall condemn those
that have the Letter of the Law, and are by Circumcision engaged to keep it,
and yet transgress it.

28, 29. For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew that is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.

28, 29. But the Jew that God will accept, and justify as the Seed of
Believing Abraham, and that answers the end of the Law, is not he that is
only visibly one in the outward Ceremony; nor is that the acceptable
Circumcision, which is only outward in the Flesh: But he is the accepted Person
with God, as his peculiar, who is such at the Heart as the Law required Jews to
be; and that is the acceptable Circumcision, which cleanses and sanctifies
the Heart in Spirituality, and not only in outward Letter, Form and Ceremony;
which is approved of the most Holy Heart-searching God, and not that which is
but approved of Men.

CHAP. III.
1. WHat advantage then has the Jew? and what profit is there of circumcision?
2. Much every way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles
of God.

1, 2. You will say, If this be so, what advantage has the Jew above the
Gentile, or what profit does Circumcision afford them: I answer, Much every
way: As first, That God committed his Oracles of supernatural Revelation
principally to them; (and from them it is that others have received them.)

3. For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of
God without effect?

3. It Is true, that the most of the present Jews do not believe in Christ, nor
yield to the persuasions of the Gospel. But still Gods Word is sure and true,
and his Fidelity will perform all his Promises.

4. God forbid: Yea, let God be true, and every man a liar, as it is written,
That thou may be justified in thy sayings, and overcome when thou art judged?

4. Far be it from us to think that God is untrusty, or can lie: All Men are
untrusty, and may deceive by lies; but God's Fidelity is his Perfection, which
cannot fall. As David says, His Word shall be justified, and all be silenced
that dare accuse him of untrustiness or lying.

5. But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we
say? Is God unrighteous, who takes vengeance? I speak as a man.

5. But if all our Sin do but occasion the manifestation of Gods Righteousness,
and so his Honor and End is secured, is it not unjust for God to punish and
destroy Men for unbelief and sin? I object as a Man.

6. God forbid: for then how shall God judge the world?

6. Far be it from us so to think: For sure the Judge of all the World is
Righteous, and will righteously judge.

7. For if the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his glory,
why also am I yet judged a sinner? 8. And not rather (as we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say) Let us do evil that good may come:
whose damnation is just.

7, 8. But, say they, If my falsehood and sin do occasion the glorifying of God
and his Truth, why should I be judged a Sinner against God, who is glorified by
all that I do; and not rather conclude (as some falsely say we do) that we
should never fear sinning, seeing the effect is always good? But just is the
damnation of such that pretend Gods Glory to embolden them in Sin.

9. What then? Are we better than they? No, in no wise: For we have before
proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin.

9. What shall we then conclude from this unbelief and punishment of the Jews?
Is it, that we who are Christians, Jews and Gentiles, were so much better
antecedently than the unbelieving part, that God therefore gave us his Grace
for our better deserts? No, in no wise: For we have before proved, that Jews
and Gentiles are all under the guilt and reign of Sin, till Grace recover them.

10. As it is written, there is none righteous, no not one. 11. There is none
that understands, there is none that seeks after God. 12. They are all gone
out of the way: they are together become unprofitable; there is none that does
good, no not one. 13. Their throat is an open sepulcher; with their tongues
they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips. 14. Whose mouth
is full of cursing and bitterness. 15. Their feet are swift to shed blood. 16.
Destruction and misery are in their ways. 17. And the way of peace have they
not known. 18. There is no fear of God before their eyes.

10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. David truly describes the state of
Corrupted Nature, and of all Men till Grace restrain or change them, in Psalm.
14. and 53, etc. that, There is not one of them that are Righteous Men: They
understand not practically the matters of True Wisdom, and chief concerns, but
are a blind and sottish Generation; and therefore they seek not seriously to
know God, or to please him, and enjoy his love. They are turned from the way of
truth and obedience, and happiness: They are all but hurtful, or unprofitable
in the World, and none of them that set themselves to a Life that may do good
to themselves or others, or to please God. They are so like Satan, who seeks
whom he may devour, that their Throat is like an open Sepulcher, greedily
gaping to devour the Just and Godly; their Tongues serve the Father of lies, in
slandering Gods Truth, and Servants; and their Words are like Adders Poison,
that tends to do mischief, and destroy the good and innocent. Cursing and false
deceitful words, are the fruit of their Lips. They are ready to shed the Blood
of the Godly and Innocent: The way of their Life is Destruction and Misery to
the Faithful, and to the Societies where they live, and finally to themselves.
Nature and Custom may teach them to talk for Peace, and Unity, and Love: But
they do not, and will not know the true Nature of them, or the way by which
they must be attained. For they are not governed by the Law and Fear of God,
but by their Carnal deceived Wit, and Worldly Interest, which God condemns.

19. Now we know, that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who
are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God.

19. All this is written in the Jews Law, and therefore is spoken to and of the
Jews as well as others; for the Law speaks to none but those that are
Subjects, and obliged by it: So that neither Jew nor Gentile can be justified
as innocent; but all such self-justifiers will be confuted, and all the World
proved guilty of Sin and Punishment before God when he shall judge them.

20. Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his
sight, for by the law is the knowledge of sin.

20. By all this therefore it is clear, that seeing all that are under Moses's
Law are Sinners against the Law, and none are innocent, no Flesh shall be
justified in Gods sight by that Law: For as they are Sinners, so it is the Law
which notifieth their Sin, and condemns them for it.

21. But now the righteousness of God, without the law, is manifested, being
witnessed by the law and the prophets. 22. Even the righteousness of God, which
is by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe; for
there is no difference.

21. But there is another way of Righteousness ordained of God for our
Justification, and the Glory of his Grace and Justice, without the keeping of
Moses's Law, or being justified by it. 22. Even the Righteousness prescribed by
God, and given by his Grace, which is by the way of Faith in Christ, even our
believing trust in him, and adhering to him; and this is prescribed and given
to, and found in all true Believers, without difference.

23. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. 24. Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

23, 24. For all Men are Sinners, and therefore have come short of obtaining
the Glory which God had appointed to the Innocent that never brake his Law; and
cannot be saved or justified by the Law which they have broken; but must be
justified by his free Grace, forgiving their sin, and giving and accepting
their sincere Faith and Repentance, through the Redemption of lost Sinners,
which Jesus Christ has wrought for them and in them.

25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood,
to declare his righteousness, for the remission of sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God. 26. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness,
that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

25, 26. Whom God has by his unsearchable Counsel, Decree, and Ordination, set
forth to be the great Reconciler and Propitiation, by the way and means of
Faith in his blood, as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, and the Seal of his Truth and
Love; and this was (as well as by justifying the Innocent) to demonstrate that
he is a Holy, Just, and Merciful God, and no friend to sin, but a lo^er of
Holiness and Truth, in Pardoning to such Believers all their past Sins, to
which his forbearance and reprieve was a preparation. I say, to declare that he
is (as merciful, so) Just, while he will have so precious a Sacrifice for Sin,
and by Pardon and Grace does make, and judge the Faithful Righteous, which is
it which is now fully declared by our preaching the Gospel.

27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded: By what law? of works? Nay: but by
the law of faith.

27. Grace therefore must have the Glory of our Justification: For who can
boast that he has it by Innocence? because he deserved not death by Sin? No,
this is utterly shut out: By what Law? Is it by the Law of Moses, or any Law
which justifies Men because they sinned not against it, nor deserved death?
No: but by another Law, even the Law of Faith, which Grace has brought us
under, which pardons and saves true Penitent Believers.

28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds
of the law.

28. Therefore against the Jews and all self justiciaries, we conclude, that
the Law of Moses, (much less the first Law of pure Innocence) is so far from
being necessary to the Gentiles for Justification and Salvation, that no Man,
Jew or Gentile, is otherwise justified by God, but by his free Grace given
through Jesus Christ, to all true Believers, who accept it as a free gift.

29. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of
the Gentiles also.

29. And how absurd is it to think that God is a God, that is, a merciful
Governor, to no more in the World, than that little sorry People of the Jews?
Does not his actual Mercies, and his Government, obliging all the World to the
use of some means for Recovery, Pardon and Salvation, confute this, and show
that he is the God and Merciful Governor also of the Gentiles?

30. Seeing it is one God which shall justify the circumcision by faith, and
uncircumcision through faith.

30. It is the same God who will justify Circumcised Believers, and
uncircumcised Believers, by one and the same way: Even by the way of Grace and
Faith.

31. Do we then make void the law by says? God forbid: Yea, we establish the
law.

31. Can the Jew then say that we dishonor, and make void their Law, as if God
had given it in vain, and they had not been bound to keep it: Far be this from
us; yea, by the Doctrine of Christianity, we set the Law in its proper place,
(as consequent and subordinate to the Promise and Law of Grace that went before
it, and as preparatory to the fuller edition of the Law of Grace whch comes
after it. And so we assign it its due Office and Honor, and End, that God may
have the Glory of making it; though the Jews misunderstand it.)

CHAP. IV.
1. WHat shall we say then, that Abraham our Father, as pertaining to the flesh
has found?

1. Let us consider Abraham's case, the Father of the Israelites according to
the Flesh. For sure his Prerogative must be as great as theirs that claim it as
his fleshly Seed.

2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory; but not
before God.

2. If Abraham was justified by the merit of his Righteousness, as having never
deserved death by Sin, then he may boast that Life and Impunity was his due on
that account, though yet even that did not merit by any benefit to God. (Or,
but toward God he could have no matter to boast of, as his own.)

3. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted
unhim for righteousness.

3. For what account does the Scripture give us of his Righteousness? Abraham
believed God, ( viz. That he would perform his free Promise of Grace and
Peculiarity made to him and his Seed, and all Nations of the Earth in him) and
it was counted to him for Righteousness. And though God made his Promises to
him also for his obedience, Because he spared not his only Son; yet this was
not because he never deserved death by any Sin, but as it was a work of Faith,
and so a consequent part of the Righteousness of a Believer, accepted, though
imperfect, through the Merits and Righteousness of Christ, forgiving his Sin,
and freely adopting him an Heir of Life.

4. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.

4. Now to him that meriteth by the perfection of his Obedience, or that never
deserved death by Sin; (much more to him that benefiteth another by his Work)
the Reward is not reckoned to be the free gift of a Benefactor, but the just
giving a Man that which is his deserved due (in the first case by governing
Justice, and in the second by Commutative Justice.)

5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

5. But to him that has no such meritorious work for the value of which the
Reward should be his due, but trusts wholly to his free Grace, who first
makes and then judges them just that were before ungodly and unjust, (or, who
justifies them that by Sin have deserved death, and never merited life by the
worth of their good Works) his Faith is counted for Righteousness, by the
Covenant of Grace; that is, God accepts it as the qualification or condition,
which must be found in him, (without such meritorious Works) to make him
partaker of that Pardon, Adoption, and Salvation freely given by Grace, upon
the consideration of the meritorious Righteousness of Christ. (Indeed Faith,
Repentance, Prayer, Confession, Love, etc. are Acts that may be called Works in
another sense: But it is Works deserving life for their perfection, or not
deserving punishment by the Law, which are here spoken of.)

6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works, 7. Saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, 8. Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes not sin.

6, 7, 8. So David also describes the qualification of a Blessed Man (which is
a man justified) Not that he has no Sin, which deserved death, but that God
does not impute his Sin to him for his condemnation, but forgiveth and covers
it, and imputes Righteousness to him, that is, judges and uses him as one
that is not obliged to punishment, but has right to Salvation, and this, not
because his Works deserved not Death but Life; but because he forgiveth him,
and freely saves him for Righteousness and Intercession of Christ; and uses
him not as he deserved.

9. Comes this blessedness then on the circumcision only, or on the
uncircumcision also? For we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for
righteousness.

9. And are none pardoned and saved but the Circumcised? Are not the
Uncircumcised pardoned and blessed also? If Faith was imputed for Righteousness
to Abraham, will it not be so to all that have it?

10. How was it then reckoned? When he was in circumcision or in
uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.

10. And the time when this was said of Abraham will clear up all this; for it
was not after he was Circumcised, but before; even Uncircumcised, as the
Gentile Christians be.

11. And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
the faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised; that he might be the father of
all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might
be imputed to them also.

11. And he after received the Sign of Crcumcision, not as a Legally justifying
Sign, but as a Seal of that Righteousness which God before imputed to him as a
Believer; that so he might be by Promise and Example, the Father, not only of
his Carnal and Circumcised Seed, but of all them that believe, though out the
World, that so Righteousness might be imputed to them as Believers, as it was
to him.

12. And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision
only, but also (to them that) walk in the steps of that faith of our father
Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised.

12. And might be the Father of the Ends, and Spiritual benefits of
Circumcision, conveyed to them who are not of the Circumcision only, but also
to them that walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he
had being yet Uncircumcised, as they are.

13. For the promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not to
Abraham and his seed through the Law, but through the righteousness of faith.

13. For the Promise to Abraham and his Seed, That he should be Heir of the
World, was not made to him by the Law, which was long after, nor for the
keeping of it; but upon his believing Gods merciful Promise, and trusting him,
for which he was accounted and pronounced Righteous.

14. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the
promise made of none effect.

14. For if this great Promise of Inheritance was made to Men for keeping
Mises's Law, as such, (and so only to them) then it was null to Abraham, and it
is of no effect to any.

15. Becsuse the law works wrath; for where no law is, there is no
transgression.

15. Because, as the Law is made to forbid and condemn Sin, so it obliges
Sinners to undergo the Punishment; which were no obligation, were there no
obliging Law: And Abraham was not under Moses's Law, and so transgressed it not.

16. Therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace, to the end the promise
might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to
that also which is of the says of Abraham, who is the father of us all.

16. Therefore this great Promise and Blessing is made to Believers, as such,
that it may be free, and of mere Grace, that so it may be sure and firm to all
the Seed or Children of Promise; not only to the Jews that had the Law, and
were the Natural Seed, but to the Gentiles also, who have Abraham's Faith, and
so are his Spiritual Seed, who is the Father of all Believers.

17. (As it is written [I have made thee a father of many nations]) before him
whom he believed, even God who quickens the dead, and calls those things
which be not as though they were.

17. As it is written, I have made thee a Father of many Nations, and not of
the Israelitish Nation only: So that though the Gentiles were not then called,
as now they are, by the Gospel, yet that God who promised this to Abraham, when
his Body and Sarah's were naturally past Generation, and to Isaac when he was
unborn; and again, when God demanded him as an Offering, and thence, as it
were, raised him from the dead; that God, I say, did decree the calling of the
Gentiles, and spoke of that in Promise which was long after to be done.

18. Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many
nations, according to that which was spoken [So shall thy seed be.]

18. This was the meaning of Gods Promise to Abraham, who against all natural
probability, trusted Gods Promise, and believed and hoped that accordingly he
should become the Father of many Nations: And that, as was promised, his Seed
should be as the Stars in Heaven.

19. And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when
he was an hundred years old, nor yet the deadness of Sarah's womb.

19. And his Faith was not weak and shaken with the consideration that his aged
Body was almost dead, and unfit for procreation, or that Sarah's Womb was so
also.

20. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in
says, giving glory to God. 21. And being fully persuaded, that what he had
promised he was able to perform.

20, 21. He was not staggered by unbelief unto a distrustful doubting; but was
strong in Faith, whereby he gave God the Glory of his Power, Wisdom, Love and
Truth, being fully persuaded, that though Nature, showed no probability of it
in second Causes, the Almighty God could perform all that he had promised.

22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.

22. And therefore this way of glorifying God by the trusting belief of his
free Promise, was so suitable to Gods Ends and Honor, that he accepted it as
Righteousness, or a sufficient qualification of him that should partake of his
free given Mercy, though Abraham had no sinless innocence, nor could say that
he never deserved death.

23. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him. 24.
But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised
up Jesus our Lord from the dead.

23. And certainly, God did not leave this on Record for Abraham's sake only;
as if there had been a Righteousness and right to Life, which he only must
have, and belonged to no other, and he must be justified by some odd way proper
to himself. 24. But this is written also for all us, to tell us what
Righteousness God requires and accepts to our Salvation; and that if we
believe with trust on his Power, Truth, and Mercy, who raised up our Lord from
the dead, this Faith shall be imputed to us for Righteousness, and we shall be
saved by the Sacrifice, Merits, and Mediation of Christ, though our Sins
deserved death, and neither the Law of Innocence or of Moses justify us.

25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification.

25. Even our Faith in God by Christ and in him, who for our Sins was made a
Propitiatory Sacrifice, to procure us free Forgiveness of them, and was raised
again to cause our Justification, by uniting us to himself, and pardoning our
Sin, and giving us his Spirit and right to Impunity and Salvation, and
justif^ifying this right and us as our Advocate, and by his Sentence as our
Judge.

CHAP. V.
1. THerefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Therefore I may conclude, that being Constituted, Accounted of God, and
judged Righteous by Faith, we have Peace with and toward God, as Reconciled
and Adopted through our Lord Jesus Christ, (notwithstanding we are not
justifiable as fulfillers of the Law.)

2. By whom we have access by faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

2. By whose mediation it is that we came or had access by Faith, into this
blessed state of Grace and Gods Favor wherein we now are; and greatly rejoice
in hope of the promised Glory of God.

3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience, 4. And patience experience, and experience hope,
5. And hope makes not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad on our
hearts by the holy Ghost which is given unto us.

3, 4, 5. Yea, more than so, but also in all our tribulations which we undergo
in the World for Christ and Righteousness, we exult with glorying and joy;
knowing that this tribulation does by exercise increase our Patience, and being
tried, our patient and constant suffering makes us the more certain by
experience that our Faith is sound, and gives us experience of Gods supporting
Grace. And this experience much confirms our hope of Gods acceptance, and our
Salvation, which we should be apt to doubt of, if our Faith and Gods Grace had
not been thus tried; it being easy by self-flattery to think untryed Faith is
better than it is. And this confirmed hope will never leave us to shame by
disappointment, for it is accompanied and sealed by that special gift of the
Holy Ghost, which sheddeth abroad on our Hearts the effects and sense of the
Love of God through Christ, and so replenisheth us with Reflecting-love to God,
(even as the Summer Rains and Sunshine moisten and warm the Earth, and
replenish it with pleasant Fruits.)

6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly.

6. For when we were worthless, helpless, lost and miserable, in the fittest
season Christ died even for the ungodly guilty Sinners; to recover them to God,
and save them.

7. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die; yet peradventure for a good
man some would even dare to die.

7. For among Men, few (or scarce any one) would die for an Innocent Man;
though perhaps some few of rare Charity and self-denial, would venture on death
for a Man of eminent worth and goodness.

8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners
Christ died for us.

8. But the love of God to us was so transcendently declared and magnified,
that while we were yet Sinners against his Law and him, Christ died to
reconcile and save us.

2. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him.

9. And if he loved us so far, as to give his Son to die for us when we were
mere guilty Sinners, we may be sure that now he has made and accepted us as
Righteous, pardoning all our Sin for the Sacrifice of the Blood of Christ, he
will certainly save us from Damnation.

10. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life.

10. For if God reconciled us to himself by his Sons death, when we were his
Enemies, doubtless he will save them that are now reconciled, and pardoned
Believers, by the Intercession of him that lives in Glory, and is now our
Head, the Lord of Life, by giving us his Spirit, and justifying us at last, and
receiving us to himself in Glory. He that loved his Enemies, will not damn his
beloved Children.

11. And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom we have received the atonement.

11. And now moreover, through this reconciliation by Christ, which we have
received upon our believing, God is so far from being our terrifying, avenging
Judge, that he is become our greatest glorying and joy; he being our God and we
his People, and he being our Father, and alsufficient Portion and Felicity.

12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and
so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

12. In all this we have notice of this great Mystery, that as Adam was the
Root, or first cause of Man's Sin and Death, and by that one Man sin entered into
the World, and death by Sin, and so all being Sinners, death passed upon all,
even Temporal death actually and Eternal death by the Sentence of the Violated
Law, as being our due.

13. For until the law sin was in the world; but sin is not imputed where there
is no law. 14. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them
that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the
figure of him that was to come.

13, 14. For it is certain that Sin was in the World before Moses's Law, even
from Adam's fall: And whereas that is no Sin, nor imputed to Guilt and
Punishment, which is against no Law; yet death reigning from Adam's fall till
Moses; and therefore all were under some Law, Sin being so far imputed to them;
though they sinned not themselves as Adam did, against an express particular
command and penal threatening by supernatural Revelation from Heaven, nor all
that died ( e. g. Infants) did actually and personally transgress: Therefore it
was from him, as his vitiated guilty Seed, that they derived Original Sin, and
by this vicious nature they at age sinned actually, against that Law which they
were under, and by both were the Children of death; so that we may compare Adam
as the root of Sin and Death to all, with Christ who is to all true Christians
the root of Holiness and Life.

15. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift. For if through the
offense of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace,
which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.

15. But the disparity must be noted: For if the sin of one Man had such
malignant power and pernicious efficacy as to procure the guilt and death of
many, we may be sure that the Grace and Mercy of God, and the gift of that
saving Grace which is from the Merits, Intercession and Spirit of Christ, shall
be more effectual to the Life of many.

16. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was
by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification.

16. And there is this further differences, that Adam, one Man by one sin,
brought the Sentence of Death on all the World, which had not passed else upon
us. But it is many Sins, of many Men, which Christ does deliver us from in the
free gift of our Justification.

17. For if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they which
receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in
life by one Jesus Christ.

17. For if one offense of one Man made all Men Subjects to Death by that one;
much more powerfully and effectually, they which receive from one Redeemer
abundance of Grace, and the gift of Righteousness, in the healing and pardoning
of all their Sins, shall certainly Reign in the purchased and promised life of
Glory, by that one Savior Jesus Christ.

18. Therefore as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all
men to justification of life.

18. Therefore, as by the offense of one the Sentance of Death was passed upon
all his posterity; so also by the Righteousness of one, as the meritorious and
procuring cause, the free gift came on all Men, for Justification and Life.
That is, A free Gift is made and offered promiscuously to all, on condition of
believing, suitable acceptance, and actually justifies all to Life, who so
believingly accept it, and unthankfully reject it not.

19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

19. For as by one, Adam's disobedience, all Men, as receiving their Nature
from him, are made guilty and corrupt, and punishable as Sinners, so by the
procuring meritorious Obedience of one (in performing all that was required of
him as our Redeemer, in perfect holiness of Soul and Life, fulfilling the Law
of Innocence, and of Moses, and the peculiar Law of Mediation, being obedient
to the Death on the Cross) shall the many that by Faith receive him, be
constituted Righteous, and so accounted and judged of God, even reconciled,
pardoned, adopted, and made the Heirs of Life.

20. Moreover the law entered, that the offense might abound: but where sin
abounded, grace did much more abound.

20. And Moses's Law, which came in afterward, was made to increase Men's
obligation against Sin, and more expressly and terribly forbid it, that if the
Jews would sin, their Guilt and Punishment should be the greater (as alas, they
did even to abundance:) But when guilt was increased (and Sin by Men's abuse of
the Law), Grace did superabound, being victorious against Sin and Guilt, and
the curse in all true Believers, and extending to many more than Moses's Law
did, even to all the called Nations of the World.

21. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
righteousness to eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

21. That as Sin has had its reign and sad effects in the Death and Miseries
of the Sons of Adam, even so shall Grace have its more victorious Dominion, and
Reign by the Meritorious Righteousness of Christ, in making all his Members or
Spiritual. Offspring Righteous, by his Pardoning, Adopting, Sanctifying Mercy,
and bringing them to Eternal Life, by the Power and Efficacy of Jesus their
Redeemer.

CHAP. VI.
1. WHat shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound?

1. Perhaps some may gather from all this, that we preach a Doctrine of
Licentiousness; and seeing Grace abounded, where Sin abounded; we infer that
Men may continue in Sin that Grace may abound.

2. God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein?

2. Far be it from us so to think: For though Christ came to save Sinners, it
was not to savor Sin, but to destroy it, and save Men from it. And therefore
as he died for Sin, he causes us to die to Sin; and how then shall we live in
it that are dead to it?

3. Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death?

3. Know ye not, that when Men are Baptized, they are by Vow, Covenant, and
Profession listed into the belief of a Crucified Savior, who died for Sin to
save us from it, and do profess that Repentance by which we renounce it, as
dead to it for the time to come?

4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into his death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life.

4. Therefore in our Baptism we are dipped unde the Water, as signifying our
Covenant-profession, that as he was buried for Sin, we are dead and buried to
Sin, that as the glorious power of God raised him from the dead, so we should
rise up to live to him in newness and holiness of Life.

5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall
be also in the likeness of his resurrection.

5. For as we have Covenanted and Professed our belief in him and conformity to
him as Dead, so we have Covenanted and Professed, and must practice our
Conformity to his Resurrection, or else it is not true Baptism, and
Christianity, and Conformity to Christ.

6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

6. Knowing that as his Body was Crucified for Sin, so we have herein
Covenanted and Professed to be, as to our old Dispositions and sinful
Conversations, as it were crucified with him, that the Body of Sin, that is,
our fleshly corrupt disposition and conversation, might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve Sin, but be as dead to it.

7. For he that is dead, is freed from sin.

7. For as a Dead Man is absolved from all servile Obligations to his Master,
so he that is by the Death of Sin conformed to the death of Christ, is freed
from the dominion of Sin.

8. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him.

8. And if we be indeed what we are by Baptismal Profession, conformed thus to
Christ's Death, we have cause to believe that we must and shall be conformed to
his Resurrection and Life.

9. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has
no more dominion over him. 10. For in that he died, he died unto sin once; but
in that he lives, he lives unto God. 11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves
to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

9, 10, 11. For as we know that Christ being raised from the Dead, dies no
more. His Death for Sin was but once, but he being risen lives to God for
ever; so must you reckon that you are by Conversion from Sin to God, once dead
to Sin by Covenant, Consent, and Profession, that you may ever after-live to
God, by the Mediation, Spirit, and Grace of Christ.

12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that you should obey it
in the lusts thereof.

Therefore, unless you will renounce your Baptism and Christianity, you must
not let Sin reign in those bodies which as they die for sin, so are professedly
dead to sin: Its lusts may tempt and trouble you, but must not be obeyed.

13. Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin;
but yield your selves to God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your
members as instruments of righteousness to God.

13. Nor must you yield the Members of your Bodies, as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, tho you should pretend that you keep your Hearts
clean to God; but give up your selves to the Government and Will of God, as
those that are risen and alive from your dead state of sin, that you may live
to him, and so give up the Members of your Bodies as the Souls Instruments of
Righteousness in serving God.

14. For sin shall not have dominion over you: for you are not under the law,
but under grace.

14. For sin must not, and shall not have dominion over you, to rule you or
condemn you; for you are not under the Law which merely forbade it, and
condemned the sinner, but under Grace which mortifieth and forgiveth it.

15. What then? shall we sin because we are not under the law, but under grace?
God forbid.

15. What then? shall we turn this Argument of our deliverance from sin to
encourage us in sin, and be the bolder to sin, because we are not under the Law
that condemns sinners, but under Grace that pardons them. Far be it from us.

16. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants you are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousness?

16. Know ye not, that as your engagement to be Servants of Christ binds you
to obey him; so your obedience will show whose Servants you are indeed; whether
you obey sin, which is the way of death, or obey Christ unto Righteousness and
life.

17. But God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed
from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered to you.

17. But God be thanked for your change and deliverance; that though you were
formerly the Servants of sin, you have obeyed, not only Bodily, but from the
Heart, that form of Christian Doctrine which was delivered to you, and to which
you did consent.

18. Being then made free from sin, you became the servants of righteousness.

18. In your Conversion and Baptism you being delivered from the servitude and
guilt of sin, you then by consent and Covenant became Christ's Servants for the
way and works of Righteousness.

19. I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh.
For as you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity,
unto iniquity; even so now yield your membes servants to righteousness, unto
holiness.

19. I use this familiar speech by similitude and allegory, as fitted to your
Capacity: As you did formerly use your Bodies in uncleanness and iniquity, as
Servants of iniquity; so now use your Bodies as Servants of Righteousness,
devoted to God, and sanctified to obey him,

20. For when ye were the Servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness.

20. For when you lived in the servitude of sin, you were not the Servants of
God and Righteousness, you lived not a life of Holiness and obedience to God.

21. What fruit had you then in those things whereof you are now ashamed? For
the end of those things is death.

21. Review now those works, and think what you got by them, you are justly now
ashamed of them and of their fruits: For whatever sin seem in the committing,
misery and death is the end and fruit of it, where Grace does not recover and
forgive.

22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

22. But now having by conversion changed your Master and Life, and being
delivered from the slavery of sin, and become the Servants of God, the fruit is
a life of Holiness here, and hereafter at the end everlasting happiness.

23. For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

23. For the service of sin is rewarded with death, and this the Law obliges
the sinner to: But the free gift of God through the Mediation of Christ is
Eternal Life: And this is it which in the Gospel Covenant is proclaimed and
bestowed: (And do you not now see both how necessary it is to have a Savior,
and a better Covenant and way of life than Moses's mere Law, or Man's own
meritorious Works; and that our Gospel is so far from favoring sin, that it
declares the only way to be delivered, both from the guilt and power of it,
and to be made holy here and happy for ever.

CHAP. VII.
1. KNow ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law) that the law
has power over a man as long as he lives?

1. I have used the similitudes of a dead Man, and one raised from death, and
of a Servant, and one set free and under another Master; I will now add the
similitude of a married Woman and a dead Husband. You know (who know the Law)
that the Law of Superiority, which gives one power over another, obliges only
until death.

2. For the woman which has an husband is bound by the law to her husband so
long as he lives: But if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of
the husband.

2. The Law binds a Wife to be a Subject to her Husband till he die; but then
she is thereby no longer bound to him.

3. So then, if while her husband lives she be married to another man, she
shall be called an adulteress: But if her husband be dead, she is free from
that law, so that she is no adulteress, though she be married to another man.

3. So that though she be an Adulteress who marries another, while her Husband
lives, yet when her Husband is dead, she is free from that obligation, and is
no Adulteress for marrying with another.

4. Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another; even to him who is raised from
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God.

4. So death has separated the Law and the believing Jews. The Law being
abrogated by the coming, and Death, and Grace of Christ, is dead to you, as you
by Faith and Baptism are dead to it; that so you should be married to him that
caused this by his death, and is raised from the dead, and has raised you from
the death of sin and guilt, and legal Condemnation to a new and holy life, that
regeneration may cause you to generate the holy fruit of Love and good Works,
and live hereafter unto God.

5. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the law did
work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.

5. For when we were in our mere corrupted Nature, and only under a forbidding
and condemning Law, without the Gospel and its Grace, the Law did but irritate
and show our Carnal Lusts, and cause our Guilt and Condemnation, and did not
either heal or pardon us.

6. But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were
held, that we should serve in newness of spirit and not in the oldness of the
letter.

6. But now we are delivered from that Law, and so from its manifold difficult
impositions, all which we could not fulfill, and also from its curse of those
that fulfill it not: For it is abolished, and binds us no more: That now we
may serve God with New Hearts, and lives, by the Spirit of Christ, according to
the Law of Grace, and not Carnally in the bondage and terror of the old Law.

7. What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known
sin, but by the law. For I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou
shall not covet.

7. But think not by this that we infer, that the Law is bad or culpable, or
the cause of sin: Far be it from us; so far am I from such a thought, that I
testify that the Law is the forbidder, and discoverer and condemner of sin:
For I had not known my Hearts inordinate desires or lusts to be so bad, if the
Law had not said. Thou shall not covet: For corrupt Nature hardly discerns
the evil of its own inclination, so be it, it break not out into Act, but is
ready to think it is blameless because its Natural.

8. But sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence: For without the law sin was dead.

8. But my own Soul has sinful inclinations and imperfections; by original
corruption and the evil habits increased by actual sin: And by these I am so
backward to good and prone to evil, that a Law of such a multitude of
difficult, positive, Precepts and Prohibitions, making me so much work, and so
hard, is become morally impossible for me perfectly to fulfill: Had I been only
under the Law made to fallen Adam and Noah, and all Mankind, a great number of
Legal Positives and Ceremonials had never obliged me; but this Law, being made,
and all these things laid upon me which my corrupt Nature could not fulfill,
presently my badness and disability appeared in a great number of Acts, which
now became forbidden sin, and in the omission of things commanded* even as if
you command ignorant, weak, and il-disposed Men, a multitude of such
particulars as none but the wise and well disposed will keep, it will occasion
them to be guilty of a multitude of sins, which without those Canons or Laws
would have been no sin, so my sinful Nature made this Law of Works, an occasion
of my guilt of a multitude of actual sins; which without the Law would have
been no sin, or not so culpable. Besides that the prohibition stirred up my ill
inclination, and also that I sinned against more knowledge.

9. For I was alive without the law once; but when the commandment came, sin
revived, and I died.

9. For if you suppose me only under the Common Law made to Noah and all
Mankind, and the Promise made to him and to Abraham, before the Law of Moses
was made, I had not then been under either that Sentence of a Temporal or an
Eternal death, which by Moses's Law are the wages of many sins, not before
forbidden: But when I am under all those Laws which curse or cut off all that
do not the numerous Tasks and Ceremonies there imposed, I am then become a dead
Man in Law, and the Law and sin rise up in power against me, and condemn me.

10. And the commandment which was ordained unto life, I found to be unto death.

10. And the Commandment which promised life to them that keep it, proved the
occasion of death to me.

11. For sin taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me.

11. For my sinful nature called out to so much duty, and forbidden so many
things, being unable to do the duties, and prone to the things forbidden, by
occasion of this Law, became the guilty cause of many actual sins of omission
and commission, and as ill humors stirred by a purge often rage the more, so did
the pravity of my nature, and so I was made guilty of death.

12. Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good.

12. Wherefore I testify that the Law is pure and holy, and just, and good:
God justly made it: His Wisdom and Holiness shine forth in it: If Men be bad
and ill disposed, God may justly give them such Laws as their badness is averse
to keep. And he had good and gracious ends in giving it: He made it indeed very
operous, somewhat like the Law of Innocence to Adam, though not that same, but
yet conjunct and subordinate to the Law and Promise of Grace; which the Jews
should have noted, and used it accordingly.

13. Was that then which is good made death to me? God forbid: But sin, that it
might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good, that sin by the
commandment might become exceeding sinful.

13. What then? Is the Law guilty of my sin and death? By no means: But the
inward pravity of my Soul, which else would have been more latent, unknown, and
not have brought forth so much actual sin and death, did by the good Law of God
appear in its proper evil nature, and show how pregnant it was of actual sin,
and how averse to full obedience, and so by producing these actual sins,
appeared and became exceeding sinful.

14. For we know that the law is spiritual; but I am carnal, sold under sin.

14. For we all confess that the Law being Gods own Law, is Divine, Spiritual,
and Pure: And the reason why I do not fulfill it, and so cannot be justified by
it, is in my self; who in my Corrupt Nature am Carnal, and under a Moral
necessity of sinning against it; predominantly before Grace, and in part after.

15. For that which I do, I allow not: For what I would, that do I not; but
what I hate, that do I.

15. I may well call it a Captivity, or a kind of necessity, when my knowledge
and unfeigned (though imperfect) willingness and desire, and my hatred of the
sin, yet will not enable me to be so free from sin and fulfill the Law, as to be
justified by it (much less will the uneffectual convictions and wishes of the
unregenerate do this) For though I do not in judgment approve my sin; and I
have a desire perfectly to fulfill the Law of God, and I would be freed from
all sin; yet I attain not this perfection which I desire.

16. If then I do that which I would not, I consent to the law that it is good.

16. Now if I did not justify the Law as good, I should not thus condemn my
self for breaking it, nor desire thus perfectly to keep it.

17. Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.

17. And because the Understanding and Will are the highest faculties, and a
Man is in Gods account what he truly would be, therefore I may say, that
(though it be my sin to have so inordinate a sensitive inclination, and so
imperfect a Mind and Will which should better rule it,) yet it is not such a
sin as shows the predominant disposition of my Soul, and denominateth the
Man, but is contrary to the resolved bent of my heart and life; and therefore
the Lord of Grace will not judge me according to that which is but my
imperfection, and which I more hate than love, and would unfeignedly be rid of,
for it is no reigning sin that I confess.

18. For I know, that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing: for
to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not.

18. For I know that so far as I have any corruption and carnality, I am prone
to evil and not to good! For by the Grace of God I do truly desire perfection
it self; but I am not able to attain my desire, and to be perfect in my
obedience.

19. For the good which I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that
I do.

19. For my Nature being corrupt, and my Will but imperfectly renewed, though
sincere, I cannot be as good as I would be, nor do all the good which I would
do, nor avoid all the evil which I would avoid, and so cannot be sinless and
perfectly obedient.

20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me.

20. Now seeing the main bent of my Mind and Will is for perfect obedience, and
against all sin, and it is by the instigation of the remnant of carnalitie,
that I am not sinless and free from all culpable infirmities, God will not
impute that to me which I hate, and is contrary to the bent of my Heart and
Life, so much as that which I love and live for.

21. I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

21. I find then in my Carnal part, an inclination, which is as a contradicting
Law, which striveth so much against the Law of God, that I often sin contrary to
my predominant Will, and when I would be sinless and perfect, yet I cannot.

22, 23. For I delight in the law of God after the inward man: But I see
another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me
into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members.

22, 23. For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man, which is the
bent of my Mind and Will. But my corrupt sensual inclination is like a contrary
Law, which warreth against my Judgment and Will, and like a Captive I am
brought by it under a necessity of sinning, so far as that my obedience is
imperfect, and so unjustifiable by the Law of Works, (as in the unregenerate
sin does reign.)

24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death.

24. So far am I then from being justified by this Law, that while it calls
for more perfect obedience to its hard and numerous precepts than my sinful
Soul can perform, and so condemns me, it does but show me how bad and
miserable I am, and make me cry out, O wretched Man, who shall deliver me from
this sinning deadly flesh?

25. I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, with the mind I my
self do serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.

25. But as I have told you of my misery by nature, under the Law, I will tell
you of my remedy: I rejoice in thankfulness to God that has abrogated the Law,
and sanctified my nature by Jesus Christ: And so I conclude, that my renewed
Mind and Will so desires perfection, that I would be sinless, and keep all the
Law which God shall impose and continue; but my fleshly inclination makes this
sinless perfection too hard for my attainment, and therefore I cannot be
justified by so hard and rigorous a Law.

ANNOTATIONS.
THough Expositors are much disagreed whether St. Paul here describe a Man
Unregenerate under the mere Law, or an Imperfect Man, how sincere soever; yet
no such Doctrinal Controversy depends on this Difference, as the Ignorant
and Contentious do imagine. For they that think that he describes the Case of
a carnal Legallist, or Jew, suppose that he speaks of their committing
against knowledge, and uneffectual wishes, the reigning Sins called Mortal, and
live an ungodly Life; and that [ It is not I, but sin] signifies only [My
superior Faculties have some uneffectual reluctance, and are convinced that
the Law is good]: And that by [ Captivity to the law of sin] is meant a slavish
Life of predominant Sensuality. And doubtless such there are, of whom all this
is true.

And those that think that he speaks of himself even in his Regenerate state,
and so of all Men, do think that it is not a Life of Wickedness, or Mortal Sin,
that he describes, nor a Captivity to it, but unavoidable Imperfection, called
Venial Sin* to the same sense as St. John says, If we say that we have no sin,
there is no truth in us. And that [ It is not I, but sin] signifies but that a
Man shall be accounted and judged by God according to what is predominant in
his Mind, Will and Life.

And I most incline to this Exposition, 1. Because the other seems forced,
which must not be received without necessity. 2. Because the Apostle is not
only proving that the Law will not justify an unregenerate legal Jew, but
that it will justify no Man, how good soever. 3. And I do not believe that the
unregenerate can truly say as he, [ I delight in the law of God], and [ to will
is present with me], and [ I my self in mind serve the law of God.] 4. Many
Passages are plainly applicable to Paul in his Christian state.

CHAP. VIII.
1. THere is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

1. It is not then the Law that justifies us, But ^ath in Christ; and all that
are in him are acquit (...) the curse and condemnation of the Law, (and also of
the Law of Nature) for their sin is pardoned, and they are regenerate, and live
not now after the fleshly inclination or Law, but under the Spiritual Law of
Grace, by a spiritual inclination wrought in them by the Holy Ghost, which is
given them by Christ.

2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from
the law of sin and death.

2. For the Covenant of Grace which gives the Spirit, and the Spirit so given
me by Christ, being not a killing but a quickening Law, giving me internal and
Spiritual Life; and Title to Eternal life, has made me free from the Power and
Rule of my Carnal Inclination, and from the Obligation and Condemnation of
Moses's Law.

3. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin
in the flesh.

3. For when the mere Law could neither justify nor Regenerate us, because our
fleshly pravity was incapable hereof, God sending his own Son in flesh like
ours which is sinful, though without sin, as a Sacrifice for sin, and example
of perfect holiness, thereby showed his enmity to sin, and began the holy
enterprise of its destruction.

4. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit.

4. That the true Righteousness which the Law was made to lead Men to, might be
found in us, and the true ends of the Law obtained by us, who live now by the
Spiritual Principle and Rule, and not by the Carnal Principle and Letter.

5. For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: but
they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.

5. For the unregenerate who are under the Dominion of a Carnal Disposition,
though they may be under the terror of a threatening Law, do still savor, love,
and mind nothing so much as fleshly Interest and Pleasure: But they whose Souls
are renewed by the Holy Spirit, and live by Faith on Spiritual Promises, do
mind, love, and seek most Spiritual welfare and felicity.

6. For to be carnally minded, is death: but to be spiritually minded, is life
and peace.

6. For the true state of misery called Death in the Soul, which is the way to
everlasting misery, consists in its being turned from the love of God and
Holiness, to the love of Carnal Interest and Pleasure, and the true state of
Spiritual life and Felicity consists in the love of God and Holiness, and the
Souls perfection.

7. Because the carnal mind is enmity to God; for it is not subject to the law
of God, neither indeed can be.

7. Because the Carnal Unregenerate Mind, having a predominant inclination to
inferior sensual interests and delights, and a privation, yea and enmity to
things Spiritual and Holy, has thereby an enmity to the Holy Laws and Ways of
God, and consequently to God as Holy: For it is not subject to the Law of God,
which is quite against their sinful life and inclination, nor indeed can be,
while it so continues; there being a contrariety between their Inclinations
and the Law of God.

8. So then, they that are in the flesh cannot please God.

8. So that they that are Unregenerate and Carnal, cannot please God while they
are such; because they cannot, through the perverseness of their own Wills, do
the things that please him, what legal restraint soever they be under.

9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his.

9. But you are not in this Carnal state, and under the dominion of the flesh,
if the Spirit of God do not only provoke you toward goodness, but also dwell
in you and possess you; For it is a powerful, Spirit and will overcome the
Flesh: But if any Man have not this indwelling, illuminating, quickening,
sanctifying Spirit, he is not a true Christian, and saved by Christ. He may be
baptized, and deceive the Church, and pass for a visible Member of it, and so
for a Christian among Men, but Christ will not own him as a living Member to
Justification and Salvation.

10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit
is life because of righteousness.

10. And if Christ by his Spirit and Government be and rule in you, the Body
which has still some inordinate sinful inclinations, and backwardness to good,
shall die for sin; but your Spirits being quickened by the Spirit of God, unto
Holiness and Justification, are in a state of life begun, and shall not die as
the Body does, but live with Christ, by whom they live.

11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you;
he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies,
by his Spirit that dwells in you.

11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you,
he that by this same Spirit of life and power raised up Christ from the dead,
as he has begun to rise you from Spiritual death in sin, and sanctify both
Soul and Body to himself, will not only glorify your Souls, but also raise and
save your Mortal Bodies, by that same Almighty Spirit which raised Christ, and
sanctified you.

12. Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the
flesh. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: But if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

12, 13. By all which you may see that it is not to the Flesh that we owe our
chief respect, care and obedience, nor after the lusts of which we should live:
For it is this sinful fleshly life that causes death, and tends unto future
misery: But if by the Spirit you mortify those fleshly lusts and deeds, which
Carnal Men obey and practice, this beginning of Spiritual Life will end in
future life and happiness.

14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

14. For as many as are Principled and Ruled, by Gods Spirit and Spiritual Law
of Grace, are Gods Children: And God will not forsake, lose, or destroy his
Spiritual Children.

15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

15. For the Spirit which you have now received is not that of a Slave, which
does no good but for fear of Punishment; (and the mere Law without Grace could
give no better) but you have received the Spirit of Adoption, which gives you
an inclination of dependence, love and trust in God, much like that which a
Child has by nature to his Father, to the collation of which Child-like love,
trust and nature, the wondrous revelation of Gods love in Christ, and the free
gifts of his Grace, were Spiritually fitted.

16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God.

16. And to have this Spirit of God dwelling in us, and sanctifying us, is a
certain evidence or testimony in and with our own Spirits and Consciences, that
God does specially love us, and take us for his Children, having set his
special mark upon us: For we could not love him as a Father, and he not love us
as his Children. And this Spirit also helps our Consciences to discern and
exercise this fealing Grace, and to rejoice therein.

17. And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ: if
so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified together.

17. And if this Seal of the Spirit prove us Sons, it proves us Heirs of the
purchased Kingdom, or Heavenly Inheritance, for such are all the Sons of God;
Heirs of God, and Coheirs with Christ; but so that there is a further
condition of our possession, even that we take up the cross and follow him,
submitting to be conformed to him in his sufferings, if God call us to it, that
so by the same way we may come to be glorified together with him.

18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

18. For though we must suffer in this life, with Christ, and for his sake, and
by Gods Correction for our sins, having in my reckoning compared them with the
promised effects and end, I fully resolve the case, that they are not worthy to
be compared with the Glory which in the Saints shall be shortly manifested; nor
should they stop any Man from entertaining the Doctrine of the Cross, and
pursuing his Celestial hopes.

19. For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for the manifestation
of the sons of God.

19. For all the frame of Nature strongly tending to its own perfection, (and
God annihillateth not the Natural or Sensitive Creatures, though he dissolve
the Composition) they do as it were wait for their better state and deliverance
from the Curse caused by Man's sins, till the manifestation of the Glory of the
Sons of God; with whom, and for whom they shall have their restoration, as
with Man they fell under the Curse.

20. For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason
of him who has subjected the same in hope.

20. For so much of the world as was made for Man, and marred or cursed for
man's sake, so was made subject to this Curse and Mutation, not for its own sin,
nor by its own choice, but by the sin of Man, even by that God who subjected
its condition to the free will and state of Man, and so to suffer with and for
him, but with a purpose to restore it with him unto its integrity.

21. Because the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondege of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

21. Because the Natural and Sensitive parts of the World that were subjected
to the use of Man, and fell under a Curse by Man, shall be delivered with Man
from that Curse, and Bondage, and Corruptibility, into a state of liberty and
useful perfection suitable to the Glory of the Children of God, for whom they
were made.

22. For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travelleth in pain
together until now.

22. For it is evident, that the whole Natural and Subjective World which was
thus subjected to Man and cursed for him, is like a Woman in the pangs or
expectation of Childbirth, and groaneth till it be delivered with us at that
time of restoration.

23. And not only they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the
Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption,
to wit, the redemption of our body.

23. And if this be their case, much more do we who have the Spirit of God,
which is the Pledge, Earnest, and First-fruit of Glory, feeling our selves
burdened with sin, temptations and sufferings in the World, and yet short of
our expected Glory, feel our selves as a Woman in Travel, groaning for
deliverance, and longing for the blessed inheritance, yea even the Resurrection
of the Body it self, to which we were Adopted.

24. For we are saved by hope: But hope that is seen, is not hope; for what a
man sees, why does he yet hope for?

24. For our present state of Salvation is not in sight and full possession,
but in the hope of unseen things that are promised, and this hope will bring us
to possession. But if we had sight and possession of it, we could not be said
to live by the hopes of it, for why should we be said to hope for that which we
see and possess.

25. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.

25. But hoping for that which we never saw or possessed, we do with patience
under all delays and sufferings wait for the desired attainment and possession.

26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered.

26. And the Spirit which God has given us, helps us against our Infirmities
of Hope and Prayer; and under our sufferings and distresses; for we are unmeet
judges of our own necessities and condition, and the flesh is too prone to
desire its own ease and safety: But the Spirit of Christ in us, teaches and
inclines us to go to God as to a merciful alsufficient Father, and to pour out
our Souls complaints before him, at least with groans, when we cannot utter
them with Words, and to cry, Abba Father, and to refer our selves unto his
Wisdom, and cast our case in trust on him.

27. And he that searches the heart, knows what is the mind of the Spirit,
because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of God.

27. And God that searches the Heart, knows the meaning of those very
groans, excited by his Spirit, which we want words to express: For he knows
what his own Spirit moves us to ask, and what desires come from himself; for
as Christ is in Heaven our Intercessor with the Father, so the Holy Spirit sent
down into our Hearts, is our Intercessor with the Father and the Son; for as he
is Christ's Agent and Witness in us, to communicate Spiritual Life, Light and
Love to us, so he is a Spirit of Supplication and Adoption in us, and the
spring of all our holy desires and motions Godward, and that only which is of
him is accepted of God; for he moves us to ask what pleases God, and to
submit to his Will, and returns us the answer of our Prayers in inward
strength and consolation.

28. And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God,
to them who are called according to his purpose.

28. For we know that all the course of Gods providence, and particularly all
our sufferings for him, do by Gods overruling ordination work together for our
good, even to carry on them that love him to Salvation; who are called hereto
according to the gracious benevolent purpose of his own Will.

29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the
image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.

29. For those whom he fore-knew and purposed to glorify, he also
predestined as the way to their Glory, to be conformed to the Image of his
Son, in holiness and patient suffering, that his Church as Brethren might be
like their Head and eldest Brother.

30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate; them he also called; and whom he
called; them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

30. And those whom God thus predestinateth to be conformed to Christ, them in
time he effectually called to repent and believe in Christ; and those whom he
thus called, and made true Christians, he justified, both making them just by
pardoning their sin, and giving them his Indwelling Spirit of love and
Holiness, and accounting them just, for the merits of Christ; and those whom he
thus justifies, he will glorify with Christ.

31. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be
against us?

31. What then shall we say, when we consider all this, but with joyful
thankfulness conclude, that God is for his Saints, their Father and Protector,
and therefore they have no cause to fear any that are against them, how great,
or many, or strong soever; that is, not fear their power, so be it we take heed
that they draw us not to sin.

32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things?

32. He that spared not his own Son, not thinking him too precious a gist, but
delivered him up to suffer as a Sacrifice to procure the pardon of sin and
salvation, to be given to all by a Conditional Covenant, of faith and
acceptance, and actually to pardon and save all true Believers, that accept
him, how can it be that he should think any thing else which we need too good
for us, and not freely give all other things with Christ to us that believingly
accept him. See, 1 John 5.11, 12. and Joh. 1.11, 12.

33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies:

33. Of how little moment is it what erroneous and malignant Men lay to the
charge of God's Elect (accusing them as breakers of their Laws) whilst God
himself does justify them?

34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession
for us.

34. What, or who is he that condemns those whom Almighty God does justify?
What is the Sentence of a Worm, a Sinner, and a blinded Enemy to be set against
Gods Sentence? It is Christ that died for our sins, to deliver us from the Law
and Curse, that justifies Believers here on Earth; yea, I say more to our
consolation, It is Christ that is risen again, and advanced in Glory, Head over
all things to his Church, who effectually intercedeth for us, and will finally
justify us as our judge.

35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?

35. And when God by such an incomprehensible Miracle of mercy, declared such
unspeakable love to us in Christ, who or what can be supposed to have power, to
dissolve this bond of mutual love; viz. to separate us from Gods love to us,
and our thankful return of love to him? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or
Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword, or any thing that Men can do; which
are little matters, and all work to our good, and none of them signify or
cause Gods forsaking us, nor shall cause us to forsake him.

36. (As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are
accounted as sheep to the slaughter)

36. We may say as the Psalmist does, 44.22. For thy sake we are killed all the
day long, etc.

37. Nay in all these things we are more than conquerours, through him that
loved us.

37. Yea, all these are but the occasions of our triumph, when we overcome them
all as they are temptations. It were not so much to us to conquer all our
Enemies and Persecutors in fight, as it is by Faith and Patience to overcome
their persecutions.

38, 39. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

38, 39. For I am persuaded that the band of love between God and all true
Confirmed Christians, made in and by our Mediator Christ, is so strong and sure
that it will never be dissolved by the terrors of the Death, or the Love of
this Life, nor by malignant Spirits, by Principalities or Powers, Satan or his
instruments of strength and violence, by what now does, or what hereafter shall
befall us, or assault us; by any things above us, or beneath us, exaltation or
dejection, nor by the power of any Creature: Nothing has power to cause God to
cease loving us, or us to cease loving God.

ANNOTATIONS.
I. THe Controversies raised about the first fourteen Verses, of the fulfilling
of the Righteousness of the Law; of the Carnal and Spiritual state of Mind,
etc. are sufficiently decided in the Paraphrase.

II. So is that of the Spirit of Bondage and Adoption, and that of the Witness
of the Spirit with our Spirits, etc. in the Paraphrase on the 15 and 16 Verses.

III. His Exposition of the 19, 20, 21, and 22 Verses, which feigneth them to
speak of the Heathen World, has so many and palpable Violences, that I think
it not worth the labor to give a particular Confutation of them. But if many
things about the Creatures Restoration be yet unknown and unrevealed to us, it
follows not, that therefore it is unknown whether a Restoration there shall
be. The Heavens must contain Christ till the time of this Restoration. And his
Violence is as gross about the Words of St. Peter, That we look for a new
Heaven and a new Earth, in which dwells Righteousness. What God does with the
Souls of Brutes when they die hence, may be unknown to us, and yet their
Restoration known. It is not hard, by the most probable Principles of
Philosophy, to shame their Opinion who confidently say, that their Souls are no
Spiritual Substances, but evanid Accidents, Qualities, or Motions. And as they
may easily be proved Substances, that have an Essential Power of Vital Action,
Perception, and Appetite; so it is most improbable that God annihilateth them,
or changes their essential Form or Nature. But whether they are continued:
Individuate, or only* in one or more universal Form; and if Individuate,
whither or to what use God disposes of them, and what alteration there will be
in the State of Restoration, Mortals know not.

IV. Those that say, That by the Spirit that helps our infirmities, ver. 26.
is meant Christ by his Spirit praying for us in Heaven, can neither make it
agree with the Context, nor prove that the Spirit groaneth in Heaven, or is
called our Intercessour there, but within us.

V. They that feign the 28 Verse to say, That all the Sins of Believers shall
work for their good, dangerously pervert the Text: It Is contrary to the
Context, and to the tenor of all the Scripture, and the Wisdom and Holiness of
God, and the Safety of Believers, to feign God to promise them, that how much
soever they sin, they shall be Gainers by it; when he still uses the clean
contrary means to save them from it, even by his Threatenings. And it is contrary
to the very Terms of the Text, [ To them that love God, etc.] which implies,
that the defects or decay of their Love to God is not for their good. And it is
contrary to common Experience, which tells us, that many Christians by Sin lose
some degrees of Love to God, and other Grace, and die worse than once they
were, (and so have a less degree of Glory.) And is this for their good* Yea,
all Men die in some Sin of Omission, as in a culpable defect of some due Act or
Degree of Faith, Hope, Love, Joy, Patience, of which they have no more time to
repent. And what good does that do them? Indeed some Sin to some Men God makes
an Occasion of good, and an Object of Repentance, etc. But as an Occasion is
not a Cause, and to be an Object of Repentance i^ to be a Duty, and not a Sin;
so even this much is none of the meaning of this Promise, which speaks but of
Sufferings, or at most of God's Providential Works, of which Sin is none.

VI. The Controversies about Predestination, raised from the 28 and 29 Verses,
might be ended by the Text it self, if we could be content to know no more than
God does teach us, and to be no wiser than St. Paul was.

1. He teaches us, That there are some called according to God's purpose, and
foreknown by him, that is, to be such as he will use as is after mentioned: He
knows them to be those whom he purposes to call and save. But Paul was not
so presumptuous and profane, as to dispute, How God foreknoweth them, or why he
purposes to call them rather than others.

2. And whereas profane Men do foolishly say, If God decree and foreknow my
Salvation, I shall be saved whatever I do; and if he do not, I shall not: St.
Paul tells us, That those whom God purposes or decrees to save, he
predestinateth to be conformed to the Image of his Son, even to the Means, as
well as to the End. So that, to say, That God does predestinate Men to
Salvation, and not to Holiness of Heart and Life, is to contradict God's
Doctrine of Predestination. As God does decree how long we shall live, and
withal that we shall live by Meat and Drink; so he decrees that we shall be
saved, and that by Faith and sincere Obedience. And sure they know not what
they say, who call this Doctrine of Election, Licentious. Does it encourage Men
to Impenitency or Disobedience, to tell them, that God does predestinate Men to
repent, and obey, and be saved? Will it tempt Men to live after the Flesh, in
Worldliness, or Sensuality, to believe that God has decreed to make them to
live after the Spirit, and to mortify the Deeds of the Flesh, and to avoid
such Sins?

3. And Paul tells us, That this Chain of Causes is all decreed of God, from
the first to the last; and therefore that it is God's Purpose which secureth
the Event of our Glorification. And it is strange that any should think, that
God should undertake so great a Work as Man's Redemption, and not effectually
secure the Success by his own Will and Wisdom, but leave all to the lubricous
Will of Man.

4. But the Apostle tells us of no such Decrees of the Causes of Men's
Damnation. God causes and gives Grace, and foreknoweth that which he will
give: But he does not cause or give Men Sin, nor necessitate any to commit it;
and therefore decrees not to cause it, nor foreknoweth it as his own Work, but
as Man's. So that Election and Non-election, or Reprobation, are not of the same
kind, degree, and order.

VII. The sense of the Terms of the 30 Verse, Expositors much differ about; but
there is no great Doctrinal Controversy depending on it. 1. It is doubted,
whether by [ Calling] here be meant only Effectual Calling and Conversion, or
only General Calling antecedent to its Efficacy. But it is confessed, that both
these are asserted in the Scripture. 2. It is doubted, why Sanctification is
omitted, or where it is included: But it is agreed, that it is one Link of the
Chain of the Causes of Salvation. 3. And so it is doubted, what the Word [
Justifie] does mean: But the thing is agreed on. 4. And the greatest doubt is,
whether every one of these Causes will infer the rest, or only the connection of
all the foregoing will infer that which follows.

1. There is small reason to doubt, but that by [ Calling] is meant [ Effectual
Calling]: Else it would neither prove Predestination, nor infer Justification.

2. Sanctification is a Word which signifies many Acts. As it signifies the
Gift of our first Faith and Repentance, and our Covenant-devotedness to God in
Baptism, it is the same with Effectual Vocation, Regeneration, and Conversion.
But as it signifies the after-gift of the In-dwelling Spirit, to habituate the
Soul with fixed Holiness and Love, and the Practice of these, it follows
Vocation, at least in order of Nature.

3 Justification sometime signifies Making us righteous; sometime, accounting
us righteous; sometime, by Apology, maintaining us to be righteous; sometime,
by Judicial Sentence, pronoun^ing us righteous; sometime, executively, using us
as righteous; usually, many of these together, all the rest being implied. It
is certain, that God makes Men righteous, before he account or judge them
righteous. Now to make a Man righteous (and justifiable in Judgment) all these
concur. 1. The Merit of Christ's Righteousness, as the deserving Matter and
Cause. 2. The Act of the New Covenant, giving him a part in Christ, and with
him Pardon of Sin, and Right to the Spirit of Grace, and unto Glory. 3. The
Gift of Faith and Repentance, that Christ and his further Grace may be ours;
and for continuance, the holy Habits and Acts of Sancti^^cation. And seeing all
sound Expositors confess (with Beza) that at least three Texts by Justification
mean or include Sanctification, we have reason to judge, that part of
Sanctification is here included in Vocation, and part in Justification, and,
some think, the Triumphant part in Glorification. And certainly this infers
no unsound Doctrine.

4. Augustine thought, that the Links of this are separable, unless you include
the first as the Qualification of all the rest, by way of distinction; and that
the meaning is, That [God will call all the Predestinate or Elect, and will
justify all the Predestinate that are called, and will glorify all the
Justified that are predestinate and called]; but that there are some justified
and sanctified, that were not predestinate, nor shall be glorified, but fall
away. What the s^nse of the Ancient Fathers was about Perseverance, Ger.
Vossius has so truly opened in his Theses, that I may thither refer the
Inquisitive. My own sense of it I have opened in my Catholic Theology; and
it is too long a Case, to be handled here. But I think no confirmed Christian
does totally and finally fall away; and that the rest of the Doubt should not
be thought enough to break the Love and Peace of Christians.

VIII. As to the Doubt, Whether the 38 and 39 Verses speak [ of God's Love to
us, or ours to him,] as they are in themselves inseparable, so I think that the
Context gives us Reason to think that it is both, even the Bond of mutual Love
which is here spoken of. All the doubt is, Whether it be spoken of every true
Christian, or only of the Elect and Confirmed; of which before.

CHAP. IX.
1. I Say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness
in the holy Ghost: 2. That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my
heart. 3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh,

1, 2, 3. I am so far from saying all that I have said in contempt of the Jews,
or triumph over them in their misery, that I protest as a Christian, I lie not,
my Conscience bearing me witness, which is illuminated, and actuated by the
Holy Ghost, that in the midst of all my rejoicing in Christ, I have great
heaviness and continual sorrow of Heart, for the sin and misery of the Jews,
who are my Brethren and Kinsmen according to the Flesh; yea, so great, that
were my own misery a means by which God would save their Nation, I could
consent to be deprived of my part of blessedness with Christ, and used as a
cursed Man, for their Conversion, that all the Grace foredescribed might be
theirs. (I say not that I do wish it, for it is no means to any such end; but
that I could wish it, if God had made it such a means: Because the happiness of
a Nation, and the Glory of Gods Grace in so many, is much better than my single
welfare, and if God had set them in competition, the best should have been
preferred.

4. Who are Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises:
5. Whose are the fathers, and out of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came,
who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen.

4, 5. Who are the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, adopted of God to be
to him a Holy Nation above all People of the Earth; who had the Ark and Temple,
where God often showed his presence by a Glory; and with whom the Covenant of
Peculiarity was made and often renewed: To whom God gave the Law from Heaven, and
appointed all the Services or Worship therein commanded, and gave them the
Promise of the Messiah and his Grace and Kingdom (though now they undersand
them not:) The beloved Fathers were their Ancestors, for whose sakes they were
first taken into this Covenant of Peculiarity; and (which is their greater
Honor) Christ is of their Stock and Nation according to the Flesh, in whom all
Nations of the Earth are blessed, being himself over all, God blessed for ever.
These are their great and excellent Privileges.

6. Not as though the word of God has taken none effect: for they are not all
Israel that are of Israel; 7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are
they all children; but in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

6, 7. But what, does it follow, that all Gods Promises to the Jews of a
Savior had taken no effect, because the most of them believe not? for many
thousands of them are converted, besides the Gentiles: And it is not all that
were the Offspring of Jacob, that God ever promised to save: but as he made
the Promises to Abraham and Isaac, and yet took not Ishmael nor Esau into the
state of Peculiarity, so he may distinguish of the Seed of their posterity, as
well as he did of theirs; without breaking his Promise to them. They are not
all the Children of the Promise of Life, that are Abraham's natural Seed:
Isaac's Seed had the Pecularity; and so have now the believing part.

8. That is, They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God; but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.

8. That is, They which are the Children of the Flesh, are not as such the
Children of God, but only those to whom he made the special promise of Grace
and Glory; these are the seed of Promise indeed.

9. For this is the word of promise, At this time will I come, and Sarah shall
have a son. 10. And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one,
even by our father Isaac,

9, 10. For the Promise plainly distinguishes of the Natural Seed, and is made
to Sarah's Son, and not to Hagar's; to Jacob, and not to Esau; and therefore,
it is not to the Natural Seed as such, and to them all.

11. (For the children being not yet born, nor having done any good or evil,
that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of
him that calls) 12. It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.

11, 13. For before the Children were born, or had done good or evil, (that
God's purpose might stand, by which he chose or preferred one before the other,
not because of the difference of their works, but by the absolute Will of him
that is the Lord of all, and may freely distribute his bounty as he please,) it
was said to her, The elder shall serve the younger, (as expressing Gods
differencing power and purpose.)

13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

13. As the Prophet Malachi 1, 2, 3. says of the Edomites and the Israelites
long after, Jacob and his Israelites I have loved, and chosen into the Covenant
of Peculiarity; but the Idumean Posterity of Esau; I have rejected out of that
Privilege of Peculiarity, and have exposed their Country to waste and ruin;
even as God preferred the Person of Jacob before Esau's, who was the
Firstborn, and was rejected from the Birthright and Peculiarity:

14. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid.

14. But what, does it hence follow, that God is unjust, for making such an
unmerited difference? Not at all.

15. For he says unto Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and
I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.

15. For as he says by Moses, I will have mercy and compassion on whom I will;
so, no doubt, but he may and does as he pleases, without giving us any reason
but his Will, give his free gifts, with difference and disproportion, to some
that deserve them not, passing by others: And if he call the undeserving
Gentiles, our Eye must not be evil because he is good.

16. So then, it is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God
that shows metcy.

16. So that the reason why the sinful Gentiles, (or any unworthy sinner) is
called, while the Jews and other sinners are lest in their chosen unbelief and
sin, it is not because that these sinful Gentiles (or such others) were first
more willing, or more worthy by their previous seeking of Grace, but from Gods
free differencing Grace and Mercy.

17. For the scripture says unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my Name might be
declared throughout all the earth.

17. And that he gives not his free mercies equally to all, is proved in his
words to Pharaoh. As if he had said, I well foreknew all thy sin and obstinacy,
but I will serve the Honor of my Name by it all; for I have raised thee, and
made thee King with this intent, to manifest my power in triumphing over all
thy Rebellion, and to proclaim the fame of my works against thee, through all
the Earth.

18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens.

18. So that, though as Rector he do equal Justice unto all, according to his
Laws* and their Works, yet he has two other Relations, even as our Lord or
Owner, and as Benefactor, and according to these he is a free distributer of
his undeserved Mercies, and may do with his own as he lift, and gives them
arbitrarily in great inequality. He gives his Mercy to whom and in what degree
he please; and whom he will he leaves in their wilful sin, and even
occasioneth (though he cause it not) their obduration, by such mercies and
providential dispensations as he knows they will abuse to harden themselves in
sin.

19. Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet find fault? for who has
resisted his will?

19. It Is like you will say, If this he so, why does he find fault with Men,
that want but what he will not give them, and are not what he will not make
them? Does not all this proceed according to his Will? If he would give them
all his Grace, they would be better.

20. Nay but, O man, who art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing
formed say to him that forms it, Why have thou made me thus?

20. (Gods Laws and Governing Will which make Man's Duty, is resisted by sin)
but as to the Disposing and Donative Will of God as our Owner and free
Benefactor, can Man that is a dark and sinful Worm, think himself meet to call
God to account, and demand a reason of his free Gifts, why he gives them to
this Man and not to another? Dare thou thus dispute with God, and ask a
reason of his Will, which is absolute, and the spring and reason of all created
good. Has the unformed Matter an antecedent right to any subsequent shape or
use? and may it say, Why have thou made me thus, and not in a nobler form for
higher use?

21. Has not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor?

21. The power that a Potter has over his Clay, is incomparably less than God
has over Man: and yet none accuses him for making one Vessel to serve at the
Table, and another for a baser use. As God had done thee no wrong if he had
made thee a Dog or a Toad, and not a Man; so he does thee none, if he give thee
not that undeserved abused Grace which he freely gives to others that as
little deserve it.

22. What if God willing to show hi wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction?

22. Shall Man accuse God, because he resolves to show his punishing Justice
and Power on those self-hardening, wilful sinners, who made themselves Vessels
of wrath, and fitted to destruction, when he has in long patience and
forbearance endured them, while they abused Mercy?

23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of
mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory.

23. And because he will make known the riches of his Glory in the felicity of
those whom he had freely made Vessels of Mercy, and had by Grace prepared them
for Glory.

24. Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the
Gentiles.

24. I mean, on all us that are true Christians, both Jews and Gentiles,
effctually called by his free Grace.

25. As he says also in Osee, I will call them my people which were not my
people, and her beloved which was not beloved.

25. Which purpose of free Mercy to undeserving sinners he expresses in Hosea
2.23. saying, I will call them, etc.

26. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them,
Ye are not my people, there shall they be called the children of the living God.

26. And as the words, Hos. 1.10. show, that God will call even unworthy
outcasts, and make them his People by free Grace.

27. Esaias also cries concerning Israel, Though the number of the children of
Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved.

27. Which differencing Grace, God expresses even of the Israelites, Isa.
10.32, 33. that of all their number, it is but a remnant that shall escape his
Judgment, and return from captivity, signifying the like difference as to their
Salvation by the Faith of Christ.

28. For he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness, because a
short work will the Lord make on the earth.

28. Or the Consumption decreed shall overflow in Justice; for the Lord God of
Hosts shall make a Consumption, even determined in the midst of all the Land,
etc.

29. And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed,
we had been as Sodom, and made like to Gomorrah.

29. And that differencing mercy decreed to save a little remnant; the other
words of Isay prove, Except the Lord, etc.

30. What shall we say then? That the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness, have attained righteousness, even the righteousness which is of
faith:

30. What shall we say then to this mystery of Grace (the calling of the
Gentile world, and the abscission of the most of the present Nation of the
Jews) which so much offends them? That the Gentiles, who lived in darkness
and unrighteousness, have attained Righteousness (in reality and imputation)
even that which is by Faith in Christ?

31. But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness.

31. But Israel, who had Gods own Righteous Law, and trusted to be justified by
keeping it, have not understood the True Law, and terms of Justification, nor
have attained that Justifying Righteousness to which their Law did point them.

32. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the
works of the law: for they stumbled at that stumbling-stone;

32. And wherefore have they not attained it? Because they understood not that
the Promise and Covenant of Grace was the very life and foundation, and end of
the Law, by which they should by faith have expected Justification, as Gods
free gift to True Believers; but thought it must be had by the Righteousness of
their own Works, in keeping all the Ceremonies and Precepts of that Law: For
Christ became to them a Stumbling-stone, in whom they should have believed.

33. As it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling-stone, and a rock of
offense; and whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed.

33. As it is written, Isa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Zion a Stone which many will
stumble and fall upon, though it be the precious Foundation-stone, and a Rock
that many shall be split upon, though that on which my Church is built; and
whosoever believes on him, shall not be disappointed nor ashamed of his hopes.

So that the cause why Israel is cast off, is not because God sent not his Son
and Gospel to them, nor invited them to believe, nor gave them evidence of the
Truth of Christ, which was sufficient to convince a well-disposed mind; much
less, because he hindered them from believing, or because he showed mercy to the
Gentiles; but because by error they hardened themselves against Christ, as not
answering their Carnal erroneous expectations For though God would glorify the
riches of his Grace by Jesus Christ, yet was it not his Will to reveal him in
such visible Majesty and Glory, as should of it self necessitate and force Men
to believe in him: For then Faith would have been no Work of Trial, nor fit for
a Reward, but such as the wicked and sensual might perform. But God would so
reveal his Son, as that Faith might have sufficient encouragement and help, and
yet such difficulties as might make it proper to honest Souls, and fit for a
reward; so that those that will be biassed by prejudice and worldly Interest,
will stumble and fall on the Rock which they should be built on; but to them
that sincerely trust and obey him, he might be the author of Eternal Salvation,
and be the Power and Wisdom of God.

ANNOTATIONS.
1. THis Chapter is ordinarily misunderstood, 1. Because Men observe not what
it is that Paul is proving. 2. And because they distinguish not God's Acts
which he does as an Owner and Benefactor, from those Acts of Justice which he
does as Rector to Subjects under his Laws and Covenants. 3. And because they
distinguish not the Common Law of Grace made to fallen Mankind, from the
Covenant of Peculiarity proper to the Jews.

1. Many think that Paul here gives the Reason from God's mere Will and
Reprobating Decree, why some are Unbelievers and hardened in Sin, and are not
pardoned and saved, when others are. 2. And so they think, that God pardons,
and justifies, and saves Men, without any Reason or Cause fetched from their
different Qualifications, but merely from his Will. 3. And they think, that
Esau was not only shut out from the Covenant of Peculiarity, but also from the
Commoner Covenant or Law of Grace, and was hated to Damnation, merely from the
antecedent Will of God. But contrarily,

1. It is evident, that St. Paul is but proving and justifying God's free Mercy
in calling the Gentiles, while he permitted the obstinate part of the Jews to
cut off themselves by Unbelief, and wilfully rejecting Christ.

II. And that he speaks not at all of any arbitrary Inequality in his Rewards
and Punishments, but only in his free Gifts; all Men should understand, that
God is to Man, 1. Our Owner. 2. Our Benefactor. 3. Our Rector. 1. As an Owner,
he may do with his own as he will. 2. As our Benefactor, he gives many things
antecedently to his Laws, and many things besides what he there promises. And
as a Lord and Benefactor, he distributeth his Gifts with incomprehensible
arbitrary variety; and none have cause to accuse him for giving another more
than them. He wrongs not the Stars, by not making them Suns; nor the Clouds, by
not making them Stars; nor Men, by not making them Angels; nor Beasts, in not
making them Men, nor Worms, or Toads, by making them no better. And scarce two
things in the World are like, without any dissimilitude or inequality.

But when he has made a Law, of Precepts, Prohibitions, Rewards, and
Punishments, it is his Justice equally to perform them to all, according to
their Qualifications and Titles. He pardons all Believers and none else: He
glorifieth all that are justified and sanctified, and none else: and gives the
Reason of the different Sentences, from their Qualifications and Works, Mat.
25. etc. which he does not in his Gifts, as mere Benefactor. So that he does
not say, that the Reason why some are pardoned and saved, is not in him that
wills, and him that runs; but the Reason why, of two ill-deserving Persons
or Nations, one is overcome by decreed effectual Grace, and the other has not
that Grace that so overcomes his wilful Resistance.

III. And when Paul speaks of Esau being hated, the Text alleged means no
more but that the Edomites were exposed to God's overflowing Punishments on
Earth, and that Esau was less loved than Jacob, and he and his Seed rejected
from the Covenant of Peculiarity: But as it is certain that they were under
that Law of Mercy made to Mankind in fallen Adam and Noah, so it is not said in
Scripture, that Esau was damned or void of Saving Grace.

II. As to the Hardening of Pharaoh and others, it being agreed by all sober
Christians, that God causes not Sin, we need to debate it no further, Whether
the sense be, That he denies them softning converting Grace when they have
forfeited it by wilful Resistance, and so permits them to be hardened; or,
Whether it be, that he does those good and righteous Acts which he knows they
will be wilfully hardened by, as Occasions and Objects: or both these.

Here is not the least hint, that God damneth any, or decrees so to do, merely
because he will do it, without any Reason taken from their own Deserts: Or,
that he makes some Men Sinners, or damneth them, merely as the Potter
differenceth his Vessels of Clay: But only, that when all have deserved to be
forsaken and condemned, and he gives Common Grace for their Recovery to all,
why he freely gives more, which shall be infallibly effectual, to some, rather
than to others, when those some were no better than the rest.

It Is said by some Schoolmen, That Men's Damnation is caused by Sin, but God's
Decree to damn them is not, nor has any Cause. But this must be more
distinctly answered. By God's Decree to damn Men, is meant, 1. Either the
Effects of his Will; 2. Or his Will it self; 3. Or his Will as extrinsecally
denominated from the Object correlated to it.

1. No doubt but Punishment, which is the Effect of his Will, has a
Meritorious Cause, in Man's Sin.

2. The Will of God, or his Decree, considered as in God, is nothing but his
Essence, which has no Cause; and is not in it self called a Decree to damn Men.

3. The Denomination of God's Will from its relation to the extrinsick Object,
has objective Cause, the Object qualified.

Whoever truly repents and believes, may be sure of his Justification; and
it is sinful to doubt of it on pretense that God may condemn whom he will, when
he has told whom he will not condemn: And whoever is unregenerate and ungodly,
may be sure he is unjustified, and unpardoned, and in a damnable state; for God
has assured us of this in his Word.

CHAP. X.
1. BRethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might
be saved. 2. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.

1, 2. My great desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they may be
converted and saved: And it is laudible in them that they have a Zeal of God,
and his Law and Worship; but it is frustrate, because misguided by error.

3. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God.

3. For they being ignorant of God's way of Justification and Righteousness,
intended as the end of the Law, and freely given by Grace, and fully now
revealed in the Gospel by Jesus Christ, and trusting to their own Works of the
Law as a sufficient Righteousness to justify them, have by their error
rejected Gods free gift of Justification by Faith in Christ.

4. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes.

4. For they should have understood, that the sense and use of the Law is to
lead them for Righteousness to Christ, who is its end, and prefigured in its
Sacrifices and other Types.

5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the law, That the man
which does those things shall live by them.

5. For though the Law do point Men to a better Righteousness, yet in it self
as a Law, it owneth nothing as a Righteousness sufficient to Justification, but
that which Moses thus discribeth, Lev. 18.5. The Man that does these things,
and breaks not this Law, shall live by them.

6. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise, Say not in
thy heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from
above) 7. Or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ
again from the dead.) 8. But what says it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart: that is the word of faith which we preach,

6, 7, 8. But I may describe the Righteousness which is of Faith in the Words
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. Say not in thy Heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven, (or how
can we know Gods Will, that never were in Heaven? Or who shall bring us thence
a certain Messenger of it) or, Who shall descend into the deep, (or it is hid
from us like the depths of the Sea, and who shall fetch it to our Knowledge?)
But as it says, The word is nigh thee; God has not concealed it, but sent it
from Heaven: Christ is come down to make known God and his Word; and he is
risen, and gone to intercede for us in Heaven: And he has brought his Gospel
both to our Eyes, Mouth, and Ears, and writes it by his Spirit in our Hearts.
And Moses there seems to intend such a way of Righteousness by free Grace to
the Repenting Israelites. And this is it which our Preaching fuller reveals
to you.

9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe
in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

9. That if thou confess Christ before Men, notwithstanding persecution, and
own him as Christ before the world, and believe truly and heartily that God
raised him from the dead, and thereby witnessed that he owned him, and
justified the truth of his Gospel, thou shall be saved (as well as justified.
For to justify a Man, is partly to justify his Right to Salvation.)

10. For with the heart man believes to righreousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.

10. For these two make up the Gospel terms of Life: To give up Soul and Body
to Christ; if thou believe sincerely in him with thy Heart, thou will be
accepted for his Merits by God as Righteous; and if thou constantly confess and
own him, whatever thou suffer by it from Men, by Word and Deed, in obedience
and patience, thou shall possess the Salvation to which thy Justification
initially gave thee right.

11. For the scripture says, Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed.

11. For Isa. 8.16. God has prmised us in his Word, that whoever believes on
him, and trusts him on his Promise, and practically places his hope
accordingly, shall never be disappointed and ashamed of that Hope.

12. For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same
Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.

12. For God is no respecter of persons, and saves not Men, or rejects Men,
because they are Jews or Greeks. The Law of Grace does equally pardon and
justify Jew and Gentile that truly repent and believe, and no other: He is the
same Lord over all, and is Rich in Mercy to all that call on him in Faith, (for
when he proclaimed his Name to Moses, Exodus 34. [as gracious and merciful,
forgiving iniquity transgression and sin, etc.] it was his very Nature and
Decree by which he would be known to all the World, and not only by the Jews.)

13. For whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.

13. For as it is said, Joel 2.32. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord
shall he saved; that is, of what Nation soever he be, if he truly seek God, he
will be found of him; and if he fear God and work Righteousness by Faith, he
shall be accepted of him; for he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, Heb. 11.6.

14. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how
shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without a preacher?

14. And this shows you the necessity of Preaching the Gospel; for how shall
Men seek, and worship, and call on that God and Savior in whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have never heard? And
how shall they hear, if no one tell them, or preach to them? (Even the Works of
Nature, and Providence that reveal God darkly, must be told Men by Instructors,
to make them capable of understanding them: Much more the Gospel of Christ.)

15. And how shall they preach except they be sent? As it is written, How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things?

15. And how shall Men Preach the Mysteries of Salvation, that are not called
and sent of God, by his Qualifications and Commission? for who can be such a
Light in the World, that is not taught and gifted by the Father of Lights? And
who can in Gods name proclaim the Word of Reconciliation as his Messenger, who
is not authorized by him so to do? We love glad Tidings, and welcome the
Messengers of them; and this should be the Entertainment of Christ's Apostles
and Ministers in the World, who bring the most joiful Tidings of Salvation. As
it is written, How beautiful are the Feet of them that, etc. Isa. 52.7.

16. But they have not all obeyed the Gospel: for Esaias says, Lord, who has
believed our report?

16. But you may say, Why then does not this Preaching convert more of the
Jews? This excellence of the Gospel, and the preaching of it, does not suppose
that all that have it will be converted by it: For of the Jews, Isaiah says,
Lord who has believed our Report? Few did hearken to the Prophets, Isa. 53.1.

17. So then, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

17. It is evident, that they must hear, that they may believe; and Gods Word
must be preached to them, or made known, that they may hear it.

18. But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily: for their sound went out into
all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world.

18. But is not the World excusable then in their sin, for want of preaching? I
answer, As God tells us, Psalm. 19. That the visible Works of God do Preach him,
(even his Power, Wisdom and Goodness) to all the World, which will leave it
without all just excuse; (See Romans 1.20, 21.) So Christ sent his Apostles with
a Commission to preach to all Nations; and many Nations have already heard his
Gospel.

19. But I say, Did not Israel know? First, Moses says, I will provoke you to
jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish nation will I anger you.

19. But have not the Jews had notice of the Gospel, when it was first preached
to them, and rejected by them? The very conversion of the Gentiles, receiving
that Christ whom they rejected, which is matter of envy to them, shall leave
them without excuse; as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 32.21. I will provoke you to
jealousy by, etc.

20. But Esaias is very bold, and says, I was found of them that sought me
not, I was made manifest to them that asked not after me. 21. But to Israel he
says, All day long I have stretched forth my hands to a disobedient and
gainsaying people.

20, 21. But Isaiah boldly and plainly foretells Gods calling the Gentiles by
free Grace, and seeking them that first sought not him; and his rejecting the
Jews as a People that after his long suffering did continue obstinately to
reject his Word and Grace, saying, I was found of them that sought me not, etc.
and, All days long have I streched forth, etc.

ANNOTATIONS.
1. THe 12, 13, 14, and 15 Verses are controverted by Expositors, as to the
Question, Whether they assert or deny the Salvation of any that hear not of
Christ; because (on one side) it it is said, That ever does call on the Name of
the Lord shall be saved; and the 19 th. Psalm is cited, which tell us how Gods
Works do preach him to all the World, etc. And on the other side, How shall
they hear without a Preacher? etc.

First, We must not confound the doubt of the sense of this Text, with the
doubt of the Matter, which is the Salvation of Men that hear not the Gospel: As
to the former, I have said what I thought needful in the Paraphrase, and leave
it to the judgment of the Reader.

As to the Matter, I think this much following may satisfy the sober. 1. We
must first know what Law of God such Men are under, and then how far it
justifies them. It is certain, that the World (once guilty of sin and death)
is not under the Law of Innocence, which makes Innocence the only Condition of
Life (now it is lost to all.) And it is certain, that they are neither Lawless,
or shut up as Devils in despair; but that they have duties and means of
Repentance, Recovery, Mercy, and Salvation imposed on them, which they are
bound to use for these ends in hope; and they have much forfeited Mercy given
to them all, which proves that God uses them not according to the Law of
Innocence. And it is certain, that God made to all Mankind in fallen Adam and
Noah a Law of Mercy and Grace; and that when he proclaimed his name to Moses,
Exodus 34. The Lord gracious and merciful, forgiving, etc. it was his Nature,
and his way of Governing of Mankind which he proclaimed. And so that all the
world is under a Law which offers Pardon and Life on other terms than sinless
Innocence.

2. It is certain, that the superadded Covenant of Peculiarity to the Jews, or
the preaching of the Gospel of Christ Incarnate to part of the world only,
repealed not any of the merciful Law, or Terms before given to all the World:
Christ added more Mercy, but took away none; much less so much from most of the
World: He came not to condemn the World, but to save.

3. It is certain, that all Men shall be judged according to the Law that they
were under, and obliged by, and no other.

4. It Is certain, that the Apostles themselves, though in a state of Grace,
believed not till Christ was risen, that he must die a Sacrifice for sin, rise
from the dead, ascend and intercede in Heaven, send down the eminent gift of
the Holy Ghost, call the Gentiles, gather a Catholic Church, etc. Therefore it
was not all our Articles of Faith that were necessary before Christ's coming;
but the belief of so much as was then revealed.

But, 2. What others do that hear not of Christ, in fact, who repents,
believes, and is saved, God is only fit to judge; it belongs not to us. But
we may say, that the case of Melchizedeck, Job and his Friends, and many
others, prove, that Grace and Salvation were not confined to the Jews. And that
Abraham thought that even Sodom had fifty Righteous Persons, when it was worse
than other places of the World. And he that will well read Psalm. 19. Prove. 1.
Acts 14. and 17. Romans 1, and 2. may yet receive fuller satisfaction from God.

II. About Ministers Mission, verse 15. It Is doubted whether we may hear any,
till we know that God sent them: And it is the device of the Roman Clergy, to
puzzle the ignorant, by objecting against the Mission and Ordination of
Protestant Ministers, to draw Men from hearing them as Ministers of Christ,
claiming to themselves the Peculiarity of Divine Commission and Authority, as
the only Church that have uninterrupted Succession of Canonical Ordination. But
as the Interruption of theirs is easily proved, so it is most certain, that God
has not made it an antecedent necessary thing to the belief of his Gospel, for
all Men and Women to be first so well acquianted with History, as to know what
continuance or interruption there has been in all Countries of Canonical
Ordination.

In short, 1. A Layman is not to be heard that brings the Gospel. 2. He that
wants some Circumstances of Order, necessary ordinarily to the right ordering
of the Church, may yet have all that is essential to the Ministry.

3. He that has just abilities, and mutual consent of him and a Christian
Flock that need him, has all that is essentially necessary.

4. He that is ordained by Concordant Senior Pastors of that Church, has all
that is necessary essentially to Ordination.

5. He that seems to have such Qualifications or Ordination, but has not,
but is in possession upon deceiving probability, is a Pastor to that Church, so
far that his Ministrations shall be valed to the People, though not to justify
himself from the guilt of profane usurpation.

6. The People that love their Souls must be more careful what Doctrine a
Minister preaches, than what Ordination he has.

7. In diverse cases the Magistrates Authority may serve without Ordination, and
in some the Peoples choice alone, though, where it may lawfully be had, just
and regular Ordination should not be neglected, seeing none may be himself the
sole Judge of his own call and fitness.

CHAP. XI.
1. I Say then, Has God cast away his people? God forbid: for I also am an
Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.

1. But what? do I by all this conclude, that God has broken his Covenant with
Abraham and utterly cast off the People of Israel? Not at all. For I, and all
Believing Jews, are the Seed of Abraham, not cast off.

2. God has not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not what the
scripture says to Elias? how he makes intercession to God against Israel,
saying, 3. Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and dug down thine altars,
and I am left alone, and they seek my life.

2, 3. God has among the Israelites his foreknown and chosen People: And these
he does not cast off, though he leave the rest in their Rebellion. Know ye not
what Elias thought and said of the Israelites in his time, That he was left
alone, as if they had been all Revolters.

4. But what says the answer of God unto hm? I have reserved to my self seven
thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the image of Baal.

4. But God knew of more than Elias did: He had seven thousand that were no
Idolaters.

5. Even so then at this present time also, there is a remnant according to the
election of grace.

5. So now also God has his chosen Remnant, whom his Grace has brought to
Faith in Christ.

6. And if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise grace is no more
grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace: otherwise work is no
more work.

6. And if they are chosen and made his justified People by Grace and Free Gift
for the Merits of Christ, then it cannot be by the Merit of our own Performance
of the Law. And if it be by the Merit of such Performance; deserving not Death
but Life, then it is not of mere Grace or free Gift. For what need a man
Pardon, who des^rveth not Punishment? or, to have life freely given him, which
is his due for the Merit of his Work? (For I here give you notice, that it is
no Works that I speak of and exclude, but that which excludes Free Gift and
Grace, and not that which subo^dinately obeys Grace, and does suppose it.)

7. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for: But the
election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

7. The whole Nation of the Jews have not obtained deliverance by the Messiah,
though they sought, and hoped, and waited for him: But God's Elect ones have
obtained it, and the rest miss of it, because their Sin and Prejudice blinds
them.

8. According as it is written, God has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear until this day.

8. As it is written, Isa. 29.10. Because they would not obey the Spirit of
God, that would have awakened and enlightened them, God has justly given them
up to the seduction of the Spirit of Slumber, Stupidity, and Blindness; from
whence it is no wonder that they see not and hear not to this day, being
deprived of his Spirits Illumination.

9. And David says, Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a
stumbling block, and a recompense unto them. 10. Let their eyes be darkened,
that they may not see, and bow down their back always.

9, 10. And David Prophetically prayed for such Judgments on the obstinate
Enemies of the Just, that for a Recompense of their Malice God would turn their
Comforts into Punishments, and forsake them, saying, etc.

11. I say then, Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid: But
rather through their fall salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke
them to jealousy.

11. But what? Are they utterly forsaken and cast off? And had God no better
End herein than their Destruction? No such thing. But the greater part were
permitted justly to drive away the Gospel from them to the Gentiles, that these
being converted, might after occasion their Conversion in the Universal Church.

12. Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of
them the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness?

12. And if the Gentiles have been so great Gainers by occasion of the Sin and
Fall of the Jews, how much more when they shall become Christians, will they
add to the Glory and Greatness of the Catholic Christian Church.

13. For I speak to you Gentiles; inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles,
I magnify my office.

13. I speak this to my own and the Gentiles comfort, as their Apostle, as well
as for the Jews, as improving and glorying in that my Office, that the Case of
the Jews is not wholly desperate.

14. If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and
might save some of them.

14. And that by glorying in your Faith, and hoping yet for their Conversion, I
might provoke them to emulation, and win and save more of them.

15. For if the casting away of them, be the reconciling of the world, what
shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?

15. For if the Gentiles have received the Gospel, and so are reconciled to
God, by occasion of the Jews expelling it, what a blessed State will the Church
be in, and what a Mercy like a Resurrection will it be to the Jews, when they
shall come into the Catholic Church?

16. For if the first-fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if the root be
holy, so are the branches.

16. For if God has accepted those Jews that are Believers, who are the whole
Nation but as the First Fruits to the Lump, he will accordingly accept the
Nation when they come into Christ as we have done: And as he accepted Abraham
and their believing Ancestors, he will also accept them: And if those Apostles
be honored of God as Holy, who from them are sent with the Gospel into the
World, so shall the broken Branches be when they are restored.

17. And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild
olive tree were graffed in amongst them, and with them partakest of the root
and fatness of the olive tree, 18. Boast not against the branches: but if thou
boast, thou bear not the root, but the root thee.

17, 18. The Catholic Church I compare to an Olive Tree: The Covenant of
Peculiarity is their Constituting Charter: It was made first with Abraham the
Father of the Jews, and next, of all the Faithful: It was sent to all the World
by Apostles from Jude^: These two are the Root: the Jews and Gentiles are
Branches: The Jews are the first Branches, and the Gentiles the Branches of a
wild Olive here graffed in. If the Jews be cut off, boast not against them; for
the Covenant and Gospel was not first given to you (that now receive its
Benefits) but to them, and from them to you.

19. Thou will say then, The branches were broken off, that I might be graffed
in. 20. Well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by
faith. Be not high-minded, but fear.

19, 20. If thou say, That God more esteemed me than them, because he broke
them off, that I might be graffed in. Be not deceived. It was for their own
Unbelief, and by it, and not undeservedly, that they were broken off: And it is
by Faith, and not for any Worldly. Preeminence, that thou art graffed in:
Therefore be not pufft up, but fear that Sin that cut off them.

21. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed left he also spare
not thee.

21. For if God cast off them with whom he first made the Covenant of
Peculiarity, take heed of sinning as they did by Pride and Unbelief against his
Gospel, lest he also cut off thee.

22. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell,
severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness;
otherwise thou also shall be cut off.

22. Rather here reverently admire Gods Goodness and Severity. On the sinful
rejected Jews, Severity of Justice: but Mercy to thee; which shall continue, if
thou continue in the Faith, and Obedience and Gratitude him: Otherwise thou
also shall be cut off (As, alas! most of the Eastern Churches are.)

23. And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in:
for God is able to graff them in again.

23. And God has not excluded them from the Grace of the Gospel, so, as to
make their Recovery impossible. If they be converted from the Unbelief, which
God can effect, they shall be graffed into the Catholic Church.

24. For if thou were cut of the olive tree which is wild by nature, and were
graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree, how much more shall these,
which be the natural branches, be graffed into their own olive tree?

24. For if thou were cut off from the Wild Olive Tree, which was natural to
thee; and besides or above Nature, and contrary to thy Desert, wast taken into
Gods Covenant and Church; how much more will God take them in when they
believe, who were Abraham's natural Seed, and first in his Covenant?

25. For I would not, brethren, that you should be ignorant of this mystery
(lest ye should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part is happened
to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. 26. And so all Israel
shall be saved:

25, 26. For I would not have you ignorant of this Mystery of God's Providence,
lest Ignorance puff you up with false Self-conceits; That part of the Jews are
now left in this Blindness, till the Gentile Churches be advanced to an
Honorable State and Fullness: And then all the Israel of God, the true faithful
Seed of Abraham, and therein the main Body of the Jews, shall make up the
Catholic Church, and be saved from their State of Unbelief.

26. As it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall
turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

26. As Isa. 59.20. it was prophesied, That out of Sion a Savior should arise
for Israel, to turn them from iniquity.

27. For this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.

27. As he says, That his Covenant made with them is to take away their Sin.

28. As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sake: but as touching
the election, they are beloved for the fathers sakes.

28. For your Conversion they were permitted as Enemies to Christ to drive away
the Gospel from them to you: But yet God has not quite nulled his Covenant
with their Fathers, but will perform it in the Conversion of all of them that
are Elect.

29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

29. For God is not mutable, and will not for the Sin of these Men, forget his
Covenant with their Fathers, but will yet perform it in the full sense of it,
and not repent of it and null it.

30. For as you in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained
mercy through their unbelief: 31. Even so have these also now not believed,
that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.

30, 31. For as you were formerly in unbelief, and disobedient, and yet now are
converted by occasion of their Unbelief; so the unbelieving Jews shall be
brought by Mercy into the Church, by the Preaching that shall be sent from the
Gentile-Churches, and by the Power and Glory of the Church under Christian
Emperors and Governors, and by your good Example.

32. For God has concluded them all inunbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all.

32. For God in Justice and Wisdom has for a time left the main Body of the
Jews in Unbelief, as formerly he did the Gentiles, that in his time he might in
mercy call in the main Body of them into the Catholic Church, as he has done
you.

33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

33. When we think of these mysterious Providence of God (freely showing Mercy
to the Unworthy, and permitting presuming Men to miscarry, and yet making use
of their Sin for good) we should be so far from questioning God's Mercy or
Justice herein, that we should admire the depth of the Riches of his Wisdom,
whose Judgments are unsearchable, and his Counsels and Ways not to be traced,
and fitly judged of by the Wit of Man.

34. For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?
35. Or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again.

34, 35. How little know Men of the Mind of God? Nothing but what he freely
tells them. He is not guided by the Counsel of Man, nor is Man acquainted with
his secret Counsels. Who can oblige him to recompense by his Gifts, or has any
thing but what God gives him?

36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory
for ever. Amen.

36. For as all Creatures have three sorts of extrinsick Causes, viz. the
Efficient, Dirigent, and Final, God is all these; the Chief Efficient, Chief
Dirigent, and Chief Final Cause of all things: All is Of him, By him, and To
him, and he of None: He is All in All things: And as he made and does all
things for his Glory, his Glory shall for ever shine forth in all, which Angels
and Saints shall intelligently see, and praise for ever, Amen.

ANNOTATIONS.
THe great Doubt about this Chapter is, what is prophesies of the full
Conversion of the Jews. Concerning which, I shall only speak so much as is
certain, and leave the rest to the Judgment of others.

1. It is certain, that God never meant to restore the Jewish Polity under
Moses's Law; for that Law is abrogated by Christ, and so that Polity. It Is
Jewish Contradiction of Christianity to expect such a Restoration.

2. Much less will God ever confine the Church and Covenant of Peculiarity to
the Jewish Nation, and take it from the Gentiles, and cease Catholicism.

3. Nor will God restore and confine the Jews to their ancient Country in
Palestine; which being such a Country of Wales, now barren, and about half as
big as England, would be far from making them a People of eminent Glory in the
World, but rather contemptible in that respect.

4. Nor has God promised to make the Jews Lords and Rulers over the rest of
the Nations of the Earth, as the Carnal sort of them did expect.

5. Therefore no other calling of the Jews can be expected, but that they
become Parts of the Catholick-Church.

6. It seems to me by History, that this is performed long ago, the main Body
of their Nation being turned to Christianity. To which purpose, consider these
things.

1. Myriads were converted in Judea by the Apostles.

2. In all other Countries of the Roman Empire, the scattered Jews had
Synagogues, to which the Apostles first Preached, and where they first gathered
the Rudiments of the Christian Churches.

3. A vast Number of the unbelieving Jews were destroyed by Vespasian and
Titus, when Jerusalem was besieged and destroyed.

4. Many more Jews were then converted, when they saw God's Judgments executed
on them, and the Christians spared.

5. Vast Numbers of the remainder of the Unbelievers were destroyed by Adrian,
and the Christians spared, and many turned Christians then.

6. Since then many have been converted by Solemn Disputes, and many Jews
become eminent Doctors in the Church.

7. They were ever fond of their own Country, and therefore we may suppose,
that as many as could, lived there. And it is known, that all Conquerours use to
transplant only the Rich and Ruling Men, and leave the Multitude of the poor
Laborers to manure the Ground, that it may yield them Tribute. So did
Nebuchadnezzar: And so in England did the Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans:
They left the Vulgar to possess the Land under them, or else the Land would
have been unprofitable to them. It was the Rich and the Soldiers that they
drove into Wales; so that we are mostly of a British Offspring. Now it is
known, that in the Days of Constantine, and the following Christian Emperors,
(though no Country wholly turned Christian of a long time) Judea turned as
other Provinces did; and had their Bishops, and their Patriarch in Councils;
and proportionably rather more than in other Countries, were Christians there.
So that Judea was Christian, as other Provinces were.

CHAP. XII.
1. I Beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God, that ye present
your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service.

1. Now to make Application of all this Doctrine fore-written, I beseech you,
as you have a due sense of Christ's offering himself a Sacrifice for our Sins,
and of the great Mercy of the Gentiles Salvation by Grace, and of our
deliverance from the Burdens of the Jewish Law, those costly Sacrifices of
Beasts being abrogated by Christ, that you will resign and dedicate your selves
to God, and as a living holy Sacrifice, give up your own Bodies wholly to him,
even to the Obedience of his Commands, and to suffer what he calls you to, even
to death, which will be better than a Sacrifice of Beasts, even a reasonable,
holy, acceptable Service of God.

2. And be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing
of your mind, that you may prove what is that good, and acceptable and perfect
will of God.

2. And now you are called out of the World, and made a Peculiar People to God,
conform not your selves to the sinful Practices of the World; but be
transformed from your former Errors and Sins, by the renewing of your Minds by
Truth and Holiness; that you may know by experience the Goodness of God's Ways,
to which you are called, and the Greatness of his Love.

3. For I say, through the grace given unto me to every Man that is among you,
not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think
soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith.

3. And specially because that the proud over-valuing of Men's own
Understandings, and thinking that they know more than they do, is the common
Cause of Errors and Sins, of Censures, Divisions, and Heresies in the
Churches, I do, as an Apostle sent and taught of God, admonish and charge you
all, every one to think humbly of himself, and not to think your selves wiser
or better than you are; but with wise self-suspicion, and consciousness of your
Ignorance and great Imperfection, to think soberly of your selves, according to
truth, and to the degree of Faith and Wisdom given you of God.

4, 5. For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the
same Office; so we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one
of another.

4, 5. For as the Members of the same Body have great diversity in Number and
Office; so we, though many individual Persons, make up one Body or Church, in
Christ the Head, in whom we are united, and are related to each other as
Members of the same Body.

6. Having then gifts, differing according to the grace that is given to us,
whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith. 7. Or
ministry, let us wait on our ministering, or he that teaches on teaching.

6, 7. Seeing it pleases God to give various degrees of Gifts, according to
the dispensation of his Free Grace, and not to make all equal in Gifts or
Office, let all confine themselves to their Measure and Office, and that let
them faithfully execute: Let those that are inspired to speak as from God, by
Prediction or Instruction, speak what God has revealed to them, according to
the proportion of their Revelation and Knowledge, and no more; and not pretend
Special Revelation against the sealed Word of Faith. Let those that are called
to any Special Service for the Church, perform their own Office faithfully
therein: And let those that are called to teach, be faithful Teachers. Neglect
not your own part, and invade not others.

8. Or he that exhorts on exhortation: He that gives, let him do it with
simplicity: He that rules, with diligence: He that shows mercy, with
cheerfulness.

8. He that is to exhort Men to practice what is taught, let him do it
diligently, (for Men's corrupt Wills and Affections have need of excitation and
Persuasion, as well as their Understandings of Information.) He that gives,
(his own, or the Churches) let him do it sincerely and impartially. He that is
entrusted to govern Chruch or Family, let him do it carefully, and diligently.
He that shows Mercy to any in distress, let him do it cheerfully.

9. Let love be without dissimulation: Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that
which is good.

9. Let Christian-Love, which is the Great Duty of the Gospel, be hearty and
sincere, appearing in its Fruits, and not in barren Words alone. Be not
indifferent and cold toward Evil or Good: but avoid Evil with abhorrence, and
resolutely stick to that which is good.

10. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love: in honor,
preferring one another.

10. Love each other as Brethren, and live in the kind affectionate expression
of it, (and not as selfish, uncharitable, peevish, quarrelsom, censorious, or
persecuting Men): Be forwarder to prefer others in esteem, praise, or practice,
(according to their Worth and Rank) than to set up your selves, or seek esteem,
applause, or preferment. Strive not to be thought wisest or best or to be
highest; nor envy others.

11. Not slothful in business: Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.

11. Do not your Duties slothfully, unwillingly, and heavily; but diligently:
and serve God in all the Duties of your Places and Times, with a fervent
zealous Mind.

12. Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation, continuing instant in prayer.

12. In all your present Tribulation, rejoice in hope of promised Deliverance
and Felicity hereafter; and patiently endure it: And continue instantly to pray.

13. Distributing to the necessity of saints: Given to hospitality.

13. Freely distributing to the necessity, especially of Holy Persons; and not
living in superfluity, and shutting up your Compassion from those that are in
want: Delight to give the Needy Entertainment in your Houses, and seek them to
that end.

14. Bless them which persecute you: Bless and curse not.

14. And though the Sin of Persecution be heinous, it is God that is the
Avenger of it: Avenge not your selves in word or deed: Pray for them, and curse
them not.

15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

15. Be not like those selfish Persons, that are little affected with the Case
of any but themselves: Not like the Dividers, that affect to go cross to others
by proud Singularity: But rejoice with Rejoicers, and weep with the Weepers, as
being of the same Body, and as regarding their Case as if it were your own.

16. Be of the same mind one toward another: Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate.

16. Affect not to be odd and singular from other Christians; but to be of one
Mind and Way with them, (so it be not in Sin) and mind their Case as if it were
your own: Mind not Preferment, nor Riches and Vainglory, nor put your selves
for these into the Company and Favor of those above you: But be content with a
low Condition in the World, and go along in Society with the Lower sort.

16. Be not wise in your own conceits.

16. Have humble thoughts of your own Knowledge, and think it not greater than
it is; but be conscious of your Ignorance, and Uncertainties, and Weakness, and
rather as Doubters stay and learn, than too hastily judge and conclude.

17. Recompense to no man evil for evil.

17. If others do ill to you, do not you do ill to them, nor requite them with
Revenge.

17. Provide things honest in the sight of all men.

17. Be diligent in your outward Labors, that you may avoid base Dependence as
much as may be, and may provide for a decent Living for your selves, and help
to others.

18. If it be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men.

18. Though it is not in your power to make the Malignant, Persecutors,
Contentious, and Proud, to be peaceable toward you, nor must you purchase
Peace by sinning against God; yet see that you be peaceable toward all Men, to
the utmost of your power; that the Distance may not be your fault, but theirs,
who make Peace impossible.

19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath,
for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says the Lord.

19. Passion is so unruly, and so blinds the Judgment of selfish Men, that I
again beseech you, to avoid Self-righting by Revenge; but when Men are
wrathful, and wrong you, give place, by departing, submission, or patience; and
leave God's Work of Revenge to himself, which he will execute soon enough, and
severely enough, partly by himself, and partly by his Officers entrusted with
the Sword.

20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink:
for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head.

20. As Christ has won us by Love, so has he taught us to win our Enemies.
Love is our Nature and Duty, and that to which we would win all: And therefore
Love is the Means or Weapon by which we must overcome them; and particularly,
by such Bodily Kindness which they can value: Therefore if they hunger, feed
them; supply their Want; let not there Enmity stop your Kindness. By this means,
as Fire melts Metals, the hardest Heart may be melted: For Love kindles Love,
which Strangeness and Revenge destroys. At least, this will aggravate his
Sin, and shame him, and justify you against his Calumnies.

21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

21. Satan by your Enemies tempts you to sin: They overcome you, if you
yield, by Passion, or Revenge, or any Sin; but not, if they do but hurt your
Bodies. Therefore keep your Charity and Innocence, and you are the Conquerours:
And by your Love and Good Works overcome their Evil, as it would draw you to
sin, and as it is the Malady of their Souls, which you would overcome for them,
that they may be saved.

CHAP. XIII.
1. LEt every soul be subject unto the higher powers: For there is no power but
of God: the powers that be are ordained of God.

1. And one of the Duties that are necessary to your Peace, and required of
God, is your due Subjection to Governors: Take heed therefore of their Opinion
who think, that Christ has set us free from Humane Government: For God is the
God of Order: and as in Natural Effects he uses Natural Means, so in Politic
Government he uses Officers. I speak not of mere Strength, but of Authority,
or Right to Govern: And as subordinate Magistrates have no such Power, but what
is given them by the Supreme; so it is impossible that Supreme Rulers on Earth
can have true Authority, but what is given them by God, the Universal
Sovereign; even as impossible, as for any Creature to be what it is without a
Creator: For of him, and through him, and to him are all things. Even where you
must not obey a sinful Command, yet you must be subject still. None are
exempted from this Duty; for Government is the Ordinance of God.

2. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God,
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

2. Whoever therefore will not be subject to Humane Government, but resists
True Authority, resists a needful Ordinance of God, and deserves Punishment
from God and Man.

3. For rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil: will thou then
not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same.

3. For as God is the Ordainer of Government in general, so he has specified
their Office, as to the universally necessary part, and bound them as his
Officers to see to the Execution of his Universal Laws, as the King binds
Justices to execute his Laws: And therefore their Office and Authority received
from God, is not to be Persecutors, or a Terror to Good Works, but to punish
the Evil: For God gives no Authority against himself, or his Laws. If
therefore thou fear this Power given of God, do that which is good, and it will
further thy Encouragement and Praise. Even Heathens, by seeing to the Execution
of the Law of Nature, will promote Natural Virtue, and suppress and punish Vice.

4. For he is the minister of God to thee for good: But if thou do that which
is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain: For he is the
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

4. And let not bad Men's abuse of Government make thee think evil of the
Office: For they are but God's Servants or Officers, not authorized to destroy
and to do mischief, but to do good, even to see to the Execution of God's Laws
by their own, and to take care of the Common Welfare. But if thou do evil, fear
them; for God has not entrusted them with the Sword in vain, (much less for
mischief.) For they are God's Officers, Revengers of Sin, to execute God's
Wrath and Man's on Sinners: And so to resist them, is to resist the Officers of
God; and to honor and obey them, is to honor and obey God that has
authorized them.

5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

5. Wherefore you ought to be subject (even when you may not obey) not only
for fear of Punishment from Man, but in Conscience of your Duty to God who
ordains them.

6. For, for this cause pay you tribute also: for they are Gods ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

6. Therefore honorable Maintenance and Tribute is their due: For they are
God's Servants, whose very O^^^ce and daily Care and Labor is to do his
Service for the Common Good.

7. Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom
to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

7. I am not persuading you to own Usurpation, or to give Men that which is not
their due; not yet do I determine among several Claimers, which is the Supreme:
But that you give all their proper due; Tribute, Custom, Fear, and Honor, to
every one to whom they are due. And let not Covetousness or Disobedience hinder
you.

8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves another
has fulfilled the law.

8. Discharge your Debts, and give all Men the due which you owe them, (else
you are unjust, and rob them): Only Love we shall still owe to one another, and
shall thus owe it even while we pay it. And to pay this Debt of sincere Love,
is to fulfill all the Law to Man.

9. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall
not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet; And if
there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying,
namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

9. For all our Duty to Man is virtually comprehended in Loving them as our
selves: For a Man will not wrong the Life, the Estate, the Marriage right, the
Honor of himself, nor falsely accuse or prosecute himself, or covet from
himself, or those that he loves as himself. Bring Men once to this unfeigned
Love, and Hurtfulness, Covetousness, Fraud, False Accusation, Persecution, and
all Injustice, will cease.

10. Love works no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the fulfilling of
the law.

10. As we are not apt to hurt our selves, so true Love would not hurt others,
in their Lives, Liberties, Estates, or Good Names, (much less study to destroy
them.) Therefore Love is the virtual fulfilling of all our Duty to them.

11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep:
for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.

11. And we should increase in this careful discharge of our Duty of Love and
Justice, though in the State of Infidelity we lived in such Sins: For by this
time we should be better acquainted with our Duties, and awaked to all
conscionable performance of them, we being nearer our Reward and Salvation than
when we were first converted to the Faith; and God expects now more from us.

12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand: Let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

12. We are now got further from our former State of Darkness: We are now come
to the Daylight of Illuminating Grace, and under the Increase thereof. The
Church is growing to a more Honorable State by its Increase. Let us therefore
more resolvedly cast off all the Works of Heathenish Darkness, and, as Christ's
Soldiers, put on our Sacred Armor, and use it as in the Daylight of Grace.

13. Let us walk honestly as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.

13. Seeing we are in the Light, let us walk modestly and decently, as becomes
our Condition; not as the Heathens, in rioting and drunkenness; not in
lasciviousness, and uncleanness, and fleshly lusts; not in proud, selfish, or
covetous strife and envy.

14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh
to fulfill lusts thereof.

14. But let Christ, his Spirit and Love, his Doctrine and Example, his
Interest and Kingdom, take you up, and be to you as the Clothing which you
daily wear: And do not as Carnal Men, (whose fleshly Pleasure and Prosperity is
their choice and best) that live to the said fleshly Pleasure, and make
provision to satisfy the Carnal Will and Lust, in stead of preferring the
Heavenly Treasure.

ANNOTATIONS.
Qu. I. WHat is meant here by Powers? Ans. Not mere Strength, but Authority or
Right to Govern. It is not (...), but (...): A Usurpers Strength may be
resisted; but Rightful Power or Authority may not.

Qu. II. Does St. Paul determine here either of the Species or Individually,
who it is that has the Highest Power? Ans. Not at all. In those Ages, and long
after, sometime the Senate claimed the Supremacy wholly, and sometime a part of
it; sometime they pretended to make Emperors, and some Emperors yielded them
more than others: But whether the Senate or the Emperor were the Highest
Power, or the Supremacy in both conjunct, or which de specie was most just,
Paul medleth not.

Qu. How then would he have the Christians know whom to obey? Ans. He leaves
that to be known by its proper Evidence, and not by Divine Revelation by him.

Qu. III. Is no Power to do wrong ordained of God? Or is all such ordained by
him? Ans. Power here being Right to Govern, no Man has Right to do Wrong,
that is a Contradiction: But God has ordained that Right which may be abused to
do Wrong, and yet not resisted.

Qu. IV. What Is meant by Subjection? Ans. A State of Consent and Obligation to
obey. Obedience is the Practice of Subjection.

Qu. V. Has the Universal [every Soul] no Exception? Ans. The Higher Powers
themselves are excepted: And neither Foreigners, nor those that have no
Governors, are bound to be subject to other Princes: It is only their own
Subjects that are meant. And the Pope could have no pretense to except his
Clergy, if he did not feign himself to be the Highest Power over them, and
above their Kings and States?

Qu. VI. Is Obedience to go as far as Subjection? Ans. No: We must not obey any
by disobeying God: But yet we must continue Subjection and Due honor to them,
and not deny them their due, because we must not give them more by Sin.

Qu. What then are the Limits of our Obedience to Men? Ans. 1. Materially, we
must not obey any by Sin, nor yet against the Common Good, to do more hurt than
good, when they command without due Power or Right. 2. As to formal Obedience,
(which is to act by the Obligation of their Authority) the Limits of their
Power are the Limits of that Obligation and Obedience.

Qu. What are the Limits of their Power? Ans. In general, they have no more
from God than he gives them 1. They have no Power against any of his Laws, of
Nature or Scripture, nor against his Kingdom, or himself. 2. They have no Right
or Power to overthrow Personal, or Family, or Church Government; nor to deprive
any of any thing which God has given them, without forfeiture or Consent,
explicit or implicit; nor to destroy the Common Good.

2. Therefore that Propriety which God has given Man as Man, (in Life, and
Limbs, and the use of his Faculties for his Welfare and his Duty to God, and
his Wife and Children) are such objective Limitations of this Power, that no
Man has Right to take them from any, but on Forfeiture, or valid Consent.

Qu. VII. How far is all Power of God, and how far of Men? Ans. 1. It is of
God's Ordination in Nature, That there be Government and Subjection in general.
2. And the Specification is so far of God, that he has made them his Officers:
1. To promote Obedience to his own Law: 2. For his Glory, and the Common Good.
So that no People can make a Power that shall not have Right to promote God's
Law; 2. or that shall destroy the Common Good. 3. God's Providence does so
manage the Affairs of the World, as shall point out the Man or Families that
the People should accept of first while free, as qualified by Strength, Wisdom
and Goodness, for Authority. 4. Monarchy and Aristocracy in specie are both of
Divine Allowance.

2. But it is of Men, 1. Which of these sorts (Monarchy, or Aristocracy, or
Mixed) shall by a Free People be chosen^ 2. And who (by such a Free People)
shall be chosen for the Persons or Families. 3. And what degree of Power they
shall have over their Proprieties (which are antecedent to Regiment) in
undetermined Cases. So that Government is partly from God, and partly from Man.

Qu. VIII. By what Right does one Person or Family claim it before all others.
Ans. The foregoing Words decide this. 1. Not by mere Worth, Wit, or Virtue: For
these may be without such Authority. 2. Not by mere Strength or Conquest: For
then every Rebel, or Foreign Prince, that can conquer Kings, will have the
Right; which would tempt them to attempt such Conquest. 3. Not every Conquest
made just by some Injury; For that gives Right but to Reprisal or Damages, and
over the Injurers: And all Wars usually are on Pretense of Right. 4. Not a
Succession of Primogeniture from Noah, nor from the first founding of the
Commonwealth: This is not necessary: Nor may any rebel against all the Kings
on Earth, if they can but disprove such an uninterrupted Succession of
Primogeniture: Else Kings were dangerously exposed. 5. Nor is Revelation from
Heaven necessary to notify the Person: For who but Fanatics now pretend to
that? I know therefore no remaining Title, but Mutual Consent (free or forced)
of Persons made capable by the Providence of God, at the forming of the
Government.

Qu. IX. Are not [the Powers that be] all that have present Possession? Ans.
Yes, all that possess that Right of Government; but not all that usurp it, or
possess mere Strength.

Qu. How then? Shall all the V^lgar be made Judges of the Princes Right? Ans.
They are bound to ju^ge as far as they can know; else they could not tell whom
to obey or defend: But mis-judging will not excuse them from Guilt. And in
difficult Cases, Appearance and Probability must serve them that can have no
more. And Submission and Patience under Usurpers, is not Subjection and Consent.

Qu. X. What is meant by Resistance? Ans. Not only Fighting against them, but
all that is contrary to Subjection and due Obedience: But most eminently
Libertinism, which pretends, that God has freed Christians from Subjection.

Qu. XI. How does the Description verse 3. agree with Heathens and Persecutors?
Are they none of God's Ministers who are a Terror to Good Works? Ans. If they
are not in the general Course of their Government for Virtue, and against Vice,
and for the Common Good, they want the Essence of the Office. But they that are
a Terror to some particular Good Works, not essential to the End of the Office,
and that through Error, may yet be against Vice, and for Goodness, in the
main. And a Heathen may execute the Law of Nature, and, so far be for the
Common Good. But Persecuting the Just is no exercise of the Divine Ministry or
Power.

Qu. XI. Verse 5. How is Conscience bound by Man's Laws? Ans. All Men must be
conscious of God's Obligations on them, to obey the Just Laws of Men.

Qu. XII. Verse 6, 7. May we give none mere Tribute, Custom, Fear, or Honor,
than their due? And are all Judges of the Princes due? Ans. All is not due that
may be claimed: Materially Men may, for their own Safety and just Ends, give
Rulers or others more than their due, or which they have right to: But as
formal Obedience or Justice we are not bound to give any one more than his due.
And of this we are Discerners, though not deciding Public Judges: But
mis-judging will excuse no Injury.

Qu. XIII. What sort of Debt is sinful? Verse 8. Ans. It is Injustice not to
give every Man his due, if we are able. And to promise or borrow what we know
we cannot pay, or when we acquaint not the Lender with the weakness and
doubtfulness of our Estate, that the hazard may be by his own consent, is to
defraud him, and is a Stealing of one of the worst sorts.

Qu. XIV. Verse 13. When is Provision for the Flesh unlawful? Ans. When it is
sought more to satisfy its Appetite, or Lust, or inordinate Desires, than to
strengthen and fit us (and others) for our Duty to God and Man.

CHAP. XIV.
1. HIm that is weak in the faith receive you: but not to doubtful disputations.

1. And as your subjection to Government is necessary to a life of Christian
Love and Concord, so also is the mutual forbearance and reception of such
brethren, as are weak in the Faith, and differ in disputable tolerable points.
Therefore see that you receive such to your Love and Communion, without
searching their Opinons, and racking them by doubtful disputations, about the
points wherein they differ.

2. For one believes that he may eat all things: another who is weak eats
herbs.

2. For instance, one truly believes that all meats are now lawful; another
either thinks that he should not live on the Life and Flesh of his fellow
Creatures, or that he should at least abstain from that which by the Law of
Moses was forbidden: This is his weakness.

3. Let not him that eats despise him that eats not: and let not him which
eats not judge him that eats: for God has received him.

3. Let not him that understands, that eating all things is lawful, set at
naught or vilify him (as a humorous, scrupulous fool) who is of another
opinion and thinks it unlawful to eat flesh, (as many are too apt to do) and
let not him that dare not eat such Flesh or Meat forbidden by Moses's Law, take
him for an ungodly sinner that does otherwise, nor separate from him as
profane: For God that is most holy, and hates all sin, yet receives both
these sorts; and therefore so must you, if you will Please God.

4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? To his own master he
stands or falls: Yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him
stand.

4. Do thou know thy self while thou so judge others? Who art thou, a
sinful man, that thou presumest to judge and condemn Gods Servants? It is his
Sentence and not thine to which they shall stand or fall, as justified or
condemned: and these differences shall not hinder God's acceptance of him and
his Salvation: for God that is just and merciful can justify, confirm, and
save him.

5. One man esteems one day above another: another esteemerh every day alike:
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

5. So one Man makes Conscience to keep the Jewish Feasts and Fasts: Another
knows that Christ has abrogated them. Let every one labor as well as he can
to know God's Will, and then be true to his upright Conscience; as knowing that
he may not in these things follow the judgment of others against his own, which
he thinks is according to the mind of God, whom he intends herein to obey.

6. He that regards a day, regards it unto the Lord, and he that regards
not the day, to the Lord be does not regard it: He that eats eats to the
Lord, for he gives God thanks, and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats
not, and gives God thanks.

6. He that makes Conscience to keep such Days, and not so to eat, he
intends it as an Act of Obedience to God; and so does he that is contrarily
minded; and both of them pray for Gods acceptance, and give him thanks: And
dare you for such things discourage or reject Men, that as they are able study
to please God: Is pleasing God so light in your esteem.

7. For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself.

7. For we are all convinced that we are not our own, and therefore may not do
what we list our selves, and fit our practice to carnal self-interests, but to
the pleasing of the Will of God; as all Men die at his Will and into his Hands,
and not their own.

8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die unto
the Lord: Whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.

8. For our lives are of God, and must be for him to do his Will, and when we
die, his Will therein is done, in which we must contentedly acquiesce: For
living and dying we are his.

9. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and living.

9. For this being the very end of Christ's dying, rising and reviving, that he
might be Lord of all both dead and living, who shall presume to take the
governing or judging power out of his Hands, and take Men's Souls and
Consciences from subjection to him, and expect to be obeyed or pleased before
him?

10. But why do thou judge thy brother? Or, why do thou set at naught thy
brother? For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

10. Why then does one Party call their Brethren sinners, or profane, for not
being against such lawful things as they call unlawful: And why do the other
part vilify their Brethren for Conscionable scrupling and avoiding such a
lawful thing. Do you not all know our common imperfection of Knowledge, and
that we have no authority for such Judgment or Contempt? And are you not afraid
thus to usurp the Judgment which belongs to Christ, and fear lest he will judge
you for your uncharitableness to his Servants.

11, 12. For it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give
account of himself to God.

11, 12. God has told us in his Word that he will be first obeyed and pleased
before all Men: It is he that is our supreme absolute Lord; and to him we must
all give our great account, and from him receive our final doom: And would you
wish any then to obey or humor you, when he is persuaded that it displeases
God, and would condemn him? Or will you anticipate God's Judgment, and tempt
Men out of the fear of sinning by your fallible censures or contempt?

13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather,
that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way.

13. Let not us therefore (Pastors or Neighbors) thus uncharitably judge or
use each other, for such tolerable differences in things that are done
Conscientiously as for God: But instead of this discouraging Conscience, and
the fear of sin, let this be your true Judgment, that no Man (Clergy or Lay) do
either by Command or his own practice, put a Stumbling Block, Scandal, or
occasion of sinning or hurt in his Brothers way, pretending the lawfulness of
the thing, or his own authority to impose it: Souls must not be so driven upon
sin.

14. I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean
of it self; but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean.

14. I (that am an Apostle, and therefore want not Knowledge, nor Authority to
command what should be commanded in such cases,) do know and am persuaded in
and by the Lord Jesus, that none of the Meats counted unclean and avoided by
the Jewish Christians, are unlawful in themselves, and that they mistake that
think otherwise. But it is unclean, and unlawful to him that thinks it so, (or
else Men must do that which they think God forbideth, which were formal
disobedience to him.)

15. But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not
charitably: Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died. 16. Let not
then your good be evil spoken of.

15, 16. But if by thy unnecessary practice of an indifferent lawful thing (and
much more if by thy compulsion) thy mistaken Brother be hurt and galled, and
discouraged in Religion, now thou art guilty of the great sin of
uncharitableness, when he was guilty but of a pardonable unwilling mistake: And
see to it, that thou do not thus by (the practice or urging of) thy things
indifferent destroy him for whom Christ died, by drawing or driving him to that
which to him is sin: Christ purchased Souls by a dearer price than things
indifferent. It Is good in you to know more than he, and lawful to use such
Meats as he scrupleth: But turn not your Knowledge into a scandal, and offense,
and mischief.

17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness and peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost.

17. For it is not every lawful indifferent thing, (no nor every truth or
smaller duty) which Christianity and Salvation, and right to our Love and
Communion lies on: These are not essential to the acceptable Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom: Think not so unworthily of him that came to free us from the
Mosaical Ceremonies, that he has made such things as these the necessary terms
of Love and Communion in his Church. But it is in Righteousness before God and
Man, and in the Love and Practice of Peace with all, and in the joyful sense of
the love of God and hope of Glory shed abroad on our Hearts by the Holy Ghost,
taking pleasure to help and comfort our Brethren in the way to Heaven. This is
Christianity.

18. For he that in these things serves Christ is acceptable to God and
approved of men.

18. For notwithstanding such difference in lesser things, he that is such a
one, and in these things sincerely serves Christ, is acceptable to God,
whoever censure him, despise him, or excommunicate him; and he is approved of
Wise and Charitable Men, and is one whose Life, even the Natural Conscience of
Men will secretly be forced to approve, and condemn them that condemn and
vilify him.

19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another.

19. Instead therefore of Excommunicating, Abusing or Despising one another for
such Ceremonies, or small differences as these, if we are Christians, let us
lay by these matters of contention, and earnestly pursue the things that make
for the Common Peace of all Christians, though thus differing, and the things
by which we may further each others Edification and Salvation, and not obtrude
our own Opinions, or things unnecessary, to the hurt of others, and division of
the Church.

20. For meat destroy not the work of God: All things indeed are pure; but it
is evil for that man who eats with offense.

20. Obtrude not your scrupled Meat, or Ceremonies, or small things, to the
destroying of Men's Souls by driving or drawing them to sin. All such
indifferent things are pure to the pure; but it is your sin if you use them
(much more if you impose them) to the scandal, offense, or hurt of others.

21. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby
thy brother stumbleth or is offended, or is made weak.

21. It is thy duty to forbear even Flesh and Wine when they are not necessary,
if the use of them will occasion sin or more hurt to thy Brother than good to
thee; much more to avoid obtruding thy indifferent things on him who takes them
to be sins.

22. Have thou faith? Have it to thy self before God. Happy is he that
condemns not himself in that thing which he allows.

22. Have thou more Knowledge than he, to believe those things to be lawful,
which he judges sin. Keep thy knowledge and belief to thy self, to justify
thy Judgment to God: but use it not to the hurt of others. Happy is he that
uses not his Knowledge of good and evil to his own condemnation. It Is a sad
kind of Knowledge which is used to destroy others, and condemn thy self.

23. And he that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith:
for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

23. I may well call it destroying thy Brother: For if he do the indifferent
thing, who rather thinks it to be unlawful, it tends to his damnation,
because it is sin in his Opinion and Interpretation, while be believes it to
be so, or not to be lawful. For what ever a Man does believing it to be sin,
and not believing that God allows it, is certainly a sin in him.

CHAP. XV.
WE then that are strong ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves.

1. We then (even Church Governors as well as others) that are more knowing,
(instead of driving Men of weaker understanding to go against their Consciences
in unnecessary things) ought to bear their weakness with compassion, and in
Love and Patience, and not to practice what we think lawful on pretense that we
are in the right, when it tends to their hurt (much less to force them to our
way.)

2, 3. Let every one of us please his Neighbor for his good to edification:
For even Christ pleased not himself: but as it is written, The reproaches of
them that reproached thee fell on me.

2, 3. Let every one of us (not excepting my self that am an Apostle) lay by
his own humor and self-will, and choose the way by which he may edify his
Brother, by bearing with his weakness. For even Christ to condescended and
accommodated himself to the good of others; As it is written, The reproaches,
etc. He suffered for Men's sin against God.

4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have
hope.

4. Which saying was primarily David's indeed; but all such are written in
Scripture to teach us also Patience, and imitation of such examples of Charity,
and so to confirm our hope.

5. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one
toward another according to Christ Jesus.

5. I know the danger of this selfish uncharitable humor of imposing Men's own
Opinions on all others as terms of their Communion with them, and therefore as
I have used this long and plain exhortation against it, I shall also pray for
you, that the God who is patient with the weak, and is their Comforter and
yours, will grant you so much Grace and Charity, as to make you imitators of
him, and of the Love and Condescension of Christ, and to bear with others, and
do by them, as you would be born with and used your selves.

6. That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

6. That you may with Unity and Concord hold your holy Communion for
worshipping God, without uncharitable Excommunications or Separations,
vilifying or censuring each other; which can never be expected by driving each
one to agree in small unnecessary things, or without bearing with the mistakes
and differences of one another; when all are guilty of many mistakes, and such
differences must still be expected.

7. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory
of God.

7. I conclude therefore by beseeching you, to receive one another with Love to
your Communion, and Kindness, as you would be Christian imitators of Christ,
and as you are sensible of his needful Mercy to your selves, in receiving us
that once were Enemies, and still have manifold sins and errors, to the
glorifying of God's Love and Mercy: And pretend not your Knowledge, or
Authority, or Piety against so commanding a Motive and Example.

ANNOTATIONS on the former Chapter, and this.
THe Subject of the former Chapter is handled on thus far, and here that
Chapter should have ended. He that understands the former and present State
of the Christian Churches, and the Pride and Ignorance to which Man is liable,
will easily perceive, that it was not in vain that the Spirit of God did by the
Apostle handle and decide this Case, of receiving Dissenters in tolerable
Cases into Love and Communion. The Jews were so tied up from Legislation in
God's Matters, by the knowledge of God's Prerogative in their Theocracy, that
they had less room for the Canons and Engines of Man's making to exercise their
Pride and Uncharitableness by, than the Romanists have since done. And yet the
Pharisees played their part, and by their Traditions made void the Law of God,
and preferred their Ceremonies before the weighty Matters of the Law, and would
not understand what that means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice; and
thereby did condemn the guiltless. And Christ found the Samaritans and Jews at
the Debate, Whether in this Mountain, or at Jerusalem, men ought to worship?
overlooking that Worship which is in Spirit and in Truth. And, alas! what work
have Domination, unnecessary Canons and Censures made in the Christian Churches
these 1300 years? And it is an Instance what power Blindness, and Prejudice,
and Worldly Interest have, to frustrate the plainest Decisions of God's Word,
that so full and express a Decision as these two Chapters make, (with 1 Cor.
12. and Ephesians. 4. and James 3.) has signified as little with the Dividers and
Proud, almost as if there had been no such written. And yet such Men call for a
Judge of Controversies, because of the pretended Obscurity of the Scriptures,
when nothing can be plainer than this, which they despise. They mean, that such
as they must be Judges, and God shall make the Words, if they may make the
Sense.

How great is the number that go on the two sides of Uncharitableness here
reproved; especially on that which is largeliest insisted on? One side says,
All God's Truths are precious, and none must be sold for Peace; and we must not
partake of other Men's Sins: As if our great Duty of Love, Forbearance, and
Communion, were our Sin, or a partaking of the Faults of all that we join with.
The other Side pretend, 1. That Paul only requires Forbearance in things
Indifferent, undetermined by Governors, and not after such a Command or
Determination. 2. Or, that he gives only a Temporary Rule for the present
Concord of Jews and Gentiles, till the settled Church should take a contrary
Course.

I will not here answer these at large, having done it in my Book called The
only Way of the Churches Concord: But I say, That I despair of reducing that
Man to the Truth herein, who shall continue of either of these Opinions, after
he has seriously perused the Text, and has considered, 1. That St. Paul here
uses, I think, above twenty Arguments, from Morality and common Christian
Duty, which he would not do for a mutable Case, which Bishops may change when
they will. 2 That Rome was then a famous Church, and therefore had Pastors, or
one at least; and that he writes to the whole Church, and therefore to the
Pastors: And sure he never meant, [ The Clergy shall receive such Dissenters to
Communion, and neither by Canon or Practice cast them out, till they think meet
to do otherwise, and till have made such Canons.] Paul does not so play with
Contradictions, in so long and grave a Reprehension. 3. That St. Paul often puts
himself in, as under the same Obligation with the rest: And if an Apostle
called from Heaven may not do what is here forbidden, what Bishops can pretend a
Right to do it by greater Authority or Wisdom? But they that have not known the
Way of Peace, may say something against the fullest and plainest Description of
it, and the sharpest Reproofs of God himself. But he will expound these
Chapters to their Consciences, if ever he make them Healers of his Church.

As to those that say, It is not Church Communion that Paul here speaks of; I
refer them to the plain Text, and Dr. Hammond's Annotations, which they value.
The God of Love and Peace has given Laws for Love and Peace, so strict, and
full, and clear, that all World may see, that it is not he that allows the
Canons or Censures which have so long torn the Churches.

8. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a minister of the Circumcision for the
truth of God to confirm the promises made unto the fathers. 9. And that the
Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy.

8, 9. And that you may understand my Argument from the Example of Christ, I
say, that it was his Office to reconcile both Jews and Gentiles to God, who
will receive them both: And therefore they should live as reconciled to each
other. Christ was a Mininister of God, circumcised being a Jew, and personally
exercised his Ministry among them, to perform Gods true Promises to the
Fathers: And yet his Gospel extends to the Gentiles also, that they may
glorify God with the Jews.

9. As it is written, For this cause will I confess to thee among the Gentiles,
and sing unto thy name. 10. And again he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his
people. 11. And again, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye
people. 12. And again Esaias says, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that
shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles trust.

9, 10, 11, 12. This is also prophesied, That Christ shall call and save the
Gentiles: It is written, etc.

13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye
may abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost.

13. Now that God who is our common Hope, fill you with that holy inward Joy,
and that Peace with God and one another, which are the Blessings which your
Faith does tend to, that your Hope in God may more abound, by the Seal and
Working of his Spirit.

14. And I my self also am persuaded of you my brethren, that ye also are full
of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another.

14. And though I am persuaded that you your selves are replenished with Grace,
Goodness, and Knowledge, and able to admonish one another, (and so my Letter
may seem less necessary)

15. Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you, in some
sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me of God.
16. That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering
the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable,
being sanctified by the holy Ghost.

15, 16. Yet I have written the more boldly to you, of what I found most
suitable, to put you in mind of that which I hope you know already; because God
has vouchsafed me freely the Favor and Honor, to be Christ's Minister to the
Gentiles, to minister to them the Gospel of God: And therefore I do but perform
my Office, that I may present to him the Converted and Edified Gentiles, as an
acceptable Offering, sanctified (not ceremoniously only) but by the Holy Ghost,
by whom I preach, and which is poured out on them that believe.

17. I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ, in those things
which pertain to God.

17. And in the Honor and Success of this my Office, I have just matter of
glorying and joy; not as it is a Worldly Dignity, but Spiritual in the great
things that belong to God.

18. For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ has not
wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed.

18. For I will not feign that God has done more by me than he has, but speak
the Truth of the Words and Deeds which were wrought by me, to bring the
Gentiles to believe in Christ, and obey him, and my Success herein.

19. Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the spirit of God; so
that from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the
gospel of Christ.

19. Not by mere Words, but by such Signs and Wonders by the Power of the
Spirit, as bear the proof of Gods Approbation, and were convincing Evidences to
the Hearers. So that from Jerusalem round to Illyricum I have fully preached
the Gospel of Christ.

20. Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named,
lest I should build upon another man's foundation.

20. And I specially chose to preach the Gospel, where Christ was not known,
that I might not only come after others, to finish the Work which they had
begun.

21. But as it is written, to whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and
they that have not heard shall understand.

21. Which God foretold, saying. etc.

22. For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to you; 23. But
now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire these many
years to come unto you; 24. Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I will
come to you, for I trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way
thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat filled with your company.

22, 23, 24. And by such Work I have been hindered from coming to Rome; but now
being more vacant from it here, I hope to see you as I go to Spain, and to be
brought on my way, when I have had first the comfort of your Company there.

Note, That Paul knew not how God would send him to Rome, and stop him from
going to Spain.)

25. But now I go unto Jerusalem, to minister unto the Saints.

25. Now I am going to Jerusalem, to serve Christ, in bringing his poor Saints,
which were under a Famine, such Relief as I have collected for them.

26. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain
contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem. 27. It has pleased
them verily, and their debtors they are.

26, 27. For the Christians of Macedonia and Achaia have cheerfully made a
Contribution for them, etc.

27. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things,
their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things.

27. And though they have obliged them hereby, it was but what they owed them:
For if from Jerusalem the Gospel of Salvation have been sent abroad to the
Gentiles, it is meet that they should communicate to their Wants, in the small
Matters of Bodily Relief.

28. When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this fruit,
I will come by you into Spain.

28. When I have done this, and have delivered this Fruit of the Gentiles Love
and Communion, I purpose to take you in my way to Spain.

( Note, Which God disappointed.)

29. And I am sure that when I come unto you, I shall come in the fullness of
the blessing of the gospel of Christ.

29. And I am sure that when I come to you, I shall come with such great
assistance and evidence of God's Spirit as will have great and comfortable
success among you.

30. Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the
love of the spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for
me; 31. That I may be delivered from them that do not belive in Judea; and that
my service which I have for Jerusalem may be a^ccepted of the saints.

30, 31, I beseech you for his sake whom we all serve and trust, and as the
Spirit of Love has taught you to love all Saints, that you will be very
earnest as well as I, in Prayer to God for me, that I may be preserved from the
unbelievers in Judea, and my work of relief may be so accepted as may help to
reconcile the Jews, and Gentile Christians.

( Note 1. That earnest conjunct Prayer is God's appointed means for his
Servants safety and success. 2. And that the strongest believers must so much
see and regard their dangers, as to move them earnestly to pray for
deliverance.)

32. That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be
refreshed.

32. That I may not be hindered from my desired coming to you, and comfort among
you.

Note, That when we would fain serve God in Peace, God often chooses otherwise,
that we shall serve him (as Paul there did) in Prison: And his Will is best.)

33. Now the God of peace be with you all, Amen.

33. And it is my Prayer for you, that God who is the lover and giver of Peace,
may dwell among you with the great blessing of Love, Peace and Concord. Amen.

CHAP. XVI.
1. I Commend unto you Phebe our Sister which is a servant of the church which
is at Cenchrea. 2. That ye receive her in the Lord as becomes saints, and that
ye assist her in whatsoever business she has need of you: for she has been a
succourer of many, and of my self also.

1, 2. I pray you kindly receive and assist Phebe, etc. For she has been a
great help and reliever of many Saints, and me.

3. Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus: 4. Who have for my
life laid down their own necks, unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all
the Churches of the Gentiles.

3, 4. Salute in my name Priscilla and her Husband Aquila, eminent in
helpfulness, and willing hazards, by which all the Gentiles take themselves
beholden to them, as means of my deliverance.

Note, The preserving and helping an eminent Minister, may oblige many Churches.

5. Likewise greet the Church which is in their house.

5. Salute all their Christian Family, and the Saints that use there to
assemble in Communion.

5, 6. Salute my well beloved Epenetus, who is the first fruits of Achaia unto
Christ. Greet Mary, who bestowed much labor, on us.

5, 6. Note, that God would have the good works and service of his Saints to be
valued and praised.

7. Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellow prisoners, who are
of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.

7. Noted for their sufferings and service among the Apostles.

8. Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord. 9. Salute Urbane our helper in
Christ, and Stachys my beloved. 10. Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute
them which are of Aristobulus household. 11. Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet
them that be of the household of Narcissus, which are in the Lord. 12. Salute
Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis which
labored much in the Lord. 13. Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother
and mine. 14. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the
brethren which are with them. 15. Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his
Sister, and Olympias, and all the saints which are with them.

8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15: That you may see that I mind them in particular,
salute specially these whom I have notice of.

16. Salute one another with an holy kiss. The churches of Christ salute you.

16. And exercise such love one to another, expressed by (not an immodest and
lascivious, but) an Holy Kiss (the usual expression of friendship in those
times) The Churches which have notice of my writing salute you.

17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned; and avoid them.

17. And though I seem to have ended, I will reassume my exhortation for Love
and Concord, for which I have said so much in this Epistle, Beseeching you to
mark those Men, that bring false and new Doctrines which the Apostles never
taught you, and to promote them, and for other sinful ends, draw parties, and
make Divisions and Scandals among you, avoid these, and turn from them.

18. For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

18. For tho this sort of Men pretend to be the chiefest servants of Christ,
and promoters of Truth and Holiness, and Happiness; yet it will be found, that
it is not Christ, and his Gospel, Kingdom, and Interest, which indeed they
serve: (For these are much dis^served by Divisions and Scandals.) But it is
their own Belly, and Fleshly Interest in some Carnal Design, for to escape
suffering, or prosper, or be followed and cried up as excellent Persons: And
though it is usual with them to have good Words and fair Pretenses of Wisdom
and Excellency, and to use subtle Arguments, which the Simple are much taken
with, as if they were clear Truth, and holy Zeal; yet indeed they do not edify
them, but deceive the Hearts of such ignorant undiscerning, Persons.

19. For your obedience is come abroad unto all men; I am glad therefore on
your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple
concerning evil.

19. Think not that I accuse you, but warn you: I rejoice that you are famous
for your Obedience to the Apostolical Doctrine of Faith, Love, Peace, and
Concord: But yet I know so much of the way of Dividing Seducers, and of the
Weakness and Injudiciousness of many zealous Christians, that I see cause to
warn you and all others, and to tell you, that there is need of much Wisdom to
escape this Snare, and to discern Good from Evil; and to wish that you may be
wise, as well as zealous, to all that is good; and simple or unacquainted with
Sinning and Heresies.

20. And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.

20. And to encourage you, I foretell you, That God, who would be known to us
as the God of Peace, and has promised that the Holy Seed shall break the
Serpents Head, will e're long bruise Satan under your Feet, overcoming his
Temptations, and subduing the Tyrannical and Persecuting Instruments that serve
him against the Church. That the great Riches of all Christ's Grace may be with
you, is the best Benediction and Wish that I can have for you. Amen.

21, 22. Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my
kinsmen salute you. I Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you in the Lord.
23. Gaius mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus the
chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and Quartus a brother.

21, 22, 23. The Brethren here with me salute you, etc.

24. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all, Amen.

24. From the abundance of my Affection to you, I again repeat my great
Benediction and Desire, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Amen.

25, 26. Now to him that is of power to establish you according to my gospel,
and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery
which was kept secret since the world began; but now is made manifest, and by
the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting
God, made known to all nations, for the obedience of faith; 27. To God only
wise be glory through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.

25, 26, 27. I conclude (as Christ taught us in his Prayer) with that which is
the End of all Religion, and of our Lives, and salvation it self, the
Glorifying of God. To him that can make all our Exhortations effectual, and is
of Power to establish you according to that Gospel which we preach, as it is
now a Mystery openly revealed, which was more darkly delivered from the
beginning, and not clearly understood by Jews or Gentiles; but now is openly
made manifest by Christ the Light of the World, and his Spirit in his Servants,
and by the Scriptures of the Prophets now opened, and agreeing with our Gospel,
which by Gods Command we make known to all Nations, to bring them to this
Faith, which now is the eminent and necessary Obedience to the Command and
Covenant of Grace: I say, To God only be Glory, (as the End of all our Grace
and Glory) through Jesus Christ, (whom he has ordained to be the Chief Means
and Glass in whom his Glory shall shine forth to Man) for ever. Amen.

ANNOTATIONS.
WHy do we read so much in the scriptures [ of the Obedience of Faith]? Some
would not have Faith called [ Obedience] lest that signify [ Works]. Ans. God
has not made Believers or Unbelievers Lawless, or under no Command. No Act of
Man pleases God, whicn is not Obedience to his Will. When God sends abroad
the Gospel or Word of Faith, he commands Men to hear it, believe it, and obey
it: But bare Commanding is not all; but with it he gives convincing Evidence
of its Truth, and persuading Reasons and Motives to obey it. Therefore we
translate the same Word sometime [ believing], and sometime [ being persuaded];
and the same sometime [ unbelieving], and sometime [ unpersuaded] and [
disobedient]. And Christ is called, The Author of eternal Salvation to all them
that obey him. To say, that [ Faith as it is Obedience], is the Condition or
Qualification for Salvation, but [ not for Pardon or Justification], is a
perverse Invention of Man's Brain. But cannot Men distinguish between obeying
the Law of Innocence or of Moses, and obeying the Law of Faith and Grace? yea,
and between obeying this Gospel initially by believing, repenting, and entering
into the Baptismal Covenant, (which enters into a State of Justification and
Right to Life) and the progressive Obedience of performing that Covenant to the
End, (which is necessary to Survivors for actual Glory)? Christ knew what he
said to the Jews, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom the
Father has sent: and Paul was sent to the Gent^le World to preach the
Obedience of Faith; that is, that Obedience which consists in actual Faith
performed to the Doctrine and Command of Faith; and which has the Promise of
Pardon, Grace, and Glory, freely given for the Merits of Christ.

The First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the CORINTHIANS.
The INTRODUCTION.
WHen it was that Paul wrote this Epistle, and when these Corinthians were
converted to Christianity, and what Wealth and Reputation Corinth (a Chief City
of Achaia) was then of, I pass by, as things presupposed. The Occasion of
writing this, is of nearer concern to be known, for the understanding of it. It
was not unusual with him (as to visit the Churches which he had planted, so) to
write to them for their Establishment, when he could not be present with them.
But as to the Matter and Manner of his Writing, the Case of the Corinthians was
the Occasion. 1. There were several Cases which it seems they proposed to him,
which he resolves; (as about Church Order, and Prophecy, and Prayer; about
Eating things offered to Idols; about Marriage and Separation, etc.)

2. There were many Scandals among them, which he endeavors to heal by
convincing Reproof; as, 1. ^actions and Schisms, by setting up Teachers in
envious Competition. 2. Conceitedness of more Wisdom than they had. 3.
Harkening to envious Teachers, that villified him, and defamed his Person and
Ministry. 4. The favoring of Incest and Scandal, and neglect of Discipline. 5.
Going to Law against one another, and that before Heathen Judges, when they
should have decided their Differences by amicable Arbitration. 6. Defrauding
and wronging one another. 7. Too easy Thoughts of Fornication. 8. Scandalous
eating things offered to Idols. 9. Too much backwardness to maintain the
Ministers, and the Charges of their Work. 10. Profane Disorder at their
Love Feasts and Sacrament, even to partiality, and Excess of Drink, and
scandalous Unreverence, for which God punihsed some in the Flesh. 11.
Overvaluing Gifts, and undervaluing lower Christians that wanted them; as not
enough sensible of the Necessity and Extent of Christian Unity. 12. Disorder in
their Sacred Assemblies in the Exercise of their Gifts. 13. Some erring about
and against the Resurrection, and others too much harkening to them.

These things Paul reproves, and blames them for not reforming; but
persuadeth none to separate from that Church for all these Corruptions. But by
this we may know what must be expected from young unskillful Christians; and
what Faults will be in such Churches as ours, though the Pastors were the best,
when the Churches were so faulty in the Apostles Time and Presence; and how far
they are from the Apostolic Spirit, Skill, Love, and Lenity, who would
Excommunicate all as intolerable Schismatics, who Conform not to all their
devised unnecessary Additions, and dare not subscribe their Justification or
Approbation of all their Forms. And they also that quarrel with their Teachers,
and forsake them, when Men of New Opinions and Zealous Confidence tempt them.
And they that in stead of doing their own part to reform the Corruptions of
such Church, and in Love and Tenderness to draw Sinners to Repentance, do take
the dividing lazy Course, to separate from such Churches with a few counted
the best, who will put them to least Labor and Trouble in Discipline. Paul
himself held Communion with this and other such Churches, notwithstanding all
these Faults: And we find not that he Excommunicated any one, though he require
them to do it; and decreed to do it but on one, 1 Cor. 5. and reverst that
Purpose. I find not in all the New Testament that there was ever two Christian
Churches in any one Town or City, upon any Difference among them, unless you
will call the condemned Nests of Heretics such.

CHAP. I.
1. PAul called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, and
Softhenes our Brother, 2. Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all that in
every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.

1, 2. Paul a called Apostle by the special Electing Will and Favor of God,
and Brother Sosthenes; To the Church of God at Corinth, being sanctified to God
in Christ, and so are called Saints; with all such as faithfully call on the
Name of Christ, our common Lord.

3. Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

3. I wish the great Blessings of Grace and Peace, inward and outward Welfare,
from God the Fountain of all Good, and Jesus Christ the Mediator and Donor of
all to us.

4. I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given
you by Jesus Christ. 5. That in every thing ye are enriched by him in all
utterance and in all knowledge, 6. Even as the testimony of Christ was
confirmed in you. 7. So that ye come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

4, 5, 6, 7. I am thankful for what you have received, that you abound in the
Gifts of Utterance and Knowledge, as among you the Gospel of Christ was
confirmed to you by the Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, which you saw and
received, so that you have attained to such an Eminency, as fitteth you for the
Perfection of all at the coming of Christ, which you hope and wait for.

8. Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that you may be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

8. Who will not deny you his Confirming Grace, that you may be found holy and
justifiable at that day.

9. God is faithful by whom ye were called into the fellowship of his son Jesus
Christ our Lord.

9. For God is faithful, who freely called you to the State of Communion with
and in Christ, when you were Aliens to it, and therefore will not fail you when
you are called and reconciled.

10. Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye
be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. 11.
For it has been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them which are of the
house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you.

10, 11. But notwithstanding all your Gifts, I find cause to beseech you, even
by the Authority and precious Name of Christ, that you will take heed of
Divisions, Sidings, and Contentions, and be as one in Mind and Judgment. For I
have been credibly told of your Contentions, etc.

Note, 1. That Churches and Persons of eminent Gifts may be liable to sinful
Divisions and Strife. 2. That Unity and Concord must improve all our Gifts, if
we would have them profit our selves and others. 3. Therefore it must be in the
Necessary things that we must unite, and be of the same Mind and Judgment, and
not in things Doubtful and Unnecessary: else it would be as vain, as to beseech
them to be all Men of Learning or highest Understanding.

12. Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ.

12. I hear that you name your selves as the Followers or Party of this or that
Man, as if you set your Teachers and their Doctrine against one another, and
even Christ against his Ministers.

13. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the
name of Paul?

13. Will ye make Christ, who is our common Head and Savior, to be the Head of
a Faction? Or will you set Paul against Christ? As if Paul had been crucified
for you, or you baptized into his Name? Know ye not that we have no Head of the
Church but Christ?

14. I thank God that I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius: 15. Lest
any should say that I had baptized in mine own name. 16. And I baptized also
the household of Stephanus: besides I know not whether I baptized any other.

14, 15, 16. Though Baptizing be Christ's Ordinance, I thank God that he so
overruled my Actions, that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius, and
the Household of Stephanus, but that it was done by others, because thereby I
have escaped this Scandal, which might have done more harm, than my Baptising
would have done good.

Note, That as Abraham and others were to bring all their Households with them
into the Covenant, who were their own, and not free Servants; so were those
that had Households bound to bring all their own into Gods Covenant, as far as
they were able.

17. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: not with
wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect.

17. For though Baptizing be within my Commission, it was not that, but
Preaching the Gospel to convert Souls to Christ, that I was most expressly and
principally commissioned to: And that not by such Humane Arts of Philosophy and
Oratory as now pass for Wisdom, lest these should carry the Praise from the
Doctrine, Cross, and Miracles which Christ does work by, to convert the World.

Note, how grossly they err, that say, That God converteth and gives Grace by
Sacraments only, or rather than by Preaching.

18. For the Preaching of the cross is to them that perish, foolishness: but
unto us which are saved, it is the power of God.

18. For to them that thus pass for Wise Men in the World, but are unsaved and
perish in their Wisdom, it seems great Folly to trust in a Crucified Christ
for Salvation, and suffer for him: But the Power and Wisdom of God are this way
eminently manifested to us, who have felt its saving Efficacy on our selves,
and shall be saved by it.

19. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise; and will bring
to nothing the understanding of the prudent.

19. For God, who is against the Pride of Man, did prophecy, That he would
frustrate the Carnal Wisdom of ungodly Men, saying, I will destroy, etc.

20. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this
world? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

20. Does not the Gospel of a Crucified Christ now vanquish and shame the
Learned Philosophy and Oratory, Heathen and Jewish artificial Learning, counted
the chief Wisdom? And does it not silence and shame the wrangling Logicians,
and show the Folly and utter Impotency and Vanity of their Learning?

21. For after that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

21. For when as the World, by Gods wise Permission, lived in such Ignorance,
that they had not the Practical Knowledge of the True God, but disobeyed him,
and worshipped Idols, it pleased God by that Preaching of Christ which they
count Foolishness, to convert and save Believers, and do that which all their
Learning could not do.

22. The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom: 23. But we
preach Christ crucified; unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness; 24. But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ
the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

22, 23, 24. For besides all the Miracles and Resurrection of Christ, the Jews
require some Sign from Heaven, to prove to them that Christ was sent from God:
And the Greeks look for eminent Learning to prove it, (some eminent Learning in
Philosophy, Logic, or Oratory.) But we, that convert and save the World, do it
by preaching Salvation by a Crucified Christ, though it be to the Jews a
Scandal which they cannot receive, and to Gentiles seeming Folly: But to them
that are converted and saved by it, Christ is the Power and the Wisdom of God.

25. Because the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God
is stronger then men.

25. For that of God which Men count Foolishness and Weakness, and deride, does
overcome their pretended Wisdom and Strength, and do that which they cannot do,
and proves them to be but Folly and Weakness.

26* For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called.

26. As Christianity is the true Wisdom, you see by experience, that not many
Learned Men, or Great Men that rule in the World, or Noble Men that abound in
Wealth, Pleasures, and Honor, become Christians.

27. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise;
and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which
are mighty, 28. And base things of the world, and things which are despised,
has God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that
are; 29. That no flesh should glory in his presence.

27, 28, 29. But it pleases God to choose that which the World counts Foolish,
and Weak, and Base, to confound, shame, and overcome that which is accounted by
them Wise, and Mighty, and Honorable; and the things which they despise, God
will use and honor; yea, by that which seems nothing to them, or which yet
is not in being, to vanquish those which seem great and real to them; that so
the Pride of Man may be shamed, and the Impotency of Man man fested, and all
Flesh may be humbled, and driven from their Self-confidence, and none may glory
of any thing of his own against his Glory.

30, 31. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. That according as it is
written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

30, 31. But it is by his Power and Work that you are made Christians, united
to Christ, who of God is made to us the Object and Teacher of the truest
Wisdom; (To know him, and to be taught by him the Great things of Salvation,
excels all the Heathen Philosophy.) He is made of God our Righteousness, the
Merits of his perfect Righteousness procuring our free Pardon and Adoption,
which our Works could not do. He is made our Sanctification, we being purified
by virtue of his Sacrifice, and by his Spirit, and by him separated as a
Peculiar People to God. And by him it is that we have Redemption and
Deliverance from Sin, and Satan, and the Law, and Death, and Hell: That as it
is written, God and not Man may be all our Glorying and Trust.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis Chapter does so plainly describe the same sort of Wise Men that are
described Romans 1. and several other such Places, and yet is confessedly meant
of the Heathen Philosophers, and Learned and Great Men, including the Jewish
Scribes; and therefore confuteth the misapplication of many such Texts to the
Gnostics only.

CHAP. II.
1. ANd I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech, or
of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God.

1. Accordingly I my self being sent by Christ to preach to the World, did not
come to you with the admired Philosophy and Oratory of the World, in declaring
the Gospel-Mystery, and Gods Attestation of it.

2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified.

2. For I resolved to make no Ostentation of any other Learning, and to teach
you no other, than the Knowledge of a Crucified Christ, in an humble manner
preached.

3. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.

3. And accordingly I was humbled among you, by Persecutions, and Abuse, and
continual Dangers and Sufferings, in conformity to the Cross of Christ, which I
preached.

4. And my speech, and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom,
but in demonstration of the spirit and of power.

4. And my manner of preaching was not by the witty Insinuations of Artificial
Learning, (Oratory or Logic;) but so as did demonstrate the supernatural Gift
of the Spirit of God, and in the Power thereof, manifested by Miracles and
Success.

5. That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God.

5. That your Faith, the Effect, which will be like its Cause and Motives,
might not be merely Humane, founded on and resolved into the Art of the
Speaker; but Divine, grounded on and resolved into the Evidence of Divine
Revelation and Authority.

6. Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of
this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to naught.

6. Yet we are not without useful Learning, and sublimity and accurateness of
Speech; but use such with those that are knowing and capable of it: But not the
vain and frothy Learning which is now most applauded in the World by Men of
Name and Power, which perishes as a Bubble, and saves not them that have it.

7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which
God ordained before the world unto our glory.

7. But we speak the Mystery of Redemption, the Product and Discovery of the
Wisdom of God, which has been kept in much darkness, and little known, but
ordained before the World was to be opened in the fullness of time to our Glory.

8. Which none of the princes of this world knew: For had they known it they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

8. Which none of the Rulers of this Age of the World knew; else they had not
crucified Christ, etc.

9. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love
him.

9. For the great Gifts of Gods Grace, decreed and prepared for all that love
him, are such as Man sees not, and hardly believes, and cannot comprehend: As
it is written, Eye has not seen, etc.

10. But God has revealed them unto us by his spirit, for the spirit searches
all things, yea the deep things of God.

10. But God by his Spirit has revealed them to us his Apostles (and to others
that have his Spirit in the measure that they have it): For the Spirit of God
is given us (in our several measures) to teach us all things fit for us to
know, even the Depths of God.

11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is
in him? even so the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God.

11. As a Man's Spirit is conscious of its own secret Actings and Thoughts,
which no Man else can know; so the Spirit of God knows the Secret things of
God, and makes us know them in our measures, which they that have not the
Spirit cannot by all their Learning know.

12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world: but the spirit which is
of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

12. And this Spirit God has given to us; not the Spirit of the World, to make
us carnally and worldly wise; but the Spirit of God, to make us savor and know
God's great mysterious Gifts of Grace.

13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches,
but which the holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

13. And these are the things which we preach to you, not in the Words and
Manner now counted by the Heathens to be Learned and Wise, nor after their vain
Arts; but in the very Words and Manner which God's Spirit teaches us, who
teaches us the Matter, fitting Spiritual Words to Spiritual Things, that all
may be of God.

14. But the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

14. But they that have not the Spirit themselves, but mere Nature, cannot with
all their Learning receive these spiritual Mysteries revealed to us by God; for
they will seem but Fanatic Dreams and Foolishness to them, not to be believed.
Nor can they understand them; for only a Mind illuminated by God's Spirit does
discern them.

15. But he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of
no man.

15. But he that is Spiritual discerns these revealed things of the Spirit in
his Measure; when yet he himself, and his own Spiritual Apprehensions and
Affections, are unknown to Carnal Men that hear him.

16. For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we
have the mind of Christ.

16. For who has pried into God's secret Counsels, or known his Mind, further
than he has opened it to him? But Christ our Teacher has told us his own and
his Fathers Mind, which we are to preach to the World for Men's Salvation.

ANNOTATIONS.
1. IT is none of Paul's meaning here, to vilify true Philosophy, Logic, or
Oratory, or any useful Knowledge or Art: And all Knowledge is useful to one
that refers it to right Ends, which is Knowledge indeed: For God has made
nothing knowable in vain. True Physics is the Knowledge of the knowable Works
of God, and God in them, that we may admire, love, serve, and trust him. True
Logic is but the Skill of using our Reason truly and orderly. True Grammar and
Oratory are but fitting Words to Things, and to the Hearers Minds, as most
tends to their Edification. God is against none of these, which are his
precious Gifts. But carnal Men have carnal Ends, and fit all these abusively to
their Ends, to wrangle against Truth, and divert their Minds from Things to
Words, and from great and everlasting Things to Trifles, and to feed their
Pride, and Ambition, and Covetousness, and to make their Malignity more keen
and hurtful. And such was the Learning of these Heathens, which then past for
Wisdom in the World.

2. Nor does Paul here favor false Pretenses of the Spirit, or true
Fanaticism; when Men take the Delusions of Satan, or every strong Imagination,
or the boiling of their Pride and erroneous Passions, fed by Prejudice, for the
Work of God's Spirit. These sin more dangerously than many others, by charging
their Sin and Error upon God, and tempting Men to deride the Spirit. Even as
false Prophets are sharpliest reproved, and the counterfeit use of Christ's
Name by the Sons of Sceva did but strengthen the Devil against them. Therefore
we are bid to try the Spirits.

CHAP. III.
1. ANd I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto
carnal; even as unto babes in Christ.

1. But this Spiritual Wisdom, of which I have said such great things, is not
in all Christians alike. Though the Apostles had the Spirit to lead them to all
needful Truth, and record it for the Church, yet some weak Christians are still
so much carnal, that their Spiritual Wisdom is but such as Babes in Christ
have, who have still need to be fed and taught by others: And as to such, I am
constrained to speak to you.

2. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not able
to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

2. I fed you with the Food of Babes, and not of strong understanding Men; or
else I had lost my labor by your incapacity: For harder things you could not,
nor yet can bear.

3. For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and strife,
and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men.

3. For ye are yet in a great measure Carnal: Do not your Envy, and Strife, and
Divisions, prove that you are so far Carnal, and live according to the corrupt
Nature of Man, and not by the Spirit of God?

4. For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not
carnal?

4. For while you divide into Factions for your several Teachers, are ye not so
far Carnal?

5. Who then is Paul? and who is Apollos? but ministers by whom ye believed,
even as the Lord gave to every man.

5. What are any of us but Christ's Ministers, by whose Ministry you were
brought to believe in Christ, even as God gave us various D^grees and of
Success.

6. I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.

6. I first preached to your Conversion, and Apollos to your further
Edification: but the Success and Fruit of all was not from our Power, but from
the free Grace of God.

7. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters;
but God that gives the increase.

7. If then you would know to whom to ascribe your Conversion and Salvation, we
poor Ministers that plant and water are but as Gods Tools, and to be accounted
as nothing in comparison of him, who (as he sent us, and enabled us, so) caused
freely all the Success, which is our Joy, and your Welfare.

8. Now he that planteth, and he that waters, are one: and every man shall
receive his own reward, according to his own labor.

8. Now it is by the same Ministerial Grace and Office that one of us planteth,
and another waters; and it is the same Spirit that moves us, and the same
Gospel which we preach: But we also have our different Measure of Gifts, Grace,
and Labor; and so shall we have of our Reward.

9. For we are laborers together with God: ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods
building.

9. For we are all but Gods Ministers, Fellow Laborers each with other, having
our several Parts to do: ye are not our Husbandry, and Building, and Church,
but Gods.

10. According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon. But
let every man take heed how he builds thereupon.

10. As God gave me an extraordinary Call and Grace, my Work has been that of
an Architect or Chief Builder; and accordingly I have laid the Foundation of
many Churches, preaching Christ where none before believed; and another has
come after me to build them up: But let every Man take heed that he teach
nothing but what is true and sound.

11. For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.

11. Let him not alter the Foundation which I have laid: For there is no other
but Christ, or the Essentials of Christianity.

12. Now if any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
wood, hay, stubble: 13. Every man's work shall be made manifest. For the day
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try
every man's work of what sort it is.

12, 13. And what following Teachers build on this Foundation, God will bring
to trial and manifest. If it be sound and holy, Gold, Silver, Precious Stones,
God will approve and bless it: If it be Error, or Carnal Policy, or corrupt
Mixtures, or things unprofitable, God will try and disown it, by his Spirit,
and by the Fire of Persecution.

14. If any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a
reward.

14. If his Labor and Doctrine prove sound, and endure Gods Furnace in trial,
he shall be rewarded.

15. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he himself
shall be saved; yet so, as by fire.

15. If it prove that such Teachers have erred, and misled the People, Gods
Trial will turn such Labor to their grief, as worse than lost: But if he
practically hold the Foundation, he shall be pardoned and saved; yet not
without the trying Furnace, which shall detect his Error, and teach him better
to his cost.

16. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you?

16. Know ye not that your Souls severally, and your Church collectively, are
the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you and among you;
and therefore you must be holy.

17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the temple
of God is holy, which temple ye are.

17. God will destroy them that profane his holy Temple, and defile it with the
things which he abhors: And you and your Churches are this holy Temple, if
you are holy, and his indeed.

18. Let no man deceive himself: If any man among you seems to be wise in
this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

18. Let none of you deceive himself by pretended Wisdom, which is not
Spiritual, and does not purify Heart and Life: like those that boast of
Wisdom, and live in the filth of Sin. If any Man among you be pufft up with the
Conceit of this Philosophical worldly Wisdom, let him know, that it is but
Folly, and be convinced of his Ignorance, that he may humbly learn of Christ,
and be made truly wise.

19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: for it is written,
He takes the wise in their own craftiness. 20. And again, The Lord knows the
thoughts of the wise, that they are vain.

19, 20. For all that Men call Learning and Wisdom, which does but serve a
worldly Interest, and saves not the Soul from Sin and Hell, is mere
Foolishness in Gods account: For it pro^eth but a Snare to themselves, and
vapoureth away as Idleness and Vanity; As it is written, etc.

21. Therefore let no man glory in men: for all things are yours: 22. Whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come; all are yours: 23. And ye are Christ's; and Ghrist
is Gods.

21. Therefore think not over-highly of any Man; especially for his worldly
Wisdom and Learning, or boasting that he knows more than others: For all
Teachers and their Wisdom are but Gods Gifts for your good; Apostles,
Providence, Life, or Death, all are for your Salvation; and that is best to
you, that makes you best: The End must direct you to judge of the Means, and
so of Teachers: They are for you, and your Salvation; and you are Christ's, and
for his Glory; and Christ, as Man and Mediator, is God's, and for his Glory.

ANNOTATIONS.
WE see here, that Sects, Factions, and Divisions are the Works of the Flesh,
and signify a Mind that is so far carnal; and that this comes usually by
preferring and setting Teacher against Teacher; Not but that the great
difference of Worth and Grace must be acknowledged and valued, but not made an
^ccasion of Division, but of Concord, all being Gods Ministers for the Churches
Common Good, in the various Measure of their Gifts. The Carnal are Headed by
Man, and the Spiritual by Christ only, though Men be their Helpers. And Cephas
is here named, as if it were on foresight that the Roman Bishop would make
himself such an Head, on pretense of being his Successor.

CHAP. IV.
1. LEt a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of
the mysteries of God.

1. I speak not all this to draw you from the due honor of faithful Ministers:
Account us neither more nor less, but as the Ministers of Christ for your
Salvation, and Stewards called and trusted with the just ministration of the
mysteries of God; that is, the sound preaching of his word, and due application
of it, and administration of his Sacraments, and power of the Keys to judge
who shall be baptized, and live as fit in holy Communion with his vi^ible
Churches.

2. Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.

2. And it is required of Stewards, especially that have so great a trust, that
they be faithful and answer that trust, in matter, and manner, and application;
and that they falsify not God's word, nor corrupt his Worship, or Church, nor
betray or neglect Souls, nor turn over their proper trust and work to others.

3. But with me it is a very small-thing that I should be judged of you, or of
man's judgment: Yea, I judge not mine own self.

3. And if any among you censure me, I account it a very small matter; tho I
despise no man's just admonition, Man's Judgment signifies little as to my
self, further than it may be hurtful to others: For my case will not be finally
determined by any Man's Judgment, nor by my own.

4. For I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that
judges me is the Lord.

4. For my Conscience is witness of my sincerity, and I know no unfaithfulness
in my Stewardship, though I am yet imperfect; but this is not my deciding
Justification, nor is my Conscience any public or final Judge, but only the
discerner of my Case. It is Christ only whose Judgment must publicly and
finally pass my doom.

5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.

5. Therefore usurp not God's part in uncalled, bold, and peremptory judging:
Stay till God's day come; he will bring works of darkness into light, and open
the secrets of Men's Hearts; and then those that indeed are excellent persons
shall have God's approbation and praise, which is better than the applause of
factions and partial followers.

6. And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to my self, and
to Apollos for your sakes: that ye might learn in us, not to think of men above
that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up for one against another.

6. All this I have spoken as if the case had been my own and Apollos, to warn
you of the sin and danger of making men the heads of Factions and Divisions, by
thinking over highly of your selves, or them; and that you think of all
Ministers but as God's Stewards for your good, as I wrote here-before, and use
them for Concord and not for Sects.

7. For who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that thou
did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do though glory, as if
thou had not received it?

7. And if really any of you are wiser than others, who gave thee that wisdom
which makes the difference? and what have thou which was not freely given thee
without desert? And if it was so given thee, why art thou puffed up and boastest,
as if it had been deserved, or was from thy self?

8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us: and
I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you.

8. You take your selves to be grown much wiser and better under your exalted
envious teachers, than you were under us, and so set light by those that
converted you: You are as Kings in your fullness and prosperity in your own
conceits, since I was with you: And I would you were so indeed, that we might
rejoice and partake with you, and be refreshed with you under all the
persecution which we yet endure.

9. For I think God has set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed
to death. For we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.

9. For God seems to have called us Apostles to be exposed on the Theater of
the world, as last, and appointed to greater sufferings than the Prophets were,
who suffered before us, in our Martyrdom to be made public spectacles to the
world, both Angels and Men.

10. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ: we are weak, but
ye are strong: ye are honorable, but we are despised.

10. While you are conceited of your selves as wise in the things of Christ,
and as strong and honorable, we are despised by the boasters of the world, as
fools and weak.

11, 21. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked,
and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor working with
our own hands:

11, 12. Your prosperous state, and our suffering state much differ: Formerly,
and to this day, we are taken for contemptible vagab^nds, and live in hunger
and thirst, and poor clothing, abused and buffetted without Justice or Relief,
having no fixed habitation of our own, and put to get our Bread by our handy
labor, while we preach to others.

12, 13. Being reviled, we bless, being persecuted, we suffer it: 13. Being
defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and as the
offscouring of all things unto this day.

12, 13. Being reviled by opprobrious words, we wish them well that do it:
being unjustly persecuted, we put all up, and patiently bear it: Being defamed
by vilifying false accusers, we entreat and speak them fair; we are esteemed
and used as the filth of the world, and the offscouring, refuse and scum of
the Earth, as unworthy of Humane Society or Peace to this day.

14. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you.

14. And though we suffer all this for you, and such others, and some of you
have added to my Afflictions, which you should have eased, I write it to warn
you, and not to reproach you with it; even as to my Sons, and not mine Enemies.

15. For though you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have you not
many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel.

15. For though you have never so many Teachers, you owe some special Respect
to me, who am your Father, or first Converter by my Ministry.

16. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.

16. Wherefore I beseech you, let no teachers draw you from the Doctrine which
I delivered to you from Christ, but constantly adhere to it.

17. For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved son, and
faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways, which be
in Christ, as I teach every where in every church.

17. And till I can come my self, I have sent Timothy, who is my Son and
faithful, who knows my Doctrine and Practice, in the things of Christ, and
will faithfully remember you of them.

18. Now some are puffed up as though I would not come to you.

18, Some envious teachers vaunt as if I durst not come to you, and stand
before them.

19. But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know, not the
speech of them which are puffed up, but the power.

19. But I will come shortly if the Lord will, and will try your boasting
envious teachers, not who has the smoothest Tongue, but who has the greatest
power of the Spirit.

20. For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.

20. For the Kingdom of Christ is not raised, nor distinguished from the World,
or carried on by smooth Words, but by Works of Divine Efficacy and Power.

21. What will ye? shall I come unto with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit
of meekness?

21. And had you not rather that I come in love and meekness, than with
punishing Power, to delivet any offenders to Satan as Gods Executioner on their
bodies?

CHAP. V.
1. IT is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such
fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have
his fathers wife.

1. It is not a doubtful Fame, but a credible Report, that there is such
Fornication among you, as Civil Heathens do abhor; that one should have his
Fathers Wife.

2. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that has done
this deed, may be taken away from among you.

2. And you have made light of it, and not as sensible of the Sin and Shame,
bewailed it, that he that is impenitent in this Sin may be cut off from your
Society.

3. For I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already,
as though I were present, concerning him that has so done this deed; 4. In the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit,
with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, 5. To deliver such an one unto Satan
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

3, 4, 5. For though I be absent in Body, yet present in Spirit, I have, by the
Power given me by Christ, determined already, when you are assembled, and my
Spirit with you, to deliver this Man to Satan, by casting him out of the
Church, and leaving him to Gods Executioner, to inflict destructive Punishment
on his Body, to bring him to Repentance for the saving of his Soul.

Note, 1. That Paul himself was the Judge. 2. Yet he would do it when they were
assembled, for Order, to show them what they should have done. 3. That it was
in a Church-assembly of Men present for holy Communion, and not in a Lay-Court,
or a Consistory of the Pastors of other Assemblies, who knew not the Man, nor
had any special Oversight of him. 4. That Satan is Gods Executioner on the
Bodies even of Christians, specially of Sins to Death. The Church having then
no Christian Magistrates, was put to appeal to God, to punish Capital Crimes
miraculously. 5. That yet this is to save the Sinner by Repentance, as well as
to be a Warning to others.

6. Your glorying is not good: Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump?

6. You do not well to bear up such a Man in his Sin, and to make light of it:
The whole Church, so far as it is guilty of such a Conniving or Consent, is thus
defiled with Guilt, and may be tempted to the like Sin.

7. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are
unleavened. For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us.

7. As the Jews when they kept the Passover were to cast all Leavened Bread out
of their Houses, so we assemble to commemorate the Sacrifice of Christ our
Paschal Lamb. Purge out of your Assemblies the old Leaven of scandalous Sins,
that you may approve your selves a Society acceptable to God through Christ.

Note, 1. That, as Dr. Hammond observes out of Chrysostom and Theodoret, there
was a Tradition, that this Offender was a Bishop. 2. And the Assembly was to
purge the Church of such a one, whoever he was, by forsaking him.

8. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the
leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth.

8. Therefore let our Christian Assemblies be kept as holy Feasts before God,
not with the Vices of our old Natural or Heathen State, nor with the odious
Leaven of Naughtiness and Wickedness; but with the Unleavened Bread of Purity,
Sincerity, and Truth.

9. I wrote to you in an epistle, not to company with fornicators. 10. Yet not
altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or
extortioners, or with Idolaters; for then must ye needs go out of the world.

9, 10. I did indeed write to you before (in this or some other Epistle) to
avoid Familiarity with Fornicators, Covetous, Extortioners, Idolaters, etc. I
meant, that you show your abhorrence of this Sin, and shame the Sinner, by
shunning his Company, when it is unnecessary, and it is in your power so to do:
But I meant not that you should have no Company or Converse at all with any
that are such; for you live among Unbelievers, and cannot go out of the World.

11. But now I have written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is
called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or
a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat.

11. But my Meaning and your Duty is, That you shun all Company which may
signify owning or Brotherly Familiarity with any called Christians, who are
such scandalous Sinners, that the Church and Religion may not be thought to
favor them, and that Shame may humble them. And though it belong not to every
Christian, but to the Church, to cast such out of Public Societies, nor to
separate from the Church because such are there; yet as the Church ought to
purge out such, so every private Man should avoid that Familiarity which is in
their power, even that which lies in Friendly Eating, or the like.

12. For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? Do not ye judge
them that are within?

12. For we are not authorized to call those without the Church before us, to
try and judge their Cases, who never submitted to our Authority, and are not a
Scandal to the Christian Profession. It is them that have consented to our
Power and Discipline, that you judge.

13. But them that are without, God judges. Therefore put away from among your
selves that wicked person.

13. Those that are without the Church we must leave to the Judgment of God;
they are not under our Government: But that wicked Person who is as one of you,
disown, and put away from your Communion.

CHAP. VI.
1. DAre any of you having a matter against another, go to law before the
unjust, and not before the saints?

1. Another Scandal I hear of among you, is, That you go to Law against one
another before Heathen Judges, when you might decide your Differences among
your selves. How dare you do this, when Heathens are unjust, and will deride
you?

2. Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? And if the world
shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?

2. Know ye not that Christ will commit that Honor to his Saints, with him to
judge the World of the Ungodly? And you should be all Saints your selves? And
if the World shall be judged by you, are you not meet to decide your own little
Differences?

3. Know ye not that we shall judge angels? How much more things that pertain
to this life?

3. And as Christ is the Judge of the Evil Angels, we shall be honored to join
with him in that Judgment also, when all his Enemies shall be put under his
Feet and ours. How much more are we meet to decide these Worldly Strifes?

4. If then you have judgment of things pertaining to this life, set them to
judge who are least esteemed in the church.

4. If then it be a thing belonging to you, though you are no Magistrates, to
arbitrate your own Differences, if you have no Wise M^n and Elders among you
whom you will trust, choose the weakest; for the lowest of you should be fitter
than unjust Heathens.

5. I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? no
not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren?

5. I speak Ironically, to your shame. Are you the Men that boast of Wisdom?
and is there not one Man among you wise enough to judge of the Differences of
Christians?

6. But brother goes to law with brother, and that before the unbelievers.

6. But you must take the contentious and chargeable way of Public
Judicatures, and that before Infidels, that are unjust, and will deride you?

7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one
with another: why do ye not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer your
selves to be defrauded?

7. Why have you not learnt of Christ to put up Injuries, and let go your
Right, rather than violate the Laws of Love and Peace? It is your Sin to be
uncharitable, and contentious Seekers of your own Right. Is patience, and
Forbearing, an^ Forgiving a strange thing to you? Is it not your certain Duty?

8. Nay, you do wrong and defraud, and that your brethren.

8. Nay, you that are bound to forgive Wrongs, do wrong others, even your
Christian Brethren.

9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be
not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, 10. Nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
kingdom of God.

9, 10. Think not you can be saved either by the Righteousness of Christ, or by
a dead Belief, or Profession of Christianity, without a Personal Righteousness,
consisting in sincere Obedience to God: and you are not such, if you live in
such Sins as these here named. Let no Deceivers persuade you otherwise: You
may, by neglect of Discipline, be in the Church Visible; but you are, while
such, incapable of Salvation.

11. And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but
ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

11. Though some of you were such in your Heathen State, you have since been
baptized unto Christ and the Holy Spirit, and renouncing these Sins, have been
Sacramentally washed from them, and dedicated as holy to God, and numbered with
the Just; and if you are sincere Believers, you are such indeed, as well as
Sacramentally, by the Merits of Christ, and the Spirits Sanctification.

12. All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient: all
things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any.

12. As to them that say, That there is no Law against the pleasing of our
Appetites, or simple Fornication, they take notice only of Political Laws,
with Humane Executions. I confess, that Moses's Law, as such, being Political,
lest some Excesses and Fornications, as Polygamy, etc. unpunished, or but
lightly punished; and the Roman Laws neglect them; and Moses's Law, as such, is
abrogated, and so I am under no Political Law which punishes these: But I am a
Servant of Christ, whose Law of Grace forbids all things that are
inexpedient, and contrary to the Purity and Hopes of Christianity, or to the
Law of Love. And if you plead Christian Liberty, I answer, 1. As to Meats, and
other things indifferent, though they are in themselves lawful, yet it is not
indifferent how we use them, whether we do hurt or not, when they are
inexpedient and hurtful. 2. And I wlll not be so enslaved to my fleshly
appetite, as to obey it to my own or others hurt.

13. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy both
it and them. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord; and the
Lord for the body.

13.2. And I further answer, That you do ill to join Fornication with things
Indifferent: Meats indeed are to feed Flesh and Appetite, and the Belly and
Appetite are for them; but both must be used as, perishing things; but our
Bodies are not made for Fornication, but to serve the Lord, who also will take
care of them as his Redeemed.

14. And God has both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own
power.

14. And accordingly, God that raised up the Body of Christ, will also raise us
by his Power.

15. Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take
the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid.

15. It is so far from being lawful, that it has this odious aggravation, to
make those Bodies the united Members of an Harlot, which are united and related
to Christ as his Members, that is, of the holy Society of which he is the Head.

16. What, know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot, is one body? for
two (says he) shall be one flesh.

16 Fornication is a sort of Union with a Harlot for to G^neretion they are as
one flesh.

17. But he that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit.

17. But those that by a true Faith are joined to Christ, are qui^kned and
acted in holiness by the very Spirit of Christ, and so are one Spirit with him,
by a Union which destroys not their personal individuation, nor makes them
Christ, but makes them more blessedly one with him than we can now comprehend:
(Even Plants live by the Sunbeams, and yet are not the Sun.)

18. Flee fornication. Every sin that a man does, is without the body: but he
that commits fornication, sins against his own body.

18. Hate and avoid Fornication also on this account: Most other sins in their
outward acts, are but the ab^se of things without you (as your Money, Lands,
Houses, Friends, Enemies, Power, etc.) But Fornication is the abusive polluting
and debasing your own Bodies.

19. What, know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, which is
in you, which ye have of God?

19. When God gives his Spirit to Believers to sanctify them to himself, he
thereby makes them as Temples, Holy, for his holy Spirit to dwell in and
actuate.

19, 20. And ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a Price: therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods.

19, 20. And seeing you are not at all your own, you may not do with your
bodies what you list: God is your absolute Owner, (not only by the right of
Creation and Preservation, but) by that of Redemption, ^y the price of the
Blood and Merits of Christ: Therefore you rob and wrong him (though you cannot
hurt him) if you alienate his own, and glorify not that God whose you wholly
are, by the faithful Love and Service of Soul and Body which are his. (And to
be thus his, is your Honor, Safety, and Felicity.)

CHAP. VII.
1. NOw concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for a man
not to touch a woman.

1. As to the Question about Marriage, of which you wrote, I say, That if a Man
have no kind of intrinsic or extrinsick Reason to make it best for him, it is
for a Man's own ease and quietness in the World to live single, and safest to
avoid Temptations, to keep at sufficient distance from Women, especially to
avoid all tempting and immodest Touches, or Familiarity.

2. Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and
let every woman have her own husband.

2. But the State of Man on Earth is such, that M^n cannot always do that which
is most for their own quietness and ease. Some have so strong Lust, that
Marriage is necessary to them, to avoid Fornication: And to those that need it,
it is Gods Ordinance for the Propagation of Mankind on Earth.

3. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the
wife unto the husband.

3. And let Husband and Wife perform to each other all the Duties of Marriage
which they promised.

4. The wife has not power of her own body, but the husband: and likewise also
the husband has not power of his own body, but the wife.

4. By the Marriage-Covenant you have given each other power of your Bodies,
for regular Congress.

5. Defraud you not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that
ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that
Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.

5. To deny this to each other, is Injury and Fraud: except when you are called
to Humbling, Fasting, and Prayer; and then you should consent to that sort of
Abstinence: but after use due Matrimonial Conversation, lest your forbearance
give Satan advantage to tempt you.

6. But I speak this by permission, and not of commandment.

6. But mistake me not, as if I hereby imposed Marriage on all Men as their
Duty, though allowed when necessary, or gave this my Counsel as a Law.

7. For I would that all men were even as I my self: but every man has his
proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that.

7. For I could wish that all Men, for their own advantage, had the Gift of
Continence as well as I have: But God, who will have the World yet continued,
has not given it to all; but some have one measure and sort of G^ft, and some
another.

8. I say therefore to the unmarried, and widows, It is good for them if they
abide even as I.

8. It is most for their own ease, and liberty, and quiet, if they can, to
abide single as I do.

9. But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to marry than
to burn.

9. But if they cannot, let them use Marriage, as Gods appointed Remedy for
such* which is better than sinful Lust.

10. And unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife
depart from her husband:

10. But though it be no Sin to marry, it is a Sin to depart when married:
Herein I ^ay God, Command upon you, and offer it not to your Choice, as a thing
indifferent.

11. But and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her
husband: and let not the husband put away his wife.

11. But to marry upon departure, is a double Sin. If any intolerable Abuse,
or Passion provoke her to depart, let her remain unmarried, and be reconciled
to her Husband: And so let not the Husband put away his Wife.

12. But to the rest speak I, not the Lord, If any brother has a wife that
believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
13. And the woman which has an husband that believes not, and if he please to
dwell with her, let her not leave him.

12, 13. But as to the Case of Separation from an Infidel (which some may think
necessary by the Israelites Case in Ezra, etc.) I bring you not this as a flat
Command of Christ, but as my best Advice: Though you may let an Infidel go, and
may live without, him that will not stay with you, but is the Deserter, in
enmity to your Religion; yet I think it best for you to do your best first to
make such willing to continue, and, though it be to your great trouble, to live
with such: yet if they be willing to stay, be not you the Deserters, no not for
a time, nor omit due means to make them willing; though some such will be
tyrannical and malicious Adversaries.

14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving
wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children unclean, but now are
they holy.

14. For though the Case in Ezra may make you doubt how it was with the
Israelites; yet to Christians, under the Law of Grace, your abode with an
Infidel does not make your Conjugal Stare, or Converse, or Family to be unholy.
The State and Interest of a Believer makes your Relation and Cohabitation
holy, as separated to God for holy use, which the Believer can improve, as all
things else are sanctified to him, for the Service of God Else your Children
would be like those of the Infidels, unclean, as not in the Covenant and Church
of God: but now they are holy, and numbered with his Peculiar People. For the
Christian devoteth to God himself, and all that is in his power and dispose,
which is accepted according to the Capacity and Use of that which is devoted;
and this he does by Gods Command, and therefore with his Acceptance; as the
Seed of the Faithful always were.

15. But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is
not under bondage in such cases: but God has called us to peace.

15. But (to resolve your Doubt) I say, If the Unbeliever depart, and will not
be persuaded to stay, you are not bound to follow them whither ever they go.
Marriage was made for mutual help, and you are not bound in such Cases to be
enslaved by a Sinners Implacability and Desertion. But yet omit nothing that
tends to a peaceable Cohabitation: for God has called us all to Peace.

16. For what know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? o^ how
know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife?

16. And as the Relation and Marriage-Converse is sanctified to the Believer,
so you know not but by loving and peaceable Behavior the Unbeliever may be
converted and saved.

17. But as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every
one, so let him walk: and so ordain I in all churches.

17. But let none on pretense of Christianity desert the Relation that God has
set him in, but do his Duty in the Place that God has distributed and called
him to: And this Order I appoint to all the Churches.

18. Is any man called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised: is
any called in uncircumcision? let him not become circumcised.

18. Think not that Christianity requires any needless Changes, to
Circumcision or Uncircumcision, as to the external Ceremony: It is a Change
from Sin to God which it requires.

19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of
the commandments of God.

19. To be one that was or that was not circumcised, is no part of the
Christian Religion; but to keep those Commandments which God has given us,
either in the Law of Nature, or by Jesus Christ. Do Gods Work, and make it not
more than it is.

20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.

20. Pretend not Religion for breaking away from the State of Relation that the
Gospel found you in, without a just Discharge, or cause of Change.

21. Art thou called being a servant? care not for it; but if thou may be
made free, use it rather.

21. If thou wast a Servant when thou wast converted, be contented with thy
Condition; for it is not contrary to thy Deliverance by Christ. But if thou
may be set free from a Servile Life, on lawful Terms, it is rather to be
chosen: (For it is not all change of Relation, or outward State, that I forbid.)

22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lords freeman:
likewise also he that is called being free, is Christ's servant.

22. A Christian Servant has that sort of Freedom which Christ has purchased:
He is freed from Guilt, and the Curse, and the Slavery of Sin and Satan: And
the Freest and Greatest that is a Christian, is devoted absolutely to the
Service of Christ.

23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men.

23. And if you are free, make not your selves needlessly the Servants of Men,
especially or Infidels; nor serve any Man before Christ, or against him: For he
has bought you to be his Servants.

24. Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God.

24. To conclude, Serve God in the Calling that Grace found you in, till he
remove you.

25. Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord: yet I give my
judgment as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful.

25. As to your Question about Virginity, God has made no Universal Law for
it, or against it; and I pretend not to give you any such. But it being a Case
to be variously resolved, according to Persons various Conditions, I shall give
you faithfully my Judgment how to decide it severally for your selves.

26. I suppose therefore, that this is good for the present distress, I say,
that it is good for a man so to be.

26. Christians being now under Persecution and Distress, no doubt but it is
much more for their ease and quiet to be single, than to have a Wife or
Husband, and Children to care for, in Poverty or in Flight.

27. Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a
wife? seek not a wife.

27. If thou be bound, to seek to be loosed is a Sin: But if thou art loosed,
that thou seek not to be bound without necessity, is my Advice.

28. But and if thou marry, thou have not sinned; and if a virgin marry, she
has not sinned: nevertheless, such shall have trouble in the flesh; but I
spare you.

28. But to marry, as such, is no Sin: (Though it be a Sin to do it when there
is clear Reason against it.) But such must reckon upon Trouble in the Flesh.
But though I sorewarn you to prevent your Trouble, I would not by urgency be
your Snare.

29. But this I say, brethren, the time is short. It remains, that both they
that have wives, be as though they had none; 30. And they that weep, as though
they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they
that buy, as though they possessed not; 31. And they that use this world, as
not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away.

29, 30, 31. But this none should forget, that this Life is so short, and the
End of all so near and sure, that there is little difference between having a
Wife or no Wife, weeping or not weeping, rejoicing or not rejoicing, possessing
and not possessing: And therefore you should have Wives, and weep, and rejoice,
and possess, and use this World as if you did it not, with such an Indifferency
through the sense of greater things, as that you may not be overmuch affected
with the getting, or enjoying, or loss of any transitory thing: For all these
things are in continual change, and the Fashion of them passes away.

32. But I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried, cares for
the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord:

32. Carefulness about the World is so bad a thing, that I would have you
escape it if you can. The unmarried has less Worldly Care to divert him from
caring how to please God, and to do good to others, and secure his Soul.

33. But he that is married, cares for the things that are of the world, how
he may please his wife.

33. But he that is married has made himself so much more Duty, Temptation,
and Trouble, as must needs increase those Cares which will much divert his
Thoughts and Cares from the pleasing of God: Particularly, the Care of pleasing
his Wife will take him up; because there is in all Persons much unsuitableness,
and difference of Judgment, Temper, and Inclinations; and in the weaker Sex
usually much Passion and Impatience, and difficulty in bearing that which
crosses their Wills; so that the wisest Man can hardly please some, with all
his Skill, and Kindness, and Diligence, without violating his Duty to God

34. There is difference also between a wife and a virgin: The unmarried woman
cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy, both in body and
spirit: but she that is married, cares for the things of the world, how she
may please her Husband.

34. And the difference is great also on the Women's part, (whose Weakness
usually can less bear Difficulties, Troubles, and Temptations.) The unmarried
is free from abundance of Troubles and Temptations which would turn away her
Care from the things of God, and so she is more free to keep close to God, and
to keep both spiritual and corporal Sanctity: But she that is married must
needs care for wordly things, for Children, and Family, and specially to please
her Husband, (who possibly may be unsuitable, and tyrannical, and hardly
pleased without displeasing God.) And to live in mutual displeasure, how sad
and tempting a Condition will that be? (Christ told Martha how had a choice it
was to be cumbred about many things, though lawful, in comparison of choosing a
free Attendance on the Better part.)

35. And this I speak for your own profit, not that I may cast a snare upon
you, but for that which is comely, and that you may attend upon the Lord
without distraction.

35. If any of ^ou think that I wrong you, by debarring you from the Comforts
of Marriage, let such know, that I speak but comparatively, and for your profit
tell you, that many ignorantly rush upon it, without consideration, and so
miscarry by unexpected Troubles. I forbid not Marriage, nor make a Law for you,
to ensnare you; but I would have you prudently to prefer the Condition which is
best for your selves, in which you may serve God without distracting Cares.

36. But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin,
if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let him do what he
will, he sins not: let them marry.

36. But in these things, about which there is no Common Law, Men should
themselves best judge what is suitable, convenient, and best for themselves. If
therefore you find that your Daughters have need, and that it will be
inconvenient to them to pass the Flower of their Age, let them marry; it is no
sin in it self, nor to such as so need it.

37. Nevertheless, he that stands steadfast in his heart, having no necessity,
but has power over his own will, and has so decreed in his heart, that he
will keep his virgin, does well. 38. So then, he that gives her in marriage,
does well: but he that gives her not in marriage, does better.

37, 38. But yet he that being urged by no necessity of his own or of his
Daughter, has fixed his Resolution to preserve the Freedom of a Single Life,
(not by Vows, which bind those whose Condition God may alter, and so make Laws
and Snares to themselves, but) by well-grounded Reason submitting to God, that
can change their State; this Man takes the way to his Daughters greatest Peace
and Advantage. So then, he that gives her in Marriage, does that which is in
it self good, and no sin: But he that gives her not in Marriage, does that
which is better for her, if she have no necessity.

39. The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband lives: but if her
Husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will; only in the
Lord.

39. God's Law and Man's bind the Wife to her Husband during his Life: But if
her Husband be dead, she may marry another, if nothing in her Condition forbid
it; but it must be to a Believer, that is fit for her.

40. But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment: and I think also
that I have the spirit of God.

40. But as I am giving you no Common Law against Marriage, or for it, but
directing you how every one may discern what is best for themselves, my
Judgment is, That ordinarily, where there is no necessity, a Single Life is
more for the Persons peace and quietness, and freedom from Hindrances in
serving God, and therefore better for them.

ANNOTATIONS.
Diverse Errors have risen from the misunderstanding of some Passages in this
Chapter. 1. Of them that make Paul to speak at uncertainty, without the Spirit
of God, when they read, [ by permission, and not by commandment,] and [ I, and
not the Lord]: When as he only disclaimeth the giving them a Law in stead of
particular Direction.

II. The Error of them that hence gather, That God has given us in Scripture
his Counsels, which are no Commands, and make not Duty, nor is it Sin to
violate them, but a Work of Supererrogation to do them. Whereas the Apostle
only distinguishes of a proper Universal Law, and a consequential Obligation
from other General Laws. A Common Law is the Rule of Societies: If such a Law
had commanded or Forbidden Marriage, it would be a Duty or a Sin to all: But
yet God's Law binds all to choose that which most tends to their own Good,
and the escape of Evil; and to break this Law is Sin to him that does it,
though the same thing he lawful to another, e. g. To marry against Parents
Consent, to an unmeet Person, without Necessity, and oblige ones self to
instruct and maintain a Family, when one is unable for it, and many such Cases,
may make it a great Sin to marry. A Common Law, and a Personal Obligation
resulting from another General Law, much differ.

III. The Error of them that say, By Holiness of Children, ver. 14. is meant
either Legitimation only, or mere Baptism, and not an Interest according to
their Capacity in the Covenant of Peculiarity, I have so far confuted in my
Treatise of Infant Baptism, that here I pass it by.

IV. One excellent Divine has hence taken occasion to speak so much against
changing any Trade or Calling, as affrighteth some from Lawful Changes, which
do more good than hurt.

V. From ver. 37. many unjustly commend absolute Vows of Celibate; which is to
make a Law to God, that he shall not bring them into Necessity by any Change,
and to make Snares and self-binding Laws for themselves, as if they were their
own Rulers, when God has made them Work enough, and, for ought they know, may
bring them under a necessity to marry.

VI. On the other side, by a blind opposition to this Extreme, thousands rashly
run into Marriage, without considering the Difficulties, Cares, Sufferings,
Troubles, and Temptations that attend it: And being surprised unprepared, live
accordingly in worldly Cares, Impatience, and Discontent.

CHAP. VIII.
1. NOw as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all have
knowledge. Knowledge pusseth up, but charity edifieth.

1. As to your Case about things offered to Idols, they that, to defend their
licentious Practice herein, pretend to know more of their Liberty than we do,
must understand, that we have Knowledge as well as they; and Knowledge without
Charity is not an Excellency to be boasted of; it does but puff Men up with
Pride and Self-conceitedness: but Charity is necessary to true Edification.

2. And if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as
he ought to know.

2. And this Conceitedness of their great Knowledge and Wisdom, proves that
they know nothing at all as they ought. If they knew themselves, or Man, they
would know the weakness of Man's Understanding, and how little they know. If
they knew God, or any of his Works, they would know their Incomprehensibleness.
Indeed though we know somewhat of God, and his Works, and Word, we have no
adequate knowledge of any thing in the World; we know not the whole of any
thing, but some part of it. And to be ignorant of our Ignorance, is a double
Ignorance. It is this false Conceit, That Men know more than indeed they know,
which is the grand Cause of all the pernicious Errors of the World; And
confident Error is far more dangerous and hurtful than mere Nescience.

3. But if any man love God, the same is known of him.

3. But he that has such Knowledge as habituateth his Soul to the true Love of
God and Holiness, is one that God owneth and knows as his own, and attaineth
the true End of Knowledge: For our Happiness is better secured by Gods loving
beneficent Knowledge of us, and all our Concerns, than by our own Wisdom.

4. As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in
sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that
there is none other God but one.

4. And as to the Case of eating things offered to Idols, we know, as well as
these Pretenders to great Wisdom, that Idols are nothing but Fictions of
deceived Men, and that there is no God but one.

5. For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as
there be gods many, and lords many) 6. But to us there is but one God, the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things, and we by him.

5, 6. For though the World has feigned many Deities, Supreme and Subordinate
ones, as Mediators; yet we know that there is but One God the Father, of whom
all Creatures have all their Beings, and for and to whom we and all things are;
and One Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all things were at first created, and are
ordered, and by whom we are redeemed, and who only is our Mediator with this
One God.

( Note, That this Text, which the Arians greatly boast of, and mistake, as if
it expressly confined the Deity to the Father, as distinct from Christ, is
variously expounded against them by two sorts of Expositors. I. The ordinary
Exposition is, 1. That though there be but One God the Father, the same God is
also the Son. 2. But (more probably) that in Scripture God the Father (as
Fundamentum Trinitatis, as the Schoolmen speak) is often put for the Deity, as
such, comprehending the Three Persons. II. Theirs that hold three Natures in
Christ, viz. 1. The Second Person in the Divine Nature* 2. Unitively producing
the first of Creatures, a Superangelical Being, by whom he made all other
Creatures, and who appeared to the Fathers of old. And, 3. The Humane Nature
assumed into Personal Union by the Superangelical and Divine. These say, that
Christ is called [ One Lord, by whom are all things] as in this first created
Superangelical Nature, distinct from One God the Father, but not divided from
him. But besides Peter Sterry, and some such of late, few have entertained this)

7. Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge: for some with conscience
of the idol unto this hour, eat it as a thing offered unto an idol; and their
conscience being weak, is defiled.

7. But when every Man knows not this, that an Idol is nothing, but Custom
has fixed in Men the conceit of many Subordinate Demigods, to whom they think
they owe some Worship, some Novices and corrupted Professors of Christianity
are not yet cured of these dangerous Opinions, and really intend some Honor to
the Idol; and their Diseased Souls will be more defiled, when they are herein
encouraged by your Example, and see you do the same outward Act, though you do
it not with the same Opinion and Intention.

( Note, Some Expositors rather think that this is the Sense; [Some know not
that an Idol is nothing, but think them real Demons that are worshipped, and
that eating things offered to them is real Worship; and are tempted to it by
fear to save themselves, and will be hardened and defiled by the encouragement
of your Example.] But this seems not so agreeable to the Phrase.)

8. But meat commends us not to God: for neither if we eat are we the better,
neither if we eat not are we the worse.

8. It is not the mere eating or not eating the Meat, that is any great matter,
nor makes one better and more acceptable to God, and another worse.

9. But take heed lest by any means-this liberty of yours become a
stumbling block to them that are weak.

9. But take heed, though the eating of that Meat as such be lawful, lest by
outward Symbolizing with Idolaters you seem to worship the Idol, and so tempt
others both to the mutual Error and corporal Sin, (against Charity and Piety,
viz. the Second Commandment:) For weak unsettled Persons are too easily seduced.

10. For if any man see thee which have knowledge, sit at meat in the idols
temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat
those things which are offered to idols:

10. For though thou say, that thou do not offer it to an Idol, but eat it in
that Temple, to avoid danger, as a common Meal; yet thy Action will persuade
the weak, that it is lawful, which so knowing a Man does seem by his own
Practice to approve.

11. And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ
died?

11. And whereas Christ died, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord of the
Dead and Living, and has a Right of Propriety unto all, having purchased for
them a Conditional Gift of Salvation, thou will now rob Christ of his Right,
and them of their Salvation, by the abuse of thy pretended Knowledge.

12. But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience,
ye sin against Christ.

12. Know therefore, that thus ensnaring the Consciences of the weak by
Temptation, is not only uncharitable wrong to them, but Sin and Injury against
the very Blood and Right of Christ.

13. Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the
world stands, lest I make my brother to offend.

13. I conclude then, That I do not make so light of another Sin, nor set so
light by the Soul of a weak Brother, or by the Blood and Right of Christ, as
for Flesh, or any unnecessary thing, to abuse my Liberty, when it will prove to
them a dangerous Temptation to Sin. Though it be their culpable weakness that
makes them in such danger, I will forbear Flesh as long as I live, if that
conduce to save them from Sin, (unless God lay on me a necessity to do
otherwise, and leave it no longer to my liberty as indifferent.) To prefer my
Liberty or Commodity in the use of things otherwise lawful, before the saving
of the Soul, even of the Erroneous, from Sin, is to despise both Christ and
Souls.

Note, O Then what have those Papal Church-Tyrants to answer for, that by their
numerous, vain, yea, noxious Canons, to show their usurped Dominion over Souls,
will rather tempt Men, and excommunicate Christians, and burn them, and keep
the Christian World in scandalous pernicious Strife, than they will give Men
leave to deny Obedience to their Usurpation in such things? And how unlike Paul
are they that say, They will not deny their own Liberty or Convenience in an
unnecessary Humor or Pleasure, for any Man, whose Error or Weakness is the
cause of his Offense or Stumbling?

And many good Christians mistake this and such Texts, thinking that by
offending the weak is meant displeasing them, and doing that which others take
for Sin: When as by offending, is meant laying a Stumbling Block, or causeless
occasioning or tempting Men to Sin and Ruin.

CHAP. IX.
1. AM I not an apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?
are not you my work in the Lord?

1. It seems some among you object against me, 1. That I am no Apostle. 2. That
I get my Living by Tent-making. 3. That I am none of those that knew Christ. 4.
That my Knowledge is lower than theirs. To all which I say, 1. That Christ made
me an Apostle by his Mission. 2. That I may use my own Liberty, either to live
on the Church, or on my Labor, as is most for the furtherance of the Gospel.
3. That I have seen Christ from Heaven, though not on Earth. 4. That you are
the Fruit and Seal of my Ministry, which therefore is not to be questioned by
you.

2. If I be not an apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you: for the seal
of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord.

2. You of all Men should not question my Apostleship, who were converted by it.

3. Mine answer to them that do examine me, is this, 4. Have we not power to
eat and to drink? 5. Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife as well
as other apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? 6. Or I only
and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working?

3, 4, 5, 6. And as to my Labor, I answer, That I own my Power to live on the
Church: And I that persuade you to forbear the use of your Liberty when it
would do hurt, do go before you by my own Example. I have right to be
maintained by my Hearers, and to put the Church to the charge of a Wife and
Family with me, as other Apostles do. I and Barnabas have power to forbear
working for our Living.

7. Who goes a warfare at any time at his own charges? who planteth a
vineyard, and eats not of the fruit therereof? or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock?

7. Soldiers are paid by those that use them; and the Husbandman and Shepherd
live on the Fruit of their Labor: and so may I.

8. Say I these things as a man? or says not the law the same also? 9. For it
is written in the law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn. Does God take care for oxen? 10. Or says he it
altogether for our sakes? for our sakes, no doubt, this is written: that he
that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope, should be
partaker of his hope.

8, 9, 10. Do I speak this as a Man pleading his own Interest? Does not God say
it in his Law? etc. And does God make Laws chiefly for the good of Oxen, or for
Men? For Men, no doubt, to encourage them by just Expectations of the Fruit of
their own just Labors.

11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall
reap your carnal things?

11. The Spiritual things which we sowed with you, are far greater than the
Carnal things which we may reap: And if you maintain others, you owe more to us.

12. If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather?
Nevertheless, we have not used this power; but suffer all things, lest we
should hinder the gospel of Christ.

12. Yet have I not claimed or taken that which is my due, lest it should
hinder the Success of my Ministry.

13. Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the
things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar, are partakers with the
altar?

13. You know that the Levites and Priests live on the Things that are offered
in the Temple and at the Altar.

14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the gospel, should
live of the gospel.

14. So is it the Lords own Appointment, (who said, The labourer is worthy of
his hire) that they who are called to preach the Gospel as a stated Office,
(and not only occasionally) should be maintained in and for that Labor, and
not be taken off by Cares and Worldly Labor.

15. But I have used none of these things. Neither have I written these things,
that it should be so done unto me: for it were better for me to die, then that
any man should make my glorying void.

15. But as I have not made use of this my Due, so I write not as expecting it:
For I value my Advantages for the Gospel as my Glory, above my Right, and above
my Life.

16. For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for necessity
is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel.

16. For my bare Preaching would have nothing singular, to vindicate me from
Calumny, or extraordinarily further the Success of my Labors: Even bad Men
preach, and I am under a Command or Law of Christ, which will punish me if I do
not.

17. For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if against my will,
a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me.

17. For if my Preaching, and that without Maintenance from you, be done
willingly, God will reward me (who accepts no unwilling Service): But if I
preach but for fear of Punishment, and take not Maintenance because Men will
not give it, I do but a Task imposed on me, and forfeit my Reward so far as I
am unwilling.

18. What is my reward then? verily that when I preach the gospel, I may make
the gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the gospel.

18. What then is that Qualification of my Service which God will specially
reward? Not the mere Task of Preaching; but that I so do it, as to devote all
my own Rights and Interest to the Great Ends of the Gospel; and whatever I lose
or suffer by it, take that course which tends most to promote the desirable
Success.

19. For though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto
all, that I might gain the more.

19. I am no Man's Slave or Bondman, to serve him against my will: but I am a
voluntary Servant to all Men, in charity to save them, and in obedience to
Christ.

20. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them
that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that are under
the law; 21. To them that are without law, as without law, (being not without
law to God, but under the law to Christ) that I might gain them that are
without law. 22. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am
made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some.

20, 21, 22. To the Jews, and those whose Education and Consciences keep them
under Moses's Law, I behaved my self by all Lawful Compliance and Conformity to
that Law, that I might win them, (preserving the Truth of the Gospel, and my
own and the Gentiles Liberty.) When I converse with the Gentiles that are not
under the Law of Moses, and have no written Law of God, as the Jews have, but
only the Law of Nature, and Men's Laws, I fit my self and Doctrine to their
State and Capacity, to win them, not pleading the written Law with them, as I
do with the Jews: (Though I am far from thinking or living as lawless; for I am
under Christ's own Government and Law) To the scrupulous ignorant sort of
Christians, and those that are yet unsettled, and liable to temptation, I
behaved my self with all winning Compliance and Pleasingness; knowing, that
stiff Singularity, and affected or unnecessary Crossness to others, is not the
way to gain, but to alienate them. And though I know that all will not be won
by such Compliance, yet I am made all things lawful toward all Men, that by
this my duty I may save some.

23 And this I do for the gospels sake, that I might be partaker thereof with
you.

23. All this I do, not as a man pleasing Flatterer, for Lucre or Repute; but
to promote the Ends of the Gospel with you, that you and I may rejoice therein
together.

24. Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all, but one receives the
prize? So run that ye may obtain.

24. As it is not every one that runs that wins the Prize; so it is not
every one that preaches, or professes Christianity, that is accepted to
Salvation. Therefore so preach, and so live, as answers your Covenant and
Profession, and as God has promised to accept and reward.

25. And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things:
Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.

25. Even in Ludicrous Plays, Races, Combats, etc. Men prepare their Bodies by
Abstinence and strict Diet, and this but for a withering Garland, Applause, or
Prize: And shall not we do much more for the Heavenly Glory?

26. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that
beats the air:

26. I therefore do not run in vain, as not knowing for what, or as by Sloth to
lose the Prize; nor fight I as Fencers, for mere Show and Ostentation.

27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any
means when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway.

27. But my first work is about my self, to mortify and subdue all my Fleshly
Desires, which stand against my Duty, and to keep my Body in constant
subjection, lest when by Preaching I have won others, I should as a carnal Man
be lost and cast away my self.

(And if you are true to the Gospel, and to your own Souls, and would not prove
self-deceiving Hypocrites, take you the same course, and devote all your
Interests to the Ends of your Profession, and the saving of Souls, in stead of
pleading for and abusing your real or pretended Liberties, to the tempting of
others, and hindering their Salvation, and boasting of this pernicious Folly, as
the Knowledge wherein you excel others.)

ANNOTATIONS.
I. THe Darkness of this Chapter comes from the Uncertainty in Matter of Fact,
what was the Accusation that was made by the envious proud Teachers against
Paul. 1. Whether it were that he labored like a Secular Man, and lived not on
the Church. 2. Or, That he was a poor Mechanic Fellow, that at last must be
cast on their Charge or Charity. 3. Or, That he solicited them for
Contributions to the Poor at Jerusalem, or for others; and they suggested, that
he partly meant himself. It were easier to expound many Verses, did we
certainly know the Case objected.

II. They that from ver. 16, 17, 18. gather a sort of Counsels which make no
Duty or Sin, and a State of Perfection which is no Duty, utterly abuse the
Text, which intimates no such thing; and are sufficiently before confuted, on
Chap. 7. about the Case of Marriage.

III. Though Paul's becoming all things to all men, condemn their Humor that
in Converse, Congregations, Opinions, Practices, do proudly affect unnecessary
Oddness, that they may seem wiser and better than the rest, and justify
Austin's Resolution, to do as the Church does wherever he comes, in all
lawful things, to win Men by Approach, and not to alienate them by Crosness;
yet it no way countenanceth them, who as Temporizers, Man-pleasers, or for
Worldly Ends, or an Indifferency in Religion, for want of Judgment, or tender
Consciences and true Obedience to God, will conform themselves to any Sin which
Men's Laws or Customs shall make needful to their carnal Interest. And yet in
things antecedently Indifferent, Law and Custom may weigh down lighter Motives
that are on the other side, but not weightier Motives. True Prudence here must
hold the Scales, and determine what is Duty, and what is Sin.

CHAP. X.
1. MOreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all
our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; 2. And were
all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea; 3. And did all eat the
same spiritual meat; 4. And did all drink the same spiritual drink: (For they
drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ.)

1, 2, 3, 4. And because your boast of Knowledge, and your scandalous
uncharitable abuse of your Liberty, and insulting therein, give me cause to be
jealous of many among you, let me further remember you, That it is not your
being Baptized, and being Partakers of outward Privileges, and being eminent in
the Church, that will save you, if you live in Sin: For all the Israelites
passed through the Sea, and were under the Cloud, and so were typically
baptized by Covenant to Moses's Law; and they did all eat the Passover, which
was Sacramentally Spiritual Meat, and typically as our Eucharist; and they all
drank of the miraculous Rock-water often in the Wilderness, which Rock and Water
were typically or spiritually Christ and his Sacramental Blood.

5. But with many of them God was not well pleased: for they were overthrown in
the wilderness.

5. And yet with many, yea most of them, God was so offended by their Sin, that
he overthrew them in the Wilderness.

6. Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after
evil things, as they also lusted.

6. Now these were admonishing Types to us, and written to warn us, that we
lust not after forbidden gratifying of the Flesh, as they did: (If they are
accused as lusting in the Wilderness for Flesh, when they had only Manna for
forty years, what excess of Lust is it in them that take it for their Liberty
and Wisdom to serve their Flesh and Appetite, to the scandal of others by their
ill Example?)

7. Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, The people
sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

7. And take warning by them, and do not partake of Idols Feasts, and make a
sport of that which God is jealous in.

8. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in
one day three and twenty thousand.

8, And take warning by their Destruction, Number. 25.1, 2, 3. to avoid
Fornication, which some of you make light of.

9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were
destroyed of serpents.

9. And be warned by their Plagues, that you make not your Fleshly Lusts, and
your impatience of Sufferings, to be the Law and Measure of your Expectations
from God, as if he must needs do what your Flesh would have him, and allow you
to do what you desire.

10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of
the destroyer.

10. And let not the Life of Self-denial, and Sufferings in the Flesh, which
Christ calls you to, provoke you to murmur and be impatient under the Cross, or
weary of Christianity, lest you be destroyed by the Executioners of Gods
Justice, as they were by the Plague.

11. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

11. The History of them, and their Sins and Punishments, are written for the
use of all following Generations, even for us that live in the last Age of the
World, to warn us to avoid the like.

12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

12. Therefore in stead of Self-conceitedness and Self-confidence, let even
those that think best of themselves for Wisdom and Stability, take heed lest
they fall to Sin and Misery.

13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man: but God
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able; but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it.

13. There has yet no tempting Trial befallen you, but such as Men in your
State of Humanity ordinarily undergo; so that your Sufferings have been no
justification of any self-saving Compliance with Idolaters: And you have no
cause to distrust God for the time to come; for he is faithful, and will not
let your Trials be intolerable, but with the Trial will show you a safe passage
out of it at last, that by the forefight of that, and the breyity, you may be
able to undergo it.

14, 15. Wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry. I speak as to wise
men: judge ye what I say.

14, 15. As you plead for Wisdom, I will suppose I speak to Men of Wisdom, who
can judge of Reason; and I offer the Reason of my Exhortation to your wisest
Judgment.

16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood
of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ?

16. Is not our Communion in the Lords Supper, in Wine and Bread blessed, a
common Reception Sacramentally of the Blood and the Body of Christ? Do we not
join in a professed Reception of these, communicated to us by Christ?

17. For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of
that one bread.

17. For we that are many Persons, are one Church or Body of Christ, by
Covenant-union with him the Bread of Life, of whom we all Sacramentally and
professed'y partake; as many Grains of Corn make one Loaf and many Members one
Body.

18. Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the sacrifices
partakers of the altar?

18. Do not they that eat of the Sacrifices of the Jews, thereby profess
Worship to the God they sacrifice to?

19. What say I then? that the idol is any thing, or that which is offered in
sacrifice to idols is any thing? 20. But I say, that the things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not
that ye should have fellowship with devils.

19, 20. And now do not we know as well as others, that an Idol or Image is
nothing, (but Wood, Stone, Gold, etc.) and that the Meat that is offered them
is not in it self at all changed from what it was? But I say, that it is Devils
that seduce the Heathens to this Idolatry, and Devils whom they thereby obey,
and Devils whom they worship, as supposed Demigods, there represented; and
consequentially, Devils with whom they have this Federal Communion. And I would
not have you Christians to be Subjects and Communicants with Devils.

21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of devils.

21. Think not that you may do both: You cannot lawfully, acceptably, or
effectually, Sacramentally and Federally, communicate in the Blood and Body of
Christ, or receive that sacred Cup and Bread, and be made Members of him and
his Church, and also communicate in the Federal Sacrifices to Devils; no, not
with your Bodies, though you never so much despise them in your Hearts.

22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger then he?

22. Shall we provoke God by that which in the Second Commandment, and often,
he has told us, he will be a jealous Avenger of? Are we strong enough to
overcome him, or to bear the Wrath of the Almighty?

23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all things
are lawful for me, but all things edify not.

23. As I am from under Moses's Law, and not bound by it, as such; so also I
know that all Meats are in themselves now clean, and lawful to me: But lawful
things may be used contrary to the Will of God, the Ends of Christianity, and
the Edification of others; and the Law of Christ forbids us so to use them.

24. Let no man seek his own: but every man another wealth.

24. We are bound by Christ to love others as our selves, and therefore not to
prefer our own small and bodily Interest or Safety, before the spiritual,
greater Good of others; nor to do only what we think best for our selves, but
also what is best for others, (especially for the Church of Christ.)

25. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for
conscience sake. 26. For the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

25. If it be sold in the Shambles, it is common Food to you; your Consciences
need not ask whether it be unclean, or whether it was ever offered to any Idol.
26. God, that is the Lord of all the Earth, has allowed us all that is fit for
Food.

27. If any of them that believe not, bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to
go; whatsoever is set before you eat, asking no question for conscience sake.

27. As it is not unlawful when invited to go to a Feast to Unbelievers; so,
when you see cause to go, eat what is set before you, and question not the
Lawfulness of it your selves.

28. But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat
not, for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake. The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof.

28. But if any Man say, This is part of the Meat that was an Idol Sacrifice,
eat not of it, for his sake that told thee so, lest thou tempt him to venture
on Idol-Sacrifices; and for Conscience sake, that thou uncharitably seduce not
his Conscience. God has allowed thee lawful Meats enough; thou need not eat
to others hurt.

29. Conscience I say, not thine own, but of the others: for why is my liberty
judged of another man's conscience?

29. When I say Conscience, I mean, that you wrong not another Conscience. I
mean not that this Meat is unlawful to you, had you not been told it was
offered to Idols, or had eaten it privately, where no one was hurt by it: For
another Man's Conscience is not my Guide, nor makes Lawful Food Unlawful to me.
But Uncharitableness, and Hurtfulness to others, (as well as Corporal Idolatry)
I must make Conscience to avoid my self, as against the great Commands of
Christ.

30. For, if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for
which I give thanks?

30. For if I neither seem to worship the Idol my self, nor hurt another, but
with Thanksgiving eat what is set before me at a Common Feast, though another
expect that I should enquire whether it was not an Idols Sacrifice, I sin not,
nor ought he to speak evil of me as a Sinner.

31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory God.

31. Therefore, as in all that you do, so in these things, where God has made
no particular, common, determining Law, the Interest of our Great End, the
Glory of God, must be our common and most obliging Law: Neither eat, nor drink,
nor do any thing against the Glory of God, and your Reliligion, and the Good of
others, in which God is glorified. Yea, do nothing but what, as some Means,
has its tendency to his Glory; nothing that is either hurtful or vain.

32. Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
church of God:

Avoid all unnecessary things, which will be a stumbling, or hurtful
Temptation, to Jews or Heathens, or the Church of God, or any Members of it.

(So dangerously are abundance of Religious Persons mistaken, that scruple not
offending or hardening the ungodly by sour Contempt, and causeless Singularity,
and that take displeasing mistaken Censorious Christians to be the Offense here
meant, when pleasing them by seeming to own their Mistakes (as Peter did, Gal.
2. by his Separation) is a usual hurtful way of scandalizing them.)

33. Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but
the profit of many, that they may be saved.

33. Imitate me in this, who in things which God has lest undetermined to my
power, do choose that part which pleases other Men, so far as is for their
profit, and do not humor or please my own self-will, for any carnal Interest
of my own, but do that which tends to the good of most, even their Salvation.

Note, O happy had it been with the Christian World, if the Bishops had been of
Paul's mind, and had not chosen to silence, banish, burn, and murder thousands
of Gods faithful Servants, for not humouring their Wills, and obeying
unnecessary Canons, imposed by Papal Usurpation.

CHAP. XI.
1. BE ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

1. In all this self-denial which I tell you I have used, I follow Christ, who
denied his very Life for us. Therefore follow me, as I follow Christ.

2. Now I praise you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
ordinances as I delivered them to you.

2. It is your Praise (as well as your Duty and Safety) that you remember what
Doctrine and Orders we Apostles of Christ at first delivered to you, and keep
that which then we taught you.

3. But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the
head of the woman, is the man; and the head of Christ, is God.

3. And now to your Case about Church Order, I first remember you, that the due
Subordination of Persons must be kept: Christ is the Head of all Men, high and
low; and the Man is the Head of the Woman, who therefore must show Subjection;
and God is the Head of Christ, as Man and Mediator.

4. Every man praying, or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonors
his head.

4. It being the Custom then to cover the Faces of those that were put to any
great shame, a Man that shall vail his Head and Face, does thereby take
Reproach unto himself.

5. But every woman that prays, or prophesies with her head uncovered,
dishonors her head: for that is even all one as if she were shaven.

5. But for a Woman to be uncovered in the Assembly at Public Worship, Prayer,
or Prophesying, is a dishonor to her, as contrary to the sign of Subjection
which is her Duty.

( Note, That the Woman is said to Pray or Prophecy, that joyneth with the
Church therein.)

As Custom makes it a shame to her to be shaven, so also to be unvailed.

( Note, That this was a changeable Custom, and is contrary now with us.)

6. For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it be a
shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered.

6. The Custom of long Hair as a kind of Covering, pleads also for the Custom
of Vailing.

7. For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the
image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man.

7. The Man's Face is used well to be uncovered, as being first made in the
Image of God, and so a Beam of his Splendor: But the Woman made out of Man, is
subject to him and his Splendor.

8. For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man.

8. For at the Creation the Man was first made, and the Woman was made out of
the Man.

9. Neither was the man created for the woman: but the woman for the man.

9. And so God made the Woman after, to be a meet Help for the Man; and not the
Woman first, and then the Man, as a Helper to her: (Though they must now be
mutual Helpers.)

10. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head, because of the
angels.

10. Therefore the Woman ought to be veiled, to signify her subjection to the
Power of Man, yea, and especially her Reverence to the Ministers of God, (and
perhaps of the Angels that are Spectators of the Church assembles: Doctrinally
both are true; though which is here meant, cannot be proved.)

11. Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman
without the man in the Lord.

11. Yet Men have no Being but by Women, nor without Men do Women exist or
propagate; and this is by the Ordination of the Lord.

12. For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman: but
all things of God.

12. For as at the first Creation the Woman was taken out of the Man, so in
Generation the Man is of the Woman, and all things are of God.

13. Judge in your selves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered?

13. The signification of being uncovered, being by Custom a Note Superiority,
judge in your selves whether such be decent for a Woman at the Churches Prayers.

14. Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it
is a shame unto him?

14. And when common Custom has made the wearing of Hair at length the Note of
the Female Sex, does not Nature it self tell you, that it is a shame for a Man
to be so like a Woman? (when God forbids us so much as to be clothed as
Women, to confound the Sexes, which must needs be visibly distinguished.)

15. But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given
her for a covering.

15. But Use t^lls us, that for Women to let their Hair grow out at length, is
a signification of Modesty, as a kind of Covering, and so is decent to them.

16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
churches of God.

16. But if any will contentiously dispute against what I say, though I would
make no greater a matter of such things than the nature of them requires, let
this Answer suffice to resolve sober Minds: The Custom of all the Churches is
against Women's being uncovered, as an unseemly thing; and you should not easily
be different from all the Churches, in a Matter which depends on the
Signification of an Action, which Use and common Opinion must interpret. We,
that must be as concordant as we can, must not affect dissimilitude.

17. Now in this that I declare unto you, I praise you not, that you come
together, not for the better, but for the worse.

17. But about your Church Assemblies I have a greater matter, of which I must
blame you; that you come together for holy Communion, not as you ought, but in
sinful sort.

18. For first of all, when ye come together in the church, I hear that there
be divisions among you; and I partly believe it.

18. For first, when your coming together in one Church, to profess Union and
Communion, as Members of one Body in holy Love, yet I hear credibly, that you
even there show your Divisions, and are of dissenting Minds, and Parties, and
Practices.

19. For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved,
may be made manifest among you.

19. For God will permit Heresies, or Sects and Divisions, to arise among you,
to try you, that it may be seen who are sound, well settled, approved
Christians, (when the Chaff flies away.)

20. When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the
Lords supper. 21. For in eating every one takes before other his own supper:
and one is hungry, and another is drunken.

20, 21. When you meet in one place, as a Church, to profess Unity in Christ,
it is not like the Supper of the Lord, which* is a holy Feast of Sacramental
Unity, where all had the same Food, and the same Sacramental Body and Blood of
Christ: For you first bring to the Church every one his own Supper for himself,
instead of a Common Feast of Love, and the Rich eat and drink to the full, and
the Poor are hungry.

22. What, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church
of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to you? shall I praise
you in this? I praise you not.

22. If you must d^ffer according to your Riches, do it in your own Houses, and
pretend not a holy Love-Feast in such Disparities; and abuse not
Church Assemblies and Feasts, by your Fullness, and uncharitable Propriety; and
shame not the Poor, that should be Feasted with you. This is a Practice worthy
to be blamed in you.

23. For I have received of the Lord that which I also delivered unto you, that
the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread: 24. And
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body,
which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.

23, 24. For I have not taught you of my own invention the Doctrine of the
Sacrament, but I received it from Christ (partly by them that were present, and
partly by his inspiration,) to wit, that the same night in which he was, etc.

Note, 1. It was Bread that he took, it was Bread which he brake, after
Thanksgiving or Benediction, it was Bread which he gave them.

2. Yet it was his Body which he gave them, Sacramentally and Relatively: As
the same thing which is material^y Gold and Silver, may formally be the Kings
Coin, and Current Money, or a badge of Honor, or the Kings Image, etc.

3. That Christ gave it them together plurally, and bid them take it as
personal applyers, each to himself.

4. That it is his Will and Institution that this use should be continued to
the Church, in commemoration of his sacrificed Body and Blood.

25. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying,
This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me.

25. So also he took the Cup after Supper, saying, The Wine in this Cup is by
Sacramental signification my Blood, as it purchases (as a Sacrifice) and
seals the New Covenant or Statute: Use it thus frequently in your holy
Communion, in remembrance of my Bloodshed.

26. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the
Lords death till he come.

26. For by the frequent use of this Bread and Cup, ye are to represent and
declare the Sacrificing of Christ for our Sins, till he come in Glory.

27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

27. And it being so sacred an Institution, for so high a Use, whoever shall
profane it, and use it but as common Food, or contrary to the holy Ends of it,
which is the signification of Gods Love to us by the Sacrifice of Christ for
our Sins, and our Signification and Covenant of Love and Union with him and one
another, he partaketh in Guilt with them that despise and crucify him.

28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink
of that cup.

28. But let Men try and examine themselves, whether their Hearts and Practice
do answer the necessary Ends of this holy Institution, [coming to it as
reverent Partakers of the Sacramental or Representative Sacrificed Body and
Blood of Christ, in the penitent and believing sense of their Sin, and need of
a Savior, and of his pardoning and healing Grace trusting the Hopes of their
Salvation on him, and sincerely renewing their Self-dedication to him, and
Covenant of New Obedience to him, in Love and Unity with his Church, even all
sincere Believers,] and so let them comfortably herein communicate.

29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation
to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

29. For he that eats and drinks otherwise than thus, that is, profanely,
and not to the Ends of the Institution, does but draw Judgment on himself, in
stead of Grace.

30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.

30. For this very Sin of Profaning the holy Ordinance, God has inflicted on
many of you Weakness and Sickness, and Death on some. (For God uses Paternal
Castigation, Justice, and Punishments even on his Family.)

31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.

31. And if we would examine and judge our selves, and so come to this Feast as
true penitent Believers, with a right Intent, and holy Reverence, we should
escape such castigatory Penalties, and the Judgment of God.

32. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not
be condemned with the world.

32. But these Judgments of God on his Family are not by destructive Revenge,
but Fatherly Chastisements, to bring us to Repentance, that we may not be
condemned with the unholy World.

33. Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another.

33. Wherefore, as Brethren, do all in that impartial Unity and Love, as
answers your Profession and Christ's Institution, and not in Selfishness,
Division, or Profaneness.

34. And if any man hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto
condemnation. And the rest will I set in order when I come.

34. Let the hungry eat at home, and not disorder the sacred Communion, and use
it carnally, or as a common Feast, and that with uncharitable inequality; lest
your profanation of so holy a thing bring down Gods Judgments on you. As for
other Points of Church Order, I will determine them when I come.

ANNOTATIONS.
I. AS to the Custom of Men and Women's Covering and Hair, mentioned ver. 13,
14, etc. 1. It is certain, that the Significancy is the thing that must decide
the Case; and that as Words, so this Action is an arbitrary Sign, and depends
on the Custom and Opinion of the Country as the Expositor: And that with us,
where Men's being uncovered signifies Reverence and Submission to a Superior,
the Case quite differs from that of the Corinthians.

2. And yet the Custom is so common in most Nations for Women to wear their
Hair at full length, and Men to cut it, that it seems there is somewhat in
Nature that tends to this difference, (as there is in Kneeling and
Prostration, to show Humiliation and Submission:) And to consound the
Difference of Sexes in Habits, is a great Sin, tending to Debauchery, and to
hide unclean and Beastly Conversation. And therefore though a Man may in such
things, of themselves indifferent, do as the worst do in an undecent Fashion,
to aovid some greater Evil, (as among Thieves or Persecutors to escape unknown;
as one may wear Women's Clothes to escape from unjust Imprisonment, or Death:)
yet sober godly Persons should not without such necessity imitate the Fashions,
which are the Ensigns of Pride, Debauchery, or any sinful self-distinguishing
sort of Men or Women. Apply this to our Case of Men's wearing great Periyuks,
and that of Women's Hair, who sell it for that use; and to the Fashion of Women's
naked Breasts, and Gowns with long superfluous Trains, while the Poor want
necessary Clothing, etc. What would Paul have said, if any of these had been
then the Case?

II. It is a most doleful Case, that Satan has prevailed to turn this sacred
Institution of Christ's Supper into the matter of bloody Contention with some,
and of uncomfortable distracting Scruples and Fears with others; when as Christ
ordained it to be the firm Bond of constant Love and Unity, and the great
Comfort of the Souls of penitent Believers.

1. On one side, by over-doing in the Dogmatical and Ceremonious part, it is
turned into the Monsters of Transubstantiation, the Priests Communion alone
while the People look on, a half Sacrament without the Cup, a Latin Mass not
understood, a Real Sacrifice offered for the Dead, in stead of a Representative
Commemorative Sacrifice; the Adoration of Bread as God, supposed to be no
Bread, but the Body of God indeed, etc. And it is made an Engine to wrack Men's
Consciences, and tear the Church, by excommunicating all that dare not Conform
to all the Dresses which usurping Domination has painted this Sacrament
withal: And the Blood of Christ's faithful Servants is shed, for not following
all these Opinions and antic Ceremonies that the Sacrifice of Christ's Body and
Blood is abused by: So that, alas! how many Churches are torn, and persecute
one another, for not using this Sacrament of Love and Communion according to
those Devices of Men, which Peter or Paul never used or approved?

2. On the other side, many godly Persons, quite misunderstanding the Words of
Paul, about [ unworthy receiving], come with such an excess of Reverence and
Fear, lest they eat and drink their own Damnation, that either they seldom
venture to Communicate, (which the old Christians did oftener than every Lords
Day) or else they are more terrified far, than comforted: And looking that God
should suddenly comfort them in the very Act of Receiving, while they fight
against their own Comforts by Mistakes and unbelieving Fears, when they feel
not their Expectation answered, they are ready to despair, as having received
unworthily. And should they do so by Prayer and Hearing, what a Torment and
Slavery would they make of Religion, by their Error?

3. And yet the Ignorant and Ungodly, who truly receive unworthily, can from
the bare doing of the outward Act, steal to themselves that deceitful Comfort
by which they are emboldned to go on in Sin, supposing that now God pardons
all. Thus Satan has turned Christ's Sacred Ordinance against himself, and the
Peace of the Church, and the Comfort of some, and the Reformation of others;
and carries on these most horrid Depravations with such odious Success, that
without Wonders of gracious Providence, there appears no probability of
Deliverance from these heavy Effects of Sacrament-distraction.

CHAP. XII.
1. NOw concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant. 2.
Ye know that ye were Gentiles carried away unto these dumb idols, even as ye
were led.

1, 2. As to your case of discerning Spirits and Spiritual Gifts, it is of
great importance that you should not be ignorant, lest you should take evil
Spirits for the Spirit of God, or not distinguish the various Gifts of Gods own
Spirit in Believers: In your Heathen state you were carried away with Idol
Oracles and Worship.

3. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of
God, calls Jesus accursed: and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the holy Ghost.

3. First, in general you may be sure, that none of those Idol Oracles or
Blasphemers that speak against Christ, and Anathematize him, as Infidels do, do
speak by the Spirit of God. (For God's Spirit bore uncontrolable witness to
Christ, by Prophecy, Resurrection, Miracles, and Holiness.) And on the
contrary side, he that believes and confesses that Jesus is the Lord, the
true Son of God and our Mediator, has surely learnt this of the holy Ghost,
his outward testimony in the foresaid evidence, and his inward teaching. (For
do but truly believe the truth of Christ himself, and the truth of all his
Doctrine will undeniably follow.)

4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. 5. And there are
differences of administrations, but the same Lord. 6. And there are diversities
of operations, but it is the same God, which works all in all.

4, 5, 6. And as Gifts are ascribed to the Holy Ghost, and Administrations to
the Son, and Operations to the Father Almighty; so in all these there is great
diversities, both of kinds and of degrees.

7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.

7. But all the gifts of the Spirit are given for the Churches edification, or
to do good with. (Though some of them are found in unholy Men, who perish in
their sin.)

8. For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom; to another the word
of knowledge by the same Spirit;

8. The same Spirit makes one eminently wise and prudent in applying sacred
Truth to the Case of the Hearers; and it gives another an eminent knowledge of
sacred Mysteries.

9. To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the
same Spirit;

9. Another he makes eminently strong in Faith, for extraordinary Effects; and
another has the Gift of miraculous Healing of the Sick, (when the Spirit will
have it done.)

10. To another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another
discerning of Spirits; to another diverse kinds of tongues; to another the
interpretation of tongues.

10. To another, other sorts of powerful Miracles; to another, to speak by
immediate Inspiration, either Predictions, or powerful Explications and
Applications of Gods Word; to another, a quick and sure Discerning whether Men
pretending to the Spirit speak from God or not; to another, the speaking of
diverse Languages; to another, the Interpretation of those Languages to them
that understand them not.

11. But all these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every
man severally as he will.

11. And though these are very various, and greatly d^fference Man from Man,
yet it is the same Spirit that works them all, diversifying as he freely and
wisely pleases.

12. For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that
one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ.

12. For here One and Many well consist: As the Natural Body is but One Body,
but made of Many Members, differing in number, excellency, and office; so is
Christ and his Church.

13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit.

13. F^r as Sacramentally all visible Members are baptized into one Universal
Church of professed Christian, and drink the Cap of holy Union and Communion in
the Lords Supper; so all true, living, saved Members are baptized by one Spirit
into one Universal Church of true spiritual Christians, and drink the true
uniting Spirit of Communion.

14, 15, 16, 17. For the body is not one member, but many. If the foot shall
say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of
the body? And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the
body; is it therefore not of the body? If the whole body were an eye, where
were the hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?

14, 15, 16, 17. The Body is not one Member as to Number, Kind, or Office; but
many united: And so in Christ's Body the Church: If a mistaken Christian himself
should say, Because I am low in place, Grace, or Gifts, I am none of the
Church; this will not prove or make him none: Much less, if others, by false
Censure or Church-tyranny, say he is none, or excommunicate him for dissenting
from their vain Appendages or Opinions. If all were of one Office, Stature,
Complexion, or degree of Grace or Knowledge, who would be Rulers, and who
Subjects? who Teachers, and who Learners? How many Offices of Piety and Charity
would be unperformed? God has not a Church on Earth where all Members are so
wise, as besides the Essentials of Christianity, to know all the Integrals;
much less, to know the numerous little Accidents of Forms and Ceremonies, and
all that is really or pretendedly Indifferent and Lawful (which Domineerers can
invent) to be so indeed, and so to be all united in such things indifferent.

18. But now has God set the members, every one of them in the body, as it
has pleased him. 19. And if they were all one member, where were the body? 20.
But now are they many members, yet but one body.

18, 19, 20. But as the Wise Creator in Nature, so as our Redeemer, Governor,
and Regenerator by Grace, God has chosen great diversity of Members, as to
Office and Gifts; and he himself, as it pleased him, has set them in his
Church. (And who are they that presume against him, to censure or cast out the
meanest of such?) Were they all numerically, or in Office, or degree of
Knowledge and Grace, but one, or equal, the Church would not be such a thing as
God has made it. But now God, that freely delights in the variety of his
Works, has made it one Body of Christ, composed of variety of Members.

21. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again
the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

21. As the principal Members of the Body need the less principal; so the
Rulers, Pastors, and wisest Members of the Church need even those weak and
inferior Christians, whom surly Censurers, and proud or contentious Usurpers,
will cast out.

22. Nay, much more those members of the body which seem to be more feeble, are
necessary.

22. Yea, the Parts which are least honored, and feeble, have a peculiar
necessary Office, which none of the rest is able to perform or supply.

23. And those members of the body, which we think to be less honorable, upon
these we bestow more abundant honor, and our uncomely parts have more abundant
comeliness.

23. And those Parts which we account shameful, we most carefully clothe and
cover, to hide either Deformity or Shame, (and do not reproach, neglect, or
cast away.)

24. For our comely parts have no need: but God has tempered the body
together, having given more abundant honor to that part which lacked: 25. That
there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the
same care one for another.

24, 25. Our comely Parts need not our care to adorn and cover them from Shame:
But God has so contempered the Parts, that we should more care to secure from
dishonor the Parts that need our care: That Unity and Love of the Whole should
cause such Love and Care for every Part, that the Parts should not envy, or
strive against, or cut off, or divide from one another.

Note, 1. O how clean contrary to this are the tearing Canons and Cruelties
that cut off all Members that think any of their needless Impositions unlawful!

2. And here Paul tells us the true Cause of Schism: Not Weakness of
Christians, but the Butchery of that Clergy that cut off the Weak, when they
should carefully hide their Dishonor in Love; and that revile them whom they
should love as themselves.

26. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it: or one
member be honored, all the members rejoice with it.

26. As all the Body condoleth or rejoiceth with the pain or welfare of every
Member, even the weakest; so is it with the Living Members of Christ.

Note, Therefore they are but Hypocrites, like Wooden Legs, that have no such
sense; and traiterous Enemies of Christ, that hate, and reproach, and destroy
his true Members.

27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

27. Thus must it be with you, that are the several Members of Christ's Church.

28. And God has set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets,
thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps,
governments, diversities of tongues.

28. And God has set in his Church Diversity and Disparity, both in qualifying
Gifts and Offices: As, in the first place, are Apostles, sent immediately by
Christ, to be the Chief Witnesses and Recorders of his Works and Words. Next
them, Prophets, immediately inspired to reveal his W^ll: And next them, settled
Teachers of his Record^d Word: And then, Workers of Miracles, for convi^cing
Infidels, and confirming Believers: Then, extraordinary Gifts of Healing; and
eminent Helpers of the Churches by Charity and special Care, especially for
Ministers and the Poor; and Governments, to arbitrate Differences, and keep
Order; and Languages, to spread and confirm the Word.

29, 30. Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers
of miracles? Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all
interpret? 31. But covet earnestly the best gifts:

29, 30, 31. None of all these Gifts or Offices are common to all. But desire
most that which is best and most edifying.

Note, That even Apostles are but Chief Members, and Peter himself not the
Head, but one of them.

31. And yet show I unto you a more excellent way.

31. Yet true Christian Love excels all these Gifts and Offices.

CHAP. XIII.
1. THough I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity,
I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.

1. Lest you should too much trust to any of these forementioned Gifts, which
Christ gives to some that perish, you must know, that the true Divine Nature,
proper to Saints, consists in Charity, (which is the predominant Love of God,
and of Saints as Saints, and Men as Men, as God is in them, and served by
them.) And if I be without this, could I preach, discourse, and pray in better
Language and Oratory than any mortal Man, even as well as Angels, what were
this Voice to God, that is a Spirit, and looks to the Heart, but even as the
tinkling of a Musical Instrument?

2. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
and have no charity, I am nothing.

2. And though I could speak by Inspiration (as Balaam did) of things present
or things to come, and could understand all the deep and difficult Points in
Gods Word and Works, and were the most excellent Philosopher, and could truly
open all the Principles and Compositions in Nature; and though I could believe
even to the Production of the most miraculous Effects, and yet have not this
predominant Love of God, and of Saints, and of Men, as to Gods Acceptance, and
my own Salvation, I am as a mere Nothing: None of these Shadows will do my Work.

3. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my
body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing.

3. And though I give all that I have to the Poor, either to be well spoken of,
or through fear of Hell, or a conceit of obliging God by Merit, or out of mere
natural Pity, or any other Cause, which includes not Love, it will not profit
me to Salvation, Yea, if for these lower Ends I should forsake Life it self,
without the predominant Love of God and Man, it would be as nothing to me.

4. Charity suffers long and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up,

4. Love is kind, inclining to do good, and is patient, and can bear much wrong
from others, (as Self-love makes us bear much more from our selves.) Love
envieth* not the Reputation, Applause Precedence, or Profit of others. Love
does not vaunt and lift up a Man's self in his own esteem, or desire to be
lifted up by others, above our Worth and Place, but in Honor prefers others.

5. Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil,

5. Love does not break out into injurious Reflections, or Passions, or uncomely
Deportment toward others: It is not selfish and seeks not our own
inordinately, to the injury, neglect, or greater hurt of others: Is not
provoked to any uncharitable thought, word, or deed, by small Injuries or
Occasions, but bears, forbeareth, and forgiveth; and does not think evil of
any groundlesly, or till constrained, nor design evil or hurt against any
unnecessarily or unjustly.

6. Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth:

6. It does not rejoice in the Sins that others commit, nor in the Wrongs they
undergo, nor themselves to do unjustly against any, or to be prosperous therein
against them.

7. Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things.

7. It does by others as we feel we do by our selves; that is, it b^areth with
the Faults of Men so far as ^^ not against their own or others good: It is
inclined to believe the best of all Men, till Evidence constrain us to know the
worst, (not neglecting such cautelous suspicion, as may save us from rash and
foolish trust.) It still hops well of others, as far as there is any ground
of hope: It endures hurt and wrong from others, when it is for their own or
others greater good.

8. Charity never fails: but whether there be prophecies they shall fail;
whether there be tongues they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall
vanish away.

8. Holy Love is an everlasting Quality and Employment, and shall not cease,
but be perfected at Death, and in Heaven: But Prophesying, Languages, Sciences,
and all the art^ficial and imperfect sort of Knowledge which now we have, shall
cease, as useless there.

9, 10. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part. But when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.

9, 10. For here the manner of our knowing in the Body is imperfect, and the
measure is all inadequate: we know nothing wholly, but some part of things; and
so we speak, even in Prophesying and Preaching: But Perfection will end all
this Imperfection.

11. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought
as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things.

11. As Manhood, and increase of Wit and Experience, change the Childish
Speech, Understanding, and Thoughts, into that which is true and more perfect;
so much more will the Life to come do.

12. For now we see through a glass darkly: but then face to face: now I know
in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.

12. For our Knowledge now in this Body and World, is by imperfect Media, as we
see things in a Glass; and know by Riddles, Parables, or Similitudes, a
superficial Glimpse: But then we shall know as Men that see each others Faces,
by intuition. Now we know but little Parts, and Outsides, and Accidents of
things, and nothing adequately: but then we shall know in the World of Spirits,
as those Spirits now know us; which is better than we know our selves.

13. And now abides faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of
these is charity.

13. I conclude therefore, That though now our State of Grace consist of Faith,
Hope, and Love, the Greatest of these is Love: (For it is the Divine Nature,
the Everlasting Work, the Souls Felicity, even its Complacency in God, and in
all his Sa^nts, and all his Works: and it is the End, to which Faith and Hope
are but the Means.

ANNOTATIONS.
1. YEt Faith and Hope have their peculiar Offices, which Love alone cannot
perform: As the Heart cannot do the Work of the Hand or Eye.

2. By Faith is meant, Believing and Trusting in God through Christ for Grace
and Glory, And by Hope is meant a desirous comforting Expectation of the Good
promised and believed.

3. It follows, That he has the most excellent Knowledge, who has most
holly Love: And all the Learning that kindles not this Love, is but dreaming,
doting, diverting, and deceiving Vanity.

4. The English abuse of the Word [ charity] deceives many, as if it were
nothing but Giving to the Poor; But it is the Love of God and Holiness, and of
holy Persons, and of our Neighbors as our selves; and specially of the holy
Celestial Society, Christ, Angels, and Saints.

5. By this we see, that those Church-Rulers, Preacher, Writers, Disputers, and
all other Malignants, who zealously labor to destroy Love, and to persuade
Christians to hate, and persecute, and destroy one another, for their selfish
Interests, Opinions, or Factions, whatever they think of themselves, are
Diabolists and Cainnites, the Devils Slaves, and in his Image do his Work.

6. It Is made a doubt by some, Whether Faith and Hope continue not in Heaven;
because, say they, How shall we know things past, (as the Creation, Flood,
etc.) but by Believing? And shall we not Believe and Hope for the Perpetuity of
Glory? But, 1. We know not now in what manner God will make known things to us
there: Whether in seeing him, we shall see all things? or how? 2. However, it
will not be the same things that are called Faith and Hope, which are exercised
on Promises, and are but Means to that Perfection which is their End: So that
if you call them by the same Names, they will be but equivocal.

7. This much tells us what Measure of Faith and Hope are necessary to
Salvation, viz. so much as shall cause in us sincere Love to God and Holiness,
and Heaven, to one another.

8. This tells us what those Texts do mean, which promise the Spirit of
Sanctification to penitent Believers: viz. The Holy Ghost does but prepare us,
and open the Door by Faith and Hope, that by them, as means, he may excite holy
Love, and as a Spirit of Love dwell in us, and possess us.

9. This teaches Ministers how to Preach, and People what and how to hear,
read, meditate, and confer, and live; and what true Religion is, viz. To do all
as may most kindle holy Love, as we use the Bellows to kindle the Fire. Pure
Religion, and undefiled, is to visit the Fatherless and Widows in adversity,
and keep our selves unspotted of the World.

10. This teaches as what Fear or God to use: None that breeds hard thoughts
of God, or quenches holy Love; but a Reverence of him, and a Fear lest by S^n
we make our selves unlovely to him, and fall under that Justice is holy and
good, even when it destroys the wicked. Other Fear of God is sinful
Superstition.

CHAP. XIV.
1. FOllow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may
prophecy.

1. The sum of my Advice is, That above all you value and pursue Charity, (or
holy Love:) But desire also Spiritual Gifts, in subordination to it, and for
the profitable exercise of it; and therefore prefer Prophecy, (which is
speaking by immediate Inspiration; to the Instruction and Edification of
others) as most profitable.

2. For he that speaks in an unknown tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto
God: for no man understands him; howbeit in the spirit he speaks mysteries.

2. For he that speaks in an unknown Language, speaks not to the
Understanding of Man, though God understand him: For though he speak never so
high and excellent Mysteries, no Man that knows not that Language
understands him.

3. But he that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, and exhortation,
and comfort.

3. But he that intelligibly applies Gods Word to the Hearers, speaks so as
conduces to their Edification, and Exhortation, and Comfort, which are the
Ends of your Assemblies.

4. He that speaks in an unknown tongue, edifieth himself: but he that
prophesies edifieth the church.

4. It is supposed, that he that speaks in a Language unknown to the People,
understands it himself, and so may be edified himself: (For the Spirit of God
did not move Men to speak like Parrots, they knew not what.) But he that by
Gods Spirit instructs and exhorts others, edifieth the Church; for which
End you meet.

5. I would that ye all spoke with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied; for
greater is he that prophesies, then he that speaks with tongues, except he
interpret, that the church may receive edifying.

5. I would you had all such knowledge of Languages as is useful to propagate
the Gospel: But I more wish, as Moses, that all the Lords People were Prophets,
that is, inspired to speak wisely and zealously the Will of God to Men. For he
is the Greatest in the Church, who is most Edifying; and that is he that
prophesies, more than he that speaks strange Language, unless he interpret
it to the Churches Edification.

6. Now brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tougues, what shall I profit
you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by
prophesying, or by doctrine?

6. What the better will you be for speaking Languages to you, except I either
reveal to you something immediately from God, or open to you some Truths which
you knew not before, or from God urge you to some needful Duty, or Doctrinally
expound to you the Matters of Faith and Obedience recorded in the Gospel.

7. And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except
they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or
harped?

7. Even the sound of lifeless things, as Musical Instruments, being used for
some signification, are useless, if by distinction their signification be not
perceptible.

8. For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to
the battle?

8. You may learn this of Soldiers, how vain the unintelligible Sound of the
Trumpet is.

9. So likewise you, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be
understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the
air.

9. So if you speak not intelligibly to the Hearers, what the better are they?
You do but speak into the air.

10. There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of
them is without signification.

10. Even the Voices of Birds and Beasts have their useful significancy to Man,
and to one another: much more of Men.

11. Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that
speaks, a barbarian; and he that speaks shall be a barbarian unto me.

11. Therefore what I understand not, is of no mor use to me, than to a
Barbarian of another Language.

12. Even so ye, for as much as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye
may excel to the edifying of the church.

12. Therefore as you much desire Spiritual Gifts, prefer those that most
edify, and seek them not for vain glory.

13. Wherefore let him that speaks in an unknown tongue, pray that he may
interpret.

13. Let him that has the Gifts of Languages, pray for the Gift of edifying
Interpretation.

14. For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my
understanding is unfruitful.

14. If I pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit prays, but others understand
me not, and cannot profitably join with me.

15. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also.

15. Therefore when I pray or sing by the Gift of unknown Tongues, I will also
pray and sing intelligibly, for edification.

16. Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how sholl he that occupies
the room, of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say.

16. If others join not with thee, it is but a private Exercise, and not a
Church-exercise: And how shall the Vulgar join by consent, and say, Amen, to
what they do not understand?

17. For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified.

17. Thy Thanksgiving is a good Work; but what is another or the Church the
wiser for it?

18. I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than you all:

18. I thank God he has given the Gift of more Languages to me, than to any of
you.

19. Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding,
that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue.

19. Yet in the Worshipping Assembly, (which is the Church) I prefer a few
intelligible Words which may teach others, before all that can be said for
ostentation, and are unintelligible.

20. Brethren be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye
children, but in understanding be men.

20. Be not like Children, that l^ve unedifying Gingles; but imitate them in
harmlesness: but as Men, value and use that which increases Wisdom and
Understanding.

21. In the law it is written, With men of other tongues and other lips, will I
speak unto this people: and yet for all that will they not hear me, says the
Lord.

21. It is spoken in Isaiah 14.11. by God, That with Men of, etc. to show their
hardheartedness, that would neither hear their own Prophets, nor Strangers sent
to them by the Providence of God.

22. Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them
that believe not: but prophesying serves not for them that believe not, but
for them which believe.

22. So that the miraculous Gift of Languages is to convince Unbelievers, of
that which the Church believes already: But Prophetical opening the Doctrine
of Christ, for further edification, is appointed for them that are already
Believers.

23. If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all
speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers,
will they not say that ye are mad?

23. Surely you should not meet or worship God scandalously, like mad Men: But
if the whole Church do meet in one place, (as Churches then did) and all speak
in unknown Tongues, the Unlearned and Unbelievers will take you all for mad
Phanaticks.

24. But if all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all:

24. But if all that speak do by Gods Spirit use convincing Evidence in
Explication and Application, they all convince him, and show him his Condition.

25. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down
on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.

25. And this searching convincing Light will make them join with you in the
reverent Worship of God, and make them report that God is in your Church, a a
holy Assembly.

26. How is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you has a
psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an
interpretation. Let all things be done to edifying.

26. Therefore let all your G^fts, whether of Psalmody, or Doctrine, or
Languages, or Revelation, or Interpretation, be used to Edification, which is
the true End of Church Assemblies: And the End is your Directory, in the use of
all undetermined Accidents of the Means.

27. If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by
three, and that by course; and let one interpret.

27. If you will use your Gift of Languages, let it be done by no more than
two or three, one after another; and let some interpret it to the Unlearned in
the Church.

28. But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the church; and
let him speak to himself, and to God.

28. That which only God and your selves understand, let none but God and your
selves hear; and speak not that in the Church which they cannot understand.

29. Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge.

29. And the Prophets also must do all to Edification, and therefore must speak
no more than may edisie the Church, which is but two or three at an Assembly,
the rest judging.

30. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold
his peace,

30. If God immediately inspire another then to speak, let the first give way
to him by silence.

31. For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted.

31. For all that are Prophets, or are then prophetically inspired, may
prophecy in order, that all in the Church may learn, and be exhorted, and
comforted.

32. And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.

32. And whereas Men may pretend to be inspired of God, and that to speak just
at that time, when it is not so (as their own Understanding must judge of the
edifying Season and Order, so) the Prophets that are Hearers, having the Spirit
of God, are fit Judges whether it be that Spirit, or a Delusion and Passion of
their own, that Order may be kept in the Assemblies, at least as to the time.

33. For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches
of the saints.

33. For pretended Inspirations and Mandates are not to be believed against
Gods common Law to all the Churches, which have a surer notification than a
single Man can give us: B^t Gods common Law is against Confusion, and for Peace
and Order; and therefore it is certain, that Confusion is not of Divine
Inspiration.

34. Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto
them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also says the
law.

34. And it is one of the Rules of Order, That Women be no Public Teachers or
Speakers in the Church: God permits it not, who has commanded them
Subjection by the Law.

35. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home, for
it is a shame for women to speak in the church.

35. Not but that they should learn; but it must be with modesty, asking their
Husbands, if they have such as are able to teach them (as they ought; else they
have other private Helps.) It Is a shame to the Church and her, for a Woman
there to speak (except in common singing Psalms, or other Common Acts.)

36. What? came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only?

36. I ask them that contradict this; Did Gods Word come out from you, or from
entrusted Apostles? Or did it come to you only, that you contradict the
Churches?

37. If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, are the commandments of the
Lord. 38. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

37, 38. If any be indeed a Prophet, or Inspired, and not pretendedly only, he
will confess, that these Canons or Decisions are Gods own Commandments, and not
my Device. But if Men will be obstinate in their Ignorance, let them look to it.

39. Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophecy, and forbid not to speak with
tongues.

39. Prophecy for the Churches Edifying is to be coveted, and Languages there
not forbidden.

40. Let all things be done decently, and in order.

40. That Sacred things be all done decently, and not with uncomely negligence,
and orderly, and not in confusion, or as every Man's Fancy leads him, this is a
General Law of God, according to which undetermined Modes and Circumstances
must be regulated and done.

ANNOTATIONS.
I. It Is a Doubt often put, How it could be that Gods Spirit should inspire Men
with Tongues or Prophecy, and yet not tell them when and how to use them? But
it is not to be thought, that he that was before without the Habit, had the
actual Use of them, then suddenly inspired; but that, as the Learned, so the
Inspired had the habitual Knowledge of Tongues before they assembled, and so
for the actual Use and Time, were to exercise their own Discretion.

II. The Description of the Church here, often named as meeting in one Place with
their Officers and Guides, tells us, that then a Church of this Rank was not a
Diocese of many hundred Assemblies, which had all but one Bishop, their
Constitutive Head; but that it was a Company associated for Personal Communion,
that usually met in one Place; though Necessity might make them meet in many,
and tho some General Guides might take care of many such Churches.

III. The greater number of Prophets, and Teachers, etc. that were here in one
Assembly, whose Exercises the Apostle was put to restrain, does fully confute
Dr. Hammond's oft-repeated Opinion, That in Scripture-times there is no Proof
that there were any more Presbyters to one Church, than one, who was a Bishop,
and had Deacons under him; and that for want of capable Persons. But his
Opinion infers, That then a Church was no greater than could meet in one
Place: For one Bishop could not be at once in many. And if no
Subject-Presbyters were made in Scripture-times, it must be proved by what just
Power they were after made, even a sort of Pastors never made by the Apostles

IV. The Arguments of the Apostle against the uninterrupted Use of Tongues not
understood in the Church, are so many, cogent, plain, and vehement, that I will
not lose time to answer the Papists Cavils against them, when they defend their
Latin Masses and Prayers; but only note, That nothing can be so plainly spoken
by Gods own Spirit, which Carnal prejudiced Men cannot pervert; and that it is
no wonder if they will not be judged and ruled by Gods Word, unless they
themselves may be Judges of the Sense of it; and how little Gods Word
signifies to the People, where it must have such Expositors and Judges.

One that knew no more against the Papal Kingdom, called the Church of Rome,
than, 1. Their Latin Service, and cherishing of Ignorance: 2. And that as
Leeches they live on Blood, and keep up their Religion by violent Cruelty; if
he have but read this 1 Cor. 14. and Christ's Commands for loving each other;
yea, if he have not lost much of Humanity it self, I think, can hardly be a
Papist.

V. The Pretense that some fetch hence, for any Man that will to speak in the
Church, if he think he is inspired, is utterly vain: For that leave is here
restrained to Inspired Prophets, and those to be regulated by the Laws of
Order, Decency, and Edification. And God has made it the Office of the
Pastors, to be Rulers in the Assemblies.

VI. The abuse of the General Rules by Papist Usurping Church-Lords and
Canonists, is notorious; who, because Gods own Ordinances must, as to Modes and
Circumstances, be managed Decently, Orderly, and to Edification, thence plead
for a Dominion to add many Symbolical Rites and Ordinances of their own, which
Peter and Paul never knew, to make Gods Ordinances seem Decent, Orderly, and to
Edification, even things that in specie and genere are needless at the best;
and then they silence, excommunicate, and ruin all that refuse such corrupting
inventions: Like Zedekiah Ahabs Prophets, who (with his Brethren) spoke by a
Lying Spirt; and then made it Decent, Orderly and Edifying, by wearing a pair
of Horns, to tell Ahab how he should push down his Enemies, and then smote
Michaiah, for pretending to have more of the Spirit and Truth than he had; that
Michaiah might be sed in Prison with the Bread and Water of affliction, t^ll
experience showed who had the Truth: How these Men would have used the Apostles
of Christ if they now lived, and worshipped God but as then they did, their
Canons teach us to conjecture.

CHAP. XV.
1. MOreover, brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I preached unto
you, which also you have received, and wherein ye stand; 2. By which also ye
are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye have
believed in vain.

1, 2. And because some endeavor to subvert your Faith, I will recite the sum
of that Gospel which I preached to you, and in which you have since continued
and which is the sure and sufficient Doctrine of Salvation, (though the
Articles be few) without all the corrupt Additions invented by proud erroneous
Men; unless your Belief of them have been unsound and superficial, and so in
vain. See that your unsound Belief deceive you not, and this Gospel will not
deceive you.

3. For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures.

3. For I told you, that Christ died as a voluntary Sacrifice for our Sins,
therein fulfilling what was prophesied of him. This I received from God by
Inspiration, and from the certain Witnesses by just Report and Evidence.

4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to
the scriptures: 5. And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve. 6. After
that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once: of whom the greater
part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

4, 5, 6. And as the Scripture foretold, he was buried, and rose again the
third day, and appeared to Peter, and after to the special Disciples, who were
Twelve before Judas's Defection, and after. And after that [it's like, in
Galilee] he was seen of Five hundred, etc.

7. After that, he was seen of James, then of all the apostles.

7. Note, That it is not to be wondered at, that this Appearance to James, and to
the Five hundred, are not before distinctly mentioned in the Gospel, when St.
John tells us how small a part of what Christ did is written. And as one
Evangelist has some things which the other omit, so if Paul have some which
all four omitted, the same Spirit records them all.

8. And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.

8. And after all these he appeared to me from Heaven, as to one that was too
late converted.

9. For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an
apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.

9. For my persecuting Gods Church makes me so unworthy to be numbered with the
Apostles, that though God called me to be one, I must esteem my self as the
last, so the least of them, or below the Twelve.

10. But by the grace of God I am what I am: and his grace which was bestowed
upon me, was not in vain; but I labored more abundantly than they all: yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me.

10. But Gods free Grace has called me to this Honor and Work: and his Grace
given has not been in vain; for (though I came late in, and was a Persecutor)
I have since been more laborious than any of them all: which I ascribe not to
my self, but to God's free Grace, which chose, called, instructed, excited, and
strengthened me.

11. Therefore, whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed.

11. But whether the Conversion of so many of several Nations was by me or by
them, is not material to the thing in question. These same Articles of Faith
were they that we all unanimously pr^ached, and into the Belief of which, as
the Christian Verity, you were Baptized.

12. Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among
you, that there is no resurrection of the dead?

12. And how then can the same that say they believe the Resurrection of
Christ, deny the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life hereafter?

13.14. But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen.
And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also
vain.

13, 14. If none rise, Christ is not risen: And if Christ be not risen, then it
is Falsehood and Deceit which we preach, and which you have believed, and not
the glad Tidings of Salvation.

15. Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified of
God, that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead
rise not.

15. And then it will follow, not only that we deceive the world, but that we
belie God himself, when we witness that he has raised Christ; which would be a
most heinous crime.

16. For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised: 17, And if Christ be
not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins.

16, 17. If the dead rise not, and Christ rose not, what hope have you of
Salvation from sin and death?

18. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished.

18. Then dead Christians are perished: that is, If their Souls live not when
the Body* is dissolved, their Souls perish; and if the body rise not, that
perishes for ever; and the Martyrs would be great losers, and martyrdom folly.

19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable.

19. And if there be no resurrection or life after this, but our hope of
benefit by Christ were only in the things and time of this present life, none
were so miserable as Christians, who must forsake all, even life it self for
Christ.

Note, That the thing denied by the Heretics, was not only the resurrection,
of the body, but also all life after this for Soul or Body: And so the Apostle
joyneth the confutation of both, under the name of Resurrection.

20. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them
that slept.

20. But we have full proof even from sense, that Christ is risen; and
therefore as the first fruits consecrate the whole, so Christ's Resurrection
being to purchase ours, does prove to our comfort, that the dead shall rise.

21. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

21, 22. For as by Man came death Corporal, as well as Spiritual and Eternal,
by Man also came our deliverance by a Resurrection. For as by Adam's sin the
sentence of death came on all his posterity, as ^^ch; so all that are in Christ
shall by him be delivered to everlasting happy life.

Note, That the Resurrection of all Men, good and bad, is an effect of Christ's
death and resurrection, antecedently to differencing Grace, as appears John
5.24, 25, etc. But that it proves a Resurrection to condemnation, is
consequently caused by Men's sin: and the Apostle here speaks of the Elects
Resurrection to felicity.

23. But every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits, afterward they
that are Christ's, at his coming.

23. But Christ the cause of our Resurrection must rise before us, and all
Christians at his coming.

24. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God,
even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and
power.

24. Then comes the end of his acquired Mediatorial Kingdom, when he shall
have reduced us perfectly to God his Father, and we shall need his reducing
healing Government no more, and so God shall govern us in the state of perfect
innocence and Christ shall have put down all Rebelling Powers* Authority and
Rule.

Note, This is a sad intimation that so much of Rule, Authority and Power as is
here called [ All,] will be against Christ.

25. For he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet.

25. For these Powers now mentioned being Enemies to Christ, he must reign till
they are all subdued.

26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.

26. By Enemies I mean all that resist his saving works: And of these death is
the last.

27. For he has put all things under his feet. But when he says all things
are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all things
under him.

27. Only God is evident^y excepted, who is he that thus puts all things under
him.

28. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also
himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all
in all.

28. When Christ has subdued all that opposes his saving mediatorial work,
Christ as a Creature shall be for ever himself subject to the Deity, and shall
give up his recovering work (tho still it will be our Glory to see his Glory:)
So that the pure, blessed Deity will be the felicity of Saints, and be all in
all.

29. Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise
not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?

29. And if the dead rise not, to what purpose do we in Baptism profess our
belief of the Resurrection, and resign our Bodies a living Sacrifice to die
when Christ requires it, and this in hope of a resurrection signified by our
rising from under the Water.

30, 31. And why stand we in jeopardy every hour? I protest by your rejoicing
which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.

30, 31. What folly were it in us Christians to choose a Religion and course of
life, for which we are in continual danger from the malignant World? I protest
by the joy which I have in your Christianity, that I live continually a dying
life, that is, in daily sufferings, and danger of death, and preparation for it.

32. If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what
advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
die.

32. If as Men Combat one with another, I was put at Ephesus to strive with
Beasts (or Beasts in the shape of Men) what get I by such hazzards and
sufferings, if there be no life to come? Then it will follow, that those
sensual fools are the Wise Men, who say, Let us eat and drink, and take
pleasure to the Flesh while we may, for we shall shortly die.

33. Be not deceived: Evil communications corrupt good manners.

33. Let not such evil Principles, and Proverbs, and talk deceive you. Ill
words deceive many, and draw to ill Deeds and Conversations.

34. Awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of
God: I speak this to your shame.

34. Such lewd opinions show that men's Reasons and Consciences are in a sleep
and stupidity; awake them, and they will lead you from sin to righteousness. By
this it appears that some among you that call themselves Christians, have not
yet the true knowledge of God and his Will; which I say, to humble you by shame.

35. But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do
they come?

35. But some of you may the hardlier believe the Resurrection, because they
cannot tell how the dead are raised, and with what body they shall rise.

36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die.

36. This is the Objection of a Fool: For in sowing (though a Seed truly dead
be unfruitful, yet) the Seed is buried, and by a sort of Rotting or Corruption
seems as dead, before it spring up unto Fruit.

37. And that which thou sowest thou sowest not that body that shall be, but
bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain.

37. The Corn which thou sowest has not the Blade or Stalk, and Ear, and
Flower, and Chaff. It is not formally, but virtually or seminally the same,
whether it be Wheat, or other Grain.

38. But God gives it a body as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own
body.

38. But out of this Seed, and by its Seminal Virtue, God, by the addition of
attracted Nutriment, gives it a Body, with Straw, Flowers, Chaff, and Seed, as
pleases him: It being his Power and Will, to which nothing is impossible,
which must satisfy our inquisitive Minds; Resurrection, as Generation, being
unsearchable to us.

39. All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of men,
another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds.

39. But you must allow a difference of Bodies: for even here there is much
difference.

40. There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of
the celestial is one, and the glory of the terestrial is another. 41. There is
one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the
stars; for one star differs from another star in glory. 42. So also is the
resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption.

40, 41, 42. The Celestial Bodies greatly differ from the Earthly Bodies; and
so do even the Celestial among themselves; as the Sun from the Moon, and one
Star from another, etc. And so shall our Bodies at the Resurrection greatly
differ from these that we have now; particularly, by being incorruptible.

43. It is sown in dishonor it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it
is raised in power: 44. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.

43, 44. It is now so vile a Body, that it must rot and corrupt in darkness in
the Earth; but it shall rise in Glory. It is buried in utter impotency, like
the common Earth; but Gods Power shall raise it a Powerful Body. It is buried
like the Body of a Beast, that was passive, and only acted by the living Soul;
but it shall rise a Spiritual Body, more suited to the Nature of the Soul, and
having also an active Nature (like as Fire has) in it self. Their are Natural
Bodies, of Passive Matter, in daily flux, repaired by Food, and acted only by
other Natures, or Souls: And there are Spiritual Bodies, (either such as the
Sun and Light has, or higher) which are incorruptible, and of themselves not
inclined to death, dissolution, or change, and besides the Soul, are so like
it, that they are themselves Active Natures.

45. And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last
Adam was made a quickening spirit.

45. That is, The first Adam was made by God a living Soul, put into a
corruptible Body, not having an unchangeable State in himself, nor Power to
make his Posterity such; But the second Adam had in himself unchangeable Life,
suited to a spiritual, glorious State, and was the Root of such to his
Believing Posterity, enabled, as the Lord of Life, to rise himself, ascend to
Heaven, and to raise them to Life, and take them to himself, and to make them a
spiritual, holy People, capable thereof.

46. Howbeit, that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural;
and afterward that which is spiritual.

46. But the Animal Person, from whom by Generation we have but mere Nature,
was to us in causality, before him that conveyeth to us Spiritual and
Everlasting Life. Our Nature derived from Adam was before the Reparation,
Spiritual Holiness, Resurrection, or Glory given by Christ; even as Adam was
before Christ's own Incarnation and Resurrection. Perfection is the last and
ripe State of Gods Work in our Salvation.

47. The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from
heaven.

47. Adam was made out of the Dust of the Passive Elements; though God breathed
into him a Living Soul, yet Earth was his first abode: But Christ is the Lord
from Heaven; his Divine Nature being there from everlasting, assumed the Humane
by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost.

48. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.

48. And as Adam was a Natural Man, and the Root of such; so it is but Nature
which we have from him: And as Christ is Heavenly and Spiritual, so will he
make all the holy Seed to be like him, Spiritual and Heavenly.

49. And as we have born the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image
of the heavenly.

49. And as we are born of Adam, Men, as he was; so we shall be made by Christ
Spiritual and Heavenly, as he is.

50. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God; neither does corruption inherit incorruption.

50. And this I tell you, That these Bodies must not come to Heaven in the
proper Form of Flesh and Blood, nor can as such possess it* for, as such, they
are corruptible, and cannot so inherit Heaven, which is incorruptible.

51. Behold, I show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed,

51. And I will tell you that which is commonly unknown: Though the Just shall
not die that are alive at Christ's coming, they shall all be changed, as well as
those that rise from the Dead, from being proper Flesh and Blood, to have
Spiritual Bodies.

52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, (for the
trumpet shall sound) and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall
be changed.

52. In a moment Christ's potent Call will be like a Trumpet, calling Men
together; and the Dead shall be raised, and living Saints changed into an
incorruptible state.

53. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.

53. For this mortal Body and Composition, which is now corruptible by
Dissolution, must be changed into an incorruptible and immortal state of Being
and Habitation.

54. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal
shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory.

54. And Death being conquered by Christ, (being a Fruit of Sin, from which he
saves us) we shall die no more.

55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? 56. The sting
of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law.

55. Though now Death seem to conquer us, we triumph over it by Faith in
Christ, foreseeing our Resurrection: being saved from Sin, which is the Sting,
and the Penal Law or Curse, which is Sins condemning Strength.

57. But thanks be to God which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

57. But by Faith, which sees things to come, we give God thanks, that will
raise us from the Dead, and give us final Victory over Death through Christ.

58. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much ye know that your labor is not
in vain in the Lord.

58. And now, Brethren, make this necessary use of all. Seeing our Faith and
Hope of a Resurrection and future Life assures us, that none of our Christian
Labor or Suffering shall be in vain, or to our loss, or without a glorious
Reward; what remains, but that against all Temptations you be steadfast and
unmovable, and do Gods Work with all your Power, abounding in Labor and
Patience to the end?

ANNOTATIONS.
AS this Chapter is of great use for our Instruction, so it is not without many
Difficulties to our Understanding.

I. It Is needful to be observed, into how narrow a room Paul reduces the
Gospel, or Articles of Faith concerning Christ; and how greatly herein they
differ from him, that condemn, excommunicate, or persecute those who believe
These, and all the Bible besides, if they subscribe not to the Truth of all
their Articles and Forms superadded, and the justness of their numerous Canons.

II. The Apparition of Christ to the Five hundred, and to James, seems part
of that which St. John says was not by him written: So that part of the
Evidence of Christ's Resurrection should be enough to cause us to believe it.

III. Though it was but some at Corinth that denied the Resurrection, the
Church was faulty in bearing with them: yet Separation from that Church for
their sakes is not required, nor allowed by the Apostle.

IV. The Socinians from the 19th. Verse, and diverse others, gather, That Paul
denies the Felicity of our Souls before the Resurrection, because he
intimates, That if there were no Resurrection, (but only an Immortality of the
Soul) Christians were the most miserable Men, and their Faith and Sufferings
vain, and they were yet in their Sins, etc. The Matter is weighty, and the
Solution has its Difficulty. Some say, That because the Heretical denied the
Immortality of the Soul, as well as the Resurrection of the Body, Paul
supposes this, and answers them as to both: And they say, That (...)
signifying but to stand up, that is, to live again, includes the Life of the
Separated Soul, as well as the Resurrection of the Body. Others say, That Paul
speaks only of the Man, and not of the Soul alone, which is but part of the
Man. Soul and Body are essential to a Man; and as a Man he may be miserable,
because part is so, (as a Toothach is to the whole Body) though the Soul be
happy. Others say, That the Felicity or perfect Man at the Resurrection will be
so much greater than that of the Separated Soul before, and also that this
Separate State is so darkly revealed to us, that the Apostle makes light of it
in comparison of the latter. The first of these Opinions is not inconsiderable;
but the chief Answer is by a stricter Exposition of the particular Texts. And,
1. Verse 19. argues thus: [If we believe in, and suffer for a Christ as risen,
who is not risen, then he cannot save us either as to Soul or Body; and then we
are the most miserable sort of Men. For our Hopes in him, for the Time and
Things of this Life only, affords us less than others have, his Kingdom being
not of this World] This Argument is not against, but for the Immortality of the
Soul.

So Verse 32. [ What advantageth it me if the dead rise not?] i. e. Neither
Soul nor Body is advantaged by suffering for a Christ as risen, who is not
risen.

V. The Comparison of Adam and Christ is as hard, seeming to mean, that Adam's
Soul, and his Posterities, as such, are not Immortal. But indeed it implies no
more than this: 1. That it is called, Genesis 2. a Living Soul, but Christ the Lord
of Life. 2. That Adam had but a Soul breathed into him by Creation on Earth;
but Christ was in Heaven from Everlasting, the Living God. 3. That Adam
propagated only Humanity; but Christ also Sanctity and Felicity. 4. That Adam
by Nature had but a loseable Capacity of Bodily Life continued, and Heavenly
Felicity; and by Sin came short of both: But Christ has Life in himself, as
the Root of Holiness and Happiness in Heaven, which he will give Believers,
both to their Souls and Bodies; and will give a Bodily Resurrection to all Men.

VI. Ver. 24. The Kingdom delivered up to the Father, is but that Government
which Christ uses to recover and save Sinners, and is no addition to the
Father, nor diminution to Christ: But as a Prince undertaking to reduce Rebels,
lays down his Commission and Arms when he has done his Work, and yet
increases his own Honor; or as a Physician gives up his Hospital, when he
has healed all the Sick. And it is like, yea, certain, that when Christ's
acquisitive Mediation is finished, he will still be some sort of Mediator of
our Fruition: For we shall still behold his Glory.

VII. Ver. 37.39. seem to intimate, That the Body that shall rise is not the
same that was sowed, but such a Body as God pleases a new to give. Doubtless
it is the same in some respect, and not the same in an respects: And to be able
to know just how far it is or is not the same, is too hard for us, and may be
quietly left to the Will of God. The Seminal part of the Grain (Matter and
Form) lives in the new Fruit, in which it springs up, (as the Seminal part
of Man begins his Being in the Womb) but the added Mass which makes up the
Root, the Stalk, and Ear, and new Grains, are all drawn from without, from the
Water, Earth, and Air, by God, and by the Seminal Spirit. We see that Men often
grow Fleshy, Fat, and Lean again, and at last die with little but a skinned
Skeleton: I think few believe, that either Men dying Fat shall rise Fat, or Men
dying Lean shall rise Lean; or yet that every Man shall rise with all the Flesh
which he ever lived or sinned in, and which daily passed away, or consumed in
Sickness. To know how much, and what goes to identifie the Body, we must leave
to God, if we will not pretend to the knowledge we have not. Nor is it
necessary to believe, that all Fowls, Beasts, and Fishes rise again, and go to
Heaven, which are ever digested, and made Humane Flesh.

The Apostle likening our Bodies to Seed, makes some to doubt whether the dead
Body have a Resurrection by any Seminal Virtue, as a Natural Cause, or only
rise by Miracle. The latter is most commonly held: And yet it is certain, that
the Soul takes with it a Love and Inclination to its Body, which is a sort of
Seminal Disposition. And no mortal Man knows whether the Soul take not with
it some of the Igneous Spirits by which it here operated as such a Body, as
Seminal Virtue in Inferior things is lodged in them; and whether at the
Resurrection God use that Composition of Igneous Matter (or Ethereal) and
Spiritual Form, for the aggregation of so much more such Matter as shall be
needful to make up the Glorious, Spiritual, Incorruptible Body. But all this,
and how much of the Flesh we lived in God will raise, is to us unknown.

VIII. Ver. 50. That Flesh and Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, is
grossly perverted by them that say, That it is only Sinful Flesh that is meant;
or them that say, That Flesh and Blood shall enter, but incorruptible. It is
proper formal Flesh and Blood that the Apostle mentions. Flesh is the Blood,
and other nutritive Juice, coagulated into that Fibrous Substance so called,
and is the Matter of Food digested and assimilated unto this. It is made of
Earth, Water, and Air; and so is Blood. Define them, and nothing that is in
Heaven will agree with that Definition. If such Earth shall be placed in
Heaven* it will cease by transmutation to be Earth. To call a Spiritual,
Incorruptible, Glorious Body, Earth and Water, or Flesh and Blood, and place
these with the Blessed Spirits, is but to equivocate, and not to use the Words
univocally. The two General Councils ( Nice second, and Constance before it)
differing in other things, agree That Christ's true Body is in Heaven, but that
there it is not Flesh and Blood: (And yet the Papists feign, that he has still
real Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament.)

Doubtless by a Spiritual Body is meant one that is so near the Nature of a
Spirit, as is fittest for spiritual and glorious Work; which made many of the
Fathers say, That it will be an Ethereal, or Igneous, or Luminous Body. But
Gods Knowledge must be implicitly rested in, when we have no explicit Knowledge.

CHAP. XVI.
1. NOw concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to the
churches of Galatia, even so do ye.

1. I come next to your Order for Collections for the poor Christians in the
present Famine at Jerusalem: In which I would have you, as most convenient, to
observe this Order, which I gave to the Churches of Galatia.

2. Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store,
as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.

2. The Lord's Day being separated for sacred Works, of which holy Charity is a
great part, let every one willingly lay by, as devoted to God for this Service,
according to the proportion of his Increase, that I may find it ready, and not
stay when I come for your Collections.

3. And when I come, whomsoever you shall approve by your Letters, them will I
send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem.

3. And then, that you may be satisfied of the faithful delivery, you shall
choose the Messenger your selves.

4. And if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me.

4. And if I find cause to go my self, your own Trustees shall go with me.

5. Now I will come unto you, when I shall pass through Macedonia: (for I do
pass through Macedonia) 6. And it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter
with you, that ye may bring me on my journey, whithersoever I go. 7. For I will
not see you now by the way, but I trust to tarry a while with you, if the Lord
permit.

5, 6, 7. Note, That a wise Fore-contrivance of our own Course of Labor is
lawful, but only with submission to Gods Will.

8, 9. But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost. For a great door and
effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries.

8, 9. Hope of great Success, and the opposition of many Adversaries, persuade
me to stay at Ephesus.

Note, That great Success of the Gospel often consists with many Adversaries.

10. Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear: for he
works the work of the Lord, as I also do.

10. See that Timothy, when he comes, be not discouraged by distrust, or
abuse; for he is my faithful Helper in the same Work of the Lord, in which I
serve him.

11. Let no man therefore despise him: but conduct him forth in peace, that he
may come unto me: for I look for him with the brethren.

11. Despise him not, but give credit to his Message, and respectfully conduct
him at his return to us.

12. As touching our brother Apollos, I greatly, desired him to come unto you
with the brethren: but his will was not at all to come at this time; but he
will come when he shall have convenient time.

12. Note, That Paul left him to his choice, and did not suspend or silence him
for disobeying an Apostle.

13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong.

13. Finally, Your Case is so weighty, and Trial so great, as require your
constant watch, your resolved steadfastness in the Faith, a Manlike Strength,
Endeavor, and Defense.

14. Let all your things be done with charity.

14. The sum and chiefest Rule that I give you, is, Do all that you do in Love,
or Endearedness to one another; and this will cast out Selfishness, Pride,
Envy; and Division, and keep you from rash censuring, separating, despising, or
abusing one another.

15, 16. I beseech you, brethren (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is
the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the
ministry of the saints) That ye submit your selves unto such, and to every one
that helps with us and labors.

15, 16. The House of Stephanas being the first converted in Achaia, and
addicted to further Christians with their Estates and Labor, and he being now
my Fellow Laborer, submit your selves to him, and to all such.

17. I am glad of the coming of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus: for
that which was lacking on your part, they have supplied. 18. For they have
refreshed my spirit and yours: therefore acknowledge ye them that are such.

17, 18. For they have performed such respectful Offices as you were wanting
in. Therefore let such be respected by you.

19. The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in
the Lord, with the church that is in their house. 20. All the brethren greet
you. Greet ye one another with an holy kiss. 21. The salutation of me Paul with
mine own hand.

19, 20, 21. The Christians of their Family, (or the Assembly that used to meet
there for Church Communion.)

22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maran-atha.

22. Those that love the Lord Jesus as their Savior and Hope, will stick to
him, and confess him in Temptation and Sufferings: And if any Man love him not,
let him, as accursed, be delivered to Satan, and cut off from God.

23, 24. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. My love be with you
all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

23, 24. The best Benediction I can give you, is by praying, That the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ may be with you, (for that will render you holy and
acceptable to God, and save you from Evil, and bring, you to Glory.) I am sure
my Love is with you all: May your Loveliness so continue it. Amen.

The Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the CORINTHIANS.
CHAP. I.
1. PAul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy our
brother, unto the church of God [which is at Corinth, with all the saints which
are in all Achaia:] 2. Grace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ.

1, 2. When it is read to the Church at Corinth, to whom it is specially
directed, to be communicated to others in Achaia by them.

3. Blessed be God even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort; 4. Who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

3, 4. -- [By the same Reasons that comforted me, and by the experience of his
Mercies, which gives me a comforting frame of Mind.

5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ.

5. As I suffer more than others for Christ, so I have proportionable comfort
by Christ.

6. And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation,
which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer:
or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation.

6. So great is the love of God to you, that both our afflictions and our
comforts are intended as means to your comfort; that you may the easilier
suffer as we do, and hope for that comfort that we enjoy, and that all may
further your Salvation.

7. And our hope of you is steadfast, knowing that as you are partakers of the
sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation.

7. Therefore I hope that suffering will not overthrow your Faith, while you
look for the same consolation.

8. For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which came to
us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure above strength, insomuch that
we despaired even of life:

8. I would have you know how great our sufferings were in Asia, even beyond
our own strength to bear them, and such as put me in expectation of death.

9. But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in
our selves, but in God which raises the dead.

9. But God brought me to this expectation of death, that I might not trust to
my present life, but unto God alone, and that as one that can raise the dead,
and give them a better life hereafter, than that which they lay down for Christ.

10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust
that he will yet deliver us: 11. You also helping together by prayer for us,
that for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons, thanks may be
given by many on our behalf.

10, 11. Who has delivered us from so terrible a kind of Death, and still does
deliver us, and we hope will do till our Work be done: But your Prayers must
concur as the Means, that God also may have all your Thanks.

12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-wards

12. Note, 1. That a Christian must have rejoicing not only in Christ's Merits,
but in the Conscience of his own Sincerity. 2. Sincerity is much in Simplicity,
and contrary to self-seeking fleshly Wisdom. 3. It is Gods Grace that gives
this Sincerity. 4. Where it is used in eminent Self-denial, it may lawfully be
gloried in against D^tractors.

13. For we write none other things unto you, then what you read or
acknowledge, and I trust you shall acknowledge even to the end.

13. For I willingly expose my self and Doctrine to your Trial; I write but the
same things which you have received and own, and I hope will own even to the
end.

14. As also you have acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even
as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.

14. As I my self have been owned by you as your Comfort, though I have some
Accusers, even as you are my Comfort when I render an Account of my Ministry to
Christ.

15. And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before, that you
might have a second benefit:

15. And in confidence of this our mutual Love, I purposed to come to you, for
the increase of your Graces.

16. And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of Macedonia unto
you, and of you to be brought on my way toward Judea.

16. When I carry the Contribution to Judea.

17. When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness? or the things that
I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be
yea, yea, and nay, nay? 18. But as God is true, our word toward you, is not yea
and nay.

17, 18. What I purposed was with submission to Gods Providence and Will. Had
any cause then to accuse me of Levity and Falsehood in my Promises, as if my
Word were not to be credited? I take God to witness, that I spoke my real
Purpose in truth, though I was hindered from Performance.

19. For the son of God, Jesus Christ, who as preached among you by us, even by
me, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea. 20.
For all the promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of
God by us.

19, 20. And more abusive is it hence to gather my Incredibility in preaching,
and the uncertainty of my Doctrine: For Christ whom we preached is a certain
Savior, and his Promises all sure, and are sealed, confirmed, and proved to
Gods Glory, in the Power of our Ministry.

21. Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is
God: 22. Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our
hearts.

21, 22. And it is God himself who stablisheth both us and you in Christ, and
has anointed and sealed us, and given us the Earnest of his Spirit, which is
his Pledge, and our Security.

23. Moreover, I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came
not as yet unto Corinth.

23. I do by Oath call God himself to witness, that my not coming yet to you,
was not out of any such Falsehood, Levity, or Self-respect as my Accusers
intimate; but I delayed, as foreseeing how unpleasing it would be to have
exercised the Severity among you, which your Sin, before Repentance, required.

24. Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your
joy: for by faith ye stand.

24. Not that we are Lords over your Faith, or have any power to change it; but
our Preaching and Discipline is to help your Joy, by casting out Sin, and by
stablishing you in Faith, in and by which you must stand and live.

CHAP. II.
1, 2. BUt I determined this with my self, that I would not come again to you
in heaviness. For if I make you sorry, who is he then that makes me glad, but
the same which is made sorry by me?

1, 2. But the true cause of my delay to come to you, was, that having reproved
you for many Sins, which required sharper Censure if you had not disowned them,
I was not forward to grieve you by such displeasing Work, and staid to hear of
your Repentance. For your Grief is my own; and none can take it from me, but
your selves, by your Repentance.

3. And I wrote this same unto you, lest when I came, I should have sorrow from
them of whom I ought to rejoice, having confidence in you all, that my joy is
the joy of you all.

3. And I gave you my Reproof by a Letter, tha^ it might cause that Reformation
which might prevent my Sorrow when I came my self: for I ought to have joy in
you, as I hope also my joy is yours.

4. For out of much affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote unto you with many
tears; not that you should be grieved, but that ye might know the love which I
have more abundantly unto you.

4. For I was so far from insulting over you, or desiring your hurt, that I
performed that necessary part of my Office with great grief and anguish, and
wrote to you with many tears; not delighting to grieve you, but to show my Love
for your Reformation and Salvation.

5. But if any have caused grief, he has not grieved me, but in part: that I
may not overcharge you all.

5. But the Grief which I had by the Sins of some particular Persons, I am far
from charging on all the Church.

6. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many.

6. The Churches Censure and Rejection of such a Sinner, is as much Punishment
as I judged meet.

Note, That the Punishment was not only in the presence of Many, (that is, the
Assembly) but also [ by many:] For though the Pastor had the Keys, the People
were consenting Executioners, by avoiding Communion with the Excommunicate.

7. So that contrariwise, ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest
perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.

7. But now he is penitent, ye ought to forgive, and comfort him with the
notice of Pardoning Mercy from God, lest too much sorrow overwhelm him.

Note, That Sorrow for Sin may be too much; and it is so, when it swalloweth us
up, and does more hurt than good.

8. Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward him.

8. I that judged him for his Sin, now absolve him, and entreat you in Love to
receive him.

9 For to this end also did I write, that I might know the proof of you,
whether ye be obedient in all things.

9. I wrote to you to cast him out, to exercise your Obedience: and so I now do
to take him in.

10. To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgave any thing,
to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it, in the person of Christ;

10. As ^o^ forgive him, and desire his Restoration, ^o do I: And I absol^e him
by Christ's Authority, as his Minister, for your own Good and Comfort;
Discipline being for the Churches good.

11. Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his
devices.

11. For we know that Satan has his Stratagems, and would turn our Justice and
Discipline to our hurt, (either by too much dejecting the Sinner, or by
exasperating and dividing the Church:) And we would not be overreached by him:
The Means are for the End.

12. Furthermore, when I came to Troas to preach Christ's gospel, and a door was
opened unto me of the Lord, 13. I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not
Titus my brother: but taking my leave of them, I went from thence into
Macedonia.

12, 13. At Troas I had great Encouragement in my Ministry; but not hearing of
you by Titus, disquieted me, etc.

14. Now thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and
makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place.

14. To God I give Thanks, who causes me to rejoice in the Success of my
Ministry for Christ; and wherever I come communicates to Men the Knowledge of
his Gospel.

15. For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and
in them that perish. 16. To the one we are the savor of death unto death; and
to the other the savor of life unto life:

15, 16. For our Service to God is an acceptable Sacrifice, for the sake of
Christ, both about them that are saved, and them that perish; to them that
abuse and reject the Gospel to their own destruction, and them that are
converted and saved by it: For God will be glorified in both, and accepts our
Ministry to both, notwithstanding the various Success.

16, 17. And who is sufficient for these things? For we are not as many, which
corrupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of
God speak we in Christ.

16, 17. So great is this Work, that neither I nor any is sufficient for it, in
our own Strength, without Gods suitable Help and Grace. But I have the
Conscience of my Sincerity, that I do not as do the Corrupters of the Word of
God; but I speak the things of Christ in truth, as God inspired me, and as in
his sight.

CHAP. III.
1. DO we begin again to commend our selves? or need we, as some others,
epistles of commendation to you, or letters of commendation from you?

1. And seeing the Reputation of our Persons is so needful to the Ends of our
Ministry, let me expostulate with you, why you should hearken to them who make
it needful to vindicate our selves? Am I a Stranger to you? Do I need, as some
others, to be recommended to you by other Men's Letters? Or by your Letters to
be recommended to other Churches? Do I not bring with me the Proof of mine
Apostleship?

2. Ye are our epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men:

2. Your own Conversion by my Ministry, which is the rejoicing of my Heart, is
more than a Commendatory Epistle; and this may be read of all that know you.

3. For as much as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ,
ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God;
not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart.

3. For your Conversion openly proves, that you are as it were Christ's own
Epistle by our Ministry, written by the quickening Spirit of the Living God, and
not with Ink; not as Moses's Law, on Tables of Stone; but on your very Hearts;
And therefore, as you are the Epistle or Testimony of the Work of Christ, so of
me, as his Minister.

4, 5. And such trust have we through Christ to Godward: Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves: but our
sufficiency is of God.

4, 5. It is of God that I have this Confidence and Glorying: Far be it from me
to think that I have any such Sufficiency of my self, to convert Souls; but my
Sufficiency and the Success is all of God.

6. Who also has made us able ministers of the new testament, not of the
letter, but of the spirit: for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life.

6. It is he that has made me an able Minister of the New Covenant; not a
Preacher of the Law of Moses written in Stone, but of the Gospel of Christ, who
sends us forth by his Spirit, and gives his Spirit by our Ministry: For the
Law of Moses curses Sinners, and shows them Sin, and condemns them: But
the Spirit of Christ does quicken them, and kill their Sin, and lead them in
the way of Life.

7. But if the ministration of death written and engraven in stones, was
glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face
of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away.

7. For if that Ministry of Moses, which by consequence was of Death, (or of a
Law that condemned, but gave not the Spirit of Life) written and engraven by
God in Stones, was accompanied with so great Glory, that the Israelites could
not endure to look Moses in the Face, for the Glory of his Countenance, which
yet is now done away;

8. How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious.

8. Must not the more excellent Ministry of a durable Gospel, by which God
gives Men his Spirit, be more glorious? (though we the Ministers seem
contemptible.)

9. For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory.

9. The different Covenants show the different Glory of the Ministry: For if
Moses's Ministration of a condemning Law was Glory, our Ministration of a
justifying, saving, Gospel Covenant must needs exceed his Ministry in true
Glory.

10. For even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by
reason of the glory that excels.

10. For as a greater Light makes a lesser seem as none, so the Mosaic
Ministry of the Law had as it were no Glory, being, clouded by the Glory of the
Gospel.

11. For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remains is glorious.

11. For if the Law of Moses (considered formally as such, and given to the
Jews to rule their Commonwealth, and lead them to Christ) which was to cease
when the Gospel came, to which it was a Schoolmaster, was yet given in Glory;
much more is the Gospel, which is to continue, and its Ministration, glorious.

12. Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech.

12. Wonder not then that we speak boldly to you, when we can show such
Authority.

13. And not as Moses, which put a vail over his face, that the children of
Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished.

13. We do not as Moses veil our Faces, signifying that the Israelites could
not well look to the true End and Meaning of their own Law, which is Christ, to
whom by Types it pointed them; nor see that it was to be abolished by his
better Covenant, as it now is. We speak freely to you with open Face.

14. But their minds were blinded: for until this day remains the same vail
untaken away, in the reading of the old testament; which vail is done away in
Christ.

14. But the Minds of the unbelieving Jews were blinded, and to this day the
Veil remains by this their Blindness, so that they understand not the End and
Design of the Old Testament when they read it. B^t it is taken away by Christ to
true Believers.

15. But even unto this day when Moses is read, the vail is upon their heart.

15. Their Unbelief shows us, that the Veil and Blindness is on them to this
day.

16. Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away.

16. But when they shall be converted to Christianity, the Veil shall be taken
away, and they shall understand the Meaning and Tendency of the Law.

17. Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty.

17. And as the Letter does but point unto the Spirit, without which it does
but kill; so it is Christ who is that Spirit which is the Sum and End of the
Letter and Types: And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Freedom and
Power of Speech, as well as Deliverance: And therefore we use that Freedom with
you.

18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord.

18. And so all true Christians, not veiled as the Jews, but with open Face, in
the open Light, though yet but as in a Glass, behold the Glory of the Lord; and
by our Spiritual Renovation are changed into the Image of Christ, from one
Degree of Glory to another, by the Spirit of the Lord, who will perfect his
Work.

ANNOTATIONS.
THe fear of favoring Antinomianism has tempted some to pervert this Chapter,
about the abolishing of Moses's Law. I know of no Man that has written so much
against the Antinomians as I have done, nor with so much success, in casting
down their Libertine Errors in this Land: And yet I abhor running into the
contrary Extreme. And therefore I say, that it is evident to any unprejudiced
considering Reason, that Paul here affirms, That the very Law written in
Stone is abolished and done away, To say, It is only the Glory of the Burning
Mount, or of Moses Face, that is done away, is plainly contrary to Ver. 7, 9,
10, 11, 13. I will not tire the Reader with Arguments from so plain Words. The
Truth is this:

1. The Law of Nature is not done away by Christ, but made part of his own Law,
into whose Hands that and all things are given.

2. The Ten Commandments, except the Preface, and a Word or two in the Second
Commandment, and the Determination of the Seventh Day in the Fourth
Commandment, are the Common Law of Nature.

3. Christ also has expressly made them his Law, by reciting them preceptively:
And so they bind all Christians now, as the Law of Nature, and the Law of
Christ.

4. God by giving the Jews their Laws, gave us Directions to know in the like
Cases what is equal or wrong to us.

5. But formally, as it was Gods Law delivered by Moses to the Jews, it binds
not us, and it is done away.

For, 1. It never, as such, bound any but the Jews, and the few Proselytes
among them. For it was never promulgated to the World: And even the Decalogue
was Political, and all made for that Commonwealth. And all the World was never
bound to turn Jews, nor to dwell or come into a remote Country, no bigger than
half England.

2. The Jews own Commonwealth is dissolved, and so are their peculiar Laws.

3. The Apostle expressly says, That the Law written in Stone, that was
glorious, is done away, ver. 7. and 11.13. compared.

4. Moses was no Ruler or Mediator to the whole World.

5. If one part of Moses Law, as such, bind, then all of it binds, a quatenus
ad omne; and so we must turn Jews.

6. Paul expressly names Sabbaths as abolished; that is, A Day of Ceremonial
Rest, which the Fourth Commandment ordains as a Type of Spiritual Rest by
Christ.

The Sum is, That we are bound to the Law commonly called Moral, as it is the
Law of Nature, and of Christ; but not formally, as the Law given the Jews by
Moses, or as written in Stone.

CHAP. IV.
1. THerefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy we faint
not:

1. Therefore having received a more honorable Ministry than that of Moses,
Gods Mercy encourages us, and keeps us from fa^nting in our Labors and
Sufferings.

2. But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

2. But have renounced those things which cannot endure the Light, lest they
should be shamed, but are craftily carried on in the dark; nor do we use
deceiving Arts in handling the Word of God, but in the open Light, by Evidence
of Truth, we expose our selves to trial, and expect Success.

3. But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost:

3. So that if our Preaching be not yet understood and believed, it is not for
want of our clear Delivery, but from the miserable Case of lost incapable
Hearers.

4. In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe
not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them.

4. Because the Devil, by the love of worldly things, ruling the Hearts of
worldly Men, has blinded them, that they may not believe the Gospel, and see
that Glory which shines in Christ, who is the Image of God.

5. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and our selves
your servants for Jesus sake.

5. It is not our selves that we commend by preaching to you, or set up for you
to believe in; but it is Christ Jesus the Lord, (else indeed our Ministry were
inglorious:) and we only manifest our selves to be faithful Servants for your
Salvation by Christ, who has called us hereto, and whose Glory we proclaim.

6. For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
of Jesus Christ.

6. For God, who by his Word created Light, has shined by Spiritual Light into
our Hearts, giving us that Knowledge of God which gloriously appears in the
Person, Doctrine, and Works of Christ, which he commands us to communicate to
others.

7. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the
power may be of God, and not of us.

7. But we that are thus trusted and honored of God, are our selves poor,
frail, afflicted Mortals, that it may appear, that it is by the Power of God,
and not of Men, that the Gospel prospers.

8. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but
not in despair; 9. Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed;

8, 9. We are many ways troubled, but not brought to any extreme distress; in
straits, but not in despair; persecuted by Men, but not forsaken of God; cast
down low, and yet upheld, and not destroyed.

10. Always bearing about in the body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body.

10. We still bear in our Bodies a memorative Conformity to our suffering dying
Lord, that our delivered Bodies also might have some conformity to his Life, by
whom we live, and whom we preach.

11. For we which live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh.

11. For we that yet live are in continual danger of death by Persecutors, for
Jesus sake: that we might be Emblems of Christ's Resurrection and Life, and a
Proof that he lives, who preserves us, while we preach that blessed Life
which he possesses, and has purchased and promised.

12. So then death works in us, but life in you.

12. So that in our Sufferings Christ's Death is resembled; but his Life in your
Conversion and Preservation.

13. We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I belived,
and therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and therefore speak;

13. But we have the some Spirit of Faith as you have, and therefore say with
David, That we speak because we believe.

14. Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by
Jesus, and shall present us with you.

14. For he that raised up Christ, shall raise us up both from our Suf^erings
and Death, and present us with you who are the B^essings of our Labors.

15. For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might, through
the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God.

15. For it is for you that we suffer, and labor, and are preserved; that as
many have the Benefit, so God may be glorified by the Thanksgiving of many.

16. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day.

16. Therefore we are not tired in our Labor or Suffering; but while our
Bodies suffer and perish, our Souls receive daily new Supplies of Strength and
Comfort.

17. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;

17. For all our Sufferings for Christ, and Bodily Afflictions, are very
tolerable and light, and so short as to be but as for one moment; and so
gainful, that they are the Means appointed to procure us a Crown of Glory,
which is weighty, and of exceeding Worth, and Everlasting.

18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which
are not seen, are eternal.

18. For we intend no worldly End, nor fix our Eyes and Mind on these
transitory things, which now are here seen; but on the Glory and Kingdom which
is unseen: For the things which are seen are temporary, mutable, and fly away,
and therefore are not to be much regarded; but the things which are now to us
unseen, are unchangeable and everlasting.

CHAP. V.
1. FOr we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

1. For by Faith we know, that if our Bodies, which are as a Tent or Tabernacle
to the Soul, were dissolved, we have in the Heavens a Building of Gods
providing for the Blessed, not like our Houses here made by Man, but Celestial
and Everlasting.

N^te, 1. That Faith is a sort of Knowledge: We kn^w what God says is true;
and we know this to be his Word.

2. That our Happiness will not be only in the New Earth, and at the
Resurrection: but it is a Dwelling in Heaven, now existent, and such as shall
be everlasting: And therefore no hope of Christ's Reign on Earth, should take
down our Hopes and Desires of Heaven.

2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from heaven. 3. If so be that being clothed, we shall not be found
naked.

2, 3. For in this Body we are under a constant uneasiness, which makes us
groan with earnest desire to be better clothed, even with the Incorruptible
Celestial Glory: For when Death unclotheth us, we shall not be found naked and
destitute, (or, as some expound it, [So be it we be not found, as Adam, naked
in our Guilt, when we enter into the future State.])

4. For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not for that
we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up
of life.

4. For our Burdens in this Body are so great, as make us groan: not that we
desire Death, as Death; or to be unhoused, or without Clothing to the Soul:
but we would be better clothed with a Heavenly Glory, that that which is Mortal
may be swallowed up by Immortal Glory.

5. Now he that has wrought us for the self-same thing, is God, who also has
given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.

5. And we have good Evidence for the certainty of this Hope: For God himself,
who does nothing in vain, has made and formed us hereunto: It is he that gave
us Immortal Souls, and Faculties to prepare for a better Life: And it is he
that has redeemed us to it, and has promised it, and provided and commanded
us the Means that lead to it, and has given us by his Spirit those holy
Affections, Desires, and Endeavors which are the Earnest of it, and which he
will not frustrate.

6. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in
the body, we are absent from the Lord: 7. (For we walk by faith, not by sight.)

6, 7. Therefore we go on in the Confidence and Boldness which beseem
Believers, being above the Fear of Death; knowing, that while we dwell here in
these Bodies, we are absent from the Glory where God is fully manifested to the
Blessed: For it is not things seen which are the Motives, Hopes, and Comfort of
our Lives; but it is things believed and unseen.

8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and
to be present with the Lord.

8. I say, we are bold and comfortably confident in all our Labors and danger
of Death, and rather willing to go from the Body, and to be at home or present
with the Lord.

9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent we may be accepted of
him.

9. Whether we shall yet live or die, we leave to God; but it is our earnest
desire, care, and labor, that whether we live here or die, or wherever we
are, we may please God, and be accepted by him.

10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad.

10. For we must all appear at the Judgment Seat of Christ, where all that we
have done will be brought to light, and every Man shall be sentenced and
rewarded according as he has lived and done in the Body, whether it be good or
evil, according to that Law which pardons penitent Believers.

11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we are
made manifest unto God, and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences.

11. It is the knowledge of the Terrors of the Lord, and how woeful it will be
to be found there unjustified under Guilt, and sentenced to Damnation, which
causes us to make so much ado in the World, to persuade Men to believe and
repent, that they may be saved: And God, that knows our Hearts and Ways, will
justify us herein, and I hope so do your convinced Consciences.

12. For we commend not our selves again unto you, but give you occasion to
glory on our behalf, that you may have somewhat to answer them which glory in
appearance, and not in heart.

12. I say not all this to get your Praise by my self-commendation, but to give
you the Matter of Answer to them that would draw you from the Truth, by drawing
you into a disesteem of us that were your first Teachers, and by boasting of
themselves by outward appearances, without an answerable inward Worth.

13. For whether we be besides our selves, it is to God: or whether we be
sober, it is for your cause.

13. And if any tell you that our Zeal is but crazed Melancholy, (as Festus
thought of Paul) it is in obedience to Gods Command, and for his Work and
Glory; (and dare any accuse this of Madness?) And if we be thought to do it
soberly, it is not for our Glory, but for your Stability and Safety.

14. For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one
died for all, then were all dead: 15. And that he died for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for
them, and rose again.

14, 15. If any think we are too zealously transported, let them know, that the
greatness of Christ's Love to us, and ours to him, constrains us, and will
bear no cold Indifferency: For we have cause to judge, that they are great
things which our Redemption intimates, even that Christ, who died for all,
found all Men dead in Sin and Misery; and that he therefore redeemed them by
his Death, that they who are recovered by him should not hereafter live to
themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose again.

16. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we have
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more.

16. Wherefore it is the great things of Spirituality and Eternity which we now
look at in our Ministry and Life: We value no Man on mere Carnal Advantages or
Account; yea, if we had been of those that converst with Christ on Earth in the
Body, and had eat and drunk in his presence, such Corporal Familiarity is
ended, and is not it that our Faith, and Hope, and Preaching most respects;
but his Spiritual Kingdom, and Glorious Presence, and the Means thereto.

17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are
past away, behold, all things are become new.

17. Therefore if any one be a Christian indeed, a true Member of Christ, he is
a new Man, as it were new made by Regeneration. The old Legal and Carnal Mind
and Conversation are ceased; his old Mind, and Will, and Life are changed; his
fleshly and earthly Mind is become spiritual and heavenly, and all is new.

18. And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation;

18. The Divine Revelation and the Divine Nature in us, now causes us to mind
and use all things as they belong to God, and as they are all Of Him, and By
Him, and To Him; and to overlook comparatively Carnal Interest: and as
reconciled, and brought home to God by Jesus Christ, and placing all our
Interest and Hopes in him, who also has committed to us this Ministry, to draw
home the World into this reconciled State.

19. To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them; and has committed unto us the word of
reconciliation.

19. To tell them, that it was God himself that sent Christ to redeem us, and
was in Christ, reconciling the lapsed World to himself, by the Doctrine,
Merits, and Sacrifice of Christ, which was performed by his gracious Will for
that end; purchasing their Pardon, and not using them as their Sin deserves,
but giving them an Act of Oblivion, on condition of Believing Acceptance; and
has committed to us the Ministry, to preach this Reconciliation to the World.

20. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

20. By all this they that contemn us may see what is the Nature and Dignity of
our Apostleship: We are sent to Men from God, as his Ambassadors, to persuade
them to believe in Christ. As though God himself did beseech you by us his
Messengers, we pray you in Christ's stead, who is the Prime and Great Apostle
from the Father, to be reconciled to God, even thankfully to accept his Grace,
and to give up Heart and Life to him.

21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him.

21. For God has made Christ to be a Sacrifice for Sin, who himself was
sinless; and this in our stead, and for our Pardon and Salvation, that so in
him we might have the Righteousness which is freely given us of God, and be
Partakers of the Divine Nature.

ANNOTATIONS.
1. THe Socinians strive hard to distort the first part of this Chapter, as if
it spoke of no Heavenly House till the Resurrection: Their first Reason is,
Because (...), Domicilium, is opposed to the Body here, and therefore it must
mean the future Body. But, 1. by [the Tabernacle of our Earthly House] Paul
seems to me to mean both this Body and Earth together; our present worldly
state in the Flesh. 2. Were it otherwise, yet their Conclusion would not
follow: For the Heavenly State of Glory without a Body, may be called our House
as contradistinct to this Body. 3. Nor is this Objection any thing to the Old
Fathers, and some present Divines (as Dr. Mo^e, etc.) who think that departed
Souls have a pure sort of Bodies above, to us invisible; either taking with
them some tenacious, igneous Spirits hence, or passing into some Etherial
Vehicle there; as even Mammertus thought, and others, who yet assert, that
Souls themselves are immaterial.

2. Their Second Reason is from v. 2. because it is called (...), our House
which is from Heaven, and not [ which is in Heaven.] But, (...) often signifies
the Substance, Matter, or thing of which another thing is made; as we say, some
things are made from or of Earth, Stone, Iron, Silver, etc. So here (...) does
necessarily signify no more, but that our House or Building after Death, will
be Heavenly, that is, of Heavenly Substance, Quality, and State.

3. And the Context does confute the Perverters; For 1. The first verse
intimates that we shall have the Eternal Building in Heaven, when the Earthy
Tabernacle is dissolved; for the conditional (...) intimates the time.

2. Verse 3. signifies, that we shall not be found naked; which none could
suspect after the Resurrection that believed it; but the putting off the Body
might make Men fear.

3. What else can be meant v. 6, 8. by being absent from the Lord while we are
in the Body, and being absent from the Body, and present with the Lord? And v.
9. by being accepted of him as the height of our Ambition when we die?

II. Verse 19. is mistaken by many, as if by [ the World] were meant only [ the
Elect] because Reconciliation and not imputing Trespasses are mentioned: But
the Text most plainly tells us of a General Reconciliation and non-imputation
to Mankind, and a particular to Believers. God did so far reconcile and forgive
the World, as not to deal with them merely on the terms of the violated Law of
Innocence, but to give them a Redeemer, and a Law of Grace, and a Sealed Pardon
of all sin, and free gift of Salvation by Christ, on condition of Believing
Acceptance; and that is commonly said to be given, which is freely by a deed of
Gift conferred, though Acceptance be employed or expressed as the Condition of
enjoymenr, and a Man may yet wilfully refuse it or neglect it; yea, such
Conditions a^e so naturally necessary, that they use not to be expressed. Yet
no Man is Actually (but only Conditionally) possessed of Pardon and
Reconciliation, till that Condition be performed: Yet God was forgiving them on
his part, and was not imputing sin and unworthiness of Redemption to them, when
he gave them a Savior. And yet the work of the Ministry remains, even to
entreat Men to believe and accept this Pardon and Reconciliation as offered;
and it is then actually theirs, when they thus accept it. To say, that then
their Faith does more than Christ's did, or Gods Grace, is a putid Cavil. Their
Faith or Acceptance is no efficient cause at all of their Pardon or
Justification: It is but a necessary Receptive Qualification; he that shuts the
Window causes darkness: But it is sottish to say, that he that opens it does
more than the Sun to cause light; which he causes not at all, but removes the
impediment of reception; and Faith it self is Gods Gift of Grace, though
Preaching and Persuasion be the means of working it.

CHAP. VI.
1. WE then as workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not
the grace of God in vain:

1. We then whose Office is to subserve Christ so your Salvation, beseech you
that ye take care that all the Mercy which he has showed you in the Gospel,
and you profess to have received, be not in vain, and ^^ustrated by any deceit.

2. (For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee: behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now
is the day of salvation)

2. It is of exceeding great moment to know your time and day of Grace: God
has his accepted time, and special day of Mercy, which all should watch and
take; as it is written, I have heard thee, etc. And certainly this is your time
and day of Mercy, while Mercy is so freely and fully preached to you.

3. Giving no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed:

3. Our care is to give no occasion of falling to any, nor expose the Ministry
to blame, or to the hard thoughts of those that should be saved by it.

4, 5. But in all things approving our selves as the ministers of God in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings.

4, 5. Note, What an approved Minister of Christ must endure and do, for the
Ends of his Ministry, if he be called to it.

6. By pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the holy
Ghost, by love unfeigned, 7. By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the
armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, 8. By honor and
dishonor, by evil report and good report:

6, 7, 8. Note, By how many means the Work of the M^nistry is promoted, and how
we must be qualified thereto.

8, 9, 10. As deceivers and yet true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying,
and behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing
all things.

8, 9, 10. Our Life is made up of seeming, but not real Contradictions. As
Deceivers use Craft to hu^t Men, we use our Wit and Skill (or Wiles) to save
Men; and yet we deliver nothing but the truth: Our Spirit and Spiritual
Condition is unknown; and yet our Outside known to many. We daily are exposed
to the danger of Death, and die daily; and yet you see we are alive. We are often
chastened, and yet not killed; we are under many Sorrows in the Flesh, and yet
we continually rejoice in God; we are poor, and yet God uses us to make many
rich in Grace; we have nothing, and yet by Faith all the World is ours, as
ordered by God and used by us for our Spiritual Good Love makes all other Men's
Estates comfortable to us as our own, and God uses all things for our good.

11. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged. 12.
Ye are not straightened in us, but ye are straightened in your own bowels.

11, 12. Our Mouth has been opened to you in full Communication of the Gospel,
and our Hearts enlarged toward you, in Love and Zeal for your Salvation. If
yet there be any straitness and defects in you of Knowledge and Love, it is of
your selves, and your own deficiency.

13. Now for a recompense in the same, (I speak as unto my children) be ye also
enlarged.

13. And Justice requires, that (as Children to a Father) your Love and
Kindness be large toward us, and that the Fruits of our Ministry in you be not
narrow and defective.

14. Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelivers: for what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? 15. And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he
that believes with an infidel?

14, 15. Let not Seducers, or Carnal Interest, draw you to Communion with
Infidels and Idolaters, as if you were inclined to their way, or were yet
indifferent in Religion. Partake not externally of their Sacrifices, as if you
were of their Society: For how can such Contraries as Righteousness and
Unrighteousness, Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, a Believer and an
Infidel, be united, or have special Communion, even Symbolical, in the things
wherein they are contrary?

16. And what agreement has the temple of God with idols? for ye are the
temple of the living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

16. Will you join the Temple of God and Idols together? God has made you his
Temple, and peculiar People, and promised specially to own you in Communion as
your God: And will you go to Idols Temples, as if your God had Concord and
Communion with them?

17, 18. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

17, 18. Wherefore go not to the Idols Temples, and symbolize not with them in
Religion to avoid Persecution; but come out from among them, as a holy People
segregate to the Lord, and defile not your selves with their unclean things,
and then God will own you as his Sons and Daughters, while you are pure, and
cleave to him.

1. Note, That this Command for the Church to avoid Communion with Idolaters
and Infidels, is perverted by them that feign it to forbid Communion with
Christians and their Churches, if they do but differ in some tolerable Opinion
or Practice from them, which their censorious Ignorance will falsely call
Idolatry. They call such Differences or Defects False Worship, and then say we
must not join in False Worship: Whereas every faulty Manner of Worship may be
called False, because it is so far disagreeable to the Rule: And no Man offers
any Worship to God that is not False, if all Faultiness be Falseness. But it is
no False Worship that will allow us to separate from Churches or Christians,
further than they separate from Christ, and Christ disowneth them for that
Faultiness; or than they make any Sin to be to us necessary to any part of
their Communion. They were very foul Sins, even in Worship, that the
Corinthians were guilty of; and yet none was commanded to come out from them.

And much more are those Papists displeasing to God, who cast out and violently
persecute good Christians, that do but avoid as sinful some Circumstances or
Forms which their Canons impose as things Indifferent, or made Necessary merely
by themselves.

Yet is it not the Name of a Christian Church that will make it lawful for us
to communicate in Idolatry, or to commit any Sin for their Communion, or to own
such Worship as we know God rejects: But as he pardons the faulty
Imperfections of other Men's and Churches Worship, and of our own, so must we
bear with our own and the Churches tolerable Failings, so far as we cannot
cure them.

II. They are mistaken that think it is unequal marrying with Infidels, which
the Apostle here only or chiefly means. The Word translated [ Yoaked]
signifies here rather Inclined toward them, as the Balance is by Weight: And
that which Paul chiefly pleads against all along, is that Rev. 2. and 3. called
the Doctrine of Jezebel and the Nicolaitans, which God hates, which taught the
Lawfulness of Fornication, and eating things offered to Idols; and this on
pretense of greater Wisdom and Revelation than Paul had.

CHAP. VII.
1. HAving therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God.

1. Having these Promises, That God will be your God, and own you, and dwell in
you, on this Condition, that you keep your selves pure to him, from Fleshly
Vice and Idol-Communion; let us avoid all Defilement of the Flesh, by
Fornication, or outward symbolizing with Idolaters; and of the Spirit, by
entertaining the Doctrines of Seducers, or suffering our Hearts to depart from
God.

2. Receive us: we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have
defrauded no man.

2. And let not seducing Teachers turn you from receiving the Ministry of us by
whom you were converted: We have not done by you as they do; we have wronged
none, corrupted none, nor covetously over-reached or defrauded any.

3. I speak not this to condemn you: for I have said before, that you are in
our hearts to die and live with you.

3. It is not censoriously, or for your reproach, that I say this; for you are
dear unto me.

4. Great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is my glorying of you: I
am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.

4. It is my Love that makes me use so much freedom of Speech to you, and
makes me boast of you. I am full of Comfort and Joy, to think of your
continuance in the Faith.

5. For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were
troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were fears.

5. And our Condition needed such Consolation: for in Macedonia our Flesh had
no rest from Labor and Trouble; we had Persecution and Opposition without, and
Fears within.

6. Nevertheless, God that comfort those that are cast down, comforted us by
the coming of Titus:

6. But God who comfort them that are humbled, made the coming of Titus a
Comfort to me.

7. And not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith he was
comforted in you, when he told us your earnest desire, your mourning, your
fervent mind toward me; so that I rejoiced the more.

7. Not so much for his Company and Welfare, as for the glad Tidings which he
brought of you, even of your earnest desire of me, your sorrow for the Sin
which I reproved, and your Zeal in my just Vindication against Accusers, which
were my Joy for you.

8. For though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent, though I did
repent: for I perceive that the same epistle made you sorry, though it were but
for a season.

8. For though, till I heard of the Success, I was troubled my self that I must
trouble you; yet now I repent not of it: for I perceive, that the Sorrow which
it caused in you was but short, till the reproved Sinner did repent.

9. Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to
repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive
damage by us in nothing.

9. And now I rejoice, not in your Grief, as such; (for Sorrow is but to
prepare for Joy by Reformation) but that your Sorrow was godly, and wrought
Repentance; which is so necessary to Forgiveness and Salvation, that I am
satisfied my plain dealing with you was not to your damage, but to your gain.

10. For godly sorrow works repentance to salvation not to be repented of:
but the sorrow of the world works death.

10. For godly Sorrow, as it is commanded of God for your own good, so it
works Repentance and recovery from Sin, and so the saving of the Sinner: But
the Sorrow for Losses and Crosses, which proceeds from the over much love of
the World, is sinful; and as it does but hurt the Soul, so does it the Body,
and hasteneth Death.

11. For behold the self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what
indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea,
what revenge! in all things we have approved your selves to be clear in this
matter.

11. Of this you have now experience in your selves; for your godly Sorrow for
the Scandals that rose among you, has wrought great carefulness to search out
the Case, and to reform it; great care to clear your selves from partaking in
the guilt, great indignation against the Sin; great fear of God, lest he should
avenge it; great desire after a Reformation; great Zeal against any
Church-pollution in the things of God; yea, and just Revenge on the Offenders
by way of Penitence, and on your selves for any degree of guilt: so that you
have by all means showed, that you are clear from the guilt.

12. Wherefore though I wrote unto you, I did it not for his cause that had
done the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered wrong, but that our care for
you in the sight of God might appear unto you.

12. And my sharp writing to you was not merely to right one Man against the
Injuries of another, as an Act of Justice between Man and Man; but it was in
love to you, and care of your Souls, that you might not be found guilty before
God.

13. Therefore we were comforted in your comfort: yea, and exceedingly the more
joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by you all.

13. Therefore in these fruits which tend to your own comfort, I also an
comforted; to which much is added by the Comfort that Titus had amomg you.

14. For it I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not ashamed; but as we
spoke all things to you in truth, even so our boasting which I made before
Titus is found a truth.

14. For you have confirmed to him all the good which I boastingly spoke of
you; so that I have no cause to be ashamed of it: But as I spak^ truly to you,
so I did of you.

15. And his inward affection is more abundant toward you, whilst he remembers
the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling you received him.

15. And he is greatly affected toward you, by finding you so obedient, and
how you received him and his Message with a careful fear of Gods displeasure,
and the guilt of Sin.

16. I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you in all things.

16. My expectation therefore of your Obedience, dispersing my fear of you, and
increasing my confidence of your stability, does increase my Joy.

CHAP. VIII.
1. MOreover brethren, we do you to wit, of the grace of God bestowed on the
churches of Macedonia:

1. And I think it meet here to give you notice of the Grace of God on the
Churches of Macedonia, which appeared in their willing Liberality in our
Collections for Judea.

2. How that in a great trial of affliction, the abundance of their joy, and
their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberality.

2. How that while they were themselves under a great Trial of Affliction, and
in deep Poverty, yet they joyfully abounded in Liberality.

3. For to their power (I bear record) yea, and beyond their power, they were
willing of themselves.

3. For they were voluntarily ready, even beyond their Power; which they
extended to the utmost.

4. Praying us with much entreaty, that we would receive the gift, and take
upon us the fellowship of the ministering to the saints.

4. Earnestly entreating us to receive their Contribution, and undertake the
administering of it to the Saints at Jerusalem, as an Expression of their
Communicating Love.

5. And this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own selves to the
Lord, and unto us by the will of God.

5. And in this they exceeded our hope, first giving themselves to God, and to
us as his Ministers, as ready to help us with their Persons, as well as with
their Purses.

6. Insomuch that we desired Titus, that as he had begun, so he would also
finish in you the same grace also.

6. And so we desired Titus, that as he had begun the motion or this Charity to
you, he would be at the labor to travel to you, and bring it to perfection.

7. Therefore as ye abound in every thing, in faith, in utterance, and
knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us; see that ye abound in
this grace also.

7. Therefore as you are a Church eminent for Gifts of Faith, Knowledge,
Speech, Diligence, and Love to us, see that your charitable Contribution abound
in answerableness to your Gifts.

8. I speak not by commandment, but by occasion of the forwardness of others,
and to prove the sincerity of your love.

8. I do not this as the Master of your Purses, by way of command; but I set
before you the good Example of others, and I invite you to give this proof of
the sincerity of your Love to me, and to the Brethren: (For Hypocrites will
afford us a cheap sor^ of Love, but not a costly one.)

9. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich,
yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.

9. And what can be a stronger Motive to you, than the Example of Christ, who,
though he was Lord of all the World, for our sakes lived in the Body, in the
Condition of the Poor; and this was to procure us the Heavenly Riches: So that
you relieve him reputatively, in relieving his Members; and you imitate him,
when you forsake your own Abundance for the good of others.

10. And herein I give my advice: for this is expedient for you, who have begun
before, not only to do, but also to be forward a year ago.

10. And I am the bolder herein to advise you, because you your selves have
herein begun, and resolved to go on, a year ago; and therefore it is but
agreeable to your own Resolves.

11. Now therefore perform the doing of it; that as there was a readiness to
will, so there may be a performance also out of that which you have.

11. Therefore now perform what then you readily resolved on, according to your
ability.

12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a
man has, and not according to that he has not.

12. For if there be a true willingness, it will be performed according to a
Man's ability; and God requires no more, but accepts the Will for that which
we are unable for.

13. For I mean not that other men be eased, and you burdened: 14. But by an
equality, that now at this time your abundance may be a supply for their want,
that their abundance also may be a supply for your want, that there may be
equality.

13, 14. Not that I would lay more on you than your Proportion, to ease others:
but that now you abound, you may supply their want; and that when you are in
want, the abundance of others may supply your wants.

15. As it is written, He that had gathered much had nothing over: and he that
had gathered little, had no lack.

15. In which I may allude to what is said of the Israelites gathering Manna; [
He that, etc.] Obey God, and you shall not want; and if you abound, what enjoy
you of it more than they that have but Food and Raiment? God will reduce all
his Servants to an Equality suitable to them severally, in the Use and End.

16. But thanks be to God, which put the same earnest care into the heart of
Titus for you. 17. For indeed he accepted the exhortation, but being more
forward, of his own accord he went unto you.

16, 17. I thank God that Titus was as forward to move you to this Work as I;
for he did not only yield to it at my request, but of his own accord was
forward to go to you about it.

18. And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the gospel,
throughout all the churches:

28. And with him we sent Luke, whose Service for the Gospel has made him
honored in all the Churches.

19. (And not that only, but who was also chosen of the churches, to travel
with us with this grace which is administered by us to the glory of the same
Lord, and declaration of your ready mind)

19. And who was chosen by the Churches to go with us in this Ministration of
your Charity to the Jews, that God may have the Glory of this notified Concord
of Jewish and Gentile Christians, and of your ready Minds to so good a Work.

20. Avoiding this, that no man should blame us in this abundance, which is
administered by us: 21. Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of
the Lord, but also in the sight of men.

20, 21. For I took care to avoid all occasion of suspicion, that I should
detain any of this large Conribution to my self, or unfaithfully distribute it:
Providing that all be done decently and blamelesly in the sight of Men, as well
as faithfully in the sight of God.

22. And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes proved
diligent in many things, but now much more diligent, upon the great confidence
which I have in you.

22. And with them I have sent another Brother, whose Diligence I have often
tried, but now find him much more willing; being encouraged by my confidence of
your forwardness.

23. Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner, and fellow-helper
concerning you: or our brethren be enquired of, they are the messengers of the
churches, and the glory of Christ.

23. If any doubting of their Trustiness, enquire what these Brethren are, let
them know, that Titus is my Partner and Helper even for your Service; and the
other two Brethren are Messengers of the Churches (who would not trust untrusty
Men) and an Honor to the Christian Faith.

24. Wherefore show ye to them, and before the churches, the proof of your
love, and of our boasting on your behalf.

24. So far therefore regard them, as to let them see, and the Churches that
sent them, hear the Proof of your Love to me, and to all Saints, by your
Liberality, and that I have not boasted of you in vain.

Note, 1. That Paul's Importunity for this Collection shows that the Case was
much altered, since in Acts 4. etc. they sold all and laid at the Apostles
Feet, and had all things common. And as Men were quickly grown more cold, so
that was not intended for a constant and universal Practice, but to show with
the Gift of Tongues, the mavelous degree of holy Love and Unity which the
Holy Ghost was given to effect: For to continue it every where, would have
disabled them all to do much future good with Riches, when all was gone. And
perhaps the Christians at Jerusalem were then in greater want by that.

2. We see, that even among Christians costly Duties come hardly off (else Paul
had not needed all this ado) even where Gifts and Parts are eminent.

3. And yet it is costly Duties of Charity that must prove the truth of our
Faith and Love, which are dead if barren.

4. We see, that a Minister who sees cause obstinately to avoid being
chargeable to any of his Hearers himself, lest they contemn or suspect him as a
Self-seeker, may yet put on confidence, and be bold and importunate in urging
them to Charity for others, and Collections for the Service of the Church and
Gospel.

CHAP. IX.
1. FOr as touching the ministering to the saints, it is superfluous for me to
write to you. 2. For I know the forwardness of your mind, for which I boast of
you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal has
provoked very many.

1, 2. But to use many Arguments with you, for the Duty of relieving the needy
Saints in general, or for this Contribution in particular, I suppose it
needless, you being your selves so forward to it, that I have boasted of your
readiness a year ago, which has quickened the Zeal of many others.

3. Yet have I sent the brethren, lest our boasting of you should be in vain in
this behalf; that, as I said, ye may be ready:

3. Yet to make sure, I have sent the Brethren, lest it be to do when I come,
and my boasting of you fail.

4. Lest happily if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, we
(that we say not, you) should be ashamed in this same confident boasting.

4. For I would not have them of Macedonia, if they come with me, by finding
your Collection unready, think that you are unwilling, to your dishonor, and
mine, that boasted of you.

Note, That it is lawful to use an honest Craft to draw Men to their Duty, 1. By
engaging their Reputation in it: 2. And by alluring them by just Praise.

5. Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren, that they would go
before unto you, and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof ye had notice
before, that the same might be ready as a matter of bounty, and not as of
covetousness.

5. Therefore I sent these three Brethren, to desire you that it might be
ready, (you having notice of it also heretofore) that it may appear to be of
willing Liberality, and not extorted from covetous Men.

6. But this I say, He which sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly: and
he which sows bountifully, shall reap also bountifully.

6. As to the Proportion, I will say but this; All shall reap in that measure
that they sow.

Note, That Paul's disclaiming Justification by Works, consists with this
Doctrine, That all Men shall be rewarded not only according to the Sincerity of
their Hearts, but also according to the Degrees of their obedient Will and
Works.

7. Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give; not
grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loves a cheerful giver.

7. Let your Will command you in the proportion: Do it not grudgingly, and as
urged and constrained against your Wills; but as you are truly willing: For God
loves a cheerful Giver, and not the outward Deed only, which is against or
without the W^ll.

8. And God is able to make all grace abound toward you; that ye always having
all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work:

8. And it should take off all unwillingness, to consider, that God is
All-sufficient to give you by his Blessing such Abundance, that you shall
always have enough to furnish you for Good Works, as well as to supply your own
Necessities.

9. (As it is written, He has dispersed abroad; he has given to the poor: his
righteousness remains for ever.

9. For God has promised in his Description of the Righteous, Psalm. 112. That
he will so bless him that is charitable and liberal in Good Works, that he
shall prosper, and have supply from God, for all that he requires of him, and
shall for ever be rewarded for it, as for that which is part of his Personal
Righteousness.

10. Now he that ministers seed to the sower, both minister bread for your
food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your
righteousness)

10. And this is my Benediction and Prayer for you, That God, who gives both
Seed and Increase, will supply all your Wants, and bless your Liberality with
the Increase of his Gifts, and the Fruits of this your Righteousness to your
selves.

11. Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, which causes through
us thanksgiving to God.

11. That, you may be enriched by him in all things, so as to feed your Bounty,
which when we distribute will make many thankful to God.

12. For the administration of this service not only supplieth the want of the
saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God;

12. For the distribution of your Charity will not only supply the Saints
Necessities, but also cause them to give thanks to God, who sends them his
Mercies by the Hands of Men.

13. (Whilst by the experiment of this ministration, they glorify God for your
professed subjection unto the gospel of Christ, and for your liberal
distribution unto them, and unto all men.)

13. The distribution of your Gift will be a convincing Experiment to the Jews,
that the Gentiles are converted to a loving Union with them, and are sincerely
subject to the Gospel, and that your Faith is not barren, but effectual and
fruitful.

14. And by their prayer for you, which long after you, for the exceeding grace
of God in you.

14. And it will provoke them to pray for you, who greatly value you, for the
abundant Grace of God, which shows it self by such evident Fruit.

15. Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift.

15. And as Gifts and Grace* Wealth and willing Minds, are all the unspeakable
Gifts of God; to him we return our chiefest Thanks.

CHAP. X.
1. NOw I Paul my self bes;eech you, by the meekness and gentleness of Christ,
who in presence am base among you, but being absent am bold toward you. 2. But
I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present, with that confidence
wherewith I think to be bold against some which think of us, as if we walked
according to the flesh.

1, 2. And having pleaded with you for the poor Christians in Judea, let me
next speak for my self. Though some among you report, that my bold Speech to
you is only by Letters, and that my Presence is contemptible; I will by this
Letter also use the Meekness and Gentleness which is according to the Command
and Example of Christ, in beseeching you not to put me to use that Boldness
that else I must do against them that calumniate my Ministry as Carnal and
Self-seeking.

3. For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh:

3. For though we yet dwell in the Body, our Ministry and Life are not from
Carnal Principles, to Carnal Ends, nor by Carnal Means.

4. (For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to
the pulling down of strong holds)

4. For it is not Bribes, or Swords, or outward Violence, but more powerful
Arms, by which we batter and cast down the Fortresses of Sin and Satan.

5. Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ:

5. It is not Men's Estates or Bodies that we conquer, by Fines, Imprisonments,
or Captivity; but even the Conceits, Opinions, and Imaginations of Men's Minds,
the Logic of Cavillers; the Philosophy of Opposers, the Pride of Jews and
Gentiles, and all their Misapprehensions of the Christian Verity, and
Opposition against it, and bringing their Thoughts and Minds into subjection to
Christ.

6. And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience
is fulfilled.

6. And tho we call not for Fire from Heaven to revenge our selves, and
gratify our Passions; yet when the Church is settled in their Obedience, so
that the Wheat may be separated from the Tales, God, who has furnished me with
Authority, will not deny me Ability to inflict such Penalties as he judget^ fit
for the Impenitent, by delivering them to Satan.

7. Do ye look on things after the outward appearance? if any man trust to
himself, that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this again, that as he is
Christ's, even so are we Christ.

7. Do you judge by Men's outward Appearance and Ostentation, and judge of me by
the meanness of my Garb, and Bodily Stature, and Aspect? If it be Pretense of
any Gifts or Authority from Christ, which puffs up these Men, let them
consider, whether we have not as much of these from Christ to show as they?

8. For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority, (which the Lord
has given us for edification, and not for your destruction) I should not be
ashamed:

8. If I should say, that I can show more Authority from Christ than they can*
I should not be ashamed, as unable to prove it: (Yet we pretend to none that is
destructive and hurtful to the Church, or any of the Brethren; but only to
such Power as is to edify and do good.)

9, 10. That I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters. For his
letters (say they) are weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence is weak,
and his speech contemptible.

9, 10. I will not seem to terrify you by Letters, contrary to what I say in
presence: Though my Accusers say, that my Bodily Presence and Speech are
contemptible, and not answerable to my Letters.

Note, That Tradition tells us, That Paul (according to his Name) was a Man of
a very little Stature, and his Voice answerably small; and it may be that hence
they raised this Report of his Presence and Speech.

11. Let such an one think this, that such as we are in word by letters, when
we are absent, such we will be also indeed when we are present.

11. But let such believe, that when I come, my Deeds shall he as awful as my
Words are.

Note, That the thing which Paul would have his Accusers fear, was, that by the
miraculous Gift of the Holy Ghost they should speed as El^m^s did.

12. For we dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with
some that commend themselves: but they measuring themselves by themselves, and
comparing themselves amongst themselves, are not wise.

12. I will not imitate them in Self-commendation and Comparisons: but it is
their folly and self-deceit, to measure themselves by their own self-conceit,
and compare themselves with their own Followers, not knowing the Grace of God
in others.

13. But we will not boast of things without our measure, but according to the
measure of the rule which God has distributed to us, a measure to reach even
unto you.

13. But I will not boast of any thing done beyond the Province and Measure of
Gifts assigned and vouchsafed to us of God, as those that would reap the praise
of other Men's Labors; but of that which God has really done by us, of which
your selves are part of our Witnesses.

14. For we stretch not our selves beyond our measure, as though we reached not
unto you; for we are come as far as to you also, in preaching the gospel of
Christ:

14. You know, that when I extend my boasting even to you, that I boast not of
that which I never performed: For you are my Witneses, as being the Fruits of
my Ministry.

15. Not boasting of things without our measure, that is, of other men's
labors; but having hope when your faith is increased, that we shall be
enlarged by you according to our rule abundantly,

15. I boast not of Labor in another Man's Province, and of other Men's
Performance (as these do.) But I hope that the increase of your Faith will be
the increase of my Advantage, and of my Comfort and Reward, whoever helps
you, it being the Fruit and Increase of the Seed which I sowed.

16. To preach the gospel in the regions beyond you, and not to boast in
another man's line of things made ready to our hand.

16. I hope by your Increase to have the better opportunity to carry the Gospel
beyond you, to the Regions that have not yet received it; and not to boast, as
entering on other Men's Labors.

7. But he that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

17. But let us all take heed that we glory not in our selves, but purely in
God, and for God, that we do his Work, and promote his Kingdom and Honor in
the World.

18. For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends.

18. Self-commendation is no just Praise (but a detection and shame of Pride
and Folly.) But it is Gods Approbation and Praise which is our real Honor.

CHAP. XI.
1. WOuld to God you could bear with me a little in my folly; and indeed bear
with me. 2. For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for I have espoused
you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.

1, 2. I would you could bear a little with that which is like to foolish
Boasting! Yea, you must bear with me, because it is from a godly Jealousy of
Love to you, for Christ's sake, to whom I did espouse you as chaste and peculiar
to him.

3. But I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtility, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

3. But I fear, lest by the Craft and fair Pretenses of them that tell you of a
more sublime Degree of Knowledge, as the Serpent by subtilty beguiled Eve, by
telling her that they should be as God, knowing Good and Evil; so your Minds
should be corrupted, while you think that they are edified, by forsaking that
Christian Simplicity and Purity which is the true Wisdom.

Note, 1. That fair Promises and Beginnings may end in soul Corruptions.

2. Forsaking Christian Simplicity, is the Corruption of Minds and Churches.
That is, 1. Turning from the simple Doctrine of the Creed, and things necessary
and sure, to vain Curiosities, and uncertain Assertions and Contentions, on
pretense of Orthodoxness, or of higher Knowledge. 2. From the simplicity of
Worship, to ludicrous Humane Ceremonies and Formalities. 3. From the Simplicity
of Discipline, to Tyranny and Domination, and ensnaring unnecessary Canons and
Customs, imposed on the Churches. 4. From the Simplicity of Christian Love and
Conversation, to segregate Sects, and to Partiality, and self-seeking wordly
Crast.

3. Pretended extraordinary Knowledge is one of Satan's Methods to corrupt the
Church.

4. For if he that comes, preaches another Jesus whom we have not preached,
or if ye receive another Spirit, which ye have not received, or another gospel,
which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with him.

4. It is one Christ, one Spirit, and one Gospel, that we have preached, and
you received: If your new pretended Teachers have another Christ, and Spirit,
and Gospel to preach, and can give better Proof of what they say, than I have
done for the Christ, Spirit, and Gospel which I have preached, let them show
it, and let them be born with and received.

5. For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles. 6. But
though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have been thoroughly
made manifest among you in all things.

5, 6. I suppose that I have no way come short of those that are the most
eminent Apostles: If my Speech be as mean and rude as they object, so is not my
Knowledge, (which is the thing that they pretend to excel in.) But sure I need
not tell you of this, who have had the Proof of it in my Ministry to your
selves.

7. Have I committed an offense in abasing my self that you might be exalted,
because I have preached to you the gospel of God freely?

7. Is it my offense, that forbearing the ostentation of Learning called
Wisdom, I have preached the Gospel of the Cross according to your capacity, and
that without putting you to Charge, by taking any Maintenance from you?

8, 9. I robbed other churches, taking wages of them to do you service. And
when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no man; for that
which was lacking to me, the brethren which came from Macedonia supplied, and
in all things I have kept my self from being burdensome unto you, and so will I
keep my self.

8, 9. I did that which had been partiality and robbing, had there not been
just cause, etc.

Note, That, 1. One Church ought to contribute to the furtherance of the Gospel
to others.

2. This is a close Reproof of the Corinthians, whom Paul saw so covetou^, or
suspicious of him, that if he had made himself beholden to them, he had crossed
the Ends of his Ministry.

10. As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting in
the regions of Achaia.

10. And that you may not think I am covetous, or like to burden you, I
solemnly protest, that I will not in Achaia give away this Advantage of serving
you freely, knowing what occasion some among you would else take to reproach my
Ministry.

Note, If it was so meritorious in Paul to serve them freely, what a sort of
People are they among us, that reproach that Ministry that would, in stead of
burdening them, give even their own Estates to the Poor, as well as their
Labors?

11, 12, Wherefore? because I love you not? God knows. But what I do, that I
will do, that I may cut off occasion from them which desire occasion, that
wherein they glory, they may be found even as we.

11, 12. This is not, God knows, because I love you not; but because I know
how some Men watch for an occasion to accuse us; which I will cut off from
them, that they may not have an advantage to boast on this account.

Note, That it is very like these Accusers of Paul were some rich Men, that
complied with the Times for Interest, and took no Pay of the Churches, but
deceived them freely, and reproached Paul has a poor indigent Fellow, that
preached for Bread.

13. For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves
into the apostles of Christ.

13. For these false Apostles are deceitful Workers, pretending that they are
Christ's Apostles, and acting as if they were such indeed.

Note, It Is no wonder then if there be swarms of false Ministers, pretending to
be the true Ministers of Christ.

14. And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light.

14. And no marvel, when Satan does but teach them to do as he does, who
counterfeiteth an Angel of Light, and brings in Error and Sin, by bold
pretending that it is Light, and extraordinary Knowledge and Virtue.

15. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the
ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works.

15. Therefore it is not an incredible thing, that Men should be really the
Devils Ministers, animated and taught by him to do his Work, against the
Interest of Christ, and Truth, and Godliness; and yet pretend to go beyond
Christ's own Apostles in preaching Righteousness, Wisdom, and Godliness.

Note, That the Pretenses of Truth, Orthodoxness, Righteousness, Free Grace,
Unity, Peace, etc, are no sufficient Evidences of true Ministers. The Devils
Ministers may pretend them all, and may cry down Christ's Ministers as Carnal,
Heretics, Legal, Schismatics, etc.

16. I say again, let no man think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a fool
receive me, that I may boast my self a little.

16. Take it not for Folly to vindicate my Ministry: But if you do, yet hear
me, try, and judge.

Note, That Paul means, that Boasting is the usual mark of a Fool; but it is
no Folly, when the Interest of God and Souls require it: It was seemingly, not
really his Folly.

17. That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were
foolishly in this confidence of boasting.

17. That which I speak of my self, I speak not as I do the Gospel by
Inspiration; and I confess that materially it has the appearance of Folly in
ostentation.

18, 19, 20. Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also. For ye
suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise, For ye suffer if a man
bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man
exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face.

18, 19, 20. You can easily bear with a Fool, because you are wise your selves:
So bear with me, while I do that necessarily, which they do vainly. You can
bear with greater Provocations, even with them that would captivate you to
Error and the Law, and would make a Prey of you, and make themselves your
Lords and Masters, and abuse you.

21. I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak: howbeit,
whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak foolishly) I am bold also.

21. I speak of them that reproach me of contemptible Weakness: Though I
confess, that Boasting usually signifies Folly, I will say, that I have as
much as they to boast of.

Note, That Paul is so cautelous lest any by his Example should be tempted by
proud Boasting, that materially he calls it Folly, though formally it was not
so in him.

22, 23. Are they Hebrews? so am I: are they Israelites? so am I: are they the
seed of Abraham? so am I: Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as fool) I am
more: in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more
frequent, in deaths often.

22, 23. They boast that they are Hebrews, Israelites, Abraham's Seed, and
Ministers of Christ: And am not I so too? Yea, though my Words be like those of
a Fool, I say, that I have labored and suffered more for Christ, by Stripes,
Prisons, and daily dying, than they have done.

24. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. 25. Thrice was I
beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and a
day I have been in the deep:

24, 25, Scourged by the Jews to the utmost seve^ity, beaten by the Romans,
stoned by the Rabble, thrice shipwrack'd, a Night and a Day in some darksom
dangerous Passage at Sea (or a Dungeon so called, as some think.)

26, 27. In journing often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city,
in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false
brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.

26, 27, Note, That the Sufferings which deter Carnal Men from Religion by
Shame and Fear, are the Honor of Believers.

28. Besides those things that are without, that which comes upon me daily,
the care of all the churches.

28. Besides the things that are without my Body, even the Case of all the
Churches, which are my daily Care.

29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?

29. Every Man's Weakness and Sufferings are to me as my own: The danger of the
Tempted and Scandalized is my pain, and care for their preservation.

30. If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern mine
infirmities.

30. If you will put me to boast, it shall be of that which worldly Men will
turn to my reproach; not of any Preeminence, but of my Sufferings.

31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for
evermore, knows that I lie not. 32. In Damascus the governor under Aretas
the king, kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend
me: 33. And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and
escaped his hands.

1. Note, That through all this Chapter Paul calls his Boasting Folly, not
formally and really, but materially and seemingly, because it is Fools that
boast unnecessarily; when the false Apostles made it his Duty.

2. Note, That it was no small Quarrel of Brethren (like that of Barnabas)
which put him upon all this Apology, (which else would not have savoured of
Humility.) But it was the Intrusion and envious Accusation of such Jewish,
Heretical, false Apostles, as he calls the Ministers of Satan, who
endeavored to subvert the Gospel, and by disgracing him, to frustrate all his
Labors, and destroy the Church: It Is like to be those called Nicolatians, Rev.
2. and 3.

CHAP. XII.
IT is not expedient for me doubtless to glory: I will come to visions and
revelations of the Lord.

1. I know that boasting is unseemly for an humble Minister of Christ: but
seeing it is put upon me, I proceed to a higher Matter, even Visions and
Revelations from God.

2. I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago (whether in the body, I
cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knows) such an
one caught up to the third heaven. 3. And I knew such a man (whether in the
body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knows) 4. How that he was caught
up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man
to utter.

2, 3, 4. I knew a Man that was acted by the Spirit of Christ above himself*
who above fourteen years ago (whether Bodily, or only by mental Ecstasy and
Rapture, I know not, God knows) was caught up to that Place of Glory called
the Third Heavens, and caught up there into Paradise, a Place of Joys, and
heard that which neither can nor must be uttered, being unsuitable to the Ears
of Mortals, and proper to Possessors.

5. Of such an one will I glory: yet of my self I will not glory, but in mine
infirmities.

5. I think this Fore-taste of the Heavenly Glory, worthy to be gloried in: But
(though I be the Man) I will not glory in it as my own, who was but passive,
and advanced to it by God, to whom all the Glory is due. It is my Infirmities,
or debasing Sufferings in the World, which I will call my own, and boast of.

6. For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool; for I will say
the truth: but now I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that which
he sees me to be, or that he hears of me.

6. Should I boast of this so great a G^ft, to the Glory of the Giver, it would
be no Folly: But I lay it by, expecting that no Man judge highlier of me, than
by what himself shall see or hear.

7. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations, there was given to me a thorn in in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to busfet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

7. And lest this Revelation should too much lift me up, there was given me a
Thorn in the Flesh, a Messenger of Satan to put me to pain, and keep me from
too much Exaltation.

Note, 1. It is most unlikely which some feign to be the sense of these Words,
viz. That it was a Temptation to Lust: It Is most like it was such a Pain as the
Stone, or at least some bitter Persecution.

2. Even the holiest Christians, after their most heavenly Acquaintance, are
not out of danger of Pride, or being too much exalted.

3. This Spiritual Pride is so dangerous a Sin, that it is a Mercy to be saved
from it, even by Bodily Pain.

4. God will hurt the Bodies, to save the Souls, even of his dearest Children.

5. Satan, that intends hurt, is often Gods Instrument to do us good.

6. Bodily Pains are often the Messengers of Satan, and yet of God.

8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

8. Note, 1. That it is lawful to pray for the removal of Pain; 2. Yea, to be
often in prayer for it.

9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is
made perfect in weakness.

9. And the Answer which I had was not a present removal of the Thorn, but a
Word for Patience and Trust in God, viz. That his Favor and Grace was
sufficient for me, to support and comfort me till deliverance came; and that it
is his way in our Weakness to manifest most his helping Power.

9, 10. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for
when I am weak, then am I strong.

9, 10. It is therefore in Sufferings that I will glory, as being the occasion
of my greater Experience of the Love and Power of Christ: Yea, I even take
pleasure in abasing Sufferings for him, though not as painful, yet as an
advantage to his Grace that strengthens me, so far am I from being ashamed or
impatient of them.

11. I am become a fool in glorying, ye have compelled me: for I ought to have
been commended of you: for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest apostles,
though I be nothing.

11. I have said all this as in the Habit of a Fool: but it is you that put it
on me, by necessity, who should have vindicated me and my Ministry against
seducing Accusers.

12. Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in
signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds.

12. Are not you my Witnesses? I appeal to your selves: Among you my
Apostleship was fully proved, by patient Suffering, and by miraculous Gifts,
and Signs, and Wonders, and Works, done by the Power of God.

13. For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches, except it be
that I my self was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong.

13. For what Gifts of the Spirit poured out among you? what Signs and Miracles
have other Churches excelled you in? The difference between you and others was,
that I spared your Purses, and put you to no charge: If that be a wrong, I hope
you can easily forgive it.

14. Behold, the third time I am ready to come to you; and I will not be
burdensome to you; for I seek not yours, but you: for the children ought not to
lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.

14. A third time I purpose to come to you, and not to burden you, but as to my
children, to give, rather than to receive.

15. And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I be loved.

15. And I will gladly spend my Time and Labor, and be spent my self, even as
to my Strength and Life, for your Salvation, though my Love should be requited
with Neglect.

16. But be it so, I did not burden you: nevertheless being crafty, I caught
you with guile. 17. Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto
you?

16, 17. But be it as some object, that though I took no Money of you, I
craftily caught you with guile, that getting your Affections, I might hereafter
make advantage of you for my self: But my Craft was but to win you to Christ.
Did I make a gain of you, by any of them whom I sent unto you? Will you judge
of my Design contrary to my Practice?

18. I desired Titus, and with him I sent a brother: did Titus make a gain of
you? walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps?

18. Did Titus, or the Brother whom I sent to you, make a Gain of you? Did we
not all agree in Mind and Practice?

19. Again, think you that we excuse our selves unto you? we speak before God
in Christ: but we do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying.

19. Think not that I say all this to insinuate my self into your esteem for
any by Ends of my own: I speak it as before God in Christ; It is your
Edification that is my End in this and all things that I do concerning you.

20. For I fear, lest when I come I shall not find you such as I would, and
that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates,
envyings, wraths, strifes, back-bitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults: 21.
And lest when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall
bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the
uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they have committed.

20, 21. For I fear lest when I come I shall find among you these Sins, which
are the Characters of Factious Minds, Debates, etc. and lest God will humble me
among you with grief for you, and mourning over the Impenitent, that have been
guilty of those filthy Sins, which Deceivers and Idol-Feasts have drawn them
to; and left I be forced to be unwelcom to such Persons.

Note, I. Though Paul seems to contradict himself in praising the Corinthians
so largely in the beginning of this Epistle, and describing them so ill in the
end: yet, 1. It is not the same Persons that he praises and dispraiseth,
though of the same Church. 2. We must praise all that is good in Men, when we
reprove the evil.

II. Note, That the very Characters of factious seduced Professors, are the
Sins here named, which therefore we should specially abhor: 1. Debates, 2.
Envying Zeal, 3. Wraths, 4. Strifes, 5. Back-bitings, 6. Whisperings, 7.
Swellings against each other, 8. Tumults. Yet it is very notable, That
notwithstanding all these Corruptions, and Abuses and filthy Scandals, Paul
neither separateth, nor persuadeth any to separate; but leaves that to the
Heretical, who used to separate themselves into distinct Bodies, for the
promoting of their Opinions and Parties.

CHAP. XIII.
1. THis is the third time I am coming to you: In the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall every word be established.

1. As the Testimony of two or three Witnesses confirms questioned Truth, so
my second and third Admonition warns you to prevent Severity.

2. I told you before, and foretell you as if I were present the second time,
and being absent, now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all
other, that if I come again I will not spare:

2. Though I be absent, my Writing may pass for warning as if I were present,
by which I foretell you, that if I come, I will not forbear to exercise on the
Impenitent the Power given me by Christ.

3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you-ward is not
weak, but is mighty in you.

3. And seeing you call for a Proof of Christ's speaking in me, you shall have
this further Proof (the Corporal Punishment of the Impenitent by Miracle or
Satan's Execution): Though sure the Power of Christ attesting my Ministry, has
been so fully manifested among you, that you should have been thereby convinced.

4. For though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the power of
God: for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him by the power of
God toward you.

4. For as Christ in the State of Humane Weaknss was crucified, but by Divine
Power was raised, and lives; so, as we are conformed to him in Weakness and
Suffering, we shall show you that we partake of the Power of God in our Life
and Ministry.

5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves: know
ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates?

5. If you question my Ministry, do but examine your selves, whether you be
Christians or not: If you are, was it not by the convincing Power of Gods
Attestation to my Ministry? and do you question that which converted you? If
not, you are yet without a Savior, and in your Sins: And if you deny Christ in
you, and his Power showed among you, you may expect that he will deny you.

6. But I trust that ye shall know that we are not reprobates.

6. And I trust that you shall be convinced that we have not forsaken Christ,
nor shall be cast off or forsaken by him.

7. Now I pray to God that ye do no evil; not that we should appear approved,
but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as reprobates.

7. My Prayer is, That you may be saved from Sin and Seduction, not so much
that you may think well of us, but that you may do that which is right, how ill
soever you think of us.

8. For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

8. For as we have no Authority or Commission to do any thing against the
Truth, but only for it; so we have no desire to do otherwise.

9. For we are glad when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this also we wish,
even your perfection.

9. For how much soever we be vilified or afflicted, it is our joy that you are
strong, and that it is better with you: yea, it is your Perfection that is our
desire.

10. Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I should
use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord has given me to
edification, and not to destruction.

10. It is to prevent Severity when I am present, and the trouble that you and
I shall have in Penalties on you, that I give you this Admonition by Letter:
still professing, That Christ has given me no Power of Tyranny, or against
your own good, but only for your Edification. Should I claim any other, it is
not of Christ.

11. Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

11. My concluding Valediction is, Be compact together in holy Union; Rejoice
in the Lord; Be of one mind in Faith and Love, though you cannot in lesser
things; Live in peace: and then he that would be known to us as the God of Love
and Peace, will be among you.

12, 13, 14. Greet one another with an holy kiss. All the saints salute you.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.

12, 13, 14. Express Christian Love to one another. The Saints here salute you.
The highest Blessing I can wish you is, The Grace of Christ, the Love of God,
and Communication of, and Communion in the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Note, out of all this Epistle, That though proud tenderness of our Reputation
be a Sin, yet it is a Duty to vindicate it when the Interest of the Gospel and
of Souls require it; which it did more with an Apostle, than an ordinary
Minister.

The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the GALATIANS.
The INTRODUCTION.
THE Scope of this Epistle is to reduce the Galatians, who began to be seduced
by those Judaizers that would have not only joined Moses's Law to Christianity,
but also would have put that Yoke on the Gentile-Christians: And it is like some
Heretics joined with them. To which end he sharply reproves the
unsteadfastness of the Galatians; evinceth the non-obligation of that Law, and
the Carnality of Judaizing, and the Spirituality of the Gospel; and that he had
his Gospel by immediate Inspiration from Christ; and that it is not singular
from the other Apostles, nor dissonant to it self, nor to his condescending
Practice with the Jews.

CHAP. I.
1. PAul an apostle (not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God
the Father, who raised him from the dead) 2. And all the brethren which are
with me, unto the churches of Galatia: 3. Grace be to you, and peace from God
the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

1, 2, 3. Paul an Apostle, not of Men, nor called by Men, but by Christ from
Heaven, and by his Revelation, attested by the Power of God the Father, who
raised him from the Dead; and all the Brethren with me: to the Churches of
Galatia we wish Grace and Peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Note, That Paul mentions not [ the Church of Galatia], but [ the Churches];
every City that had Christians (like our Corporations) having then a Church,
not then put down to settle one only Church called Diocesane, in stead of
multitudes.

4. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present
evil world, according to the will of God and our Father: 5. To whom be glory
for and ever. Amen.

4, 5. Who by dying for our Sins, designed to call us out of the World, and
save us from the Temptations, Vices, Examples, and Practices of wicked worldly
Men. To him be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the
grace of Christ, unto another gospel:

6. I marvel that you, who voluntarily received the Truth from me, are so soon
turned from the Gospel of the Grace of Christ, to another Doctrine contrary to
this Grace, as if it were the Gospel.

7. Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert
the gospel of Christ.

7. Which is far from being Christ's Gospel, contrary to my Preaching, as they
pretend; but it is the Doctrine of Men that would trouble you, and would
pervert the Gospel of Christ.

8. But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you,
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. 9. As we said
before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other gospel unto you then
that ye have received, let him be accursed.

8, 9. But I pronounce and repeat it, If I, yea, or an Angel from Heaven, if
any Man pretend to preach to you any other Gospel than that which we have
preached, or you received, let him be Anathema, renounce him as an
excommunicate accursed Person.

Note, 1. That there is no other Gospel to be expected, besides that
communicated to us by the Apostles, and recorded in the Scripture. The Dream of
a more perfect Gospel of the Holy Ghost, is wicked.

2. That this Gospel has fuller Evidence than if an Angel spoke from Heaven,
and is to be believed before and against such an Angel.

3. That it is the Peoples Duty to reject and forsake any Teacher that would
bring another Gospel, or pervert this: Not as Church Governors, but as
Subjects of Christ, that must be loyal to him, and save themselves.

10. For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I
yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

10. Do I now preach the Doctrine of Men, on Man's Authority, to please Men; or
the Word of God, by his Authority, to please him? Am I the Messenger and
Preacher of Man, or of God? Which do I serve, and seek to please? For if I
please Men as their Servant, I am none of Christ's Servant.

11. But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me, is
not after man.

11. I would have you know, that the Gospel which I preach is not Humane, from
Man, nor on Man's Authority, nor to gratify the Will or Wordly Interest of Man.

12. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

12. I learned it not of any Humane Teacher, nor took it on Humane Authority,
but from Christ's Revelation.

13. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past, in the Jews religion,
how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it: 14. And
profited in the Jews religion, above many my equals in mine own nation, being
more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.

13, 14. You have heard how I formerly unmeasurably persecuted and wasted the
Church, through excess of Zeal for the Tradition of my Fathers, and Religion of
the Jews, etc.

15. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and called
me by his grace, 16. To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the
heathen;

15, 16. But when it pleased God, who by his free electing Grace decreed me to
know Christ first my self, and then preach him to the Heathens, which was a
kind of separating me to it from the Womb, and when he called me hereto by his
mere Grace,

16, 17. Immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood: Neither went I up to
Jerusalem, to them which were apostles before me; but I went into Arabia, and
returned again unto Damascus.

16, 17. I staid not to consult with any Man, but presently preached the
Gospel; nor went I up to Jerusalem, to learn of the Apostles there what to
preach, but, etc.

18. Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem, to see Peter, and abode
with him fifteen days. 19. But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the
Lords brother.

18, 19. It was three years after, before I went to Jerusalem, and staid
fifteen days with Peter, etc.

Note, 1. That though Luke, Acts 9.26. put Paul's coming to Jerusalem near his
Conversion, and mention not expressly his three years absence, or being in
Arabia; yet the brevity of the History proves not the shortness of the Time:
And it was not three years after his going from Damascus, but after his
Conversion. And Luke, Acts 9.23. says, That it was after much time that he
went from Damascus (which belonged to Arabia); so that it is like that he spent
the three years at or near Damascus; and when he was escaped, went presently to
Jerusalem.

2. And though it may seem that three years had been time enough to have
satisfied the Church at Jerusalem of Paul's Conversion, yet it seems that he
spent that time in Arabia and Damascus, to avoid the rage of his Countrymen at
Jerusalem, and so his remoteness occasioned their dissatisfaction.

20. Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not. 21.
Afterward I came into the regions of Syria and Cylicia; 22. And was unknown by
face unto the churches of Judea, which were in Christ: 23. But they had heard
only, That he which persecuted us in times past, now preaches the faith which
once he destroyed. 24. And they glorified God in me.

Note, All this Paul writes to prove that he received not the Gospel from the
Apostles, or any man, but immediately from Christ.

CHAP. II.
1. THen fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem, with Barnabas, and
took Titus with me also. 2. And I went up by revelation, and communicated unto
them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which
were of reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain.

1, 2. Fourteen years after my Conversion I went again to Jerusalem, etc. and
told them what Doctrine I preached, and with what sucess: But severally and
privately to the eminent Apostles, that avoiding offense both of Jews and
Gentiles, I might not frustrate my Labors to either of them.

3. But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be
circumcised. 4. And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who
came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that
they might bring us into bondage:

3, 4. And I would not yield that Titus should be circumcised, because some
false Brethren crept in to take advantage of the Liberty I used in compliance
with the Jews, to take occasion by it to bring us into bondage to the Mosaic
Law, and turn our Liberty into Necessity, and to plead that Conformity to it is
our Duty, because in some Degree and Case we yielded to it as lawful, at the
present, to avoid a greater hurt.

5. To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour; that the truth of
the gospel might continue with you.

5. Note, That an outward Act of Compliance, which in some Cases may be lawful,
must not be done when it will strengthen Church-Tyrants and Deceivers, who by
making it necessary, would turn Christian Liberty into Bondage.

6. But of these who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it makes no
matter to me: God accepts no man's person) for they who seemed to be somewhat
in conferrence added nothing to me.

But even Peter, James, and John, who were the Chief Men, and of Reputation,
(God tieth not his Grace to the Dignity of Men's Persons, therefore my Case
depends not on their Worth:) I say, in Conference they added nothing to me,
much less taught me any other Gospel than I had learned of Christ, nor found me
faulty or defective in my Doctrine.

7. But contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, as the gospel of the circumcision was unto Peter; 8. (For he
that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the circumcision, the
same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles) 9. And when James, Cephas, and
John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me,
they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship; that we should go
unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision.

7, 8, 9. But they being satisfied that I was sent to preach to the Gentiles,
as Peter was to the Jews; and that God wrought powerfully in me for the
Conversion of the Gentiles, as he did in Peter for the Conversion of the Jews,
even by many Miracles; these, who are justly reputed Pillars, perceiving Gods
Grace, agreed to take me and Barnabas for their Fellow Laborers, and that we
should preach to the Heathen, and they to the Jews.

Note, That Dr. Hammond thus Paraphraseth it; [ into what City either of us
entered -- and so constitute several Congregations in each City, of Jews and
Gentiles.] And he, with Grotius, say, That the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. are the
Bishops and Churches of these two sorts at Jerusalem. If so, Cities had then
more Bishops and Churches than one.

10. Only they would that we should remember the poor; the same which I also
was forward to do.

10. That we should make Collections in the Gentiles Churches for the Christian
Jews.

Note, That besides the extraordinary Famine, the Jews were generally poorer
than the Gentiles; 1. Living in a poor and narrow Country; 2. And having at
first sold and given their Lands to the Common Stock.

11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because
he was to be blamed.

11. I withstood him Face to Face, because he was blamed (or, to be blamed) as
dissembling.

12. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but
when they were come he withdrew, and separated himself, fearing them which were
of the circumcision. 13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him;
insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.

12, 13. Note, 1. That it appears by this, that it was then the ordinary
Practice of the Apostles and Christians at Jerusalem to observe the Law of
Moses, though they absolved the Gentiles from it.

2. That Peter did this to avoid the Displeasure and Censure of the Jewish
Christians, in compliance with their Weakness, which is a lawful End.

3. That his Fault lay in letting this weigh down a far greater Evil on the
other side, viz. the danger of bringing the Gentiles under the Law of Moses, by
making it seem necessary. This Case is much like as if some doubtful thing
should by Canon or Custom be imposed on Christians; and one Party says, You
may do it; and another says, You must do it, or you sin: And they that say we
may, though they know it be unnecessary, for fear of displeasing the Imposers,
separate from the Refusers, and forbear Communion with them, and thereby harden
them in their Error, and would ensnare the rest.

14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of
the gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou being a Jew, live
after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews?

14. When I saw that this Cause was not according to the plain simplicity of
the Gospel, nor answered the ends of our Preaching, but was the way to seduce
the Gentiles to Judaism, I said to Peter before all (because the Case concerned
all) seeing thy own Practice before the Jews came, shows that thou think
not that the Gentiles are bound to live as the Jews do after Moses's Law, why
do thou now seem to tell them the contrary by thy contrary Practices, as if
Judaizing were necessary to them?

15, 16. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing
that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but; by the faith of Jesus
Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by works of the law shall
no flesh be justified.

15, 16. We our selves who are Jews by birth, and not the Seed of Heathen
Idolaters, yet knowing that it is not by the works of the Law, but by Faith in
Christ that we must be justified have become Christians that we might be
justified by this, and not by the Works of the Law, which none are justified
by: And shall our Practice, now seem to intimate the contrary, and gainsay our
Faith?

17. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves also are
found sinners, is therefore Christ the minister of sin? God forbid.

17. For if you feign us to be sinners, and guilty of Gentilism, because we
communicate with the Uncircumcised, you hereby would make Christ to be our
Leader and Teacher to sin; for it it is he that taught us this: And dare you
charge Christ with Sin?

18. For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressour.

18. For if we that have preached Deliverance from the Law, and that it does
not justify us, do now intimate the contrary by our Practice, we confess our
selves Sinners in teaching such Doctrine heretofore.

19. For I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto God.

19. The Law it self has taught me not to trust it for Justification, nor to
live in the Bondage of it, but to look for Life toward God by Christ.

20. I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ
lives in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

20. As Christ was crucified, and took away this Wall of Separation, and Yoke
of Bondage; so I am now a Member of his Body, the Catholic Church, and am dead
to the Law, and it to me: But I have a better Life, by which Christ lives in
me, both objectively, as trusted, and loved; and efficiently, by his Spirit.
And now it is by Faith in him, who loved me, and gave himself for me, that I
live.

21. I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness come by the law,
then Christ is dead in vain.

21. I do not by returning to the Law make void all the Design of Grace in our
Redemption: Christ is dead in vain, if Righteousness must be by our performance
of the Law of Moses; for what need we then any other Sacrifice for sin, or to
be Redeemed from its Curse?

CHAP. III.
1. O Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified
among you?

1. So great is your folly in inclining to Judaism, that you seem in it as men
bewitched, and deprived of Reason, to turn from Grace to the Law so soon, when
Christ crucified for your deliverance has been so plainly preached and set
forth before you.

2. This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the
law, or by the hearing of faith?

2. Do but answer me from your own Experience: Have you not received the Spirit
your selves? (some for Miracles, or Tongues, and the sincere for
Sanctification:) If not, you are none of Christ's: If yea, then by what means
did you receive it? Was it by the Works of the Law? (you will not say it:) or
was it by hearing the Gospel of Faith?

3. Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by
the flesh?

3. Are you so foolish, as having received a Spiritual Doctrine, and having
received and seen the Gifts of the Spirit by it, which are its Seal, that you
should think it your growth or perfection to turn to the Carnal Ceremonies of
the Law, which gave you not the Spirit?

4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain.

4. Will you lose all the sufferings which you have undergone? If you turn to
the Law, you lose them all.

5. He therefore that ministers to you the Spirit, and works miracles among
you, does he it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?

5. Are the Miracles that are wrought among you, and the Spirit communicated to
your selves, given from God by the Ministry of the Law or its Works, or by the
Preaching of the Gospel?

Note, That here is a strong Evidence for the Matter of Fact, That the Gift of
the Spirit, and the Working of Miracles, were then things certainly existent:
Else when Paul appealed to these seduced Galatians themselves, as to Men that
had the Spirit and these Miracles among them, and that with the provoking Words
of [ foolish and bewitched], how easily would they have confuted him, and said,
They knew of no such thing? This had been the likeliest way to turn them from
Christianity with scorn, to make that his Proof, which, if false, must be so
known to them all.

6. Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness. 7. Know ye therefore, that they which are of faith* the same are
the children of Abraham.

6, 7. As it was by believing and trusting Gods Promise, that Abraham was
accounted righteous; so it follows, that it is Believers that are his Seed as
Heirs of the Promise.

8. And the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through
faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all
nations be blessed.

8. And the Scripture foretelling that God would justify the Heathen, as he
did Abraham, by Faith, did in effect preach this Gospel to him then, when it is
said, [ In thee shall all Nations be blessed,] and therefore not the Jewish
Nation only.

9. So then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

9, So that if the Promise be made to them in Abraham, they that have the same
Qualification of Faith, must needs be they that are blessed in him, though they
keep not the Law of Moses, which Abraham did not, nor the Gentile Believers.

10. For as many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse: for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them.

10. For all that trust for Justification and Life, to their own doing the
Works of that Law, and not to the free Grace of God in Christ, must needs be
cursed, and not justified by it: For it says, Cursed is every one that
continues not, etc. which no man does.

11. But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is
evident: for, The just shall live by faith. 12. And the law is not of faith:
but, The man that does them, shall live in them.

11, 12. It Is evident, that before God none is justified by the Law: For it is
said, that The just by faith shall live: But the Law considered in it self, as
distinct from the Promise, does not give Life on condition of Faith receiving
it as a free Gift, but on condition of doing all that it commands, (Though
the Law, as subordinate to the Promise, be of Faith.)

13. Christ has reedeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree:

13. That Law which curses us, does not justify us: but so does Moses's Law:
and therefore came Christ to redeem us from that Curse, suffering as a
Sacrifice for us a cursed Death.

14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.

14. That the Blessing which was pronounced to Abraham as a Believer, might
come on all ( Jews and) Gentiles, who are Believers; and we might through Faith
receive the promised Gift of the Holy Ghost, (as we have done.)

15. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; Though it be but a man's
covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth or adds thereto. 16. Now
to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says not, And to seeds, as
of many; b^t as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.

15, 16. Even Men presume not to violate Covenants: And Gods Promise to Abraham
was to him and his Seed, which immediately was Isaac, prefiguring Christ
eminently: (Though as all the Carnal Seed also sprang from Isaac, so all
Believers be included as springing from Christ.)

17. And this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed before of God in
Christ, the law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot dissanul,
that it should make the promise of none effect.

17. And so the Covenant to Abraham, as the Father of the Faithful, including a
Promise of Christ and his Seed by Faith, was not nulled by the Law, which was
Four hundred and thirty years after: But if Justification before was by Faith,
it must be so still, and so all true Believers justified.

18. For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise: but God
gave it to Abraham by promise.

18. For if the Blessing meant in that Covenant with Abraham be given on
condition of keeping Moses's Law, then comes it not by free gift, as it did to
Abraham by that Promise: But God gave it freely by Promise to Abraham, without
his keeping that Law.

19. Wherefore then serves the law? It was added because of transgression,
till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made; and it was ordained by
angels in the hand of a mediator.

19. To what use then was the Law given? To convince Men of Sin, and restrain
them from it, and make them know the need of a Mediating Savior; whom Moses
typified as a Mediator, in receiving the Law from the Ministry of Angels.

20. Now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one.

20. Now Mediation is between two Parties: Of these, that God is one who made
the Promise to Abraham, and justified him by Faith, and surely is not mutable.

21. Is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had
been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have
been by the law.

21. And has this One God contradicted his Promises by his Law? By no means:
Therefore he intended not that the Works of the Law should be our justifying
Righteousness; which it must have been, if it could have given Life by the
meritorious keeping of it: and so God should have overthrown his former way of
Justification.

22. But the scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith
of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

22. But the Scripture tells us, that all Men are under the Guilt of Sin, and
the Law does not justify Sinners that break it: Therefore none can be
justified by it. And this it does, to teach us to look for Life by a Promised
Christ.

23. But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith
which should afterward be revealed.

23. But before the Gospel and Christ Incarnate came, which now as Objects
constitute our Faith, we Jews were under the restraint and tutorage of the Law,
to teach us to wait for Christ, who is the Truth and End of the Law.

24. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith.

24. And so the Law to us Jews was suited to our Youth and Rudeness, to keep us
as a Schoolmaster in a learning and restrained State, and prepare us for the
Gospel, and teach us to look for Justification by Faith in Christ alone.

25. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.

25. But now Christ is fully revealed to our Faith, we are no longer under that
preparatory Tutorage of Moses's Law.

26. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

26. For now all you that are sincere Believers, are from under the bondage of
legal servile Tasks and Fears, and are taken into the Family of God, as his
adopted Children, by Christ, whom you believe in. And all of you profess your
selves to stand in this Relation and Hope.

27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

27. For as many of you as have sincerely consented to the Baptismal Covenant,
and so been baptized into the Faith of Christ, and Relation to him, have
thereby even put him on as your Garment, and wholly given up your selves to
him, and so as his Members are united to him: And all that are baptized have
professed this, which the Sincere perform.

28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

28. So that the difference between Jew and Greek, Bond and Free, Male and
Female, makes no difference in your Relation to Christ, and your Justification
and Salvation by him.

29. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise.

29. And if you be Christ's, who was eminently Abraham's Seed in whom all
Nations by Faith are blessed, then it must needs follow, that you also are
Abraham's Seed in and through Christ, and so are justified as Abraham was, by
Faith, without the keeping of Moses's Law.

CHAP. IV.
1. NOw I say, that the heir as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a
servant, though he be Lord of all; 2. But is under tutours and governors,
until the time appointed of the father.

1, 2. As Heirs enjoy not their Estates in Minority, but under Guardians are
used like Servants, till Maturity.

3. Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements of
the world:

3. So the State of Legal Ceremonial Bondage was suited to our rude Minority.

4. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, made under the law, 5. To redeem them that were under the law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons.

4, 5. But when God, who carries on his Works from low Beginnings to
Perfection, saw it meet to use us as at Maturity, he sent his Son into the
World, whose Humanity was made of a Woman, made under the Law, which he
perfectly fulfilled, that he might redeem those that were under the Law from
its Bondage and Curse, that they might henceforth serve him as Sons, not in
Legal Terror, but in Love and Joy.

6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

6. And as Fathers communicate their Natures to their Children, (and not only
their Names and Inheritance) so God having called you in Christ by Grace into
this State of Adoption, from the Servitude of Sin and the Law, has sealed you
with his Sanctifying Spirit, whereby in the Belief of his Fatherly Love to you
in Christ, your new Natures are inclined to love and trust him, and depend on
him, and seek to him in all your Wants and Streights, as Children to their
Parents. This is your Mark of Adoption.

Note, That as Adoption is taken in two senses and degrees, so is the Gift of
the Spirit. 1. To be so far Redeemed by Christ, as to be brought from under Sin
and the Law and Curse, into a State of Sonship and Life, by a Conditional Deed
of Gift or Promise, that is, so Men will accept and not reject the Gift; this
is a Conditional Adoption, and with this there goes a measure of the Spirits
Operation, which should draw all, and does draw the Elect to the first true
Faith and Repentance, by Vocation.

2. But to those that thus actually believe and repent, and so receive Christ,
and are united to him, is given with him the Gift and Relation of actual
Adoption; and these have actually the Spirit of Holiness, Love, and Adoption,
even possessing them.

7. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir
of God through Christ.

7. So that now you are not Slaves, or mere Servants, ruled by constraint of
fear, and so not under the bondage of that Law, which does work by cursing
Terror; but you are Sons, and under a Fatherly Government; and if Sons, then
have you right to the Inheritance by Christ.

8. Howbeit, then when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by
nature are no gods.

8. But before you were brought to the true Knowledge of God, you Gentile
Christians were the worst of Slaves, serving them that are no Gods at all; and
the Jews thought there was no hope of you, but by becoming Proselytes to them:
And now Christ has delivered both you and them.

9. But now after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn
ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in
bondage?

9. And now you have learned the Knowledge of God, or rather were by his free
Mercy known first of him, and called home by him, what should more you to
incline to forsake this State of Liberty, and of Sons, to become Servants under
either Jewish or Gentile Bondage, or that Law whose Ceremonies were suited to a
poor and weak sort of People?

10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. 11. I am afraid of you,
lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

10, 11. You keep the Jewish Ceremonial Sabbaths, Feasts, and Fasts, as if that
Law were obligatory to you: This makes me fear lest I have preached the Gospel
to such in vain.

12. Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have not
injured me at all.

12. Brethren, rejec^ not my Counsel and Example, for it is for your own
Interest and Liberty that I speak, and not for any Gain of my own: Your Dissent
does not hurt me, but your selves.

13. Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the gospel unto you
at the first, 14. And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor
rejected; but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.

13, 14. You know that I was so far from seeking any Ends of my own, when I
first preached the Gospel to you, that it cost me suffering in the Flesh from
Persecutors: And though by this I was rendered vile in the eyes of the World,
and few will own Men in their Sufferings, yet you did not for this despise me,
or reject my Doctrine; yea, you received me as you would have done an Angel, or
Christ himself, with Kindness.

15. Where is then the blessedness you spoke of? for I bear you record, that if
it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given
them to me.

15. How happy did you then think your selves in the Comfort of the Gospel? And
how is the Case now altered? For I testify for you, that your respect to me
was so great, that you would not have thought: your very Eyes too dear to have
given me, had it been needful.

16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?

16. And have I forfeited all your Love, by telling you the truth, which
speaks your Liberty and Peace with God, though it may expose you to some
suffering from the Jews.

17. They zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude you, that
you might affect them.

17. They solicit you with zealous Expressions of Love; but it is not to do
you good; nor is erroneous Zeal and Kindness profitable: Yea, they would cast
you out of your Spiritual Liberty and Grace, that they might obtain a Mastery
in your erroneous affections to them.

18. But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, and not
only when I am present with you.

18. Zealous Affections are Good when they are laid out on that which is good:
But then it should be constant, and not liable to be changed by Sedu^ers, if
your Teachers be but absent from you, and not at hand to confute them.

19. My little children, of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you, 20. I desire to be present with you now, and to change my voice,
for I stand in doubt of you.

19, 20. You are to me as my Children, and I am again in painful care of your
Salvation, till I hear that you are resolved Christians in sincerity. I desire,
and did purpose to come to you: For being in suspicion and fear of you, I would
know better what to say to you, than at this distance I can.

21, 22. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?
For it is written, that Abraham had two sons; the one by a bond-maid, the other
by a freewoman.

21, 22. Did you mark and understand the Law which you hear, you would not
desire to be under it. You may read, That Abraham had two Sons, One by ^agar a
Bond-servant, the other by Sarah his Free and Lawful Wife.

23. But he who was of the bondwoman, was born after the flesh: but he of the
freewoman was by promise.

23. Ismael was born of Hagar by ordinary carnal Generation; but Isaac was born
of Sarah, by Gods Promise, and his Power, above the ordinary course of Nature.

24. Which things are an allegory; for these are the two covenants; the one
from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar.

24. Which are to be allegorically understood, as denoting the two Covenants;
One, that of the Law, given at Mount Sinai, which being a Law of Servitude and
Fear, is well signified by Agar.

25. For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which
now is, and is in bondage with her children.

25. For Hagar signifies Mount Sinai in Arabia, and prefigureth the present
State of Jerusalem, which is outwardly in bondage to the Romans, and inwardly
to their Law.

26. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.

26. But the Jerusalem above in Heaven, of which true Christians on Earth are
Heirs, and to which they belong by Promise, Initiation, and relative Union with
Christ, which is the Mother of us all that are Children of Promise, (the Gospel
and Spirit coming from Heaven, and our Inheritance being there) is fully freed
from all Bondage, and so are we all initially in our Gospel-Liberty.

27. For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that bear not; break forth and
cry, thou that travailest not; for the desolate has more children than she
which has an husband.

27. For it is written, etc. The Christian Church, which before Christ's coming
was but in obscure Rudiments, and after was but as a Grain of Mustardseed, a
little Flock, shall become Catholic, and be incomparably greater than was the
Jewish Church.

Note, That whereas many Expositors take [ Jerusalem which is above], or [
Supernal], to mean only [ the Church on Earth], because it is caused by Grace
and Revelation from Heaven, and tends to it, they causelessly give away a
plain Text which proves the Immortality of the Soul, and its Felicity
presently upon our Death: As if [ Jerusalem above] were but [ Jerusalem on
Earth, caused from above;] and so was Moses's Law, and the old Jerusalem. The
Heavenly Society contains the Spirits of the Just made perfect, with the
innumerable Company of Angels, etc. Heb. 12. To this we are joined in the
Relation of Heirs. When it is said, That this shall come down with Christ at
Judgment, it implies, that it was with Christ in Heaven before; and he has
promised, that where he is, there his Servants shall be also, Joh. 12.26. And
that some Expressions here signify the Church on Earth, is not against this;
for the Church on Earth is but the lower part of that in Heaven.

28. Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.

28. We are Children by Adoption and free Gift, and of a freely-given
Inheritance.

29. But as then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born
after the Spirit, even so it is now.

29. As Ishmael persecuted Isaac, so now the Jews and Carnal Seed do persecute
Christians, the Spiritual Seed.

30. Nevertheless, what says the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her
son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the
freewoman.

30. But as the Scripture says, [ Cast out, etc.] so the unbelieving Jews,
that trust to the Works of the Law for Life, shall not inherit the saving
Privileges of the Christian Church.

31. So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free.

31. So then we that are the Children of Promise, saved by Faith, are not under
the Bondage of the Law, but delivered from Sin and Curse by Christ.

CHAP. V.
1. STand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

1. It is not a vain thing which Christ has purchased for us; undervalue not
this Freedom, and cast it not away, but hold it fast and do not causelessly
return to the Yoke of Jewish Bondage.

. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. 3. For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he
is a debtor to do the whole law.

2, 3. I Paul tell you, That if you be crcumcised, as these Men tell you must
be, ( Acts 15.) that is, as it binds you to Moses's Law as the Condition of
Salvation, you renounce the Deliverance purchased by Christ, and so he will be
no Savior to you: For, to be so circumcised, is to bind your selves under that
whole Law and Covenant of Works.

Note, That as Baptism Physically taken is but Washing, and is not Baptism in
the Moral sense, which is, a Sacramental Covenanting with Christ by that
Figure; just so the Physical Act of Circumcising is not Circumcision in the
proper Moral sense, but using it as a Covenanting Sign: And as Abraham used it
as a Seal of the Promise to him as a Believer, it is in specie morali another
thing from that used by the Carnal Jews, as signing another Covenant: For they
used it as a Covenanting Sign that they would keep Moses's Law as the Condition
of Life; whereas they ought to have used it as a Seal of the Promise made to
Abraham and his Seed, and also to bind them sincerely to keep that Law as the
Matter of their Obedience, trusting to the Promise for Grace and Pardon. So
that Paul does not say, that the Abassines that are circumcised for other Ends,
or Timothy, or such believing Jews as were circumcised only to win the Jews,
had no profit by Christ: but only such as believed those that taught them, [
Except you be circumcised, and keep the Law of Moses, you cannot be saved.]

4. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by
the law; ye are fallen from grace.

4. What use is Christ of to you? If you trust to your fulfilling the Law for
Justification, you renounce Justification by Grace, and so are fallen from
Christianity, and the Covenant of Grace.

5. For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.

5. For the Spirit of Christ, which is poured out on the Faithful, causes them
to wait in hope of that Blessedness, of which we are made Heirs by the
Righteousness of Faith.

6. For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.

6. For in our State of Christianity, as Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, a Man
shall not be accepted and justified as circumcised, or as uncircumcised,
(though Circumcision, as binding him to the Law of Works, may undo him:) But
the Qualification necessary to ^alvation is, Faith working by Love; that is,
such an effectual Belief of the future Heavenly Blessedness, purchased and
promised by Christ, as causes us to place our Trust and Hope on Gods Love, and
Christ's Merits, and Promise to attain it; and in the sense hereof to love God,
and that Glory, above all thi^ World, and our Neighbors sincerely as our
selves.

7. Ye did run well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the truth?

7. You began your Race of Christianity well: who has stopped and perverted
you from the Belief and Obedience of the Truth of the Gospel, which you then
received?

8, 9. This persuasion comes not of him that calls you. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump.

8, 9. This Judaizing was never taught you by me, that first preached to you,
or by God: But a few corrupted Men among you, have brought all your Churches
into danger of defection.

10. I have confidence in you through the Lord, that you will be none otherwise
minded: but he that troubles you, shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be.

10. I trust God will keep the Churches from revolting: but those Persons,
whoever they be, that by Seduction trouble and endanger you, shall not escape
Gods Judgment, and our just Rebukes and Censures.

11. And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer
persecution? then is the offense of the cross ceased.

11. And as for me, what need I suffer much, if I could conform to the Judaism
which these Men would impos^? And then how are we still bound to take up the
Cross, and suffer with and for Christ? These Conditions, imposed by Christ on
those that will reign with him, are then ceased, and the Church is no more a
persecuted Society.

Note, That the Jews, who took themselves to be not only Gods peculiar, but
his only People, and thought all others contemptible and profane, were yet far
greater Persecuters than the Heathens, and that as in zeal for God and his Law.
And so are the Worldly, Papal, Tyrannical Clergy at this day, who appropriate
the Name of the Church to themselves.

12. I would they were even cut off which trouble you.

12. The hurt that these Men do, who would unsettle and pervert you, is so
great, that I would they were even cut off from the Church, if upon personal
Admonition they repent not, and so left to Gods Judgment, who often makes Satan
his Executioner on such Men's Bodies.

13. For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty for
an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.

13. Christ has called you to a State of Freedom from Mosaical Rites, and from
the Curse: Use it therefore thankfully; but yet abuse it not to any Sin, to
despise the weak that yet scruple the forsaking of those Rites, or to serve any
Carnal Lust or Interest, as if you had liberty to sin.

14. For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self.

14. You are still under a Law; but it is the Law of Love, which, in the Duties
which you owe to Man, is fulfilled, if you do but love your Neighbors, as your
selves, (supposing that you love your selves with a well-guided Love.)

15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed
one of another.

15. But if Selfishness and Faction conquer Brotherly Love, and set you on
hurting one another, you will stir up those whom you hurt to Self-defence and
Revenge, and make your selves so many Enemies, that you will be consumed each
of other.

Note, How sottish or malignant are they that preach down Love and Gentleness,
and preach to stir up Men to Wrath, Hatred, and Hurtfulness, that they consider
not this, and lay it not to heart with fear?

16. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of
the flesh.

16. If you say, That without the Law there will be no restraint of fleshly
Sins; I say, Walk in the Spirit of Christ, that is, by his Spiritual Law, and
his Spirits sanctifying Inclinations, and then you will overcome your fleshly
Lusts, without the Carnal Rites and Corporal Penalties of that Law.

17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would.

17. For the Flesh and Spirit are more contrary than the Flesh and Moses's
Political and Ritual Law. It is the Spirit that the Flesh lusts against; and
it is the Spirit that is contrarily inclined, and must overcome it. These
contrary Inclinations keep you in such imperfection, that you cannot be as good
and blameless as you would be, (and therefore Grace must pardon you.)

18. But if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the law.

18. But if the sanctifying Spirit of Christ be it that rules you, then as you
are above the childish Rites, so you so far are above the need of terrifying
Penalties; for Love will be your powerful Principle.

19, 20. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, 21. Envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

19, 20, 21. Perhaps you will say, How shall we know Sin, but by the Law? To
which I say, That they being Works of the Flesh, against true Reason, and the
Spirit of God, the very Light of Nature, and Christ's Spirit and Spiritual Word
does make them manifest, such as Adultery, Fornication, etc. of which I have
told you, and yet tell you, that such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

22. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, 23. Meekness, temperance: against such there is no
law.

22, 23. But the Fruits of the Spirit of Christ in all true Christians (them
that are not under the Law of Moses) are Love to God and Men, Joy in the hope
of Salvation and in doing good, Peace with Conscience, and as much as in us
lies with Men, Patience under Sufferings and Wrongs, Kindness and Gentleness,
doing all the good we can, Trustiness and trusting God, Meekness and tameness
of Disposition, Temperance and Chastity, etc. The Spirit of God gives us a
Love to all these; so that such need not penal Terror to force them to it, nor
does the Law condemn any of these.

24. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections
and lusts.

24. And all true Christians whom Christ will own, have by his Spirit crucified
the Flesh, with its inordinate Affections and Lusts, in conformity to the
crucified Body of their Lord, (though he had no Sin.) And this is more
effectual against Sin, than all the Curses of Moses's Law.

25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.

25. If the Spirit be the Principle of our New Life, let us do the Works of it.

26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one
another.

26. If you be Spiritual, show it by avoiding vainglorious Boasting of your
own Knowledge and Goodness, and provoking others by proud Contempt, or
contentious Opposition. See Jam. 3.

CHAP. VI.
1. BRethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted.

1. If any of you be surprised in Faultiness, contrary to the bent of his Heart
and Life, you that are indeed spiritual and free your selves, show it by that
Meekness which is the Fruit of the Spirit, in restoring him by Repentance; and
use not rough Severity and Contempt, considering how uncertain you are what
Temptation may d^ upon your selves.

2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

2* Let other Men's Burdens, Hurts, and Dangers, be to you as if they were your
own; help each other to deliverance and ease, and not add to the Load that is
upon them: And by this you shall fulsul the Law of Christ, which is the Law of
Love.

3. For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he
deceives himself.

3. Alas! Man is a poor nothing, unable of himself to stand in trial; and the
self-confident, who roughly handle the Faulty, or contemn them, and so think
themselves to be something, do but deceive themselves, as the Event will
manifest.

4. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another.

4. The way of Wisdom is; not to lift up your selves as Wise and Good, by sharp
censuring the Faults of others; but closely to try and prove your selves, and
your own doings, that so your own Consciences may speak comfort to you, and not
to seek Honor by insulting over the Weak, that others may exalt you.

5. For every man shall bear his own burden.

5. For it is not other Men's Goodness or Sins for which Men shall be rewarded
or punished, but their own: And therefore they are most concerned to judge
themselves.

6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches, in
all good things.

6. And to your Teachers, it is the Hearers Duty to maintain them, and
communicate according to your own Ability for their Provision and Supply.

7. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall
he also reap.

7. Let not Men deceive themselves by a barren Profession; for God will not be
deceived: All Men shall reap as they sow, and be judged according to their
Works.

8. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

8. They that seek first Provision for their own Flesh, do live but for a Body
that will rot in the Grave; and where then is the Fruit of their Life? (besides
the Ruin of their Soul.) But they that in obedience to the Spirit do live a
spiritual Life, for spiritual Felicity, shall receive everlasting Life as their
Reward.

9. And let us not be weary in well-doing: for in due season we shall reap, if
we faint not.

9. And let not us be tired with length of Labor, or delay of the Reward:
Harvest comes not as soon as we have sown: When Gods due season is come, we
shall certainly reap the blessed Fruit, if fainting make us not come short of
it.

10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially
unto them who are of the household of faith.

10. Let us therefore according to our several Abilities do all the good to all
Men that we can, but especially to Christians, who are the Household or Church
of Christ.

11, 12. Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand.
As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you to be
circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.

11, 12. You see how large a Letter your own Danger has drawn me to write.
They that would draw you to conformity to the Jews, are a Carnal sort of Men,
that will keep their Wordly Reputation and Safety; and because they cannot
suffer Persecution from the Jews themselves, they would draw you to this
Conformity with them, that you may seem to justify them in their Sin, and
pretend that all others are ignorant of Christian Liberty.

13. For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law; but desire
to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.

13. For they keep not the Law themselves, but would keep up their Reputation
by getting you on their side, to strengthen their Interest, and make you their
Defense.

14. But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

14. But my Glorying shall not be in worldly Prosperity, and freedom from
Sufferings; but in following a Crucified Christ in Cross-bearing, by whom the
World to me is a dead contemned thing, as Christ on the Cross seemed to the Men
of the World; and my Esteem and Love of the World are crucified and dead in me,
so that I can spare its Ease and Honors.

15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

15. For in the Judgment of Christ, the Christianity which is accepted to
Salvation, is neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, (though Judaizing
Circumcision be now contrary to Grace:) but it is a New Creature, by the Spirit
regenerated to God.

16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God.

16. And the Peace and Mercy of God will be on all them that walk as New
Creatures, by the guidance of his Spirit, placing acceptable Religion in this,
and not in Circumcision or Uncircumcision. This Benediction I pronounce on them
that are the true Israel of God, and will so be accepted by him, however judged
of by Man.

17. From henceforth let no man trouble me; for I bear in my body the marks of
the Lord Jesus.

17. Let not those that profess themselves Christians any more trouble me by
their Emulations and Calumnies, and by seducing the Churches: For I carry with
me the Marks of my Faithfulness to Christ, even the Sufferings which I undergo
for him; which are a better Evidence of his Acceptance, than avoiding
Persecution is to my Accusers that would seduce you.

18. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.

18. My Benediction and Prayer for you is, That the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be with your Spirit, to guide, justify, and sanctify you, (which
will save you, when Judaism and trusting to the Works of the Law will fail
you.) Amen.

The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the EPHESIANS.
CHAP. I.
1. PAul an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, to the saints which
are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: 2. Grace be to you, and
peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

1, 2. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, called and sent by his Appearance and
Voice to preach his Gospel, to which God had chosen me; to the Saints and
faithful Christians at Ephesus, my Benediction and Prayer is, That they may
have Grace and Peace, Holiness and Consolation, from God our Father, and Christ
our Savior.

3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ*

3. Thanks and Praise be given to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in Celestials, or Heavenly things
which tend to Glory, which Christ does purchase, promise, prepare, and possess
for us.

4. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love:

4. As he chose us as Members of Christ, whom he chose to be our Head, before
the World was made, that we should be holy and blameless, both which summarily
consist in holy Love.

5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, 6. To the praise of the
glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved:

5, 6. Having predestined us to become his adopted Children to him in and by
Jesus Christ, of his own free and good Will, that so his Grace, wherein he has
made us accepted in his beloved Son, might have the Praise and Glory.

Note, 1. That the Election is from before the Foundation of the World. 2. That
it is one Decree or Election of God by which he chooses Christ to be our Head,
and us to be his Members. 3. It is one and the same Election by which God has
chosen us to the praise and glory of his Grace, to be saved, and to be holy and
blameless in Love. On Gods part it is by one Act, and on our part it is to one
state of Blessedness, (as Generation makes one Man) though as objectively that
one have many Parts, it may accordingly be named Many, and distinguished. And
the Essentials are given at once, though the Integrals and Augmentation be
after given by degrees. 4. That Love is the sum of that Holiness and
Blamelesness to which we are predestined. 5. That we are not only
Predestined to Life on condition of Holiness, but are Predestined to
Holiness it self; and consequently, to Faith and Repentance, and not only on
condition that we believe and repent: And so Election is of Individual Persons,
to Faith, Holiness, and Salvation, and not only of Believers to Salvation, or
of Persons to be saved if they believe. A Conditional puts nothing into being
or act. Were the Scripture dark in the Point of Gods free Electing of some to
Faith and Repentance, more than others of equal Guilt and Pravity, Experience
might fully satisfy us of it.

7, 8. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace; wherein he has abounded toward us in all
wisdom and prudence,

7, 8. In whom we have deliverance by Redemption, through the Sacrifice of his
Blood for our Sins, even the forgiveness of all our Sin, which manifests the
Riches of his Grace and Bounty, from which this Gift proceeds; in which he
abounded toward us in the exercise of that wonderful Divine Wisdom and Prudence
in the way of our Salvation by Christ, which to search and know, is the
greatest Wisdom and Prudence of Man.

9. Having made known unto us the mystery of his will according to his good
pleasure, which he has purposed in himself:

9. Having now opened to us the Mystery of his own Will and good Pleasure,
which he purposed in himself, but was little known by Jews or Gentiles.

10. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together
in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth,
even in him:

10. That when he saw the fit time fully come, he might gather into one
Universal Church, united to Christ the Head, as his Kingdom and Body, both Jews
and Gentiles, yea Angels and Men, the departed Souls and those on Earth, to be
One, I say, in him their Head and King.

Note, Those that confine this to Jews and Gentiles, yea and those that exclude
Angels, force the Text without proof. For though Angels sinned not, Christ may
gather us into one Heavenly Society with them, and make us like them, himself
being the Head.

11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined
according to the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his
own will:

11. In whom also we have our Lot of Inheritance, being thereto predestined
by God, who calls whom he pleases, and works all things according to his
own Counsel, Wisdom, and Will.

12. That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ.

12. That we, who were first called, and made Believers in Christ, might be the
First Fruits of his Church, and bring him much Praise and Glory by our Service.

13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel
of your salvation: In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with
that holy Spirit of promise,

13. In whom you trusted, when you had heard the true Gospel of your Salvation;
and in and by Christ, after you believed, you received the great Gift of the
promised Spirit, which is Gods Seal upon you, and the Seal of the Truth of his
Promise to you.

14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the
purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.

14. Which Spirit is given us by God as the ascertaining Earnest of our
Inheritance, to fit us for, and assure us of our attaining the Possession of
that which Christ has purchased for those whom he had redeemed to be his
peculiar People.

15. Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love
unto all the saints, 16. Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of
you in my prayers;

15, 16. Hearing of the continuance and increase of your Faith, and your Love
to all the Saints, (and not only to those that conform to your Minds in small
or indifferent things) do constantly give thanks to God for your Stability, and
daily pray for you.

17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto
you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him:

17. That he that is the God of our Lord Jesus as Man, who sent him, and raised
him from the dead, and glorified him, would give you yet more of the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation, that you may know yet more of the Mystery of his Love in
our Redemption by Christ.

18. The eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is
the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in
the saints,

18. That your Minds being yet more illuminated, you may fullier and clearlier
know, to what glorio^s Hopes he has called us, and what Treasures of Glory he
has promised to his Saints, in whom he will be glorified for ever.

19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe,
according to the working of his mighty power; 20. Which he wrought in Christ
when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the
heavenly places,

19, 20. And how wonderfully God has manifested his Power in us that believe,
in giving us the Spirit of Miracles, Tongues, Prophecy, etc. and the Spirit of
Illumination, Faith, Hope, Love, Joy, Patience, to go on in Labor and
Suffering for Christ, suitable to the Power which he showed in raising Christ
from death, and advancing him to the Heavenly Glory, where he is Lord of all.

21. Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every
name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come:

21. Far above all the Princes, States, and Powers on Earth, the greatest
Conquerors or Monarchs, whether those that persecuted him and us, or any other,
even those above us in the World that we are going to, Angels, or any sort of
Spirits.

22. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over
all things to the church.

22. And has given him power over all things, and made him Head of the Church,
and Lord over all things, for his Churches good, and the Ends of Redemption.

23. Which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.

23. Which Church is his Body Mystical, the Celestial, Political Society,
united to and under him, in which he attaineth fully the Ends of his
Redemption, and in whom, as glorified with him, he is effectively a full and
perfect Savior, in whom he will delight, and be glorified: and God, that is
all in all things, fully manifests his Love and Glory.

Note, 1. That the Text distinguishes Christ's Relation to his Church, and to
all things else. He is Head to the Church by vital influx, as his Body. He is
over all things, some as Utensils for the Church, and some as conquered Rebels,
or Enemies.

2. How little reason the Church has to fear malicious Principalities or
Powers, or Great Names, or Devils, any further than we fear our selves, lest we
yield to Sin by their Temptations; seeing they are all in the power of Christ,
and under his Feet: And therefore our sinful Fear does plainly prove our
Unbelief, in that degree that it prevails.

3. As the same Love, so the same Power of God that was glorified in the
Miracles and Resurrection of Christ, is engaged for, and glorified on the
Church: And this Glory we shall see in the fullness of time, though now the
Church (as Christ on the Cross, or in the Grave) seem a forsaken, shattered,
desolate thing.

4. It is no wonder that Christ takes what is done to his Church and Members
as done to himself, and will judge Men accordingly.

5. The great Service that Christ requires of us in the World, is to
contribute our utmost Labor and Help for the Church; he himself needing
nothing that we can do.

CHAP. II.
1. ANd you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins.

1. And you who are members of this Church has he revived and quickened by his
mortifying and sanctifying Grace, and by absolving you from the Guilt of Death,
who were in and by your Sin as dead to spiritual saving Good, and liable by
Guilt to everlasting Death: your State of Sin was such a State of Death.

2. Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world,
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience.

2. In this Sin you lived in your former Gentile State, according to the
Temptations and Will of Satan, who is by Gods permission the Prince of the
Power of the Air, and by his Temptations works in the unpersuadable
Unbelievers and Ungodly, against Gods Grace and their Salvation.

3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of
our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by
nature the children of wrath, even as others.

3. And we our selves were formerly such as they, and lived among them in
fleshly Lusts, fulfilling the Desires of our Flesh and our own Thoughts and
false ^easoning, and were by Natural Corruption (not only as Children of Adam,
but also the Progeny of Heathens) the Heirs of Gods Wrath, obliged to
Punishment by his Justice, as other Men, and specially Heathens be.

4. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, 5.
Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, (by
grace ye are saved) 6. And has raised us up together, and made us sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

4, 5, 6. But God, who is very merciful, to manifest his own free Love to us,
when we were as others dead in Sins, has by his own Grace begun our Salvation,
conforming us to the Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ, by delivering us
from the Death of Sin and Guilt, and making us alive to Holiness, and giving us
the Earnest and Fore-taste of Glory.

7. That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace,
in his kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus.

7. That in these latter days he might show forth the Glory of his Grace in our
Redemption by Christ, in which his Love and Kindness to us is resplendent.

8. For by grace are ye saved, through faith; and that not of your selves: it
is the gift of God: 9. Not of works, lest any man should boast:

8, 9. For your Salvation is of Gods mere Grace and Gift, through your Faith in
Christ; And this is not of your own contriving, meriting, seeking, or
effecting; but all of Gods own Gift, who has chosen this way, rather than that
of Works, that none may boast, and ascribe that to themselves which is due
only to God.

10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has before ordained that we should walk in them.

10. Not that we hereby exclude Good Works, by excluding Man's boasting of his
own Power or Merits: For we our selves are Gods Work, new made by Regeneration,
which planted us into Christ, purposely to do those Good Works, which neither
the Law nor mere Nature enabled and inclined us to do: These God has
foreordained and prescribed for us to live in, and by Grace inclined us to do
them.

11. Wherefore remember that ye being in time passed Gentiles in the flesh, who
are called uncircumcision by that which is called the circumcision in the flesh
made by hands; 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having
no hope, and without God in the world:

11, 12. And that you may duly value the Mercy of your Vocation, you must
never forget, that you were of the Gentiles, called Uncircumcised by the Jews,
and had no Knowledge of Christ as promised, or as Incarnate, and were no part
of that peculiar People the Jews, but Aliens, whom they justly refused
Communion with, and were Strangers from the Covenant which promised
Peculiarity, and so had none of the hope of Redemption which those Promises
gave, nor knew how, as reconciled, to be accepted of God, and lived as
Atheists, without the true Knowledge of God, or Trust in him, or Obedience to
him, (though you had many Idols.)

13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by
the blood of Christ.

13. But now ye are Christians, you are brought as nigh God as the believing
Jews, the Partition being taken down, and the Covenant of Grace founding an
Universal Church, purchased and sealed by the Blood of Christ, whose peculiar
People now ye are.

14. For he is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the
middle wall of partition between us;

14. For he is the Maker of our Peace with God and one another, and has taken
away the Division between Jews and Gentiles, which was like the Wall which kept
the Gentiles in the outer Court of the Temple, and opened to us all a way into
the Sanctuary.

15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments
contained in ordinances, for to make in himself, of twain, one new man, so
making peace;

15. Being Man in the common Nature of Man, and offering his Body a Sacrifice
for the Sins of all, he has abolishe^ the Law of Moses, which contained
Ordinances Ceremonial, Typical, and Political, with severe Penalties, and
makes us all one Catholic Church, united in himself the Head.

16. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having
slain the enmity thereby:

16. And as his one Body was crucified for both, so he thereby reconcileth both
to G^d in one Body or Society, which is his Church, having abolished the Enmity.

17. And came, and preached peace to you which are afar off, and to them that
were nigh.

17. And this Gospel of Reconciliation and Unity he has by himself and his
Apostles preached, and offered Grace and Peace, both to Gentiles and Jews.

18. For through him we both have an access by one Spirit unto the Father.

18. For through his Merits, Intercession, and Covenant, all Believers, Jews
and Gentiles, are made the Children of God, and are sealed by his Spirit of
Adoption, which is an Intercessor within us, by whom we have access to God.

19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens
with the saints, and of the household of God;

19. And now this Reconciliation being made by Christ, you Gentiles are no
longer Strangers or Foreigners to the Church or peculiar People of God, but
are free Denizens, Burgesses, or enfranchised Citizens with the rest of the
holy Society, even Members of the Holy Catholic Church, of Adopted ones, which
is as the Household of God.

20. And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief cornerstone;

20. And I may liken you not only to the Household, but to the Horse of God, of
which you are a living part, built on the Doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets, qualified by the Holy Ghost, and authorized by Christ to call and
gather his Catholic Church, and so may secondarily be called its Foundation,
Christ himself being the primary Foundation, or Chief Cornerstone.

21. In whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy
temple in the Lord.

21. In whom, as the Head of Union, all the Church of God being compact into
one holy Society, as it were, of Living Stones, is built, rises, and grows
up to be an holy Temple to the Lord, increasing to its perfection.

22. In whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God through the
Spirit.

22. And as God called the Temple at Jerusalem his Dwelling, so, by the Spirit
of Christ, you also, with all the rest of the Faithful, are built up as a holy
Temple, in which, by the same Spirit, God will dwell.

Note, That, 1. The Catholic Church is not only that which was once by the
Policy of Emperors and Bishops called Catholic, as National, being in that
Empire only, and under its Laws; but as it contains all Christians in the
World. 2. That it is Headed only by Christ, the Center of its Unity. 3. That
inspired Apostles and Prophets being the M^ssengers of new Divine Revelation,
are its secondary Foundation, by an Authority and Qualification proper to them,
and not extending to Bishops or their Councils, who come after them. 4. Note
the great Dignity of the Church, as resulting from this Foundation Christ, and
the Reconciliation wrought by him. 5. That they that would destroy this Unity
and Superstruction, fight against Christ, and would destroy the Church; which
is most notably done by setting up a false Head or Foundation, or making false
incapable Terms of Union, by the presumptuous Canons and Laws of Usurpers. 6.
That though this Church have no Uniting Head but Christ, yet it must be
compact, as the Members of his Body, and have one Faith, Hope, Baptism, and
Spirit of Love, and abhor Division as Destruction.

CHAP. III.
1. FOr this cause, I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles.

1. Having those great Encouragements, I Paul even glory that I am Christ's
Prisoner for the Gentiles sake, even for preaching the Gospel for their
Conversion and Salvation.

Note, That at once Paul was the Jews Prisoner, as his Accusers and
Persecutors; and the Heathen Romans Prisoner, as his Judges; and Christ's
Prisoner, both finally, as suffering for his sake, and obligatorily, as
Commissioned for a Persecuted Work; and the Gentiles Prisoner finally, as
suffering for his Labors for their Salvation.

2. If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which is given me
to you-ward: 3. How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery, (as I
wrote before in few words,

2, 3. For I suppose you have heard how for your good God has commissioned me
to declare and dispense to you the Gospel of Grace, and Gifts of the Spirit,
and by Revelation from Heaven by the Voice of Christ, and inwardly by his
Spirit, made known to me the Mystery of Man's Redemption, and the Calling of the
Gentiles, (as I wrote briefly before.)

4, 5. Whereby when ye read ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of
Christ) which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is
now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; 6. That the
Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his
promise in Christ by the gospel:

4, 5, 6. In which you may read my Explication of this Mystery, and perceive
that Christ has acquainted me with it, which in former Ages was not openly and
clearly made known to Men, as it is now by the Spirit revealed to the holy
Apostles and Prophets who preach the Gospel; even that Christ would call and
take in the Gentiles into the Catholic Church and Covenant, as his peculiar
People, and make them Partakers of his Promise and Gift of Life in Christ, by
the Gospel preached to them.

7. Whereof I was made a minister according to the gift of the grace of God
given unto me by the effectual working of his power.

7. Of which Gospel I was made a Minister, to dispense it according to that
Measure of the Gift of the Spirit by Grace given to me, which wrought
effectually in me, and by me, by Doctrine and Miracles to convert the Gentiles.

8. Unto me, who am less then the least of all saints is this grace given, that
I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ;

8. To me, who am by my former Persecution of the Church the lowest or most
unworthy of all Saints, is this Favor and Honor freely vouchsafed, that I
should preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ.

9. And to make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from
the beginning of the world, has been hid in God, who created all things by
Jesus Christ:

9. And to notify to all Men the Communication and Communion of this
Mysterious Grace, which from the very Creation was secretly included (as a Tree
in the Seed) in Gods making the whole World by Jesus Christ, even that he would
redeem and new make us all by him.

10. To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly
places, might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God, 11. According
to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord:

10, 11. That now in this Collection of the Universal Church in Christ, as in a
Glass, or as in the clear Effects, the very Spiritual Principalities and Powers
above us in the Heavens might see more of Gods eternal Counsel opened, and
manifold Wisdom displayed, than they knew before.

Note, 1. That Superior Spirits are Principalities and Powers, either over
Political Societies there, or as Rulers over us here below, as Guardians: See
Josh. 5.14. Exodus 23.20, 23. and 32.34. Number. 20.16. Genesis 24.7, 40. Psalm. 34.7.
Dan. 10.13. etc. It Is like it is both.

2. That even Superior Powers are not Omniscient, but may by new Means have
new increased Knowledge; and therefore Saints in Heaven are not more knowing.

3. That it is in Heaven that the Great Ends of God, in Redeeming and Gathering
his Church, are attained.

12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.

12. In whom we all that trust in him, may come with boldness and confident
hope of acceptance to God.

13. Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you, which is
your glory.

13. Wherefore, I beseech you, be not discouraged by my Sufferings for
preaching to you; for it is your Honor to have the Ministry of your Salvation
thus attested by me.

14, 15. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, 16. That he
would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner man;

14, 15, 16. For this end I beg of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whom all the Blessed Society in Heaven and Earth is named his Family, (or of
which Christ Jews and Gentiles are named Christians) That of his abundant
Grace, in which he will be glorified, he will by his Spirit fortify your Souls.

Note, 1. It is uncertain whether [ of whom] relate to the Father, or to Christ.

2. Though Paul speak specially of the Catholic Church of Jews and Gentiles,
there is no reason to exclude the glorified Souls; no, nor the Angels, from
being part of Gods Family, united in and under Christ.

17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and
grounded in love, 18. May be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; 19. And to know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.

17, 18, 19. That Christ may by the constant exercise of your Faith upon him,
even dwell objectively in your Hearts, (as one Friend by Love and Trust does in
another) and effectively possess and actuate you by his Spirit; that by his
Spirit and your Faith, you may be so deeply possessed with the sense of Gods
Love, that you may be filled with Love to him and one another, and it may be
the very Habit of your Souls, and a rooted Nature in you; that so being
qualified by this Faith and Love, you may be able and fit to measure and
understand, as all Saints in their several degrees do, the vast and wonderful
Dimensions, and to know the Love of Christ, and of the Father in him, which
exceeds our comprehensive and adequate Knowledge, (or which is more excellent
than all the Sciences which Heathens and Heretics boast of;) that so by Faith
and Love your Souls may be filled with the highest degrees of Grace, and the
Spirit of God.

20, 21. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in
the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

20, 21. Now to that Almighty God who can do for his People exceeding
abundantly, above all that we can desire or ask, believe or conceive in our
narrow Thoughts, as is intimated even in the Power of Sanctity and Miracles,
which he exercises in and among us now; To him, I say, be Glory in the Church,
by the Mediation of Jesus Christ, (in whom ^he Glory of Gods Love shines ^o
us, and by whom ^e render Praise to God) throughout all Ages, World without
end. Amen.

CHAP. IV.
1. I Therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of
the vocation wherewith ye are called,

1. Seeing then the Riches of Gods Grace in Christ is so abundant to you
converted Gentiles, I that am a Prisoner for declaring this Grace of Christ to
you, exhort you that you live according to the great obligation of your
Vocation.

2. With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in love;

2. Such a Christian Life must be in all lowliness, or humble thoughts of your
selves, your Knowledge, your Goodness, and your Power, and in all meekness or
gentleness toward others: Love must cause you with long-suffering to forbear
one another.

Note, 1. That Forbearance is to be exercised toward evil, that is,
Imperfections in Knowledge, Virtue, and Duty, and tolerable Faults, and
Injuries against each other: Therefore it supposes us to be all faulty,
needing forbearance.

2. That proud high thoughts of our selves, and Contempt, Censoriousness, and
Hurtfulness to others, and not forbearing tolerable Offenders, are contrary to
Christianity, and the Cause of Divisions in the Church: And by these the carnal
persecuting Seed, especially when they invade the Sacred Office, are
differenced from true Christians, as Wolves from Sheep, even when, as the false
Prophets, they pretend the Cause and Name of Christ.

3. That all this is for want of Christian Love, and the Dominion of carnal
Self-love; and Love to God, and to others as our selves, must be the proper
Cure.

3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

3. This Love and forbearance must specially be exercised to preserve the Unity
of the Christian Church; which all must endeavor faithfully to keep. And this
Unity inwardly consists in being all possessed and governed by One Holy
Spirit, as all the Parts of the Body are by one Soul; and outwardly, by living
peaceably toward each other, especially in our Church Communion.

4, 5, 6. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope
of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all,
who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

4, 5, 6. More particularly, in these seven Respects our Unity does consist. 1.
The Church, which is as the Body of Christ, is one Universal Church. 2. The
Spirit of God, which as it were animateth it, is One and the same Spirit. 3.
The Grace and Heavenly Glory which is the Hope of Believers, which they seek,
and for which they forsake the World, is One. 4. The Head, Lord, and Savior of
the Church is One and the same to all. 5. The Essentials of the Christian
Faith, or Creed, are One and the same. 6. The Baptismal Vow, and Covenant, and
Profession, in which we are devoted to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and united Sacramentally to Christ his Church, is One and the same to all in
the Essentials. 7. And all have One God and Father in Christ, who is, 1.
Transcendently and absolutely above and over all; 2. And unconceivably
penetrateth all: And, 3. and is in his Essence most intimately in you all, and
is All in all things.

Note, That in these seven things, that Unity of the Church consists, which
is Gods prescribed and conferred Qualification for Christian Communion in Love
and Peace. And that as Satan uses to undo by overdoing (and the Pharisees had
more Laws, Traditions, and strictness therein as needful to Communion than
Christ had, who would have Mercy rather than Sacrifice) So it is by adding a
multitude of Ensnaring Canons, Customs, and Opinions as necessary to Communion,
that he has corrupted and torn the visible Church, and turned Love and
Communion into Wrath and Persecution.

And yet this Unity must be kept in Peace, and therefore, both Persecuting, and
Contumeli^us, Turbulent Vnpeaceableness against those that own these Seven
Points of Union, should be avoided by Christians, and restrained by
Magistrates, who must keep the Peace. And whenever God in mercy will heal the
lacerated Church, it will be on these terms.

7. But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the
gift of Christ.

7. But though we have all One Spirit, and are One in all the foresaid
Essentials of our Religion, yet this Unity is found in very great diversity of
degrees of Grace, and both degrees and kind of G^fts, (S^e 1 Cor. 12.) as it
pleases Christ to distribute them.

8. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive,
and gave gifts unto men.

8. As it is said in Psalm. 68.18. When, etc. So when Christ ascended, he
triumphed over Satan, Death, and Hell, and sent down from Heaven the Gifts of
his Spirit.

9. (Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the
lower parts of the earth? 10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended
up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things)

9, 10. And when it is said, that he ascended, it implies, that he first
descended into this lower World, into a low Condition, and into the Grave. And
therefore it is the same Jesus who was here humbled in his Descent, who is
exalted by his Ascent, f^r above all Heavens which Man does see or know, that
thence (is the Sun by the influence of its Heat, and Light, and Motion, fills
all below, acccording to the rec^pti^e Capacity of each, so) our glorified
Lord, by h^s administering Influx, might fill all with common or special Grace,
according to their various receptivity.

11. And he gave some Apostles: and some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and
some, Pastors and Teachers; 12. For the perfecting of the saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:

11, 12. And he gave, by Qualification and Mission, some Apostles, sent by his
own Mouth, to be the most eminent Attesters of his Miracles, Doctrine, and
Resurrection, and Founders of the Churches; some Prophets, by Revelation and
Inspiration to confirm the Christian Faith; some Evangelists, whose Work was as
eminently qualified to go abroad, to preach the Gospel, and gather Churches, or
confirm them, without being fixed to a special Place or Flock; and some Pastors
and Teachers, (called also Bishops and Elders) who were set over the particular
Churches as their Guides and Instructers, as being their special Flocks and
Charge. And all these Gifts and Offices are given for that Ministerial Work
which God (who works by Means) will use, to bring on all his Saints toward
the Perfection of themselves and of the Church, and by the Increase, Concord,
and Sanctity, of the Members, to edify or build up this Body of Christ.

13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ:

13. Till by this increase of Number and Holiness, and Concord, we all Jews and
Gentiles make up that Church, which in the Unity of Faith and Knowledge and
Acknowledgment of Christ, attaineth to that degree of perfection, in which
consists the measure of Grace, and fullness of Stature, which Christ will
bring his Church unto, which is that maturity which imitateth our natural
growth from Infancy to full Manhood.

14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive:

14. That being by Gods blessing by such a Ministry brought up to Manhood, we
may no longer be like Children, who through weakness cannot stand in the Wind,
but are carried about by it; so childish Christians are by every Wind of
Plausible Doctrine, by the slight subtilty and craft of Men that by pretenses
of Knowledge, Holiness, Power or Love, lay snares and lie in wait to deceive
the weak.

15. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which
is the head, even Christ:

15. But (though we know but in part, yet) speaking and keeping the necessary
truth or essentials of our Religion, in Love and Concord, in this Faith and
Love, may in all things grow up to greater measures by degrees, even into a
fuller Communion with Christ our Head, and likeness to him.

16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which
every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love.

16. From whom the whole Church receives both that vital Influence, and that
Conduct and Government, to its own intensive and extensive increase in Love,
which is its spiritual Life, which the natural Body does from the Head and
Heart, by communication of vital and animal Spirits and Heat: And this Life and
Increase is received and communicated to each part from Christ, by that
coagmentation and due connection of all the Members of the Church together,
while each keeps his place, and performs his own Office, by the exercise of
Faith and Love effectually for the good of all: Even as the Body is kept in
Life and Health, while every inferior Part and Joint is receptive and active
according to its proper Place and Office.

Note, There is no Text which is so plausibly wrested to maintain Popery, that
is, One Universal Humane Government of the whole Church on Earth, Monarchical
or Aristocratical, (by Pope, Council, or combined Metropolitans, as one
Sovereignty) as this: It seeming to forestalled Men, to speak of the Church as
compacted in one Universal Policy, so governed: And it is a Text which must be
greatly studied against Dividers, and yet vindicated from Roman Perverters.

I. Doubtless the Text speaks strongly for Universal Concord, and not only
for an uniting of Members in several Congregations, which shall each be
Independent, which would be but like so many Limbs cut off from the Body; but
for an uniting of Congregations, yea, of all through the World, in one
compacted Body: And therefore all Christians must abhor Dissection and
Separation, or Schism.

II. Yet it is evident that Paul speaks of no one Head but Christ, and of no
sort of Universal Sovereign on Earth as under him. And indeed it is an Office
that Humane Nature here is not capable of, either in Monarchy or Aristocracy;
It Is impossible for any Church-Soveraign-Power, save Divine, (or Angelical at
least) to rule the Church by Legislation, Judgment, and Execution, all over the
Earth: much of it being out of our reach, as the Moon is: And the Church is
under contrary, enemy, militant, Civil Governors, which makes it the more
impossible. And the only Pretenders have been the great Dividers and
Destroyers. What then is here meant, and to be done for Unity?

Not to feign impossible Terms, such as are An Universal Sovereignty, and
Multitudes of Hamane, Doubtful, Unnecessary Canons; which are the most
effectual causes of Discord. But, 1. to take up with Christ's own prescribed
terms of Union here laid down, v. 3, 4, 5. If Christ have not made the Laws of
Church Union, he is not the maker of the Church; for Unity is essential to it
(as to a House or Body.) 2. To be one in Love, and to repress all Tyranny that
would destroy Love and Peace. 3. As in the several Assemblies they must
exercise the same Faith and Hope, and love and worship the same God and
Savior, by the same Spirit; so that these Churches must live in love to each
other, and avoid all Discord: And if any breach be made between them in Faith
or Love, they must use all reasonable means to heal it; which is by Writing or
Messengers giving to each other an account of their Faith and Practice; and
when need is, consulting in Synods, of one or of diverse Nations: Not that such
Synods are Governors of many Churches by a Major Vote, or by Metropolitan
Power (save as they may exercise the Magistrates Power of the Sword by his
Commission, which (were such fit) can be given only in his own Dominions, out
of which Synods and Metropolitans can have no Political Governing Power: But
the Major Vote must be regarded for Concord, which is the use of Synods; yet so
that it prevail not against Divine Authority and Law, nor against Reason, or
the Churches good. And therefore, 1. Synods are but for Counsel and Agreement.
2. And General Councils impossible and neeedless, it being impossible and
needless that all the World have notice of the Cases of every particular
Church, much less that they meet for the redress. 3. And when Corruption and
Tyranny (as under the Arrians and Papists) have got the Major Vote, the minor
are not bound to agree with them, but to dissent. As the Earth is Gods Kingdom,
and all Kings are his Officers in their several Kingdoms, but neither any one
Man, or many Conjunct in one Aristocracie or Council, are One Sovereign
Governing Power over all the Earth; but only should by Consultations seek to
keep the Common Love and Peace; even so all Churches and Christians on Earth
are Christ's Kingdom or Church Universal, and all True Pastors are his Officers
in their several Churches, but neither one Man, or many Conjunct as one
Political Person, or Aristocracie, are one Summa Potestas over all Christians
on Earth; but those that are within the reach and notice of each other should
when it is needful, by Synods and Consultations keep up Unity of Faith and Love,
and all needful Concord. Had not Princes been made too capable of abuse, they
would not take well the Doctrine of a late Learned and Triumphant Writer, who
tells us, that tho de facto, Princes do not, yet they ought to unite their
Power in one Council, which should be the brightest Governor of them all: And
so, 1. all Kings must be Subjects. 2. Aristocracy must rule Monarchy. 3. How
shall all Kings from the Antipodes, or over all the Earth meet? 4. Who shall
call them? 5. Where must they meet? 6. Shall they trust their Crowns to
Deligate Subjects? 7. What if the most be Heathens and Mahometans, and most
Christians Heretics in each others account? 8. If he condescend to limit this
Sovereign Diet, who shall limit it, and how? And then the Universal Sovereign
is still wanting.

They that dare plead for no more than Universal Communion, should have
understood that Communion as such belongs but to a Community; and a mere
Community is no Body Politic, or Governed Society, but a Confederacy of
Equals (as to Rule.) With respect to God only the World is one Governed
Kingdom, and with respect to Christ, the Church in one Ruled Body Politic: But
neither of them is One as united in any Vicarious Sovereign, but in their
several Provinces must keep Communion in Faith, Love and Peace.

17. This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk
not as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind,

17. Therefore I charge you as from Christ, that you that are Christians live
not henceforth as the Unconverted Heathens, that follow their own false
imaginations.

18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart:
19. Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness.

18, 19. Their Understanding being darkened, and they being mere strangers to a
holy living on and unto God, because of the ignorance and blindness of their
Minds, which have lost the very light of Nature, and being stupefied by Pravity
and Custom in sin, have given themselves up to fleshly lusts, to do the
filthiest Acts with greedy desire and delight.

20. But ye have not so learned Christ; 21. If so be that ye have heard him,
and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus:

20, 21. But Christ has taught you, and you have learned a clean contrary
course of life: If indeed you have heard what he teaches, and have been taught
the True Doctrine of Christ.

22. That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts: 23. And be renewed in the spirit of
your mind;

22, 23. That you put off the old fleshly Mind and Life, which is corrupt in
disposition and practice, by the deceit of sensual lusts: And that you be made
New Men, in the very bent and habits of your Mind, with New Judgment and
Affections.

24. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

24. And that you become New Men, possessed of New Dispositions, wrought in you
by God, according to his Word, and for his Glory, consisting in Righteousness
and true Holiness.

25. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbor:
for we are members one of another.

25. And in particular, as parts of your Righteousness* see that you avoid all
lying and fraud, and speak the plain truth to one another; for we are all
fellow Members of one Body, and therefore should not be false and fraudulent to
each other.

26. Be ye angry and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath:

26. Anger is given us for the due resisting of Evil; but use it not blindly,
rashly and inordinately to sin; much less may you lie down and continue in such
sin.

27. Neither give place to the devil.

27. And do not yield to Satan, who by Men's provocations would draw you to sin.

28. Let him that stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor, working with
his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.

28. If any have by want or error been tempted to steal, or take any thing
that is another against his Will, let him do so no more, nor by idleness
continue his necessities, but as he is able labor in some profitable work, and
that not only to supply his own wants, but to relieve as many others as he well
can.

29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is
good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.

29. Let no sinful, rotten, or filthy Discourse come out of your Mouths, (which
will signify a polluted Heart, and may corrupt the hearers) but let your words
be such as are not only harmless to others, but profitable, even that which is
useful to edification, (for useless truth it self is not to be chosen.)

30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day
of redemption.

30. For the Spirit of God, which is his Mark and Seal upon you, to prepare you
for the day of Salvation, is a hater of all filthiness and vanity, and a lover
of Purity and Holiness, and Mutual Edification: And though he have not Passion
and Grief as Men have, yet as offended Men will in displeasure forsake that
which is filthy and abhorred, so will the Spirit of God in displeasure forsake
a filthy sinner: And that is one of the forest kind of Punishment.

31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking
be put away from you, with all malice.

31. And Gods Spirit being the Spirit of Love, cast away Malice and all that
savoureth of it; bitterness, wrath, and hurtful anger, clamorous, fierce and
ill and hurtful words.

32. And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even
as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

32. As having the same Spirit in the same Body, be kind and tenderhearted one
to another, taking the good or hurt of each other as your own: And as you can
easily forbear and forgive your selves, and be willing that others forgive you,
so forgive one another, and that out of the belief and thankful sense of Gods
forgiving you much more, for the sake of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. V.
1. BE ye therefore followers of God, as dear children; 2. And walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.

1, 2. Having therefore so obliging an example of your Heavenly Father, show
that you are his true beloved Children by imitating him; and let Love be your
very Nature and course of life, remembering still how Christ has loved us, and
given himself for us, an Offering and Sacrifice for our sins, with which God
was highly pleased in him.

3. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once
named amongst you, as becomes saints: 4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish
talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks.

3, 4. But let not Fornication or any uncleanness or filthy lust be once named
among you, unless by necessary opposition and detestation; for this is the
course beseeming all Christians, who must be pure or Saints: Nor yet use any
ribald talk, or filthy action, nor foolish speaking, nor vain jesting or
drollery, the foam of a light vain wit; for these are unbeseeming Holy Persons;
but rather employ your Tongues in thanks and joyful praise to God, and in holy
edifying Discourse.

5. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man
who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God.

5. Let none pretend that Christianity by freeing them from the Law, gives
them liberty to sin unpunished: For if you are Christians, the Word and Law of
Christ has taught you, that no Whoremonger, or Unclean Person, or Covetous
Person, who is an Idolater by loving the World more than God (or one that
imitateth Idolaters in lusts,) has right of inheritance in Heaven, or in the
holy Church on Earth.

6. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. 7. Be not ye therefore
partakers with them.

6, 7. Let no Heretics or Libertines deceive you with false Pretenses of
Liberty; for these are the Sins for which Gods Wrath comes on the Unbelievers,
and therefore will do so on all the Disobedient that live in them: Therefore be
not you Partakers in the Sin, if you would not partake also of the Punishment.

8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as
children of light,

8. For you were in darkness formerly your selves, but Christ has brought you
into the light of saving Knowledge: Live then as in the Light, according to the
Gospel and Spirit of Christ, and do that of which you need not be ashamed.

9, 10. For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and
truth) proving what is acceptable unto the Lord.

9, 10. For Christ rules all true Christians by his Spirit of Illumination and
Sanctification; and the Fruits of that Spirit and Light are Goodness, Love, and
Kindness, Righteousness, Truth, and Faithfulness; trying and choosing what is
pleasing to the Lord.

11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them.

11. Communicate not with these Heathens and Heretics Works of Darkness, and
fleshly Lusts, but rather do your best to save Men from them by reproof.

12. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in
secret.

12. For their secret Filthiness, which cannot bear the Light, is such as
Modesty is loath to name.

13. But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the light: for
whatsoever does make manifest, is light.

13. But all things when the Light discovers them are manifest, and, if
approvable, need not fear it; for the Doctrine and Spirit of Christ are a
manifesting Light.

14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light.

14. Which is the sense of Isa. 60.1. which calls the People that slept in
Darkness to awake, that the Lord may shine upon them; which Christ now does to
true Believers.

15. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, 16.
Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.

15, 16. See then that you live not carelessly, but with watchfulness and
accurate circumspection, not as Fools that see not, or mind not their danger,
but as Wise Men, that look on every side, and are careful to avoid all sorts of
Evil: And therefore take hold of the present Opportunity, and use well the
Light of the Gospel while you have it; for the World is round about you full of
Snares and Dangers, which without wise Circumspection cannot be avoided.

17. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.

17. Wherefore let not Ignorance and Folly prepare you for Deceit, but labor
to be well acquainted with the Will of God concerning your Duty.

18. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the
Spirit: 19. Speaking to your selves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord,

18, 19. And do not, like Heathens and sensual Libertines, think that the
exhileration of excess of Wine, which causes Sottishness and Lust, is either
lawful, or suitable to Devotion; but be you exhilerated by the Spirit of God,
whose Grace you must excite and exercise, by Psalms, and Hymns of Praise to
God, and Spiritual Songs, which you must use in holy manner to the Lord, with
the inward Melody of the Heart.

Note, 1. That Paul here leaves it to Christian Wisdom, whether we shall use
David's Psalms, for others more fitted to Gospel Times and Worship.

2. That hence it is evident, that it is lawful to use some Forms of Worship
invented and imposed by Man: For Hymns and Songs cannot be used without
Invention: And the Church, or many, cannot join in them, unless some one lead
and impose them on the rest. It would be mad Work for a Congregation to sing
extemporate Songs, and every one a several one of his own. And if Prayer and
Praise in Meter may be invented and imposed, the same Reasons will hold as to
Prose, when Uniformity is needful, (as in Baptism, and c.)

20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ;

20. Cheerfully thanking God continually on all occasions, for all his Mercies,
which are found in all things that he does; offering this to the Father in the
Name of Christ.

Note, That Psalms and Thanksgiving to God through Christ, must be the most
constant Part of Christian Worship.

21. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God.

21. And let Gods Command move you to be yielding and submissive, and not stout
and staff toward one another; but especially to your Superiors: but so as to
fear and obey God before Men.

22, 23. Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.
For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the
church: and he is the Savior of the body.

22, 23. Let Wives show their Subjection to Christ, by submitting to their
Husbands, as by his Command. For the Husband is under Christ the Head or Ruler
of the Wife, to govern her in Love, and protect her, as Christ is the Supreme
Head and Ruler of the Church, and the Savior of it as his Body.

24. Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to
their own husbands in every thing.

24. Therefore as the Church is in all things to be subject to Christ, so must
the Wives be to their Husbands, in all things belonging to that Relation, under
Christ.

25. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave
himself for it: 26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water, by the word,

25, 26. Husbands, imitate Christ, in loving your Wives, as Christ did his
Church, for which (in a special sense) he gave himself by death, that he might
sanctify it to God, and cleanse it from Sin, by washing away their Guilt and
Filth, signified and sealed in Baptism, and by the Promises and Preaching of
his Word.

27. That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish.

27. That he may prepare it for the great Marriage-day, and then present it to
himself, cleansed and beautified, without Sin, Guilt, or Blemish, but perfect
in Holiness, and glorious.

28. So ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies: he that loves his
wife, loves himself.

28. As Eve was taken out of Adam, so the Union between Husband and W^fe is so
near, that Men should love their Wives in a sort as their own Bodies; and to
love a Wife, should be as the loving of our selves.

29. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourishes and cherishes it,
even as the Lord the church.

29. And as Nature causes all Men to love, nourish, and cherish their own
Flesh, and not to hate it; so must Men do by their Wives, as Christ does by the
Church.

30. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

30. And as Eve was said to be to Adam, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his
Bone; so, by allusion, we may say of the Church and Christ in a spiritual sense.

31. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be
joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.

31. And as it was then said, [ A man shall leave, etc.] so must Believers
leave all for Christ, as Christ laid down his Life for them; and they shall be
made as one.

32. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church.

32. This that is said of Adam and Eve, and of Marriage, did mystically
prefigure the Marriage of Jesus Christ and the Church: and of this it is that I
now speak.

33. Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular, so love his wife even as
himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband.

33. But though I have turned my Speech to Christ and the Church, I repeat my
Counsel; Let every Man love his Wife with such an entire, constant, and
forbearing Love, as he loves himself; and let the Wife see that she live in
loving Subjection and Reverence to her Husband.

CHAP. VI.
1. CHildren, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.

1. Let Children be obedient to their Parents, under God, in obedience to him;
for he has commanded it,

2. Honor thy father and mother, (which is the first commandment with promise)

2. Saying, Honor thy Father and Mother: And though general Promises be
intimated in the First and Second Commandment, this is the first Commandment
that has annexed the Promise of the Land which God was then leading the
Israelites to; as it is said,

3. That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth.

3. That thou may live long, and prosper, in the Promised Land of Canaan;
which intimates also to us Christian Gentiles a Promise of more Prosperity on
Earth than disobedient Children shall have, and an earthly Curse to the
disobedient.

Note, That accordingly, Gods Curse on Earth does usually follow Children that
dishonor and wrong their Parents, and rebel against them; and usually even
Earthly Blessings are given to those that honor and obey Parents (under God.)

4. And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

4. And let Parents remember, that Childrens corrupt Nature and Weakness are
liable to such Passions as may pervert them: and therefore let not your sour
and provoking Government and Carriage tempt them hereto, beyond their strength:
but govern them with Fatherly Love, and bring them up to the Knowledge and
Obedience of the Lord, by wise and diligent Teaching, Example, Admonition, and
Discipline.

5. Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ.

5. And let not Servants think that Christianity freeth them from Service, or
from Obedience, Diligence, or Reverence to their Masters, though they be
Unbelievers: but give them all due Obedience, and reverent Submission, and this
in conscience and sincerity, as part of your Obedience to Christ, who does
command it, and will reward you.

6. Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing
the will of God from the heart;

6. Not deceitfully, when your Masters see and know what you do, merely to
please Men; but as the true Servants of Christ, with heartiness, and in secret
things as well as open, doing Service to Men in obedience to the Will of God,
and to please him.

7. With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men.

7. I repeat it, because it greatly concerns you, that you do all your
Service faithfully and willingly, without grudging; and that not as a bare
Service to Man, but as a part of your Service to the Lord himself, which he
has prescribed, and will accept.

8. Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive
of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

8. Be sure of this, That your lowest and hardest Service being your Duty, is a
good Work; and such Works of Fidelity in the lowest Bond-servants are accepted
of God, as well as the more honored Service of the Greatest.

9. And ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening:
knowing that your master also is in heaven, neither is there respect of persons
with him.

9. And you that are Masters, see that you be as careful of your Part to your
Servants, as you would have them be of their Duty to you; and rule them not
tyrannically, by insulting and passionate Menaces and Reproaches: Knowing that
Christ in Heaven is equally the Lord of them and you, and will not be partial
to you for your Wealth or Superiority, but will equally do Justice unto all.

10. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

10. To conclude, Behave your selves in the discharge of all your Duties, and
resistance of all the Temptations of your Warfare, as resolved valiant
Christians, strong in the Faith and Love of Christ, by his powerful assisting
Grace.

11. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the devil.

11. And with skill and care put on and use the Grace and Helps which God
vouchsafes you, (which are to a Christian like complete Armor to a Soldier)
that you may be able to stand fast against all the Stratagems and Plots of the
Devil, who seeks to overthrow you.

12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in high places.

14. For the great Conflict which Christians are engaged in, is not merely
against Men, but against Devils, who by Gods Ordination, and the Success of
their Temptations, are Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the Persons
and Ways of Darkness, Ignorance, and Unbelief in the World, and are spiritual
W^ckedness, above us in the Air.

13. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.

13. Therefore neglect no part of the Armor afforded you by God, but use it
all, that in the time of Temptation you may be able to resist and conquer the
Assaults of Men and Devils, and when they have done their worst, and you have
withstood them, you may stand fast in Faith, and Holiness, and Hope.

14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on
the breastplate of righteousness; 15. And your feet shod with the preparation
of the gospel of peace.

14, 15. Stand therefore to your Obligations to Faith and Holiness. 1. See that
the firm Belief of the Truth of the Gospel, against all Deceivers, be to you as
a Military Girdle about your Loins. 2. And that universal sincere Obedience to
God, and Uprightness of Life toward all Men, joined to your Pardon through the
Merits of Christ, may be to you as a Breast Plate is to Soldiers in Fight, that
no Adversary may have Matter of just Accusation against you. 3. And that the
Gospel of Christ, which speaks Peace to the World, and to your selves, may so
dwell in your Hearts, to make you Men of Peace, and in your Mouths to invite
others to Peace with God and one another, that it may be to you as those Shoes
were to Soldiers, which they put on when they went to War, to keep their Feet
from hurt and danger.

16. Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

16. Above all, see that you firmly believe and trust to the Word and Promises
of God, which will be to you as a Shield or Target to a Soldier, by which he is
preserved from all the Darts or Shot that is made against him. And though
Satan's Darts be fiery Persecution and fierce Temptations, this will defend you,
and frustrate all.

17. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is
the word of God:

17. And trust fully in Christ as your Savior for Salvation, and this will, as
an Helmet (or Headpiece) to a Soldier, defend your chiefest Part from danger.
And skilfully use the Word of God, indicted and sealed by his Spirit, which will
serve you for Defense and Conquest by the help of the same Spirit, as a Sword
does to a Soldier.

18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all saints;

18. And because you must do all in dependence on God, see that you be constant
in all sorts or parts of Prayer, for your selves and others, even such Prayer
as Gods Spirit directs you to by his Word, and exciteth you to by his Grace:
And for that end, keep your Minds by watchfulness in a serious praying temper,
and be not cold or weary, but hold on; and forget not to pray for all holy
Persons (and holy things.)

Note, That, 1. They that scorn praying in or by the Spirit, scorn the Work of
the Spirit in all acceptable Prayer to God.

2. They that forbid Prayer, forbid that which God commands, and his Spirit
in us as an Intercessor performs.

3. When God commands [ all Prayer and Supplication], we must obey him,
though any Men would confine us to the Fetters of their narrow defective Words
and Books.

4. They that hate, revile, excommunicate unjustly, and persecute those Saints
whom God commands us to love and pray for, fight under Satan, against Christ.

19. And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth
boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel:

19. And let me have a special part in your Prayers, that I may be freed from
silencing Imprisonments and Restraints, and may have Liberty and Ability boldly
to make known the Mystery of Man's Salvation by Christ.

20. For which I am an ambassador in bonds: that therein I may speak boldly,
as I ought to speak.

20. For I am in Bonds by Men, though Christ's Ambassador, even for preaching to
Men this Gospel of Salvation: But pray for me, that whatever it cost me, I may
do my Duty, and speak (though forbidden) as I ought to speak.

Note, That as God works by Men, so does the Devil: And therefore it is no
wonder that Paul was in Bonds for preaching Salvation; and that Men make Laws
against Praying and Preaching, and if the Devil call it Sedition: For really
Praying and Preaching do more to destroy his Kingdom, and save Souls, than Arms
can do.

21. But that ye also may know my affairs, and how I do, Tychicus a beloved
brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all things:

21. And that you may know how all things go with me, Tychicus will tell you,
whom you may trust.

22. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know our
affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts.

22. I have sent him, that he may represent things truly to you, and help to
keep you from discouragement, or undue trouble for my Sufferings.

23. Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith from God the Father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ.

23. I conclude with this Benediction and Prayer for you, That God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ will give, maintain, and increase in you all, that
confirmed Faith which may fill you with Love, and keep you in Peace and Welfare.

24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

24. And let the Grace, Favor, and Blessing of God be still with all them who
love our Lord Jesus Christ with sincere, incorruptible, confirmed Love. Amen.

The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the PHILIPPIANS.
CHAP. I.
1. PAul and Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in
Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons: 2. Grace be
unto you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

1, 2. I Paul, and Timothy now with me, send greeting with this Epistle to all
the Saints (or Christians) which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons
there; wishing to them Grace and Peace, which are all Blessings in sum, from
God our Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord.

Note, 1. That Dr. Hammond affirming, That Paul meant here all the Bishops and
Deacons in Macedonia, or a whole Province, does this without any cogent Proof;
as he says the like of Corinth, Ephesus, etc. though it may be granted, that
consequently they to whom these Epistles were written, were to communicate them
to as many as they could.

2. That he contradicts himself in saying, there was but one Bishop in a
City; when elsewhere he says, there was one of the Jews Church, and another of
the Gentiles.

3. That Paul says it was [ the Saints which are at Philippi, with the Bishops
and Deacons], to wit, which were at Philippi with them. But sure all that were
in a Province so great, were not at Philippi.

And his Conclusion, That every Church in Scripture-times had but One Bishop,
with Deacons his Servants, [ there being then no middle Order in use;] and that
in all the New Testament the Words [ Bishop and Presbyter] signified only such
as we now call Bishops, 1. Is contrary to the Descriptions of the Churches of
Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, etc. where, in one Assembly, there were so many
Prophets sit for the Public Ministry, that they needed regulating restraint in
Ministering. 2. But thus he must maintain, That de facto no Church had then more
than one Presbyter, and so no B;ishop more than one sixed Congregation, (being
but in one place at one time:) And so that there was no Bishop that governed
Presbyters, nor any Presbyters subject to Bishops, (but only to Itinerant
Apostles.) So that all that remains in controversy will be, Who instituted
this middle Order of Presbyters after Scripture times? and* Quo jure? and, How
it is proved that they had Power so to do?

3. I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, 4. (Always in every prayer of
mine for you all, making request with joy)

3, 4. Whenever I remember you, it is with thankfulness to God; and in all my
Prayers for you, I do it with joy.

5. For your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now;

5. For the hearty Communion and Communication in and for the Gospel, which you
have exercised from the first day of your Conversion until now.

6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

6. Not doubting but God, who has been the Author of this good Beginning, will
carry it on, till you* are presented perfect in the day of the coming of Christ.

7. Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have you in
my heart, in as much as both in my bonds, and in the defense and confirmation
of the gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace.

7. It is meet that I think this of you all; for you have a great room in my
Heart, because in my Bonds and Sufferings, and in all that we do for the
defense and confirmation of the Gospel, you have manifested the same Grace, and
by your Communication and Cooperation have your part in the Blessing and Reward
of my Ministerial Grace and Labors.

8. For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ.

8. For God is my Witness, with what earnest Love I long for your Welfare; even
with that Love which Christ has kindled in me for his own sake, who loves you.

9. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge,
and in all judgment;

9. And my Prayer for you is, That you may increase and abound in holy Love to
Christ and his Gospel, and each other, and in all spiritual Wisdom and
discerning Judgment.

10. That ye may approve things that are excellent; that ye may be sincere, and
without offense till the day of Christ;

10. That you may yet more grow up in the Approbation and Love of the excellent
things of Christian Faith, and Life, and Hope, and may be sound and sincere in
Faith and Life, without warping in Judgment, or scandal in Practice, till the
Day of Judgment.

11. Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ
unto the glory and praise of God.

11. And that you may abound with all that Righteousness toward God and Man,
which is the true Fruit of Faith and of the Spirit, by which you may praise and
glorify God.

12. But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things which happened
unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel:

12. I think meet to give you notice, lest misinformation discourage you, that
my Imprisonment and S^fferings have not hindered but furthered the Gospel.

13. So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all
other places;

13. For my Imprisonment for Christ, has but made me, and consequently my
Preaching, to be known in the Court, and Places of Judicature, and abroad to
others.

14. And many of the brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds, are
much more bold to speak the word without fear.

14. And the Example of my Patience, Boldness and Success in Suffering, has
emboldned many of the Brethren, confidently, without fear, to preach and
profess the Gospel.

15. Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of good
will. 16. The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add
affliction to my bonds: 17. But the other of love, knowing that I am set for
the defense of the gospel.

15, 16, 17. There be some here at Rome, and elsewhere, that because I reprove
them for Judaizing, by obtruding the Law and Ceremonies of Moses on the
Gentiles, and such other Causes, are quarrelsom with me, and seek Defamation;
and while they preach Christ, it is with the mixture of Spleen and Bitterness
against me, and in an envious, striving, and reproachful manner, against me,
and such as I, who conform not to their Ceremonious Impositions. Thus some
preach the same Christ that I do, but contentiously, and not in sincerity, and
love, and meekness, but to add to my Bonds the Affliction of Men's Contempt and
Disaffection, to turn the Hearts of People from me and my Ministry. But there
are others that preach in Christian Love, and carry it with Kindness toward me,
knowing that I am called to propagate and defend Christ's Gospel, and that it is
it that I suffer for, and not for my Fault and Error, as the other would
persuade the People.

18. What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in truth,
Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

18. But though some seek Preeminence, and their own Honor and Interest, and
envy me, and join too much self-seeking with the Preaching of the Gospel, and
do it not with the Love and Sincerity that they ought; yet every way Christ is
preached, and I therein rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

Note, 1. That they mistake who think Paul speaks of the Preachers of false
Doctrine in any great Point; for he would not rejoice in that. It is but
preaching with corrupt Passions and Purposes, perhaps for little Differences,
in a splenetick manner, contrary to Love and Peaceableness.

2. Paul here enters his professed Dissent, both against Church-Tyranny, that
would forbid those to preach that cross them and their Opinions or interest,
and against those Separatists who cry down the Ministry of those that are
faulty in tolerable things, yea that cross them and their Way.

19. For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, and
the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,

19. For I doubt not but even this accumulating Affliction on me, by envious
Brethren, with Heathen Persecutors, shall through your Prayer, and Christ's
Spirit, all turn to good, and but further my own and other Men's Salvation.

20. According to my earnest expectation, and my hope, that in nothing I shall
be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be
magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death.

20. For, as it is my earnest expectation, so it is my comfortable hope, that
whether it be by my Life or Death, all that befalls my Body shall be to the
honor of Christ, and then I have my End.

21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.

21. For to me to live, is to serve and honor Christ; he is the End of my
Life, and his Work the Business; it is for Christ that I live; and if I die, it
will be my gain.

22. But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor: yet what I
shall choose I wo^ not.

22. But if God will have me live longer, it will be time given for my fruitful
Labor, (or it will be worth desiring, for my Labor sake;) or, as Beza, [
whether it will be worth my Labor and Suffering,] and what to choose (if God
would leave it to my choice) I know not.

23. For I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ; which is far better:

23. For it is to me a great difficulty to know which is more desirable: I
would fain be with Christ, which is far better for me than to be here.

24. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh, is more needful for you.

24. But my Life seems more needful for your further Service.

25. And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with
you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith;

25. And being assured of this, (and knowing withal Christ's Love to his Church)
I am persuaded that I shall yet longer continue in Life, for your furtherance,
and comfort, and confirmation in your Christian Faith and Hope.

26. That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me, by my
coming to you again.

26. That when you see me with you again, you may greatly for my sake rejoice
in Christ.

27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the gospel of Christ: that
whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that
ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of
the gospel;

27. But I beseech you look to this one thing on your own part, that your
Conversation may be such as becomes the Belief and Profession of the Gospel of
Salvation; that whether I come again to you, or not, I may hear that you stand
fast, in One Spirit actuating you, and with One Mind and loving Concord (not
striving against one another, as Persecutors and Sectaries do, but) cooperating
and striving together, to defend and propagate the Belief of the Gospel,
(though you may differ about many lesser things.)

28. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an evident
token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.

28. And that you be in nothing terrified by your Adversaries Power or Rage;
for their Persecuting, and your Patience, are an evident Prognostic of their
Perdition, but of your Salvation, even by God, who will condemn the Wicked, and
justify the Just.

29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake;

29. For it is a great addition to your Honor and Felicity, that God has
given you this Blessing, not only to believe on Christ as Christians, but to
suffer for him as Martyrs. (For by this you have the Promise of the greatest
Reward.)

30. Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me.

30. Having the same kind of Conflict with Opposers and Persecutors, which you
saw me have when I was with you, and now hear that I have at Rome when I am
from you.

Note, It is mere violence to the Text, which the Socinians use with Ver. 21,
23. while they expound Ver. 21. of [ Gain to the Church by my Martyrdom, and to
me only as I shall be rewarded as a Martyr at Christ's coming;] and Ver. 23. of
[ A desire to depart by Martyrdom, that I may be with Christ at the
Resurrection;] or, [ which is far better for the Church, that will gain more by
my Martyrdom, than my Preaching:] Clean contrary to what he says Ver. 24, 25.
and to the plain Text. Men that can thus use the Scripture, may believe what
they list, let God say what he will. Christ has expressly promised all his
Servants, John 12.26. as well as the dying Thief, that they shall be with him
where he is, even in Paradise.

CHAP. II.
1. IF there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; 2. Fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

1, 2. I adjure or beseech you therefore, as ever you take Christ, our common
Head, for your Hope and Comfort, and look to find Comfort in the Exercise of
Christian Love to all Saints, and if you are indeed united in the Communion of
the same Spirit, (without which you are none of Christ's) and if you have any
Bowels of Mercy to others, (as all Christians must have,) that you yet make me
more joyful by your increased Unanimity, that you have all one and the same
Affection and Design of Life, that you all love one another as your selves, and
be of one accord in your Doctrine and Converse, and of one Mind and Judgment.

Note, 1. That Paul here supposes that all Christians should live in this
Unanimity, Love, and Concord, who do but know and agree in the great things
which constitute true Christianity, though they may not have skill enough to
know Right from Wrong in many small, indifferent, or circumstantial things. The
Church-Tyrants Exposition makes Paul to scorn them, rather than counsel them;
as if he said, [ I adjure you by all the Comforts of Christ and his Spirit,
that you be all so wise as to know all that is in the Bible, yea more, all that
any Bishops in Council and all their Canons shall tell you, or command you;
yea, that you know not only all the Essentials and Integrals of Religion, but
even all the things indifferent, which Canons shall impose on you, to be really
indifferent, that is, that every Man and Woman know more than any Doctor on
Earth kno^eth, or else you cannot live in Christian Love and Comfort.] It is
this Diabolical Exposition of the Scripture, that has torn and ruined the
Christian World.

2. And yet Paul here implies, That no Christian should affectedly scruple any
lawful Command of their Superiors, or Custom of the Church, but should so
avoid Singularity and Disobedience, as to do any thing, save sin, for Peace and
Concord.

3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind
let each esteem other better then themselves.

3. Let not Pride make you vainglorious and contentious; but let Christian
Humility make you so low in your own Eyes, as to be more inclinable to think
highly of other Men's Wisdom and Goodness than of your own, further than
Evidence constrains you to think meanlier of any.

Note, That Paul knew that it was Pride of Men's own Knowledge and Goodness,
(especially in the Clergy) setting them in a vainglorious striving against
each other, that was like to cause Schism in the Church.

4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others.

4. Specially take heed of Selfishness, which makes Men over-regardful of all
that is their own, their own Interest in Honor, of Profit, or Opinion; and to
set too light by other Men's, yea, to set against the Interest of others to
advance their own.

Note, That Self-denial and Love (or, to love others as our selves) are the
great Means to keep and cast out Schism; and the want of them in Clergy and
Laity, is the common Mischief and Ruin of the Churches.

5, 6. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who being in
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God:

5, 6. Learn this of Christ, who being God, the Brightness of his Fathers
Glory, and the express Image of his Subsistence, (or Person) H^b. 1.3. thought
it no Robbery to be Equal with God the Father, being One with him.

7. But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant,
and was made in the likeness of men:

7. But yet condescended to assume Humane Nature, and so in that which was
visible was a Man, and a Servant, obliged to Obedience in the most humble
Instance, and so made himself, by this humble Self-deni^l, of no Reputation
with the unbelieving World, that knew not his Divinity thus veiled, yea,
co^nted him a Malefactor.

8. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.

8. And being visible only in his Humane Nature, like other Men, he yet
further humbled himself, obeying his Father, by submitting to the reproachful,
cursed Death of being crucified, as accused of Blasphemy, and Treason against
Caesar.

9. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is
above every name:

9. Wherefore God has highly exalted him in that Manhood in which he suffered,
and has given him greater Dignity, and Honor, and Renown than any Creature
ever ^ad over them all.

10. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth;

10. That to his Dignity and Power all Creatures should be subject, and Angels,
Men, and Devils should by their submission respectively honor his Name.

11. And that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord to the
glory of God the Father.

11. And that all reasonable Creatures acknowledge Christ's Dominion, to the
Glory of the Father.

12. Wherefore my beloved as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence
only, but now much more in my absence; work out your own salvation with fear
and trembling.

12. Wherefore as you have always lived in Obedience to Christ, both while I
was with you, and much more since, go on, and finish or perfect that holy
Obedience which God requires of you, for the obtaining of Salvation, and that
with holy care and diligence, and watchful cautelous fear of miscarrying.

13. For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do of his good
pleasure.

13. Which I may the more confidently exhort you to in hope, because you are
not the prime Agents required to do this merely of your selves, but only under
God, the prime Cause of all Good, both of Nature and Grace, who does not only
give you Power, but works in you both the Act of Willing and of Working, of
his own good Pleasure.

14. Do all things without murmurings, and disputings:

14. And do all your Works of Obedience to God, in Love and Peace with one
another, without murmuring at your Work, or one another, and without provoking
Wr^nglings.

15. That ye may be blameless and harmless the sons of God without rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse r^tion, among whom ye shine as lights in
the world:

15. That you may be ^nreproveable and sincere, the blameless Sons of God, in
the midst of a naughty crooked perverse Generation, or sort of Men, among whom
ye shine as lights in the World.

16. Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ,
that I have not run in vain, neither labored in vain.

16. That in the day of Christ's Judgment, I may rejoice not only in the
sincerity of my labor, but in the success, that I have not preached, and
labored, and suffered without fruit.

17. Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I
joy, and rejoice with you all.

17. Yea, if I suffer death as a Sacrifice for the service of your Faith, your
Constancy and Welfare will make it matter of joy to me for your sakes.

18. For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me.

18. And if my suffering be my joy, let it be yours also; be not discouraged,
but rejoice with me.

19. But I trust in the Lord Jesus, to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I
also may be of good comfort, when I know your state.

19. But I hope by the mercy of the Lord, to send Timothy shortly to you, that
when by him I know your State, I may have comfort in you, as you may have in me.

20. For I have no man like-minded, who will naturally care for your state.

20. For I have no man equal to him in Love to you, who will care for your
State with such affection, even as Nature teaches Men, to care for their
Children as themselves.

21. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

21. For all are so much set on minding their own Matters, and seeking their
own Interest, that it abateth their Zeal and Diligence in seeking the Interest
and things of Christ.

Note, 1. That selfishly to prefer their own Carnal Interest to Christ's, is a
certain mark of a Graceless Hypocrite. 2. Therefore Paul means not that all
are such predominantly, but that all too much seek their own, and Christ's too
little. 3. But that this self-seeking is the Plague of the Clergy and Church,
culpably in all in various degrees, and predominantly in False-hearted
Hypocrites.

22. But ye know the proof of him, that as a son with the father, he has
served with me in the gospel.

22. But you know what experience you and I have had of him, that with the love
of a Son, and the diligence of a Servant, he has assisted me in my Ministry of
the Gospel.

23. Him therefore I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see how it will
go with me.

23. Him I hope to send as soon as I know, and can by him tell you, how it will
go with me.

24. But I trust in the Lord, that I also my self shall come shortly.

24. And I trust that the Lords Mercy will deliver me, and I shall shortly come
my self.

25. Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and
companion in labor, and fellow-souldier, but your messenger, and he that
ministered to my wants.

25. But I thought good to send you back Epaphroditus, who is my Brother and
Fellow Laborer, and Messenger, who from you supplied my wants.

26. For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because that ye
had heard that he had been sick.

26. He longed to be with you, and comfort you by the sight of his health,
hearing that his sickness made you sad.

27. For indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy on him; and not
on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.

27. He was nig^ to death, but God in mercy to him and me recovered him, not
adding his death to my affliction.

28. I sent him therefore the more carefully, that when ye see him again, ye
may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.

28. Note, That Mercys restored after Danger, affect us more than those
continued in Prosperity.

29. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and hold such in
reputation: 30. Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not
regarding his life to supply your lack of service toward me.

29, 30. Receive him gladly as returned to you by God, and account such
honorable; for it was for the work of Christ, that he willingly hazarded his
Life by his Travels and labor to be serviceable to me as your Messenger in
your stead.

CHAP. III.
1. FInally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you,
to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe.

1. Finally Brethren, serve God with joyful hearts: That I write to you the
same things which I have formerly taught you, and warned you of, is not through
sloth of cowardice in me, but for your own safety, as fittest for you.

2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.

2. To wit, that you take heed of the worrying, hurtful sort of Men, who live
in wickedness, and calling themselves the Circumcision, are indeed the
Concision, that cut and rend the Churches.

3. For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

3. For we are the Children of Circumcised Abraham, who worship God in Spirit
and Truth, and have no confidence in Fleshly Privileges, or Carnal
Ceremonious, Jewish Worship.

4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinks
that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more:

4. Though if Judaism were matter of trust or boasting, I have more such cause
than any of them.

5. Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of
Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee; 6.
Concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteousness which is in
the law, blameless.

5, 6. I was Circumcised as the Law required, I was an Israelite, a Benjamite,
an Hebrew, a Pharisee, the strictest Sect in Religion; not cold in Religion,
but a zealous persecutor of the Church, which I thought had been against it:
And as to the outward observance of the Law of Moses, I seemed to Men so just
and harmless, that none accused me.

7. But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.

7. But I willingly disclaim all confidence in these, and reject all as loss
that would keep me from Christ.

8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ,

8, 9. Yea, I reject all as loss and hurtful to me, which stand against the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, for whom I have readily suffered the
loss of all things, and count them but as Dung in order to my part in Christ,
and that I may be found in him.

9. And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is
of God by faith:

9. Not having and trusting not in that Righteousness which consists in
keeping the Law of Moses, which is of my own Works, and I accounted formerly to
be my justifying Righteousness; but that which is of Faith in Christ, even the
Righteousness which is of Gods free Gift by believing acceptance of his
purchased and offered Grace.

10. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship
of his suffering, being made conformable unto his death.

10. By which I shall gain the knowledge of Christ, and of the great Mystery of
Salvation by him, and the powerful work of his Grace and quickening Spirit and
preserving Providence, answering in his Members that power that raised him from
the Dead, and a Communion with him in sufferings, by which I shall be made
conformable to him as Crucified for our sins; and thus in all be made as a
Member suitable to him that is my Head.

11. If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead:

11. In hope that by all these means and methods (which I account not too dear)
I may at last attain that blessed perfection in which I shall be also like him,
as he is now risen from the Dead, and glorified, in the state of Immortality.

12. Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but I
follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of
Christ Jesus.

12. Not that I have already attained this Conformity to my Glorified Lord, or
were already perfect, by reaching all that I pursue: But I run as for this
Prize, and earnestly strive, that at last I may lay hold on and attain the
state of Glory, to bring me to which Jesus Christ did elect, redeem, and call
me to himself.

13. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended: but this one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things which are before, 14. I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus.

13, 14. I know I have not yet attained the end that I ran for, even glorious
Perfection: But this I do, not minding the things of the World which I have
forsaken, but neglecting and forgetting them, and with all my might and
diligence striving toward the things which are before, I press or hasten
toward the Mark, for that glorious Crown and Prize, for obtaining whereof, the
high Calling of God by Jesus Christ has encouraged me to seek and hope.

15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect be thus minded: and if in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.

15. And let all that are sound and sincere Christians, holding these things
that are necessary to Salvation, be thus minded, and with joint endeavor
confessing our Defects, thus press toward the End of our Faith in Love: And
then, if through imperfection of Knowledge you come short, and differ in other
things, while you wait on God in Humility, Love, and Peace, God will in time
make you know what yet is wanting to you.

16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
rule, let us mind the same thing.

16. But let all that have attained soundness in these necessary Essentials of
Christianity, still live according to these Gospel Truths which we all
acknowledge, and in Love and Concord practice and promote these things in which
we are agreed.

Note, How directly Paul condemns both Church-Tyrants and Sectaries, the
former silencing, reviling, and persecuting, and the other reproachfully
censuring, and separating from those that agree in all here instanced, for not
consenting to needless Trifles of the Clergies imposition, or to the Errors of
superstitious ignorant Men.

17. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye
have us for an ensample.

17. God that has sent me to teach you, has herein also made me an Ensample
to you; I beseech you therefore herein follow me, (in humble striving toward
Perfection, uniting in sincere Christianity, and bearing in other things with
each other, till God teach you the rest.)

18. (For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: 19. Whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly: and whose glory is in their shame, who
mind earthly things.)

18, 19. For many, of whom I have often told you, and now mention them with
Tears, for their own fakes and the Churches, do so live, as that while they are
called Christians, they are such Enemies to the bearing of the Cross, in
following a Crucified Christ, that they will suffer nothing for their Faith:
For taking up Christianity notionally in their Brains, without the Life and
Power on their Hearts, the World was never overcome, or their Lust mortified by
it; so that their Belly, or fleshly Lust, is the God which they most love and
obey; and while they glory that they know more of Christian Liberty than we do,
and so may lawfully please fleshly Lusts, it is their Shame and Bru^tishness
which they glory in: and therefore Destruction will be their end.

20. For our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: 21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

20, 21. But our City freedom, Relation, Treasure, Converse, and Business is in
Heaven, among the Heavenly Society, in the Jerusalem above; From thence, by
Faith and joyful Hope, we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus, who is our Head
and Intercessour there; and who will not only receive our Souls at death, but
will also change these vile Bodies, (which being made of the low dissoluble
Elements, are a clog to our Souls, and must corrupt like the Flesh of Bruits)
and will make them like his own now-glorious Body, (spiritual, incorruptible,
and glorious;) and this he can and will do, how unlikely soever it appears to
us, by the exercise of his Omnipotency, by which he can conquer all
Difficulties and Enemies, for the accomplishing of the Work of the Salvation of
his Church.

Note, 1. That the great difference between miserable Hypocrites and sound
Christians is, that the former set most by Flesh and Earth, and the latter by
the Hopes of Heaven, to which they subject all worldly Interest, and on which
and for which they live and labor most, as Worldlings do for a Worldly Welfare.

2. That a false, sensual, worldly, unmortified Heart, betrayeth Hypocrites
into worldly sensual Opinions and Heresies, and they easily believe all to be
lawful which makes for their fleshly worldly Interests and Lusts, because
their false Hearts would have it to be lawful.

CHAP. IV.
1. THerefore, my brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so
stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.

1. Note, That the most amiable Christians have need of Warning and earnest
Exhortation against Backsliding by Temptation and Deceivers.

2. I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntiche, that they be of the same mind in
the Lord.

2. Note, It Is like he heard of Contention between these two, which he
beseeches them to cease.

3. And I entreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which labored
with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers,
whose names are in the book of life.

3. And I entreat thee, my true Fellow Laborer, (it is like he means
Epaphroditus, but uncertain:) take care of those Women that furthered our Work,
(by entertaining us, and suffering for the Faith,) with Clement, and other
Helpers, who are of the number of those that God will own.

4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice.

4. Rejoice in the Interest you have in the Lord, his Grace, and Protection,
and Promise of Glory: Yea, I again urge it on you, Always rejoice.

Note, 1. That Christians even in a state of opposition from the World, have
always greater cause of rejoicing in God, than of sorrow for the World, (Though
if they wilfully sin, it may interrupt their Joy, by making them unfit for it,
as Wounds and Sickness do the Body.)

2. That holy Joy in the Lord is that Flower of Religion which all Christians
should desire, and chiefly labor to attain.

5. Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand.

5. Let all Men see that you put the best sense on all that befalls you from God
and Man, and that you take nothing by impatience or uncharitableness at the
worst, but can suffer Injuries: For God is with you, and the day of his
delivering you is near.

6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.

6. Let no Want or Danger disturb your Mind with anxious distrustful Cares; but
in every Case, go and open it to God in Prayer, for your selves and others,
with Thanksgiving for what you have received, as beseems those who truly
trust in God.

7. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

7. And by this Lenity of Mind, and Trust in God by Prayer, the Peace which you
shall have in Gods Love to you, in your own Souls, and in Concord with the
Church, which is of inestimable value, above much notional Knowledge, shall, as
a Garrison, keep your Affections from disturbance, and your Judgments from
Error, through the Grace of Christ.

8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.

8. In general, to conclude, Be sure that you cleave to Truth, against
Falsehood; to things seemly and venerable, against things shameful; to things
just, against Injustice; to things pure, against Lust and Pollution; to things
truly amiable, against deceiving Paint and flattering Allurements; to things
deservedly of good report and approved by Men, against Scandal. In a word, Let
all things that are truly virtuous and praiseworthy* be faithfully minded and
followed by you.

9. Those things which ye have both learned and received, and heard and seen in
me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you.

9. Practice the Doctrine which you have heard and received from me, and the
good Example which you have seen in me; and the God of Love and Peace will be
with you, thus walking in Love and Peace.

10. But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me
has flourished again, wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked opportunity.

10. I was glad, and thanked God, that your Care of my Supply at last revived;
not that I suppose it dead before, but that you lacked opportunity of sending
to me, rather than Will, and Care of me.

11. Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned in whatsoever
state I am, therewith to be content.

11. I mean not that I so much rejoice that my Wants were supplied: For I have
learned to be of a quiet and contented Mind, in whatever Condition God shall
bring me.

12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where, and
in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound
and to suffer need.

12. I know how to be in a low and poor Condition, without repining; and how to
have Plenty, without sensuality and abuse: I have learned how to live in every
Place and Case, both to be fully provided, and to be in hunger through poverty,
to abound, and to suffer need, and glorify God in all.

13. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.

13. All this is but my Duty; and Christ will strengthen me for all that he
calls me to.

14. Notwithstanding, ye have well done, that ye did communicate with my
affliction.

14. But this Communication for my Supply in my Suffering for the Gospel, was
your Duty, and you did well in doing it.

15. Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I
departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me, as concerning giving
and receiving, but ye only.

15. I suppose you know that this Honor of Contributing to me was due only to
you, when I first had preached the Gospel in Macedonia, no other Church doing
the like at my departure.

16. For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity.

16. Note, How much professed Christians differ in Liberality, as they do in
Charity.

17. Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to your
account.

17. Not that I am craving more by commending you, or value most my own
Supplies; but I commend and desire your Fruitfulness in Good Works, that it may
abound to your own consolation, when you must be accountable for all to God.

18. But I have all, and abound: I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the
things which were sent from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable, well-pleasing to God.

18. But I certify you, that I received your Gift from Epaphroditus, and it
was a very liberal Supply to me; and to encourage you, I add, That under and
through Christ, the great propitiating Sacrifice, such Works are the sweet
Incense and Sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to God.

19. But my God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory,
by Christ Jesus.

19. And my God, who employeth me in his Work, will see that you shall lose
nothing by furthering his Service, but, out of the Riches of his Glory by
Christ, will give a more excellent Supply of all your Wants.

20. Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

20. Now to God, who is Love, and a Father to us through Christ, be Glory for
all his Mercies, and for and by all his Works, for ever. Amen.

21, 22, 23. Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me
greet you. All the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Cesars household.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

Note, 1. That Christians were all then called Saints, because they were by
Profession and Vow devoted to God in the Covenant of Holiness, and were not
debauched, as Multitudes now are.

2. That God had his Saints even in a Heathen, Persecuting Emperors Family.

3. That the Grace of Christ is the Sum of all Benediction on Earth.

The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the COLOSSIANS.
CHAP I.
1. PAul an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timotheus our
brother. 2. To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ, which are at
Colosse: Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. 3. We give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
praying always for you: 4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of
the love which ye have to all the saints;

3, 4. Note, 1. That Faith and Love are the Sum of Religion, and greater Riches
than all earthly things.

2. Love must extend to all Saints, and not only those that are of one Party.

5. For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in
the word of the truth of the gospel: 6. Which is come unto you, as it is in all
the world, and bringth forth fruit, as it does also in you, since the day ye
heard of it, and knew the grace of God in truth.

5, 6. Note, 1. It is the Hope of Heavenly Felicity, which is the End, an
effectual Motive of Christian Love and Duty. 2. It is the true Word of the
Gospel that gives us this Hope. 3. This Gospel divulged to the World is
fruitful extensively in the number of Converts, and intensely in their
Holiness, when it is so heard as to cause Men to know Gods Grace in Truth.

7. As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servants, who is for you a
faithful minister of Christ; 8. Who also declared unto us your love in the
Spirit.

7, 8. Note, It Is like Epaphras was he by whom they were converted, or at least
their present Bishop.

9. For this cause, we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray
for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will,
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding:

9. True Converts have need to be prayed for, that they may have Spiritual and
Practical Wisdom to know the Will of God.

10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;

10. That you may live suitably to your professed Faith, sincerely obeying and
pleasing God in all things, which is your Worthiness in a Gospel-sense,
bringing forth the Fruits of all sorts of Good Works, and increasing in the
Knowledge (or acknowledging) of God.

11. Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all
patience and long-suffering with joyfulness;

11. Note, 1. The glorious Power of God appears in his Servants Strength. 2.
The Strength of Christians appears most in suffering long and patiently for
Christ with joy, and not in overcoming Men by Strength.

12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the saints in light:

12. Note, 1. The Inheritance of the Saints is in the State and World of Light,
that is, of Vision and Glory. 2. Gods way of bringing Men to this Glory, is by
fitting them for it now by Holiness. 3. This is the Gift which obliges us to
the greatest Thankfulness to God.

13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the kingdom of his dear Son:

13. Note, The World is divided into two Societies: One under the Power of
Darkness, that is, Satan the Prince of Darkness, who leads Men by the way of
Ignorance, Error, Unbelief, and Lies, to the utter Darkness of Misery. The
other is the Kingdom of Christ, led by him who is the Light of the World, by
Truth, Knowledge, and Faith, to the Heavenly Light.

2. When Men are truly converted to Christ, they are initially delivered from
the Power, State, and Way of Darkness, into the Kingdom of Christ and Light.

14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

14. Note, Christ's Blood is the Price of our Redemption, and Remission of Sin
is much of the Collation and Application. Redemption signifies Deliverance
from Bondage.

15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:

15. In whose Humane Nature, Doctrine, and Works, the Invisible God, whose
Image he is, is manifested to Man; and who in his Divine Nature was begotten of
the Father before any Creature was made, (even from Eternity,) and in his
Person, as God-Man, is most Excellent, and is Lord of all.

(This [ First-born] numbreth him not with Creatures, but sets him above them.)

16. For by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in
earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him. 17. And
he is before all things, and by him all things consist.

16, 17. By him, as God, were all things created, and for him; and he is from
Eternity before them all, and by him they are upheld in being.

Note, 1. Some by [ things in Heaven and Earth,] and [ Thrones, Dominions,
etc.] understand only [ Jews and Gentiles] and [ the Powers of Men]: But this
forced Exposition is groundless; it being certain, that all Heavenly Powers and
Orders were created by the Eternal Word, and Paul being here extolling his
Magnificence, why should we feign him to leave out the highest Part, which he
so plainly expresses? That Celestial Spirits have potent Superiority both over
us and one another, is no doubt.

II. The ancient Churches and Heretics had so great Contentions about the
right Notions of the Nature and Person of Christ, and with such dismal Effects,
as makes many Lovers of Peace to wish, that such Points had been handled more
cautelously, reverently, and peaceably. Four notable Opinions there be about
the Natures and Person of Christ.

1. The Orthodox hold, That he has only two Natures in one Person, the Divine
and Humane. And of these, the subtle Philosophers say, that the Humane Nature
is no part of his Person, but an Adjunct, because God cannot be a Part. But
others avoid this, as dangerous.

2. The Arians think Christ is but a Creature, but is a Superangelical Spirit,
the first created, by whom God made all the rest; and that he assumed the
Humane Nature, and may be well called God, but not as the Father is, nor of the
same Substance: And so, that he has two Natures, Superangelical and Humane. Of
these, 1. Some think that the Superangelical, as a Soul, assumed only a Humane
Body: And, 2. Some, that he assumed a Soul and Body.

3. A third sort say, Christ has three Natures; 1. The Divine, producing by
Emanation the first created Superangelical Nature, united to it self, and by it
creating all other things; and both these Natures in the fullness of time
assuming the Humane Nature, (entire, say some; and a Body Only, say others.)

4. The last and worst is that of the Socinians, that count Christ a mere
Glorified Man. This Text seems to speak but the first, though the Favorers
of the third think it is for them; and that other Texts are so also. They think
it was not only the Divine Nature, but the Superangelical, which appeared to
Abraham, Moses, etc. in a visible Body, before the Incarnation: And by
asserting these three Natures in Christ, they would reconcile the Orthodox and
the Arians. The Controversies also whether Christ be two Persons or but one,
and have two Wills and Operations, or but one, and whether it may be said, That
Mary was the Mother of God, and that one of the Trinity was crucified, etc. did
grievously rend the Church; of which I have spoken elsewhere, and plainly
showed in what sense Christ is two, yea, many Persons (relatively), and in what
sense but one; and in what sense his Wills are two, and in what sense but one.

18. And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the
firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.

18. And he is now the Head, both by Government and quickening Influence, of the
Church, which is his Body Politic, and united to him incomprehensibly; the
Spring of Life to us, and the first that rose from Death to glorious
Immortality, triumphantly, by his own Power; by whom it is that we live, and
shall be raised: For in all things he is Highest, above all Creatures.

19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell;

19. For it seemed good to the Father that Jesus Christ should be filled with
all Created Perfection, as well as he has Divine Perfection, and be the Spring
and Treasure of all Good, as the Head over all things to his Church, and the
Universal Administrator.

20. And (having made peace through the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile
all things unto himself, by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or
things in heaven.

20. And having accepted his Sacrifice on the Cross for a general Atonement
and Propitiation, by him to reconcile the guilty, sinful, and cursed World to
him, so far as that their Guilt and Enmity should not hinder the Tenders of
Free Mercy and Salvation to Jews and Gentiles, nor keep his Elect and Faithful
Flock from that Heavenly Glory, where Angels and Saints shall be One Blessed
Society, united in Love to God and each other.

21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked
works, yet now has he reconciled,

21. And you, who were not only, as all others, originally guilty, as the Seed
of Adam, but also of the Race and Society of Gentiles, by your wicked Works
estranged from God, and out of the way of his saving Grace, and Enemies to it
and him, yet now has he reconciled by Christ, and taken you for his Children.

22. In the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight.

22. By giving up his Body of Flesh to death, as a Propitiatory Sacrifice; and
by justifying and sanctifying you, to present you holy, and blameless, and
justified at last before him.

23. If ye continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and be not moved away
from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to
every creature which is under heaven; whereof I Paul am made a minister.

23. I say, you shall be thus perfected at last, if you prove sound confirmed
Christians, continuing in the Faith, grounded and settled, and by no Temptation
be ever turned from the Hope which Christ has given you in his Gospel; which
by Christ's Commission we preach to all Men in this lower World, which is
already happily begun, the Church being no more confined to Jews, but gathered
out of all the Earth; to which Work Christ has Commissioned me, who am
laboring therein.

Note, That how true soever it be, that sound Believers shall be finally
justified in Judgment, and glorified, the Promise gives them Right to it but
on Condition of Perseverance; and God uses Conditional Promises to engage us
rationally to our Duty, and as a Means to accomplish his Absolute Decrees.

24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind
of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the
church.

24. And I rejoice that God honors me to suffer for his Church in so
excellent a Work: For it is by the Cross, or Suffering, that God will bring the
Church to Glory: And as Christ has perfectly done his own part, as the only
Propitiating Sacrifice; so I, with the rest of his Members, must undergo and
make up the rest, even for the same Churches sake for which he died, though not
as a Mediator, to reconcile God and Man, as he was.

25. Whereof I am made a minister according to the dispensation of God, which
is given to me for you, to fulfill the word of God;

25. Of which Church I am made a Servant, by Gods appointment and commission,
given me for you, as well as for others, that I may fully divulge the Word of
God.

26. Even the mystery which has been hid from ages, and from generations, but
now is made manifest to his saints:

26. The great Mystery of Redemption, (God manifested in the Flesh, as the Head
and Savior of the Church), which (though not wholly, yet comparatively) has
been hid from Jews under dark Types, as well as more from Gentiles by greater
Darkness, in all foregoing Ages: But now is plainlier made known to Gods
Saints.

27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this
mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory:

27. To whom God of his good Pleasure would specially make known the Riches and
Glory of this Mystery of Calling the whole World of Gentiles. The Sum of it is,
Christ among you, and in you, purchasing giving, and assuring to you the
Heavenly Glory, for which he has commanded you joyfully to hope. Christ the
Way, Glory the End.

28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom;
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus:

28. To preach this Christ is the Work of our Office, warning and teaching
every Man as we have opportunity, neglecting none of any Rank, in all the
saving Wisdom of the Gospel, that we may present as many as possible, perfect
to Salvation.

29. Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working, which works
in me mightily.

29. In this Labor I am employed; in which with diligence I strive, according
to the Grace of him that called me, which wrought in me (or works by me) in
Power, (confirming my Ministry by Miracles and Success, as well as qualifying
me for it.)

CHAP. II.
1. FOr I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for them
at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh:

1. [ Conflict,] by Prayer, and Care, and Study, to do them good.

Note, Good Men long for the Good of them whom they never saw.

2. That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto
all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the
mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.

2. That they may grow up to a State of Joy, by holy Union and Communion in
Love, and to be yet richer and happier in the full and assured understanding
and acknowledgment of the Mystery of God's Love, and of Christ's Grace, in the
Promises, Prefigurations, and Performance of our Redemption.

3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

3. Though it be not discerned by carnal Men, who search more after other
Knowledge in the World, the depth, excellency, and benefit of all true Wisdom
and Knowledge, are comprised in the Knowledge of God manifested in Christ: This
is the true Philosophy, in comparison of which, all other is Vanity and Folly.

4. And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words.

4. I tell you this, lest any delude you by the specious ostentation of any
other sort of Knowledge, called Philosophy, or Oracular, or Enthusiastical, or
Pharisaical Tradition, as if it were somewhat more excellent than the Knowledge
of Christ.

5. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the Spirit,
joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ.

5. For though I see you not, I am in the Spirit as if I was present with you,
affected with Joy to hear of your Order, and stedfastness of Faith: but yet I
know where your danger lies.

6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him:

6. Let it then be your care to hold fast and practice the Gospel of Christ, as
you have already received him and his Word, and turn not to any other way.

7. Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.

7. As growing downwards in the Roots is necessary to Trees, for stedfastness
and Fruit; and as the House must be built up, when the Foundation is laid: so
must you now be more and more rooted, and built up, and stablished in the same
Faith which you were taught at first, and must abound with joyful Thanks to
God, in the increased Knowledge, Love, and Practice of that, in stead of
harkening to Novelties or Errors.

8. Beware lest any man spoil you through philosphy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ:

8. The danger which I advise you to beware, is, lest any by pretending that
the Heathen Philosophy is a higher sort of Wisdom and Learning (more
methodical, accurate, extensive) than the Gospel of Christ, should deceive you,
and draw you from the true Wisdom of Christianity, or Heretics draw you by
Philosophical Pretenses to their Heresies; and they should set up the
Tradition, Books, or Opinions of any Sect of Philosophers, against the Heavenly
Doctrine of Christ.

Note, That as Moses's Law was very useful in subordination to the Covenant of
Grace, and to Christ; but pernicious to them that set it in opposition to
Christ, or in separation from him: so is true Philosophy; which is the
Knowledge of the knowable part of Gods Works, useful in subordination to
Christ: But the Heathen Sect of Philosophers were the most dangerous
Adversaries to Christianity, by deriding its Simplicity, and pretending to far
greater Learning, and despising Christians as ignorant and credulous, and using
against them their Logical Art and Sophistry, and the Reputation of all their
Sciences.

9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

9. For as the Divine Nature it self has united it self to, and so dwells in
his Humane Nature; so in the Person, Doctrine, and Works of Christ Incarnate,
God has treasured up, and by that In-dwelling placed, the fullest
Manifestation of himself to Mankind, that ever he will give them in this Life
on Earth.

10. And ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and power.

10. You need not seek after Wisdom in the Oracles or Knowledge of Demons or
Angels; for in Christ you have complete Wisdom, (if you truly receive him, and
learn of him) who is not only above all Philosophers and Rabbis, but above
the highest Angels or Celestial Powers, and is the chief Revealer of God to Man.

11. In whom also ye are circumcised, by the circumcision made without hands,
in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ.

11. Nor need you go to Judaism for Circumcision: For you have the true saving
Circumcision in Christ, even that of the Heart, made without Plands by the
Spirit of Christ, cutting off and casting away the Body of Sin, or Fleshly
Lusts.

12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein also you are risen with him through
the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.

12. And it is more than a Circumcision of your Lusts that you have in Christ;
they are dead and buried with him: For so your Baptism signifies, in which you
are put under the Water, to signify and profess, that your Old Man, or Fleshly
Lust, is dead and buried with him; and you rise thence, to signify and
profess, that you ris^ to Newness of Life, and Heavenly Hopes, through the
Belief of Gods Works that raised Christ from the dead.

13. And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh,
has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.

13. And you, that were as dead in the Guilt and Power of your Sins, your
Hearts and Lusts, as your Flesh, being uncircumcised, has God made spiritually
alive, as Christ was quickened and raised, and has absolved you by pardon of
all Sin, from the Obligation to Everlasting Death which you had contracted.

14. Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross:

14. Cancelling the Legal Imposition of Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies, even to
us Jews, which might have been produced against us Breakers of the Law to our
condemnation, and as it were nailed it to his Cross, while by dying he disabled
it: So that you need not think that Judaizing is necessary to your Salvation.

15. And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it.

15. And when his Crucifiers triumphed over him on the Cross, as if they had
utterly overcome him, it was but his Conquest and Spoils of all Principalities
and Powers, of Devils or Men, that were Adversaries to his Grace and Kingdom,
and his open Ostentation of his Victory, and Triumph over them, in that his
Crucifixion.

16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an
holy day, or of the new mood, or of the sabbath days:

6. Seeing then that Christ has abrogated the Mosaical Law, none ought to
censure you as Sinners, for not keeping the Ceremonies of the Law, about Meat,
or Drink, or in the Point of Festivals called Holydays, or of the New Moon, or
of the Sabbath Days.

17. Which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ.

17. For these were but Shadows of the things to come, even Christ and
Christianity, which are the Substance shadowed.

Note, That Sabbaths are abolished with the rest of Moses's Law. As to the
Lords-days, consider these things distinctly, 1. That all Moses's Law, as such,
bound only the Jews, to whom it was promulgate, and is now abolished, even
(says Paul) that written in Stone. 2. That all the Law of Christ in Nature and
Revelation still binds us. 3. That the Word [ Sabbath] in Scripture properly
signifies a Day of Ceremonial Rest, in which the Bodily Rest was a Duty
directly in it self, (as Sacrificing and other Ceremonies were.) 4. That the
Lord's Day is never called a Sabbath in Scripture, (however some mistake a Text
or two.) 5. That the Lord's Day is separated by Divine Appointment to the holy
Commemoration of Christ's Resurrection and our Redemption, especially in Sacred
Assemblies for Church-worship. 6. That it is of greater dignity than the
Sabbaths were, as being for more substantial, spiritual, excellent Work. 7.
That on it, Rest is not a Ceremonial Due, as it was on Sabbaths, for it self;
but only a subordinate Duty, that Soul and Body (even of Servants) may be
vacant and free for Spiritual Worship: and no Breach of Rest is now a Sin, but,
1. That which hinders this Spiritual Work; 2. Or is scandalous, encouraging
others to Sin. 8. That therefore the Seventh-day Sabbath is abolished, 1.
Because Moses's Law is abolished; 2. And all proper Sabbaths are abolished. 9.
That yet (with the ancient Churches) we may well call the Lords day [ the
S^bbath], (when it tends not to Error;) But only by allusion, or
metaphorically, as they then called the Table an Altar, the Minsters, Priests,
and the Sacrament, and Alms, and Thank^giving, Sacrifices. This is the full
Truth, as I have proved in a set Treatise.

18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind;

18. Let no Man beguile you of the Reward of Christianity, by pretending
greater self humbling than God commands, by worshipping Angels, intruding
into and pretending to know the things which he never saw, nor God revealed to
him, vainly puffed up by the Imaginations of his fleshly Mind, and building on
his deluded Conjectures and Self-conceits.

19. And not holding the head, from which all the body by joints and bands
having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase
of God.

19. By which they depart from their due Dependence on Christ the Head, whose
Office it is to be the sole immediate Mediator between God and Man, and the
Lawgiver to the Church, who has given us sufficient notice what Worship God
accepts. It is from him the Head (of Life and Government) that the Body, even
the Church, receives its Nourishment and holy Increase by the Blessing of God,
it being by Joints and Ligaments of Faith, Love, and Ministry and Communion for
Concord, conjoined and made a meet Receiver.

20. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world; why
as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances, 21. (Touch not,
taste not, handle not: 22. Which all are to perish with the using) after the
commandments and doctrines of men?

20, 21, 22. If then you be dead to the Rudiments of all other Masters and
Customs in the World, of Jews or Heathens, in conformity to your Crucified
Lord, why, as though yet you were not separated from the World to Christ, are
you subject to such Ordinances, which Christ never made you, but has
abolished? as, Touch not, taste not, meddle not with such and such Meats, as
unclean, and the like: which were all temporary things, and consist in
transient unprofitable Actions, having no Reward of God, as being but the
Products of the Commands and Doctrines of unauthorised Men.

23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility,
and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh.

23. Which are the things for which, as deceitful Shows, tho Heretical and
Heathen Seducers pretend to be wiser Men than the Apostles and Christians, and
to be more pious Men, and so would draw you to their Errors, as being stricter
in Voluntary Worship and greater Humility, and neglecting of the Body on
pretense of being more for the Soul, and not, as sensual Men do, setting up and
pampering the Flesh.

Note, The Description of Paul and Church. Historians notify to us, that these
Heretics made up a Religion of three Parts: 1. Of the Name and some Parts of
Christianity, to keep in with the Christians. 2. Of many Jewish Rites, to keep
fair with the Jews. 3. But the main Substance which they boasted of, was
Pythagorean Heathenism, in which they pretended great knowledge of Spirits,
Demons, and invisible things, their Orders, Powers, Offices, Durations, etc.
which God never revealed, but the deluded Imaginations of themselves and the
said Pythagorean and Platonic Philosophers taught them. In many of which
Superstitions, of Will Worship, Angel-worship, Laws of Penance on the Flesh,
(while the vain Mind usurpeth Christ's Legislative Power) too many of the carnal
corrupt Church do imitate them to this day.

CHAP. III.
IF ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God.

1. If then you be true Christians, risen with Christ as you profess to the
hope of a Celestial Glory, and to a Holy Life, show it by seeking the things
which are above, where Christ who you trust in is as your Head, over all in
glory.

2. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth.

2. Let the Heavenly things, and not the things on Earth, have your strongest
affections, your Love, your Desire, your Hope, your Joy, your Care, your very
Hearts.

3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. 4. When Christ
who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

3, 4. For ye are dead to the World and sin, and the root of your Spiritual
Life is not in your selves; but both your Objective Life, which is your
Happiness, and the Root of all your Spiritual Life, are out of sight with
Christ in God. It is by him that you live, and it is with him and on him that
you must live in Glory for ever.

5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which
is idolatry: 6. For which things sake the wrath of God comes on the children
of disobedience.

5, 6. Therefore, tho your Lusts are as it were the very Members of your
corrupt fleshly Nature, kill them all; even Fornication, Uncleanness,
Inordinate Affections of Love or delight, all evil lustings or desires, and
Covetousness which loves the Creature above God, and which is Idolaters sin.
For it is for these things that the Unbeliving Rebellious World is under the
wrath of God.

7. In the which ye also walked sometime when ye lived in them.

7. These sins were formerly your own practices, when you were Heathens among
them.

8. But now you also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy
communication out of your mouth. 9. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have
put off the old man with his deeds;

8, 9. But now you must not only cast off all these filthy sins, but also all
that is contrary to Love and Peace, all sinful wrath and malice, and evil
speaking and rybaldry, and lying: For all these are the Members and Deeds of
the Old Man, or state which you have renounced.

10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him that created him.

10. And you have by Conversion become New Men, renewed in Saving Knowledge,
unto the Image of that God and Savior who is the maker of this New Creature.

11. Where there is neither Greek, nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all.

11. Where the Interest and Union that we have all in One Christ, who is all in
all, does swallow up all the little differences, of Greeks and Jew, etc. And so
must lo in our Communion.

12. Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering;

12. Let these therefore be your very Habit, and Nature, and Practice, as
becomes Gods chosen, holy, and beloved ones, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, etc.

13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

13. Note, 1. That it is supposed that we are wronged, else there is no need of
forgiving. 2. True Christians are known by this Spiritual Nature, as well as by
Religious Exercises.

14. And above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness.

14. But as the most necessary and excellent of all, put on true endeared Love
to others as your selves, for the sake of God, who must be most loved: For as
this is the highest Grace which Christ's Spirit works in us* so it is that
Bond which by uniting Believers to Christ and each other, tends to the
perfect compagination, growth, and welfare of the Church, and every Member of
it.

15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are
called in one body; and be ye thankful.

15. And let that Peace which God both gives you within, and calls you to
exercise, by dwelling in your Hearts, bear rule in your lives toward all Men,
as being of the same Body: And live in continual thankfulness to God.

16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with
grace in your hearts to the Lord.

16. Let the word of God so possess your Souls, that you may by it have
plenteous Holy Wisdom to instruct and admonish one another, and Holy
Affections, that those who have the gift of composing Holy Psalms, and Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs for themselves and others use, may do it wisely, and all of
you use them with Holy Joy in singing to the Lord.

17. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

17. And let all that you offer to God in word or deed, in worship or
obedience, be done in the name of the Lord Jesus trusting for acceptance to his
Mediation, and offer your daily Thanksgiving to God the Father, by him our High
Priest in the Heavens.

18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it
is fit in the Lord. Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter against them.
Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well-pleasing unto the
Lord. Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged.
Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh; not with
eye-service as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God: And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; 24. Knowing
that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve
the Lord Christ.

18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. See all this before Paraphrased, Ephesians. 5, and 6.

25. But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done:
and there is no respect of persons.

25. But if Masters or Servants do wrong to the other, though they may escape
the punishment of Man, God who respects no Man's Person will judge and punish
them.

CHAP. IV.
1. MAsters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that
ye also have a Master in heaven.

1. Let not your power over your Servants embolden you to abuse, oppress, or
wrong them, but give them all wages and usage which Justice and Equity require;
for you have a Master in Heaven, who will judge you as you are and do.

2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving;

2. Be constant in Prayer, and not cursory or cold, and watch in it against
your corruptions, and temptations, joining thanksgiving with your requests.

3. Withal, praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ for which I am also in bonds:

3. Praying for us Ministers of Christ, that God would give us freedom from
Men's restraints and our own infirmities, that we may with enlargedness and
boldness preach the Gospel, for which I suffer.

4. That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak.

4. That I may open and apply it, as the Work and the Souls of Men require.

5. Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time.

5. Use the wisdom toward them that are without the Church, which is needful to
keep you from receiving hurt by them, or in doing good to them.

6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know
how ye ought to answer every man.

6. Let all your speech be the exercise of God's Grace in your Hearts, not
rotten, filthy, or vain, but wise and savoury, that you may speak pertinently
and fruitfully to every Man, especially in the necessary defense of the truth,
against Gainsayers, and resolving of the doubtful.

7. All my state shall Tychichus declare unto you, who is a beloved brother,
and a faithful minister, and fellow servants in the Lord:

7. T^chicus a faithful Brother, fully shall acquaint you with my Concernments.

8, 9. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your
estate, and comfort your hearts: With Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother,
who is one of you. They shall make known unto you all things which are done
here. 10. Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner saluteth you, and Marcus sisters son
to Barnabas (touching whom ye received commandments; if he come unto you
receive him) 11. And Jesus which is called Justus, who are of the circumcision.
These only are my fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God, which have been a
comfort unto me.

8, 9, 10, 11. These are all that have helped me here at Rome in my suffering,
and have much comforted me.

12. Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you, always
laboring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete
in all the will of God. 13. For I bear him record, that he has a great zeal
for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.

12, 13. Note, 1. That Prayer should be a Work of fervent laboring. 2. That
Ministers-should long for the Peoples increase in Grace and universal
Obedience, more than to promote their own Interest with them.

14, 15. Luke the beloved Physician, and Demas greet you. Salute the brethren
which are in ^aodicea, and Nymphas, and the church which is in his house (...)

15. Which use to meet there.

And when this epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read also in the
church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea.

16. Note, 1. It was the Duty of the Churches to communicate the Epistles
written to them by the Apostles. 2. What Epistle that written to Laodicea was,
it concerns us not to know. It Is vain to think that Paul and other Apostles
wrote no more Epistles than be in the Bible; or, that God is bound to bring
down all that they wrote, to us.

17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou have received
in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

17. Note, That Bishops or Pastors may have need to be admonished by the People
to take heed to the Ministry which God calls them to, and not to slubber it
over, (much less pervert it) but fulfill it.

18. The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace be with
you. Amen.

18. In conclusion, I subscribe my Salutation to you. Let the remembrance of my
Bonds, remember you of your Duty to me, in Prayer, and receiving of this Word.
Grace be with you, is the summary Benediction. Amen.

The First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the THESSALONIANS.
CHAP. I.
1. PAul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the Thessalonians,
which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace be unto you,
and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

1. To the Assembly of Christians associated in the professed Belief of God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

2, 3. We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our
prayers, remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labor of love, and
patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God, and our Father.

2, 3. We thankfully remember your working Faith, your laborious Love, and
patient Hope in Christ, which is all seen and accepted by God our Father.

4, 5. Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. For our gospel came not
unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much
assurance; as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake.

4, 5. For I was assured, that God had freely elected you to be honored as a
Church of Christ, in that he sent me particularly to you, and that with Power
of Miracles, and pouring out of the Holy Ghost, he confirmed my Ministry, and
caused me to fulfill it, as your Experience tells you.

6. And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in
much affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost:

6. And because he blessed all with such Success that you obeyed our Word, and
were converted to God, receiving the Word in the trial of sharp Affliction and
Opposition, and yet with Joy, and the participation of the Holy Ghost.

7. So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.

7. So that your Example tended to the happy imitation of all that now believe
in Macedonia and Achaia.

8. For from you sounded out the word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and
Achaia, but also in every place your faith to Godward is spread abroad, so
that we need not to speak any thing.

8. For from you the Word of God spread abroad, even in many other Countries it
is known; so that I need not tell it them, to your praise, and their imitation.

9. For they themselves show of us, what manner of entering in we had unto you,
and how ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God,

9. They tell abroad themselves, what Success we had in your Conversion from
Idolatry to the true God.

10. And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even
Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come.

10. And to wait in Faith and Hope, that his Son, that is raised from death,
and ascended, will come from Heaven for our Salvation, even Jesus, who
delivers us from the Wrath that will come on Unbelievers.

CHAP. II.
1. FOr your selves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was not
in vain.

1. For you are my Witnesses, that I came not to you in deceit, on any false
design or manner.

2. But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully entreated,
as ye know at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of
God with much contention.

3. But our shameful usage at Philippi did not discourage us; but our trust in
our God did embolden us to preach his Gospel to you, though in a conflict of
great opposition.

3. For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile: 4.
But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even so we
speak, not as pleasing men, but God, which tries our hearts.

3, 4. For I came not to you to deceive you into Error, nor to plead for
fleshly Lusts, nor crastily to make advantage of you to our gain: But as God
approved and chose me to be put in trust with the Preaching of the Gospel, I do
it to please him who tries our Hearts, and not to please the Humors and Lusts
of Men.

5. For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloak
of covetousness; God is witness.

5. For you your selves know, that I flattered you not, nor indulged fleshly
Pleasures; and God knows, that I made not the Gospel a Cloak to hide any
covetous Design.

6. Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we
might have been burdensome, as the apostles of Christ.

6. Nor did I preach up my self, for Vainglory (Power or Profit), neither with
you, or any others; though as Christ's Apostle I might have pleaded my Power,
and demanded Maintenance.

7. But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherishes her children:

7. But we sought not our Gain and Glory, but your Good; and that with all the
love and tenderness to you, as a Nurse cherishes her Children, in self-denial.

8. So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted
unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were
dear unto us.

8. So my strong Love to you made me not only willingly to preach the Gospel
to you, (without any selfish, proud, or covetous design) but you are so dear to
me, that I think not my Life too dear for you.

9. For ye remember, brethren, our labor and travel: for laboring night and
day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto you
the gospel of God.

9. Ye cannot but remember my great Toil and Labor, how working at my Trade
Night and Day, because I would not be chargeable to any of you, I preached the
Gospel to you freely.

10. Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we
behaved our selves among you that believe.

10. I appeal to your selves, and to God, as Witnesses, that our Behavior with
you was holy, just, and blameless.

11. As you know how we exhorted and comforted, and charged every one of you
(as a father does his children) 12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has
called you unto his kingdom and glory.

11, 12. As you know how tenderly I exhorted, and comforted, and charged not
only the Assemblies, but every one that I could speak to, even as a Father
will do to every Child; that now you are Christians, you will live as is
suitable to the God you serve, and the Kingdom and Glory to which he has
called you.

13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received
the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men,
but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works also in you
that believe.

13. And it is the matter of our uncessant thanks to God, that you received not
the Gospel as Men's Word, with a mere Humane Faith and Obedience; but as Gods
Word, with a Divine: which it appears to be, by the powerful efficacy of it
on your selves, who are true Believers.

14. For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God, which in Judea
are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suffered like things of your own
countrymen, even as they have of the Jews.

14. Ye follow the Churches in Judea, in suffering by your own Neighbors, as
well as in the same Faith.

Note, The same Faith, Hope, and Holiness, will meet with the same Enmity in
all Countries.

15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have
persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men: 16.
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up
their sins always: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

15, 16. Note, 1. That the Carnal Church has been more persecuting and bloody
than the Heathens.

2. That Christ himself seemed not to them good enough to live, or to be
endured among them; but was murdered as a Traitor and Blasphemer, by pretended
Law and Justice. And Prophets and Apostles had the like usage.

3. That bloody Persecution often goes with the Carnal Church for a great Duty.

4. That God is not pleased with the Persecutors of his Servants, though they
do it as to please him.

5. That malignant Persecutors are often so mad as to be contrary to all Men, or
engage themselves against the common Interest of Mankind, that they may
persecute the Faithful.

6. It is the silencing of the best Preachers of the Gospel, which has the
heat of their malignant Zeal.

7. It is that Preaching which would save Souls, which they forbid: And because
this Preaching is the Means to save Souls, it is that Satan aims his Militia
against it.

8. Persecuting and silencing Faithful Preachers, is the way to fill up the
Sins of the malignant Enemies.

9. God uses not to bring the utmost Wrath on Men, till they have filled up
their Sins.

10. How long soever they prosper, Wrath will come at last to the uttermost on
malignant Sinners and Persecutors of the faithful Preachers of the Gospel.

17. But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time, in presence, not
in heart, endeavored the more abundantly to see your face with great desire.

17. But our constrained absence from you, (in Person, not in Heart) made us
the more earnestly desire to see you.

18. Wherefore we would have come unto you (even I Paul) once and again, but
Satan hindered us.

18. I would often have come to you, and attempted i^^ but by Gods permission
Satan hindered me, (by stirring up Persecution and Restraints, and making me
Work elsewhere by Opposition.)

19. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? 20. For ye are our glory
and joy.

19, 20. For what is that Hope, and Joy, and Crown, for which I labor so hard,
and suffer so much? Is it not your Conversion and Salvation, which before
Christ at his coming will be my Joy? Yes, ye are our Glory and Joy, that God
has so blessed our Labors to your Salvation.

Note, 1. True Ministers of Christ thirst and labor far more for Men's
Conversion and Salvation, than for Reputation, Honor, Riches, Preferment, or
Domination.

2. Though God will reward Faithful Preachers though they have small Success,
yet to have great Success, to the saving of many, is far more comfortable, not
only now, but at the Coming of Christ.

CHAP. III.
1. WHerefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left at
Athens alone: 2. And sent Timotheus our brother and minister of God, and our
fellow laborer in the gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you
concerning your faith.

1, 2. Note, That in the time of trying Persecutions, Christians have special
need of confirming and comforting Helps.

3. That no man should be moved by these afflictions: for your selves know that
we are appointed thereunto.

3. Note, Sufferings for Christ should be so expected, that they should seem no
strange surprising thing.

4. For verily when we were with you, we told you before, that we should suffer
tribulation; even as it came to pass, and ye know.

4. Gods foretelling us of Suffering, should forearm us for it.

5. For this cause when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith,
lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labor be in vain.

5. Note, That though censorious Suspicions of Men be forbidden, yet Man is so
mutable and weak a thing, that loving Suspicions for preventing Heart, are
necessary to them that have the Care of Men.

6. But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good tidings
of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance of us always,
desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you: 7. Therefore, brethren, we
were comforted over you in all our affliction and distress by your faith.

6, 7. Note, That they that by Affliction are not drawn to Sin, are matter of
Joy to themselves and their Friends, notwithstanding their Sufferings.

8. For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord.

8. Your Stedfastness and Victory is the Joy or Life of our Lives.

9. For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy
wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God,

9. We can never be thankful enough to God, for the Comfort which we have in
you.

10. Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might
perfect that which is lacking in your faith?

10. Note, That the Faith of good Christians is wanting (in Act and Object),
and needs Increase and Help thereto.

11. Now God himself, and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way
unto you: 12. And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward
another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you:

11, 12. Note, That to abound in Love to Saints as Saints, and to all Men as
Men, is the state of true Increase in Grace.

13. To the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God
even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his saints.

13. Note, That it is confirmed Faith working by abounding Love, which is the
Qualification in which we may stand uncondemned, as truly holy before God, at
the coming of Christ to Judgment.

CHAP. IV.
1. FUrthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord
Jesus, that as ye have received of us how you ought to walk, and to please God,
so ye would abound more and more.

1. Note, That Paul's Doctrine against Justification by the Works of the Law,
consists with vehement urgency, for Men to please God, by doing their Duty,
and abounding therein.

2, 3, 4, 5. For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. For
this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication: That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor; not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which know not God:

2, 3, 4, 5. You know how we charged you from Christ, as that which God
requires in you, that you be a Holy People, and therefore that you be no
Fornicators, but be careful to use your Bodies in purity and honor, and not in
fleshly Lust, like the ignorant Heathens.

6. That no man go beyond, and defraud his brother in any matter: because that
the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you, and
testified.

That no Man tread upon or defraud his Brother in any Matter, etc.

Note, Some think that it is Unnatural Lust that is here obscurely named by
Modesty: But that it forbids all sorcible or fraudulent Wrong to another in
Body or Estate, is most probable. And note, That God is especially the Avenger
of such Wrongs, in which the Power and Fraud of Oppressors leaves Men no other
Help but Gods.

7. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

7. It is to Holiness, and from all Uncleanness, that God has called us by
Christ: And we must live according to our Vocation, if we are converted indeed.

8. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who has also
given unto us his holy Spirit.

8. Those therefore that plead for such Sins as harmless, and despise these
Bounds of Lust, despise Gods own Commandments and him, and not only us that
preach them; and they despise the Spirit of Holiness, given by God to all the
Faithful, which condemns these Lusts.

9. But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you: for ye
your selves are taught of God to love one another.

9. As for Brotherly Love, you have not such need to be taught it as those that
know it not: For God (who has a way of teaching by Efficiency, beyond that of
Words) has taught you to love one another, by giving you this Love, by his
Holy Spirit.

10. And inded ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all Macedonia:
but we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more and more;

10. Note, 1. That it is a wise way to make Men better, to praise so much Good
as is in them.

2. Even those that God has taught by his own Operations, have need to be
entreated by Men to increase, even in the Duty of Loving others.

11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work
with your own hands (as we commanded you)

11. And to that end, that you make it your earnest care and study to avoid all
strife, and to live in quietness with all Men: And for this, that you avoid
meddling in other Men's Matters unnecessarily, but mind and meddle with the
Business which is your own; and that Idleness cast you not on others for
Supply, but that you work for your selves, as I commanded you.

Note, That he that will increase in Love, must 1. Study Quietness: 2. And not
meddle uncalled with other Men's Matters: 3. Nor make himself need the Help of
others: 4. And therefore not live in impoverishing Idleness.

12. That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may
have lack of nothing.

12. That so your Condition in the World may enable you to live in a comely
sort, with Reputation, and not expose you to Contempt, and that Want may not
afflict you.

13. But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which
are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.

13. And left you be tempted to doubtful or over-sorrowful Thoughts of the
Dead, like them that believe not a better Life hereafter, I would not have you
cherish such Sorrows by ignorance of their Case.

14. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.

14. For how can we believe that Christ died and rose, but we must also believe
the Resurrection of those that are the departed Members of Christ? He will
bring their Souls with him, for they are with him now: and he will raise their
Bodies, and so bring the entire Man with him in Judgment.

Note, That Death is called a Sleep to the Faithful, with respect to the Body,
and the Rest of the Soul f^o^ Sorrow; but not as if the Soul were but in a
sleepy Inactivity.

15. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive,
and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep.

15. For I say this not as my Word, but Gods, That such of us Believers as
shall be found alive then, shall not go before them that are dead to Christ at
his coming.

16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall
rise first:

16. For the Lord himself coming down in his visible Humanity from Heaven,
shall call the World together, as Men call Assemblies, by Shout, by Voice, or
by a Trumpet; so shall Christ by his unknown way, called the Voice of an
Archangel, and the Trumpet of God; and first the dead Christians shall be
raised to Life.

17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them
in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the
Lord. 18. Wherefore, comfort one another with these words.

17, 18. Then those of us who shall be alive and remain, shall by his Power be
caught up with them, to meet Christ in the Air; who will adjudge us to
Everlasting Life, and so we shall ever after that be with Christ in Glory where
he is: Therefore encourage and comfort your selves, and each other, with the
lively Belief, the joyful Hopes, and the frequent mention of this most Blessed
Time and State.

Note, 1. That though Paul knew not the time, it is a groundless Reproach of
Paul by them that say, He thought that he should have lived here till the
coming of Christ to Judgment. Had Paul made Men believe that Christ should come
again in that very Age, what a Delusion would it have been to the Churches? and
what false Expectations and Religious Duties would it have enticed them to? and
have tempted the next Age, that saw the frustration, to have revolted to
Infidelity.

2. Though we are told, that we must meet the Lord in the Air, and then be ever
with him; it pleased not God to give us yet a distinct knowledge of the Place,
nor what he will do with the New Earth in which Righteousness will dwell: But
wherever it is, it will be in Heavenly Glory with Christ.

3. They that will have true Christian Comfort, must fetch it from the daily
and lively Belief and Consideration of this, That we shall for ever be in
Happiness with Christ our Lord, and the holy Society of the Blessed.

4. Qu. Why does not Paul comfort them with the mention of the Souls
Immortality and Happiness before the Resurrection of the Body? Ans. Because, 1.
It was the Body that suffered by Persecution, and that slept, and that they
mourned for too much; and therefore it was about it that they needed Comfort.
2. And the Souls Immortality was a more undoubted thing* (without which a
Resurrection of the same Man had been impossible.) 3. And the Felicity or
Perfection of entire Man is greater than that of the Soul alone, the State of
which God has less clearly and distinctly revealed to us.

CHAP. V.
1. BUt of the times and seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto
you. 2. For your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so comes as a
thief in the night.

1, 2. But to write to you of the particular time of Christ's coming, I suppose
you expect not; for you have been told, that he comes as a Thief in the Night,
unexpected, Men not foreknowing when.

3. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction comes
upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.

3. So much must the time be unknown, that it will surprise them with sudden
unavoidable Destruction when they most presume that all is well with them, and
safe.

4. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as
a thief. 5. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we
are not of the night, nor of darkness.

4, 5. But though you know not the time, it will not so surprise you, as
Thieves do Men asleep in the Night: For ye are all in the Daylight; and not
unprepared, in a state of Darkness.

6. Therefore let us not sleep as do others; but let us watch and be sober.

6. Therefore let this remember you to avoid the careless Presumption, the
Vices and unprepared state of the sleepy World; and to live as awake, and in
sobriety.

7. For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken, are
drunken in the night.

7. For the Night is the time of sleep, and to hide the shame of Drunkenness by
Darkness.

8. But let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the brestplate of faith
and love, and for an helmet, the hope of salvation.

8. But let us, whom God has brought out of Darkness into the Christian Light,
live soberly, wearing Faith and Love as Soldiers do a Breastplate, and the Hope
of Salvation as they do an Helmet, to save Heart and Head from all Assaults.

9. For God has not appointed us to wrath; but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ.

9. For it is not us, that are his faithful Servants, but his rebellious
Enemies, whom God has appointed to Wrath; but us he appoints to obtain
Salvation by Christ.

10. Who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together
with him.

10. Who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep in Body, live or die, we
should live with him.

11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even as
also ye do.

11. Therefore continue as you do to assemble and comfort your selves together
with these Hopes, and to edify one another thereby.

Note, Paul knew that Rulers were against such Assemblies and Exercises. Qu.
But must they not be forborne, if Men forbid them? Ans. Not as an Act of
Obedience, when God commands us to use them: But Force may make it impossible
to us; as it is to relieve the Poor, when Men disable us, and take away all
that we have to give them.

12. And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you; 13. And to esteem them very highly in
love for their works sake. And be at peace among your selves.

12, 13. Acknowledge their Office and Worth, and your Obligations, to them that
are truly called to be your Bishops, or Spiritual Guides and Rulers, and labor
among you in that Office, and admonish you: And as their Office is high, their
Labor and your Benefit great, let them be greatly esteemed by you, and dearly
loved for their Work. This due Love and Submission to them, and living in Peace
among your selves, will make you a happy Church.

Note, 1. That every Church should have their proper Overseers and Guides among
them.

2. That these Pastors are over them in the Lord, and not to be ruled by the
People.

3. That the Work of Bishops is to labor among them, and admonish their
particular Churches.

4. That their Authority must be owned, and they highly esteemed and loved.

5. That it is for their Works sake that this is due to them, and therefore not
to those that work not.

6. The Bishops whom in this Text they were entreated to own, honor, and love,
were those that labored among them, and not only those that lived far off,
and never labored among them.

7. Due Love and Respect between the Pastors and the Flock, and being at peace
among themselves, are the way to establish a Church in a prosperous state.

14. Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.

14. Those that are disorderly and unruly, warn: Those that are feeble-minded,
comfort: Those that are weak, support, and help them to hear their Burdens: And
be gentle and patient to all.

Note, How contrary to this reviling and destro^ing all these sorts? yea,
silencing the strongest, that fear sinning against God, by swearing,
subscribing, and conforming to the needless and wicked Canons of Papal Usurpers.

5. See that none render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow that which
is good, both among your selves, and to all men.

15. Though Men by doing evil to you, deserve evil, return it not by Revenge,
by Word or Deed: But set your selves to do good, both to Christians, and to all
Men.

16, 17, 18. Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In every thing give
thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.

16, 17, 18. Whatever you suffer, always rejoice, because still your Cause of
Joy remains: And let Prayer be your constant Practice, and your Habit of holy
Desire be a continued virtual Prayer. And in every Case give Thanks to God,
because your Mercies are still greater than your Sufferings: And this God has
made your Duty, by the great Blessings which he has given you in Christ.

19, 20. Quench not the spirit. Despise not prophesyings.

19, 20. Quench not Divine Operations of the Spirit, by Neglect, or by wilful
Sin. Set not light by those Instructing Gifts which any exercise by the special
Assistance of the Spirit of God: For the Witness of Jesus is the Spirit of
Prophecy.

21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

21. Receive not hastily or rashly, without sufficient Proof, any Doctrines, or
pretended Revelations, or Practices; but the Good that is tried and proved,
hold fast.

22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.

22. Avoid all Sin so carefully, as not to venture on that which you have just
cause to suspect to be sinful, till you have tried whether it be so or not.

23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole
spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

23. And God who gives and loves the Peace and Prosperity of his Servants,
sanctify you wholly: And I pray God that you may wholly, in Spirit, Soul; and
Body, be so preserved from Sin, that you may stand uncondemned, approved as
faithful, at the coming of Christ.

Note, 1. It is of great use for our Comfort and ^mitation, to know God to be
the God of Peace.

2. Paul means not that their Bodies should live till Christ's coming, or that
they should be without all Sin and Blame; but without all condemning Sin, and
so justified and forgiven as to their Imperfetions.

3. He does not make Spirit, Soul, and Body three substantial compounding Parts
of Man, (as far as can be proved;) but seems only to mean, that he desires
that they may stand approved in all these three respects: 1. In the Spirit,
that is, the Habits and Disposition of the Soul, looking beyond it self to its
End. 2. In the Soul, as it acts the Body which it animateth. 3. In the Body,
as it is the Instrument of the Soul. But of these things even Christian
Philosophers differ. 1. Some think Man has three distinct Souls, Intellectual,
Sensitive, and Vegetative. 2. Some, that he has two, Intellectual and
Sensitive; and that the Vegetative is a part of the Body. 3. Some, that he has
but one, with these three Faculties. 4. Some, that he has but one, with two
Faculties, Intellectual and Sensitive. 5. Some, that he has but one, with the
Faculty of Intellection and Will; and that the Sensitive is corporeal. So
little do we know our selves. What I think most probable, I have opened in
Methodo Theologiae; That Man has but one substantial Soul, with both
Intellectual and Sensitive Faculties; and that it is uncertain whether the
Vegetative be its Faculty, or only the Faculty of the Igneous or Etherial
Substance, which is the immediate Vehicle of the Soul. It is enough for us to
know so much of our Souls as our Duty in using them, and our Felicity do
require: As he may know to use his Clock, Watch, House, Horse, who knows not
how to make them, nor can anatomise them.

24. Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it.

24. Note, Gods Faithfulness may give the Sanctified great Hope of their
Perseverance.

25. Brethren, pray for us. 26. Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.

25, 26. Note, 1. Apostles needed the Prayers of weak Christians.

2. The Ceremony of Kissing, and such other, are mutable, fit or unfit, as the
Custom of Countries varieth the Signification.

27. I charge you by the Lord, that this epistle be read unto all the holy
brethren.

28. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

27, 28. Note, That the Epistles written to single Churches were not confined
to their use, but by them to be communicated to as many as they well could.

The Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the THESSALONIANS.
CHAP. I.
1. PAul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the Thessalonians, in
God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Grace unto you, and peace from
God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ 3. We are bound to thank God always
for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that your faith grows exceedingly,
and the charity of every one of you all toward each other abounds:

3. Note, That it is the growth of the Church in Faith and Love, which is the
matter of their true Prosperity, and the Pastors Joy and Thanks to God, rather
than their Riches, Honors, or notional contending Knowledge.

4. So that we our selves glory in you in the churches of God, for your
patience and faith in all your persecutions, and tribulations that ye endure.

4. Note, When worldly Men are ashamed of Christians in Persecution, godly Men
rejoice in their Faith and Patience, as being then most honorable.

5. Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be
counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer.

5. Which is a plain Prognostic, that God, the righteous Judge, will reward
you with a part in that Kingdom for which you suffer, as being worthy of it in
a sense of Grace, that is, qualified as those to whom it is promised and freely
given.

6. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them
that trouble you; 7. And to you who are troubled, rest with us,

6, 7. For God rules righteously; and it is the way of his Justice, to punish
your Persecutors, and give you who are persecuted rest with us his Apostles.

Note, That they who think this is meant of the Destruction of Jerusalem, must
think that Paul thought he should live to see it, and that he and they should
then have rest on Earth* which were to be deceived, and to deceive them.

7, 8. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ:

7, 8. Note, By [ them that know not God] is usually meant the Heathens; which
confuteth them who distort this to signify but the Destruction of the Jews.
And to them in Macedonia it was more to be delivered from the Heathens, who
were the Rulers, than from a handful of scattered despised Jews.

2. Christ will appear with his Angels to judge and punish the Ungodly.

9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power:

9. Note, That the Phrases, [ everlasting destruction,] and [ from the presence
of the Lord,] and [ from the glory of his power,] agree to the usual
Scripture-description of Damnation, and not to the Destruction of Jerusalem,
without distortion. Nor was it much ascribed then to an appearance of Christ in
Glory, that the Heathen who despised him, and killed him, and persecuted his
Cause and Servants, did also destroy the Jews.

10. When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all
them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.

10. Note, The End of Christ's glorious coming will be to be glorified and
admired in holy Believers, as having by his Merit, Intercession, and Spirit,
made them by Holiness fit for Glory, and in Justice set them above their
Persecutors.

2. So far were the poor Christians from being then such a Glory and
Admiration, that they continued above two hundred years after this to be
persecuted and made the scorn of the World.

11. Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count you worthy
of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work
of faith with power:

11. We pray, that God will fit you by his Grace for this, and make you
suitable to your holy Calling, and fully perform to you all the Purposes of his
Love, and powerfully finish your Work of Faith.

Note, Worthiness, in the Gospel-sense, is that Moral Qualification by Grace,
to which, as a Moral Condition, God has promised the Blessing.

12. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in
him, according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

12. Note, That Sanctifying Grace makes Christians a Glory to the Name of
Christ, declaratively, as the Cause is honored in the Effect; and they are
glorified in Christ possessively, as the Means in the End obtained, and the
Runner in the Prize; and relatively, as an adopted Son in a Prince that
adopteth him.

CHAP. II.
1. NOw, we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by our gathering together unto him, 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or
be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that
the day of Christ is at hand.

1, 2. I vehemently beseech you, that no Pretense either of Spirit, Word, or
Apostolical Letter, persuade you that Christ's Coming is near at hand, and so
trouble you, and your Faith be shaken when that is disappointed.

Note further, That it is more than the Destruction of Jerusalem that is here
meant; For it will be the Churches gathering together to Christ at his coming.
2. And it neither agrees with the following long Persecutions of the Church by
the Heathens, nor with Paul's usual Pity to the Jews, thus to insult in their
Destruction, as if it brought a Felicity to the Church like Heaven it self.

3. Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except
there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition: 4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped; so that he as God sits in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God.

3. It is dangerous deceit for any to persuade you, that the Day of Christ is
at hand: for there are many things that must first come to pass: There must
first be a falling away of many from the Faith; and that notable Man of Sin
must appear, who is to be destroyed. 4. Who arrogantly opposes true
Christianity, and exalts himself above all, etc.

5, 6, 7. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these
things? And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his
time. For the mystery of iniquity does already work: only he who now lets
will let, until he be taken out of the way. 8. And then shall that wicked be
revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming: 9. Even him whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 10. And
with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, in them that perish; because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. 11. And for this
cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: 12.
That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

Note, 1. That Forewarning should be Forearming. 2. Both the rise and fall of
Sin and Sinners must have their proper Seasons: Gods delays are but staying
till the due time. 3. Removing Impediments is the Prepartory work for future
events. 4. This great Enemy of Christ is a Man Lawless, and made up of
Wickedness. 5. He must be first revealed, and then consumed, even by his Word,
Spirit, and Coming. 5. Satan will promote this Enemy of Christ, with Power,
Signs, and lying Wonders, and Deceivableness of Unrighteousness. 6. Not
receiving the Love of the Truth of Gospel, nor heartily believing it, but
taking pleasure in Unrighteousness, prepare Men for damning Delusions. 7. God
is said to send them such Delusions, by penal Desertions and Permissions.

Readers, I dare not take on me to teach you that as true, which I know not my
self; nor yet to pretend that I know more than I do. I confess, that I am
uncertain who it is that Paul here describes: And merely to know what other
Men say of it, is no satisfaction to me, especially when they so greatly differ
as they do.

1. Most of the Fathers and Papists think, that Antichrist here described is
some odious False-Christ, who is yet to come before the End of the World. I
have much to say against that Opinion.

2. Grotius thought that this Chapter speaks of the Emperor Caius Caligula
chiefly, and partly of Simon Magus. So much may be said against that, as that
his Follower Dr. Hammond rejects it.

3. Dr. Hammond thinks it speaks only of Simon Magus. I cannot believe that:
1. Because really this Simon was no such considerable formidable Person as he
describes him. The few Scraps of History of Simon recited by him, are very
dubious. No great or public History of those Times mention him. He was
affrighted into Submission and Supplication to Peter, Acts 8. He was not
thought worthy the naming after, in all the sharp Charges against Heretics in
the Epistles. The Judaizers are reproved; the Concision called Dogs; the
Troublers Paul wishes cut off; the Nicolaitans named; and the Woman Jezebel,
and many Antichrists, mentioned by John; the grosser sort of Heretics smartly
described, and condemned by Peter and Jude: John forbids us to bid them
Good-speed: Paul bids Men avoid them as self-condemned: The Revelation speaks
yet more fully. And none of them all mention Simon as the God and Ringleader of
them. If the Nicolaitans, and all those that the Doctor calls G^osticks, were
known to be the Disciples of Simon, why is that concealed in such large
Reproofs? and why not called Simonians, as well as Nicolaitans? If they were
not then known to be his Offspring, it seems these Heresies had other Fathers
before him, more noted and followed. 2. Simon was revealed before the writing
of this Epistle, Acts 8. and the Heresies before too common. 3. There were
seven or eight other Heresies described by Epiphanius, as early as the
Simonians and Gnostics, and as bad. 4. Sure Gnosticism was not then an
unrevealed Mystery, if it be mentioned as often as the Doctor thinks. 5. And
through Gods Mercy the falling away first was comparatively but of few, and not
of so great a number of Churches or Christians, as was a stop to their
Expectation of the coming of Christ. It is not noted in Acts 8. that the
Samaritans were seduced by him after they believed. If it were true, that they,
and some at Rome were, what is that to all the Churches? 6. It is above Sixteen
hundred years since Simon was revealed, and yet Christ is not come; How then is
that made an Occasion of Men's delayed Expectation? 7. That Christ's coming*
signified but the Destruction of Jerusalem, is before showed to be very
improbable, and fullier might be. How many hot Persecutions of Christians after
that, do all Church-Histories describe, in another manner than Simon's Pranks?
And what could the Jews do through all the Empire, being contemned Vagabonds,
but by way of Rabble tumult, which the Roman Power restrained? 8. And it
seems mere violence to the Text, to make [ him that withholdeth, (...)], to
signify not [ him,] but [ that thing] which withholdeth, even the Christians
not yet separating from the Jews. For, 1. There was no set time of separation:
Paul did it long before the Apostles that conversed with them in Judea; and
when they did, none know. And Paul withdrew from them as Obstinacy gave him
cause, in one Place sooner than in others; and never so far, but that he
labored for their Conversion. Nor were any such direful Persecutions an Effect
of that Separation, as far as just History informs us: It was the scattered
Jews that were the Rudiments of most of the Christian Churches in the Empire,
to whom the Gentiles, were added. And this Doctor himself often asserteth, That
Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, and such other great Cities, had two Bishops, and
two Churches, one of the Jews, and one of the Gentiles. And the Christian Jews
did not separate from their Countrymen of a long time.

That which the Apostle mentions, the whole Catholic Church seems to be
concerned in whereas the little Pranks of Simon Magus were like John of
Leyden's, and Knipperdolling's, and James Naylor's, which had a few contemned
Followers, in a few Towns, a little while, and then ended in Shame: Like the
Boys Squibs, compared to a War.

8. And what Mystery was there in so gross Iniquity, as for Simon to call
himself God the Father, etc. any more than to have seen Hacket or a Bedlam rave?

9. And if such wonders of deceit had been wrought by him, as is here
mentioned, as should delude those that received not the Love of the Truth to
Salvation, History would have fullier recorded his Miracles, and this Success:
Even on All them that believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
Unrighteousness.

4. Some think that Paul here speaks of a Seditious Ringleader of the Jews,
that drew them into Rebellion, to their destruction; and that the fear of some
Roman Governor was it that for a time restrained him. But this Opinion few
follow.

5. Lyra and some other Papists think, that it was Mahomet that was this great
Deceiver, and the Antichrist, and the Empire that withheld. His Reasons are
rendered in his Annotations on the Revelations, and on this Text: And Zanchy was
much of the same mind, though he thought the Pope was a kind of second
Antichrist.

6. But the far greatest number of Protestants think, that it is the Pope that
is here spoken of, as the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, etc. and that it is
the Roman Empire that withheld his Revelation: But some few think that it was
the Godly Bishops of Rome, that for some Ages possessed that Seat, (and many were
Martyrs) that withheld this Revelation of Antichrist, till they were taken away
by Death: For Men would not believe that the Successors of so good Men could
be Antichrist. Abundance of Volumes are written to prove the Pope to be the
Antichrist; and one of the chief, by Bishop George Do^name.

For my self, 1. I can better try him by the plain parts of Scripture, than by
the hard Prophecies. And I can easily see many and great points in which Popery
is contrary to the Word of God, and I am most moved by such Moral Arguments as
Dr. H. More uses in his Mystery of Iniquity. And I find enough to settle me
against Popery. 2. But whether it be he that this Text means, or those
applied to him in the Revelation, I have not skill enough to be sure, or very
confident. And, 3. I think a Christian may be very safe without understanding
these obscure Texts: I long to know God and Jesus Christ better, more than to
know Antichrist: His name is not in the Creed, nor is it an Article of the
ancient necessary Faith to know who he is; so we know the False Doctrines and
Practices which we must avoid. Perhaps, those that have more thoroughly studied
these Texts may know more; (though I must say, that their great disagreement of
Opinion discourageth my hopes of full understanding them). I think it my duty
to confess my Ignorance, and not pretend to the Knowledge which I have not.
They that are offended at this gap or defect in my Paraphrase, may turn to many
others that know more, or are more confident.

If you say, Why were these Prophecies written, if not to be understood? I
answer, To be understood by them that can, and not to be Expounded by them that
cannot. And I add, that the great Beloved Prophet Daniel thus concludes, Chapter
12.8, 9. I heard, but I understood not -- And the Angel said, Go thy way,
Daniel, for the words are closed up and sealed to the time of the end. And I
take it to be no excess of Humility to confess, that in Expounding Prophecies I
am not so wise as Daniel. That Popery is a heinous corruption of Christianity,
I am past doubt: And that it is aggravated by the profession of the Gospel, and
Fathering their sin on Christ.

But for the help of those that are more capable of arriving at certainty than
I am, I will distinctly tell the Reader the Paraphrase of the three most
considerable sort of Expositours.

I. V. 3. Let no Man persuade you that Christ's coming is at hand, for it will
not be till a great part of the Church fall away from Christianity, and Mahomet
that wicked Man and Seducer be revealed, who is a destroyer, and shall be
destroyed, 4. Who opposes and exalts himself, not only above all Earthly
Powers, but above all sorts of Divine Worship, both Heathenish and Christian.
So that, as if he were a God, he will set up his own Worship as next to the
supreme only God, both in the Temple at Jerusalem, and throughout all the
now-Christian Eastern Empire, and a great part further of the World; and under
the Title of God's greatest Prophet, will put down God's own Institutions, and
Laws, and Gospel, and set up his own in the stead. 6. What it is that stops
him, is a thing known to you all, even the Imperial Power; which as it falls,
he will rise: For as he is to make his false Religion by a composition of
Arianism, Judaism, and his own Inventions, so the swarm of Heresies now among
us, (Nicolaitans, Ebionites, Cerinthians, Gnostics, etc.) are secretly a
Mystereous Iniquity preparing for him: Only that Empire that now lets, must
give place to him, by diminution at his first rising, and by its
total-overthrow in the East, at his full possession. And so he shall in his
time become the open Seducer and Captivater of the Church and World; and must
stay till Christ diminish and consume Mahometanism by his Word preached, and
utterly destroy it with the Glory of his more full appearance before the end.
9. Even that M^homets Kingdom, whose coming is by Satanical, Murdering Wars,
and deceitful pretenses of Heavenly Signs and Revelations; and with the
unrighteous deceit of pretended opposition to Idolatry, and to Christians, as
if they worship two or three Gods, and their Laws were not so good as his: And
those Superficial, Hypocrite-Christians, that had but the Name and Form, and
not the hearty belief, love and obedience to the Truth, shall turn Mahometans,
and be damned.

II. The commonest Protestant Paraphrase is thus,

V. 3. Christ's coming shall not be till there be a general Apostacy of the
whole visible Church, say some, or of most or much of it, say others, unto
Idolatrous Worship, and subjection to the Papacy, and that Man of sin, the
Pope, be revealed, the Active and Passive Son of Perdition, the Abaddon, the
Head of this Apostacy, given up to all sin himself, and to promote it. 4. Who
claims Christ's Prerogative under the name of his Universal Vicar, and
overthrows his Officers and Laws, and sets up his own against them, and
overtoppeth and subjecteth all Princes and Magistrates; and this in the Church
of God, say most, or in that Idolatrous Church of his own, falsely called The
Church of God, say others, as if he were there chief Lord himself, and
arrogating names of Blasphemy. I told you formerly of all this. And now you
know what hinders his speedy arising: Even the Empire, as such, (say some)
including both the Pagan and Christian: Or (as others) the Empire, as Pagan
only. 6. For the beginnings of Antichristianity are secretly and mysteriously
already working, which will bring him forth in time, even the Pride and
Ambition of Ministers seeking Superiority, and the Peoples excess of Factious
Respects to some above others, and falling into Sects and Heresies in following
them. Only the Empire that now hinders must first be taken out of the way: 8.
And then shall the Pope, that Man of Wickedness, arise (say some), or be openly
discovered to be Antichrist (say others): Whom the Lord shall consume by the
Power of his Word preached by the two Witnesses, and then destroy by pouring
out the Vials of his Wrath upon him at his later coming to restore his Church.
9. Even that Pope, with his Roman Church of Papists, whose coming to the Papacy
is after that way of working, by force, and cheats, and feigned Miracles, which
Satan teaches and gives them to seduce the Christian World. 10. And with all
the deceiving Arts of falsehood, by which unrighteousness is upheld and
promoted, to delude those that shall perish for ever: Because they received not
sound Doctrine when it was delivered, nor held the Christian Faith in Love, and
in its Power, but in Custom, Hypocrisy, and Form, that it might sanctify and
save them.

Therefore God justly gave them up by desertions, to Deceivers and Delusions,
to believe a lie. 12. That all these Papists might be damned who believed not
the Truth that is contrary to Popery, but had pleasure in its unrighteous
Principles and Practices, and in that sensual life which is contrary to the
Christianity which they profess.

III. The third considerable Opinion runs thus in the Paraphrase Exposition.

1. Paul's words have relation both to Daniels words, of Antiochus, say most,
but of the Roman Power rather say Calvin and Brightman (who largely proves it).

2. It is so far from being true, that the Christians rejoiced in Christ's
sending the Romans to destroy Jerusalem, that they greatly lamented it: The
Cities name was precious to them, the first Christians being all Jews, and the
Gentiles receiving the Gospel from Jerusalem: Christ wept over them when he
Prophesied their ruin: Paul's lamentation was great for them. The ruin was
dreadful, 1110000 killed, and 700000 carried Captive: And the Apostles were all
Jews; and there was a common expectation among the Jews of the Messiah's
glorious Kingdom at Jerusalem, and they called it, The Holy City, and Land.

3. The Abomination of desolation is by Christ himself compared to that spoken
of by Daniel the Prophet, which was the destroying the Holy Place and Worship,
and setting up Idolatry in its stead. And the Authors themselves of the second
Exposition (as against the Pope) Expound the Desolating Abomination in Matthew.
24. to be the Roman Heathen Army coming to lay waste the Holy City and Temple:
For that Abomination of Desolation was to go before the flight of Men from
Jerusalem, or to concur. And this Text, v. 3. etc. seems plainly to follow
Christ, and speak of the same that he speaks of.

4. Vespasian and his Son Titus by his Command were the Men that destroyed the
Holy City, Temple, and Nation, and the Idolatrous Heathens and their Worship
there took present possession; and so set up the Desolation and Abomination:
And his younger Son Domitian destroyed the Christians, and Proclaimed himself
to be God, and to be worshipped with Altars and Sacrifices as God.

5. This Vespatian took on him to work Miracles, healing a Blind Man, and many
others: So that some foolish Jews called him the Messiah: And he and his Son
Titus by their flattery and fair lives got great esteem as excellent Men: And
their Learned Orators, etc. promoted the honor of Idolatry by theirs.

6. This way of Self-deifying and promoting Idolatry, and Captivating the Jews
and all Christians, went on, though not equally, through all the Emperors
almost, till Constantine.

7. The attempt of Caius Caligula told the Christians what further to expect,
when he Commanded Petronius to set up his Image in the Temple to be worshipped
as Jupiter.

Nero's Cruelty prognosticated much.

8. But Vespasian and Titus were stopped from the Desolation first attempted by
the Life of Claudius, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, till he was made Emperor himself.

9. And Christ consumed their Idolatry by his Gospel, and destroyed it by
Constantine. These things premised, their Paraphrase is, v. 3. The day of the
Lord will not come till the Jews Rebellion and Revolt from the Romans provoke
them to destroy them, and then will the wicked Destroyer appear, even the Roman
Imperial Pride and Rage, who exalt themselves above all Humane Power, and will
arrogate the Name and worship of Gods, and put down Gods own instituted
Worship, and will have Altars and Images erected to themselves. 6. What
delayeth them yet you know: They are killing one another for, Empire at Rome;
and the sin of the poor Jews against Christ and his Apostles is not yet ripe
for utter ruin; and then next the destroyer will appear: For their
Self-idolizing is already at work, as Caligula's attempt assures us, with
Nero's Pride and Cruelty: Only the foresaid impediments at Rome, etc. do stop
the Desolation and Abomination till it be removed, and then it will invade the
Holy City and Temple, and Judea shall feel the Roman Pride and Idolatry. Who
come as from Satan with all the help that he can give them, by Powerful Armies,
and with the Countenance of the Roman Idolaters Learning, and Magicks, and
Lying Oracles and wonders, such as Vespasian pretended to work, and the Virtues
that his Son Titus made ostentation of. And with all the deceitful Learning and
Arts, which may countenance Idolatry and Wickedness, and beguile Men fitted to
destruction: Because these poor Jews received not the Gospel in Love that they
might be saved by Christ, and many Christians proved Hypocrites, and
Formalists, and Heretics, therefore God penally will let loose upon them the
Learned Roman Idolaters with their Arts and Subtlety, and advantages of Power
to delude them to worship Idols, which are Lying Vanities: And so they that
would not believe the Truth, but had pleasure in Unrighteousness, might be left
to be their own destroyers, by believing, and practicing the Idolatry and
Wickedness which will damn them.

The Matter of all these three Expositions in it self, has a great deal of
Truth, that is, Mahomet is an Antichrist (most notorious): The Pope as
pretended Universal Head of the Church, corrupting Christianity in Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, and bloodily destroying Sounder Christ, is one sort of
Antichrist. The Roman Pagan Idolaters that set up the Desolating Abomination
were no less: But, which this Text means, I know not. But I detest that
Opinion that makes all the Visible Church Idolatrous and Antichristian since
Constantine delivered it from Pagan Persecution. Sure such should not now
complain of Persecution, but fear Deliverance and Prosperity.

13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved of
the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth.

13. But when I speak of this pernicious Apostasy of the followers of this Man
of sin and perdition, it minds me to be thankful to God for you, that from
the beginning he has chosen and marked you out for Salvation, by Sanctifying
you by his Spirit, and giving you a found belief of that truth, which these
Apostates do deny.

Note, That Gods election Connecteth the End and Means; whom he chooses to
Salvation, he at once chooses to Sanctification and Confirmed Faith.

14. Whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

14. And I am thankful that my preaching the Gospel was the means by which he
called you hereto, and to obtain your part with Christ in Glory.

15. Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have
been taught, whether by word, or our epistle.

15. Therefore stand fast, and hold the same Doctrine which I have delivered to
you, whether by Preaching, Discourse, or Writing, against all Innovating
Seducers.

16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has
loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace. 17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.

16, 17. And I have great encouragement to pray for you, in hope that you may
be comforted and established in all that is good, because it is to that Christ
that is our Savior, and God who is our Father, and has already showed that he
loves us, and has by his Grace given us solid hope, and the foretaste of the
everlasting consolation.

CHAP. III.
1. FInally brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free
course, and be glorified even as it is with you.

1. And as I pray for you, pray ye for us, that the word of God may run abroad
with speed and prosperous success, and not be stopped or hindered by persecutors
contradictions, or Scandalous Seducers, but may be honored by free and full
reception and obedience, as it is with you (which praise I give you to
encourage you.)

2. And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all men
have not faith.

2. And that our Persons may be preserved and our Preaching prosper, against
all the endeavors of absurd and wicked Men, who are our adversaries. For
faithless Men are every where against us.

3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil.

3. But tho Men be faithless who resist me, we have a faithful God, who will
confirm you, and keep you from Satan and from evil.

4. And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do, and will
do the things which we command you.

4. And we have good hope that you will still follow the Precepts which we give
you from the Lord.

5. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient
waiting for Christ.

5. To which end I pray, that God would direct your Hearts to love himself, and
patiently to wait for Christ, and these two Graces will keep you in obedience
from backsliding.

6. Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the tradition which he received of us.

6. And this is one of the Commands which in the name of Christ I have to
deliver you, to preserve you from revolting, viz, to keep your Society clean
from Scandal, by avoiding the familiar company of every one professing
Christianity, who lives disorderly, and not according to the Law of Christ
which we delivered to him.

Note, 1. That there is a degree of avoiding Familiarity with a disorderly
Christian, to shame him into Repentance, and to preserve our selves, and the
Honor of Christianity, which is short of a public Declarative,
Excommunication, and casting out of the Church. It is justly called Suspension,
because a Man is not to be Excommunicate till he be proved obstinately
Impenitent: But a Man that is guilty of a notorious scandalous sin, may be
suspended while he is under trial whether he will repent or not.

2. Note, That this Command of withdrawing from the disorderly, does not
require that we withdraw from the Church when such intrude, or are there
permitted. No more than you must forsake your own House and Family if he
intrude: You have right and command to be there, tho he have no right.

3. Nor does it make all to be of equal power in Church Matters, not bind any
to go beyond his Power. 1. Of Man's Capacity for Public Church Communion, the
Pastors are Judges: And if they be negligent, its their sin, which will not
allow Private Men to forsake the Public Communion, till the Church so far
forsake God as to be forsaken by him. 2. But Private Familiarity is in Private
Men's Power, where they may discountenance the Scandalous by withdrawing from
them.

7. For your selves know how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not our
selves disorderly among you, 8. Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught;
but wrought with labor and travel night and day, that we might not be
chargeable to any of you:

7, 8. You know what our Example was, that ought to be imitated: I did not live
idly, and look that the Church should maintain me, nor basely hang on any, or
needlessly burden them; nor take their Bread which I paid not for: but while I
taught you I labored and toiled at my Trade that I might be chargeable to none
of you.

9. Not because we have not power, but to make our selves an ensample unto you
to follow us.

9. My Ministerial Office and Labor made maintenance from you my due; but
Idleness I saw was a sin, that had need of Example as well as Doctrine to
subdue it.

10. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would
not work, neither should he eat.

10. Note, Poor Men that will not work when they can, do forfeit the Bread of
Charity from Men; but Rich Men that live idly do by that sin forfeit their
Food, (and more, even their lives and Souls) to God; but Men may not therefore
take it from them.

11. For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working
not at all, but are busybodies.

11. By disorderly Persons I specially mean such as I hear some among you are,
who live not in any profitable Trade and Labor, but yet are busy, but its
about circumstantial, unnecessary or unprofitable by-matters.

Note, That as Idleness is a base sin, which equals Life and Death, so
unnecessary and unprofitable Labor is a mis-spending time and a forfeiture of
Maintenance as well as Idleness: and to make a Trade or Daily Employment of
vain or unprofitable Business, is but a Cloak of Deceit for an Idle Life: The
Sloathful and Unprofitable Servants forfeit Wages. Oh what a deal of Business
to little purpose has the World to answer for! (...), not laboring, but
busily Trifling; men will find that God gave them Life and Reason for greater
things.

12. Now them that are such we command, and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ,
that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.

12. To live on the labors or cost of others, through base, indulging fleshly
ease, or unprofitable trifling, is so great a sin, that I do command you, and
exhort you, by the authority of Christ, and as you will obey him, that you
avoid it, and that you quietly and willingly get your own living by some
profitable labor, and eat not other Men's Bread, but your own, and that not the
Bread of Idleness.

13, 14. But ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing. And if any man obey not
our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he
may be ashamed. 15. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a
brother.

13, 14, 15. If after all this the sloathful will not labor, though you are
not to cut him off from the Church, as if it were for rejecting an Essential
part of Christianity, yet there is a Discipline to be used in the Church
toward its Members: Set a note of shame upon that Man, by avoiding familiarity
with him: But yet take him not for an Enemy or Heathen, bu^ an offending
Christian, and continue to call him to Repentance.

Note, Qu. But what if it be a Son? must the Parents deny him Food? Ans. If he
be obstinate in an idle or unprofitable Life, being able for a better, 1. The
Parents should mark him out to shame; 2. And should so far st^aiten him in the
Quality of his Food and Maintenance, as may make his Sloth a penal Suffering to
him, and signify their abhorrence of his Sin, though they may not famish him
to death.

16. Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means. The Lord
be with you all. 17. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand, which is the
token in every epistle: so I write; 18. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

16, 17, 18. Note, We may boldly trust him for our Peace and safety, who will
be called The Lord of Peace, and by the Grace of Christ will be with us, and
give us Peace always, and by all means. Amen.

The First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to TIMOTHY.
CHAP. I.
1. PAul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Savior, and
Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope; 2. Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith:
Grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord.

1, 2. Note, 1. Apostleship was by Gods Call and Command.

2. Christ is the Believers Hope.

3. It is meet to have some special endeared Love to those that are our Sons in
the Faith, converted by our Ministry.

4. As the desire of Worldlings is to worldly Prosperity, so the sum of all
holy Christian desires, is Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God the Father, and
from Christ.

3. As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus when I went into Macedonia,
that thou might charge some that they teach no other doctrine, 4. Neither
give heed to fables, and endless genealogies, which minister questions, rather
than godly edifying, which is in faith; so do.

3, 4. Note, 1. Whether this imply that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, is a
Question of small moment to them that know what a Bishop then was. A Bishop, as
Dr. Hammond maintains, had then but one Congregation, and no
Subject-Presbyter under him. He certainly had no Power of the Sword to force
Men. He was only a Guide to Volunteers and Consenters; and not to any against
their wills. It is certain, that every Church had at least one such Bishop, (I
think usually more.) And no doubt Ephesus had such, (either Timothy, or
others.) If it be Archbishops that are made the matter of this Doubt, it is
certain, that an Archbishop had no Power of the Sword, nor was a Bishop to any
but consenting Volunteers, and worked only on Conscience, and not immediately
on Body or Purse. And I believe that Timothy and Titus, and the Apostles, were
so far Archbishops, as that they had by Office the Care of gathering many
Churches, and then taking care of their Preservation and Increase, by urging
the Doctrine and Commands of Christ, and Ordaining Bishops over particular
Churches (Episcopos gregis) by their own and the Flocks consent, and not
otherwise; and then exhorting such Pastors and Churches on just occasions to do
their Duties. And who can be against such Archbishops.

But some that now feign the Idea of a Bishop to be one that has many score or
Hundred Churches under him, which have no Bishop but himself, and one that is
set over them without their consent, and that rules them by force, of the
adjoined Sword, Imprisonment, or Ruin, are ready to Dream that Timothy and
Titus were such Bishops. Doubtless every City or Corporation where were
Christians, had then a Church (at least) and every Church a Bishop (at least.)
And whether it was Timothy or another, Ephesus was not without. Tho it is true
that we find him so constantly with Paul, almost every where, where he was,
that it is hard to believe that he was very long at Ephesus.

2. Note, That Churches are in danger of Corruption by other Doctrines than
those delivered by the Apostles. And their Doctrines were so sufficient, that
no other should be taught.

3. Though some think it is still the Gnostics that are here described by
Fables and Genealogies its most like to be all the Judaisers. And though
Genealogies be part of Scripture, it is perverseness to make too great a stir
about them, and to turn Religion into endless Questions, and divert from matter
of Faith, in which our Edification chiefly does consist. Multitudes sin by too
much stir about lesser Scripture Verities, when by wrangling or long study it
hinders them from greater.

5. Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned:

15. The Holy Scripture is as a complete Body, which has its Accidents and
Ornaments, as well as Essential and Integral Parts, (as Hair, Nails, Color)
etc. But it is the end that is the chief part and must be preferred: And the
end of all Christ's Doctrine and Law is, Charity, or to bring Men's Souls to the
love of God, and Man, and Goodness, as its very Nature: And the grand means to
this are, 1. A Heart purified by Gods Spirit. 2. A good Conscience, not guilty
of reigning sin, and justified from the guilt of former sin and present
Infirmity by Christ. 3. And unfeigned Faith in Christ, by which we are united
to him, and have our part in the foresaid benefits. And this is the Sum of True
Christian Religion in few Words, which is more profitably insisted on than
Jangling Controversies.

6. From which some having swerved, have turned aside unto vain jangling; 7.
Desiring to be teachers of the law, understanding neither what they say, not
whereof they affirm.

6, 7. And some that have roved from this Mark, (not placing Religion finally
in Love, to be promoted aforesaid) have turned aside to Vain Jangling, or Vain
Chat; as if Religion lay in being Doctors of Moses's Law; when as they
understand not what they say themselves, nor what the things are which they
pretend to teach.

Note, 1. They that shoot not at this mark (as (...) signifies) and place not
Religion as aforesaid, have ever since corrupted it by Vain Jangling, though
not about the same Subjects: Some setting the Churches together by the Ears
about unnecessary, curious Notions concerning the person of Christ, or
concerning Gods Decrees, and Concourse, and some about the Clergies Universal
Domination, and about their Canon Law (worse than was that of Moses) and their
Dunghill of Corruptions and ensnaring Ceremonies, and some about quibling
Notions concerning Justification, Faith, and Works. Satan has Religious
Diversions for them that are above Sensuality. And Ignorant-confidence (with
rage) is the usual Character of all such.

8. But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully;

8. We praise the Law as well as they: It is Gods Law, and therefore good, if
lawfully used; which is to lead Men to Christ, and typifie Spiritual things to
come, and to condemn and restrain sin; but not to justify Men instead of
Grace, nor to be imposed on the Gentiles, or continued, when a better does
displace it.

9. Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and
profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for man-slayers,
10. For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for
men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing
that is contrary to sound doctrine, 11. According to the glorious gospel of the
blessed God, which was committed to my trust.

9, 10, 11. It must be foreknown, 1. That the World was not Lawless that had
not Moses's Law: They had the Law of Nature, and the common Law of Grace which
was given to Mankind after the fall: And Christ has now brought us the Holy
Spiritual Law of Grace in the most perfect edition. So that sin is condemned
where Moses's Law is not received or known. 2. That Moses's Laws, as such, were
all Political for the Government of that Republic, even the Ten Commandments,
and had Penalties to be executed by Men annexed, as an essential part of it.
Now of this Law, says Paul, [ It was not made with these Penalties either to
bridle or to punish them that without it were Righteous Men, that is, Who were
obedient to the Law of Nature, and of Grace, and whose Hearts were ruled with
the love of Righteousness, and needed not to be frightened to it by Corporal
Penalties; much less for us Christians, who have Christ's Law of Grace, and are
Sanctified by his Spirit, writing it in our Hearts by Love of Goodness: But God
knowing the corruption of Man's Heart, did make it for the Israelites, to
restrain them by fear from living like Lawless, Disobedient Men, etc. and to
punish them by the Magistrate, who were ungodly, sinners, unholy, profane,
murderers, etc. which the Gospel, and Christ's Law, which I preach, is as much
against as Moses's Law, and more powerfully overcomes: So that we that have
better, even Christ's Law without us, need not the continuance of Moses's Law.

12. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he
counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry;

12. Note, It is a great mercy to be entrusted with the Ministry of the Gospel,
with Ability and Faithfulness.

13. Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious. But I
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief:

13. Note, 1. The great Mercy of God to great sinners; even Persecutors and
Blasphemers may be converted.

2. That God gives the greatest Mercy without previous merit.

3. The word [ because] here means not that Ignorance was a proper cause of
Gods Mercy: But that it made Paul a more capable receiver of Mercy, than he
should have been, if he had maliciously sinned against Knowledge.

14. And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith, and love
which is in Christ Jesus.

14. And this Mercy which called me, has poured out on me, by the Holy Ghost,
an abundant measure of Faith in Christ, and love to him and his, which carries
me on in his Work with Zeal and unwearied diligence.

15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.

15. This is the Great Article of our Christian Faith, which we may trust to,
and of great comfort to us all, and worthy of our thankful acceptance, That
Christ came into the World to save Sinners; which I, that am one of the chief,
must therefore predicate with chiefest Thanks.

16. Howbeit, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ
might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

16. But it pleased God to show mercy to me, so great a Sinner, to magnify his
Grace, and encourage all Sinners against Despair, that in me Christ might
exemplarily show his gracious Patience and Forbearance, and confirm all Sinners
in the hope of Everlasting Life, who after shall believe and be converted.

17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be
honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

17. The sense of this unspeakable Mercy calls up my Soul (and should do all)
to speak with joy the Praises of our God, who is Eternal, Immortal, Invisible,
the only God, absolutely Wise, over Angels, and all Creatures: To him be
honor and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

18. This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to the prophecies
which went before on thee, that thou by them might war a good warfare. 19.
Holding faith, and a good conscience;

18. Note, 1. By [ Charge] is meant holding Faith and a good Conscience, and
keeping the Doctrine committed to him by Paul, as a faithful Minister and
Soldier of Christ, against all Opposition.

2. It seems some particular Prophecy (such as Aga^us had of Paul, and many
then had) had foretold that Timothy should be a faithful Minister.

19. Which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck. 20. Of
whom is Hymeneus and Alexander; whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may
learn not to blaspheme.

19, 20. Which some have cast away, and lost the Christian Faith: Such are
Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered to Satan, as Gods Executioner of
some Bodily Punishment, to see whether Correction will convince them of their
Blasphemy.

Note, 1. What their Blasphemy was, is after shown, 2 Timothy 2.17. and 4.14.

2. That Satan is often Gods Executioner in Correction and Destruction, is
certain; and that such is the Delivery here meant (for want of Christian
Magistrates): But it was none of Satan's desire, but Gods, hereby to teach them
not to blaspheme.

CHAP. II.
1. I Exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men:

1. As I have often said, That Charity is the End and Sum of Religion, I exhort,
that this may be sincerely manifested in your Religious Worship; and that you
heartily pray for all sorts of Men, that God would save them from Sin and
Misery, and give them Grace and Mercy; and be thankful for their Welfare, as if
it were your own.

2. For kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

2. For Kings, and for all that are in Preeminence or Superiority, that they
may so govern, that we may be protected in the quiet serving of God, in
Godliness and decent Conversation with Men, without Reproach and Persecution.

Note, 1. That the Character of the Rulers that we are to pray for, is not
only (...), jus r^gendi, Right; but (...), Preeminence.

Pray for him that has the right of Governing, as far as you can know it: But
submit to him that has settled Possession, so far as it wrongeth not another
Right; and so far pray for such, that we may live a quiet and peaceable Life in
all Godliness and Honesty.

3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: 4. Who
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth.

3, 4. For this is agreeable to the great Mercy manifested in Man's Redemption
by Jesus Christ, who by his Death, and Covenant of Grace, and Preaching, has
showed us how willing he is that all Men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of his Gospel.

Note, 1. That while we obediently pray as God commands us, we may
confidently expect Gods acceptance. 2. An extensive Charity renders us like
Christ. 3. It is not only all sorts of men that Christ would have to be saved;
but he wills the Salvation of all Men in general, so far as to make a
Sacrifice sufficient for all* if all will believe; and to make an Act of
Oblivion, or general Pardon, and Gift of Life to all, on Condition of
Acceptance; and to send his Messengers promiscuously to all, with the Word of
Reconciliation, to beseech them to be reconciled to God. What Christ gives to
all, he wills and purchased for all: But he gives to all a Pardon, and Right
to Life, on Condition of Acceptance: Therefore he is so far willing of their
Salvation.

5. For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus; 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.

5, 6. For it must move us to pray for all, in compliance with this Will of
God, that would have all Men saved; because there is One God who is good to
all, and One Mediator between God and Mankind, who took on him the Common
Nature of all Men, and gave himself a Ransom for all, revealed in the Season
appointed of God, (or to be preached to all in due time, as God pleases.)

Note, The Controversy about Universal Redemption, too hotly agitated by Beza,
Piscater, and others, on one side, and by many on the other, I have fully
handled in my Catholic Theology, and Methodus Theologiae; and it needs no
more than as aforesaid: 1. Whoever is damned, it is not because no Ransom was
made for him, or because it was not sufficient for him. 2. By Gods Will to save
all, is meant the Effects of his Will that have a tendency to their Salvation.
3. It is notorious, that God has made an Universal Act of Grace or Oblivion,
giving Pardon of all Sin, and Right to Life in Christ, to all Men, without
exception, on Condition of Believing-acceptance; and has commissioned his
Ministers to offer this Gift to all Men, to the utmost of their power, and
entreat them to accept it; and does by many Mercies intimate to them, that he
uses them not according to the mere violated Law of Innocence, but on Terms of
Grace. 4. Few Christians have the face to affirm, that this Universal
Conditional Pardon and Gift (or Law of Grace) is no Fruit of the Death of
Christ. 5. If therefore this Act of Pardon was purchased by Christ, and given
to all, no modest Face can deny, that he so far died for all, as to purchase
for them all that he actually gives them. 6. It is usual to say that we give a
Man a Benefit, ( e. g. Life to a condemned Malefactor) if it be given him on
the fair Condition of his Acceptance, and brought to his own Will, and he
entreated to receive it. 7. If any Wrangler say, that this is unfit Language,
(to say, He is willing that Men shall be saved, who offers them Salvation
freely, unless he also make them willing:) Let him confess, that it is but the
Name that he denies, and none of the Gifts in question. 8. And be it known,
that Unwillingness comes not from a Physical Impossibility, through the want
of Natural Faculties, (as it is with Brutes) but from a voluntary Pravity,
which aggravateth the Sin. 9. And the mutable Will of Man is to be changed by
Reason: And God gives Men Reasons in their kind sufficient to persuade them to
accept of Christ and Life. 10. And lastly, No Man can say, that Adam when he
fell had not Grace enough to make him Able to have stood, which he might have
used, and should have done, to his actual standing: No^, that God never gives
such a power to believe (or at least to come nearer the State of a true
Believer) to many that might bring it into Act, and do not. This much is enough
to end this Controversy with modest Wits.

7. Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the truth in
Christ, and lie not) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity.

7. This Gospel I am appointed to preach to the Gentiles, (Christ knows that
I feign not his Commission) and faithfully and truly to be their Teacher.

8. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands without
wrath and doubting.

8. According to this my Commission, I give these Directions following to all
sorts. First, That all Men be much in Prayer to God, not only in the
Assemblies, but in all convenient Places wheresoever, open or secret: but that
they lift not up to God Hands defiled with any wilful Sin, but pure and clean
by harmless Conversation; and that they come not to God with Wrath against
others, or with a quarrelsom, disputing, contentious Disposition; but in
Christian Love.

Note, That the Ceremony of Lifting up the Hands in Prayer, (which was an Act
of Corporal secondary Worship) is lawful, and fit where Custom makes it so,
and yet is not necessary by Institution; as Kneeling also is.

9. In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shame-facedness and sobriety: not with broidered-hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array;

9. And for Women, I forbid them not all Ornaments, specially when they come to
the Sacred Assemblies; but let them be adorned only with Attire which
expresses Gravity, Modesty, and Sobriety; not like proud, vain, or alluring
Persons, with curious Dressings of their Hair, Embroidery, Jewels, Gold, or any
over-costly Apparel, as those that would seem either Richer or Comelier than
they are.

10. But (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works.

10. But let them take Good Works (of Piety to God, and Charity to Man) for
their chiefest Ornament; as they will do, if they are true Professors of
Godliness. It is these in which they must excel the Ungodly, and not in
Ostentation of Wealth or Beauty.

11. Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.

11. Let them be Learners, rather than Teachers; and let them use Silence and
humble Subjection, and not be over-talkative and masterly; specially silent in
the Church.

12. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man,
but to be in silence.

12. I forbid Women to be Public Teachers, and to usurp any Authority over
their Husbands, or over Men in Church Government; but to be quiet, silent, and
obedient.

Note, 1. That Paul forbids not Women to teach their Children or Servants,
or the elder Women to teach the younger. 2. Nor does he meddle with Cases of
Civil Government; as, whether a Woman may Govern a Kingdom, or a City, or a
multitude of her own Tenants and Menservants.

13, 14. For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but
the woman being deceived, was in the transgression.

13, 14. For God made the Woman for Subjection, by making Adam first, and then
making her to be for his help: And the Woman subjected her self yet lower, by
being first in the Transgression, deceived by the Serpent, and then tempting
her Husband.

15. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in
faith and charity, and holiness with sobriety.

15. Yet though her Sin have brought her low, and even under a Curse in the
Pain and Peril of Childbearing, she is, even in that low and sad condition,
under Gods merciful Protection, and saving Covenant of Grace, which contains
the Promise of this Life, and that to come, if they continue in Faith, Charity,
and Purity, with Sobriety.

Or, [Though Sin and Sorrow in Travel came in by the Woman, yet by a Woman's
Childbearing a Savior came into the World, (which is some Reparation of the
Honor of the Sex;) And so the Women may be saved as well as the Men by Christ,
if they continue in Faith, Charity, Purity and Sobriety.

CHAP. III
1. THis is a true saying, if a man desire the office of a bishop, he desires
a good work.

1. As for the Office of a Bishop, believe it, he that desires it, does desire
a very great and excellent work: It is not a bare Name, Title, Dignity, or
place of Honor and Command; but a Work, and a Work of great Importance, and
Labor, and Difficulty, which every desirer is not fit for: Take heed therefore
whom thou do admit.

2. A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober,
of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach;

A Bishop must be one, 1. That is not guilty of any scandalous sin since his
Conversion. 2. One that has not put away his Wife, except for Fornication, and
married another, much less, that has two at once 3. One that is vigilant and
wholly addicted to do what he shall undertake. 4. One that is of a sober,
moderate temper, and not guilty of Levity, and Temerity. 5. One that is of an
Orderly, Composed, Decent Temper and Carriage. 6. By Charity to be ready to
entertain Strangers, and take in those that are exposed to want. 7. One that is
fit by Ability and Zealous Willingness to teach the Flock the necessary things
committed to the Ministry to communicate.

3. Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not
a brauler, not covetous;

3.8. One that is not inordinately in love with Wine or strong Drink. 9. One
that uses no violence, nor hurts others. 10. One that studieth not after
gain, nor uses dishonest, unseemly ways of getting. 11. One that by lenity
takes all things in the best sense, and is not rigorous. 12. One that is
against Strife, Contention and Fighting. 13. One that is not in love with Money.

4. One that rules well his own house, having his children in subjection with
all gravity; 5. (For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he
take care of the church of God?)

4, 5.14. One that rules well his own House, (if he have any,) and by his
success shows it, and that God blesses his Labors, his Children being in
subjection with all Comely, Grave, and Pious Behavior. For if either he have
not Skill and Care enough to rule his Family well, or the badness of his
Children show that God blesses not his Labor, how should the Church judge him
fit to rule them, and likely to succeed.

6. Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the devil.

6. Not a late young Convert; for such are more in danger of Pride than others,
when they are set up as Teachers, and so fall as the Devils did.

Note, That young, raw Christians made Teachers are in great danger of falling
into Condemnation by Pride, even like to Devils. Because, 1. They have less
knowledge of their own Ignorance, and how much yet they want. 2. The suddenness
of the Light which they have received so transporteth them, that they think it
to be greater in them than it is. 3. They have stronger Passions than the Aged;
and those puff them up as if they signified answerable Judgment. 4. They have
weaker Degrees yet of Humility, Self-denial, and all Grace, than riper
Christians have. 5. They have had less time to learn the great things which
should balance them. 6. They want that Experience which fully convinces Riper
Christians of the error of Self exalting, so that none are so apt to rage and
be confident as the Ignorant and Injudicious. 7. And they are themselves as
Children carried away easily by the applause and flatteries of such as are like
them, and cry them up for their Injudicious fervor.

7. Moreover, he must have a good report of them which are without; lest he
fall into reproach, and the snare of the devil.

7.16. And he must be one that has by his Parts and Conversation got some
esteem, even among Unbelievers, or at least, is not by the common sort of them
made odious or contemptible by any Infamy, just or unjust, lest Satan get by
his former Scandals, or ill Name, to make the Christian Religion odious, and
turn his Infamy into a Snare to keep Men in unbelief.

Note, 1. If all these Sixteen things be needful to a Bishop, and must be
required in one that is offered to the Ministry, is he a true Bishop or Pastor
that has scarce two of all these Qualifications? Yea, that has almost all the
contraries? That such are Pastors, de facto, claiming Honor and Obedience, is
easily proved: what God accounts them I leave to him: And how the People
should esteem them, Cyprian tells us in his Epistle against Martial and
Basilides.

2. What a Bishop then was must be understood by those that would know their
Divine Obligation to obey such: Of which see before, 1 These. 5.12, 13. The
Ministerial Work was, 1. Indefinite, by Itinerants, or unfixed Men, viz. 1. To
convert those without, and gather Churches, and settle Pastors over them. 2.
And to go and send to them after for their Confirmation. These in Scripture are
called Apostles and Evangelists, and their helpers, but not Bishops. II. But
the settled Churches had settled Pastors (with Deacons) These are called
Bishops and Elders. These Churches were so many Neighbor Christians as could
know and Converse with one another, and were associated for Personal Communion
in holy Doctrine, Worship, and Conversation, as distinct from distant Communion
by mere Concord in the Species of these, or by Delegates: Though they did not
always meet all in one place; so that the Bishops or Elders had opportunity to
know them personally, teach and oversee them ordinarily: Which they did without
force, upon none but consenting Volunteers. This Episcopacy we are for, and not
against the Preeminence of some one, as a Senior and Guide to the rest of the
Elders in a Church that has many: Nor yet against the foresaid General
Ministers or Evangelists Inspection and Care of many Churches of such
Consenters. But it one such General Pastor will put down all the Bishops of
single Churches, and have none over many hundred Parishes but himself alone,
who cannot possibly do the hundredth part of the true Episcopal Work, and will
do some of the rest by Curates that are no Bishops, and by Laymen, this
Episcopacy is not to be justified. Much less when the Clergy or People choose
them not, nor consent to them, but are governed by them forcibly, and as
constrained Dissenters.

8. Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not double-tongued, not given to much
wine, not greedy of filthy lucre. 9. Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience.

8, 9. The Deacons also must be well-qualified Persons; Grave and Pious; not
double, tongued, to say and unsay, as Interest leads them; not addicted to
much Wine or Strong Drink; not greedy of filthy Gain, as Lovers of Money use to
be: and they must be sound Believers and of an upright Life.

Note, 1. That here are but two sorts of fixed Church Officers noted by Paul,
Bishops and Deacons. 2. As every Church had its own Bishop (one or more), so
had they their own Deacons. For, as Dr. Hammond notes, [ The Deacons were
every where constituted to attend the Bishop.] But Antiquity never knew what a
Deacon of a Diocese of many Churches (or hundreds of Churches) was, till
Archdeacons were first new made. Therefore, as no Man was a Deacon of more than
one single Church, so no Man was a Bishop of more (distinct from Archbishops),
as the said Doctor de facto maintains, in Scripture-times.

10. And let these also first be proved; then let them use the office of a
deacon, being found blameless.

10. And even Deacons must not be made, till they are tried and proved fit, and
sound blameless.

11. Even so must their wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all
things.

11. So also must the Women (or Wives) be grave, etc.

Note, 1. It is uncertain whether by (...), [ Women] here, be meant the Deacons
Wives, or the Deaconesses that then were appointed to some Care of Women, which
Men were less fit for. 2. The Qualifications imply, that Women are most in
danger of the contrary Sins, that is, of unstayed Levity, forwardness to
backbite and speak evil falsely, as Accusers of those that distaste them, ^ot
sober and careful of their Business, not trusty in all things.

12. Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and
their own houses well.

12. The Deacons must not be such as have more Wives than one, or that have
injuriously put away one and married another: The good government of their own
Children, and Houses also, must show that they are fit to serve in the Church.

13. For they that have used the office of a deacon well, purchase to
themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

13. For though the Deacons be as Servants to the Pastors, they that have used
that Office well, are in a degree above the Vulgar, and have matter of
confident Boldness and Freedom in the management and defense of the Affairs of
Christianity.

14. These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly: 15. But
if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in
the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground
of the truth.

14, 15. I hope to come to thee shortly; but lest I should be delayed, I write
these things to thee, that thou may know how thou ought to converse in the
House of God, (which is the Church of the Living God) as (in it) a Pillar and
firm Buttress (or Basis) of the Truth.

Note, Though it be true, that the Truth of God is most safely preserved in his
Church, yet I (with Gataker) marvel that so many apply these Words to the
Church, which are spoken of Timothy. That it is he that is called here, [ a
Pillar and Buttress of the Truth,] seems to me evident; 1. In that in the
Allegory it is not like that Paul would in the very next Words call the Church
a Pillar and Buttress in the House, when he calls it [ The House it self.] He
plainly d^fferenceth [ a Part] from [ the Whole.] The Church is the Whole, a
Pillar is a Part. 2. It is the very Sum of Paul's Exhortation to Timothy, that
according to his Office he should be [ a Pillar and Buttress of Truth in the
Church.] 3. The Preposition [ in the House] agrees to him, and the Word [
Pillar, etc. which is in the House]. 4. The omission of the Article before
[(...) and (...)] intimate, that it should rather be translated [ a Pillar,
etc.] than [ the Pillar]; which it is like would have been put in, had it been
the Churches peculiar Privilege that had been meant. 5. The Apostle uses the
same Word of James, Cephas, and John, Gal. 2.9. (...), accounted Pillars, which
Timothy was; And the very same Phrase as here, is used Rev. 3.12. He that
overcomes, I will make him a Pillar in the Temple of God, (...). So Rev. 10.1.
the Angels Feet. etc: But the Church is never called [ a Pillar that is in the
Church.] 6. As to them that feign it would be false Construction, because the
Words [(...)] are the Nominative Case, this has no pretense from the Text: So
that I doubt not but the plain sense is as it is Paraphrased; and all the
Fabric is built on a mere Mistake, which the Papists raise upon this Text:
Though, were it otherwise, it would not serve their turn.

16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.

16. And confessedly the Mystery of Godliness* which requires such great
Abilities in thee, as to make thee a Pillar and Buttress of it in the Church is
exceeding great and high. 1. God himself appeared to Man in the Flesh of our
Redeemer, to manifest his Love, and Will for our Salvation. 2. The Spirit was
Christ's Witness, which by its unimitable holy Impressions, Miracles, his
Ressurection, and Communication to his Followers, did justify Christ to be
truly what he did profess to be, and sealed his Doctrine to the World. 3.
Angels beheld, proclaimed, and obeyed him. 4. The Wall of Separation being
broken down, he was preached by his Commissioned Apostles to the Gentile World.
5. The World, that knew him not, or despised him, is by a few poor unlearned
Men brought to believe in him, and submit to him as Lord and Savior:
Philosophy submits, and Wit is silenced, and Policy and Power stoop to him
in part, and more will do. 6. He was taken up into Heaven in Glory, Angels
attending him, his Apostles looking on. These Six Articles are that great
Mystery which requires the ablest Preacher, and the soundest Faith: And he
that firmly believes these, does see into a more excellent Mystery than
Philosophy, and will be a stable Pillar in the Church.

CHAP. IV.
1. NOw the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;

1. The Spirit of Prophecy plainly foretells us, that in the latter times
some who professed themselves Christians shall depart from either the Whole, or
some Essential Parts of the Christian Faith, turning Apostates, or Heretics;
and this by giving heed to false Revelations of seducing Spirits (in themselves
or others), and to Doctrines of Devils.

Note, Whether it mean effectively Doctrines taught by Devils, or (as Mr. Mede
largely maintains) objectively, Doctrines concerning Demons, or the Nature,
Order, and Minds of the Spirits, like the Valentinians Aio^es, etc. I leave to
the Judgment of others.

2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience feared with a hot iron;

2. Covering their Lies or False Doctrine by Hypocritical Pretenses (of Piety,
or Divine Revelation, or some great Excellency); having Consciences feared and
branded as the Perfidious use to be, by their flagitious Lives.

3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the
truth.

3. Note, I think it far more probable, that Paul here speaks of those
Heretics which made up a Religion of Judaism and Pythagorean Fancies, who
taught, That Marriage was of the Devil, to propagate sinful miserable Men; and
that Flesh was not to be eaten, especially the unclean Beasts; than of those
erroneous Christians who only forbid Marriage to the Clergy, and Flesh on
certain Days of Abstinence, or that affect the total avoiding Marriage, and
eating Flesh, as a State of special Strictness, not required of most: For Paul
seems plainly to speak of a Doctrine taught to all; and he describes
Christian Knowledge herein to be, That God has made such Meat in kind to be
received with Thanksgiving; and not that All men, or any at all times, must use
such Meats.

4. For every creature of God is good and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving: 5. For it is sanctified by the word of God, and
prayer.

4, 5. For all that God has made for Food is good and clean, and not to be
refused as in kind unlawful, if it be received thankfully, as from Gods Gift,
to fit us for his Service; For to such as do thus, it is more than lawful, even
a sanctified Means to sit them to serve God, Gods Word allowing and giving it
them, and Prayer craving his Blessing to that end.

6. If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a
good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and of good
doctrine, whereunto thou have attained.

6. These things thou must suggest to the Brethren as their Teacher, that thou
may approve thy self a good Minister of Christ, bred up in sound Faith and
Doctrine, etc.

7. But refuse profane and old wives fables, and exercise thy self rather unto
godliness.

7. But as for the Jewish and Heretical Fancies of Abstinence from Marriage and
Meats, and the idle Reasons from Tradition, or Pythagorean Dotage, which they
give for them, avoid them; and let it be thy Business to preach, promote, and
practice plain Doctrine and Duties of Godliness; and guide the Flock therein.

8. For bodily exercise profits little: but godliness is profitable unto all
things, having the promise of the life the now is and of that which is to come.

8. For no Corporal Austerities or Exercises in Religion must be overvalued:
The best of them are of small Profit, in comparison of that Godliness which
consists in Spiritual Exercises (of Faith, Hope, Love, and their
Expressions): But this true Spiritual substantial Godliness is profitable to
all that we can justly desire, having from God the Promise of all the Good of
this Life which is meet for us, and we meet for it; and of that which is to
come, after this Life is ended.

9. This is a faithful saying* and worthy of all acceptance. 10. For therefore
we both labor, and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is
the Savior of all men, specially of those that believe.

9, 10. And what I say of the Promise to Godliness for this Life and that to
come, is a Truth most sure, and of greatest moment, and worthy of our greatest
acceptance. For it is on the belief of this, that we labor, strive, and
suffer, trusting on the Goodness and Promises of God, who is Life and the Lord
of Life, and as their Savior gives the Mercies of this Life and that to come,
as Men are fitted for each, to all Men; all Good being from him to all the
World: But eternal Good being by his Promise secured to all true Believers,
(which others reject when it is offered them, for temporal Good.)

11, 12. These things command and teach. Let no man despise thy youth, but be
thou an example of the Believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity.

11, 12. These things teach commandingly, as necessary, with Authority: And so
behave thy self, that thy Youth expose thee not to Contempt. Be thou an Example
in whom all the Believers may see how they should live* in thy Speech, and thy
Conversation, in Love and Spirituality, in sound Faith, and spotless Purity.

13. Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine.

13. Till I come, be diligent in Reading the Scripture, (privately for thy
self, and publicly to Expound it to the Church), to apply it by Exhortation,
and sound Doctrine.

14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy,
with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.

14. Neglect not diligently to use and improve those Eminent Gifts which were
given thee, even with Prophecy of thee, as one that would be faithful, by the
laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, or Elders of of the Church, when thou
wast called and ordained to the Ministry. (For neglect quenches the Spirit.)

15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them; that thy
profiting may appear to all.

15. Note, That even those that are extraordinarily Inspired and Qualified,
must study hard, and wholly give themselves to that, and all their Ministerial
Work if they would appear good Proficients; Therefore those tha^ have no such
Inspiration, have need of hard study. And they that wholly addict themselves to
the Ministry, have no leisure for Magistracy or Worldly Avocations: Nor can do
that for many hundred Churches, which required the whole of a Timothy for one.

16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy doctrine; continue in them: for in
doing this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.

16. In sum, Take greatest heed. First, that thy own Soul and Life be Sound,
and Holy, and Undefiled, and next that, thy Doctrine be so, and thou diligently
labor in it: Continue in this twofold Care and Diligence, and thou shall
secure thy own Salvation, and in all likelihood thy Hearers; for God will will
not deny his Blessing to such Labors.

CHAP. V.
1. REbuke not an elder, but entreat him as a father, and the younger men as
brethren; 2. The elder women as mothers, the younger as sisters, with all
purity.

1, 2. When Elders (in Age or Office) transgress, use not Magisterial roughness
of Reproof, but Humble Exhortation, as to Fathers: And speak to the Younger
with Love and Gentleness, as to Brethren: And speak to the Elder Women, as to
Mothers, with due respect; and to the Younger as Sisters, carefully shunning
all that savoureth of Immodesty or Unchastity in thought, or speech, or looks,
or behavior.

3, 4. Honor widows that are widows indeed. But if any widow have children or
nephews, let them learn first to show piety at home, and to requite their
parents; for that is good and acceptable before God.

3, 4. Let those that are Widows indeed, at once deprived of Husbands and
Maintenance, being Aged and unable to work, be maintained by the Church with
due respect. But if any of them have Children and Nephews that can maintain
them: Let these their Offspring be taught that Piety and Gratitude for all
their Parents care of them; oblige them to maintain their Widows, and not to
cast them on the Church, and that this is a Duty that God requires of them,
and will accept.

Note, That it is doubted, whether these Widows were Deaconesses, or merely
kept for poverty. I think that it was the Custom of the Ancient Churches to
maintain all that are Poor and Aged, and unable to get their own livings, but
not to maintain them in Idleness, but to appoint them to employ much of their
time, in visiting the sick and poor Women, and counselling the younger sort,
and giving notice of their Wants and Cases to the Elders; so that the same
Women were also as Deaconesses, tho some that were wiser and fitter than the
rest might be more specially thus employed.

5. Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusts in God, and
continues in supplications and prayers night and day.

5. By a Widow indeed, I mean one that is desolate, having neither
Maintenance, nor Ability to get it, nor Kindred to relieve her, but lives
Faith and truth in God, who as she is to live upon the Church, so she is bound
to serve the Church, by constant Prayers both alone and with these Women whom
she visits and instructs.

6. But she that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives.

6. But she that lives delicately, and sportingly, and wantonly, with gaudy
Ornaments is a living Carcass.

7. And these things give in charge, that they may be blameless.

7. Acquaint them with these Canons, that the Church and they may be kept from
misdoing.

8. But if any provide not for his own, and specally those of his own house, he
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel.

8. But if any of the Church that is able maintain not his own near Kindred,
especially those that have right to be kept in his own Family (as Parents have)
he lives so contrary to the Christian Faith, that he forfeits the Reputation
of True Christians, and does that which the Infidels themselves will condemn,
and in that is worse than they.

9. Let not a widow be taken into the number, under threescore years old,
having been the wife of one man.

9. Because such Widows, 1. Must be maintaned as those that cannot labor. 2.
And do resove against Marrying again, being past the need of it. 3. And must be
stayed Monitors to the Younger Women, therefore take in none into the Churches
charge, that is under threescore years old, and none that has separated from
her Husband, and Married another.

10. Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if she
have lodged strangers, if she have washed the Saints feet, if she have relieved
the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work.

10. It is her Christian Behavior before her Poverty, that must be rewarded
with the Churches Maintenance: Therefore she must be one, 1. That is known to
have done good to others while she was able. 2. Who has piously educated her
own Children. 3. Lodged Strangers, etc

Note, That in that hot and poor Country, those here called Saints usually
travailed on Foot, and were Bare legged, wearing only Sandals or Shoes, and had
not-Inns for Entertainment with that convenience as we have here, nor Money for
such charges; therefore it was one of the great works of Godly Charity, for
Christians to take Travelers and Strangers into their Houses, and Wash their
Feet from the Dust contracted daily in their Travail: And to relieve all in
want and affliction to their Power.

11. But the younger widows resuse: for when they have begun to wax wanton
against Christ, they will marry; 12. Having damnation, because they have cast
off their first faith.

11, 12. But receive not a Young Widow into the number of those that serve the
Church, and are maintained by it: For as they are not by Age past laboring for
themselves, or fit to resolve on a single life for the Churches Service, so
when they grow Lustful and Wanton, and weary of the Yoke of Chastity and Church
Service, they will Marry: And so prove Criminal Sinners against Christ, by
violating that sort of Devotedness to his Service.

13. And withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house; and
not only idle, but tatlers also, and busiebodies, speaking things which they
ought not.

13. And being idle, they learn to go about to Houses, and there not only idly
pass their time, but to spend it in tatling, or in idle and unfit Chat, aad
busying themselves with other Men's Matters, and talking of that which they
ought not to talk of.

Note, Qu. But are not Women prone to this, tho they be not Devoted to Chastity
and Church Service? Ans. Yes, 1. And therefore Paul speaks this as the Vice
that most Women are strongly by nature addicted to: And that all may see the
danger of it and fear it: And indeed how rare are those Women, even that
profess to be most Religious, that use not to venture on this Chat, and
Backbiting, and Busy judging those that are absent, and meddling with things
which they should not meddle with. 2. But yet those that are taken up with
Family Business of their own, are not so vacant and liable to these Crimes as
the idle are. And therefore what Paul says of these Young Church-Widows, all
Rich Women should read with Application: For Riches tempt them to be idle; and
idleness tempts them to the same sins, to spend their time in going from House
to House on pretense of Civil Visits, and there to talk venterous^y without a
call, of all things and Persons that come into their Minds.

14. I will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the
house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. 15. For some
are already turned aside after Satan.

14, 15. My Advise therefore is, That Young Women marry (that have not some
special reason against it); and by bearing Children, and educating them
Religiously, and guiding their Houses piously and diligently, they may so do
the Church the greatest service, and give no occasion to malicious Adversaries
to speak evil of the Church, as if it were a Society of idle twatler^, and
lustful wantons. For some have already forsaken Christianity, its like tempted
partly by some such Scandals; or at least are ready to believe and report them.

16. If any man or woman that believes, have widows, let them relieve them,
and let not the church be charged; that it may relieve them that are widows
indeed.

16. Let all Christians keep the Widows that Nature binds them to keep, if
able, and not cast them on the Church, and rob Widows indeed, by disabling the
Church to maintain them.

17. Let the elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and doctrine.

17. It being the Office of Church-elders to be the Churches Guides or Rulers,
by the Canon of Gods Laws: Let those that do this well, be counted worthy of
double honor, above the common rank of the Faithful, and to be accordingly
maintained and obeyed; but especially those of them who are Laborious
Preachers, Expounding and applying the Word and Doctrine of Christ.

Note, 1. That Elders or Bishops were the fixed Guides of single Churches, (no
bigger than our Parishes for number of Souls.) 2. That they had very much work
to do besides Public Preaching: As to judge who was to be taken in by Baptism,
or to be openly rebuked, or cast out, or reconciled; to teach from House to
House on just occasion, to visit the Sick, take care of the Poor, resolve
Doubts, oversee Manners, etc. 3. That usually one Church had many of these, and
all found work enough; some maintained themselves, and some the Church
Offerings maintained. 4. As all these could not publicly Preach at once, so
all were not fitted for it by skill and free utterance: But some one or few
that were most able for it, were the ordinary Preachers: And these being the
ablest and of most Reputation, were quickly made and called the Bishops, being
such Presidents and Gudes to the rest, as the Presidents of Colleges of Men in
the same Office, (Physicians, Philosophers, etc.) are, or as the Chief Justice
among the Judges. 5. Yet all the rest were of the same Office, Essentiated by
Church Guidance in the Word, Worship, Sacraments, and Discipline; and were not
mere Lay Men, but were Ordained and Separated to the Sacred Ministry, and
wanted not Authority to Preach and Administer Sacraments, and did these on just
occasions, tho the ablest did it most usually. 6 And it was the part of them
that were thus employed in Public Preaching (both for converting Infidels, and
edifying the Church,) who are said to be laborious in the Word and Doctrine.

18. For the scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the ox that treads out
the corn: and, The labourer is worthy of his reward.

18. Note, 1. That Honor here includes Maintenance. 2. That it is the labor
of Church Guides which gives them right to Honor and Maintenance. 3. That the
greatest Honor and Maintenance is due to them that are Laborious Preachers and
Instructors of the Flock, and not to them that seldom so labor; much less to
them that unjustly silence such.

19. Against an elder recive not an accusation, but before two or three
witnesses.

19 Seeing no private Man should believe an accusation against a Grave Ancient
Person, much less against a Person of the Church, without sufficient proof,
much less must thou that art President in the Presbytery admit any publicly to
defame an Elder in Office by entering his accusation against him without two or
three Witnesses; and much less may thou believe such an Accusation.

Note, For, 1. It is to be supposed that such are more unlikely to be guilty
than other Men. 2. And that for their Works sake, the Wicked or Reproved sort
will be more malicious and forward to accuse such; and they shall never want
False accusers if such can but find Judges that are willing to believe them 3.
And their defamation is most injurous to Religion, and to the Church.

20. Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

20. Those that sin scandalously, either openly, or after reproof for private
sin before two or three, and repent not, rebuke before the Church (or Community
of the People, says Dr. Hammond) that others may be warned to avoid such sins
and such impenitence.

21. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels,
that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing
nothing by Partiality.

21. So heinous is the sin of unjust judging in a Guide of the Church, and so
great a mischief to the Church, that I do hereby most solemnly charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe
these Rules of Justice without a hasty or forestalled Judgment, or prejudice,
and that thou do nothing according to a partial inclination to one party.

N^te, 1. There are Elect Angels, both as respecting Reprobate Devils, and as
chosen to the service of distinct Churches. 2. Tho we know not just how far,
and when Angels are present, we may so far presume of their notice of Church
Affairs, and their regard thereof, as to adj^re even the Pastors of the Church
to avoid sin, as before the Elect Angels. 3. O how heinous then is the sin of
those, who under the name of Bishops cast out and silence Christ's faithful
Ministers, and are prejudiced and partial against the most Godly Christians,
who dare not obey all their Questionable Canons? The honor of Bishops being
due to them for their Work, it is Satan's Design to bring them into dishonor by
engaging them in contrary odious work.

22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins; keep
thy self pure.

22, Lay not Hands in Ordination rashly on any unworthy Candidate; nor for
absolution too hastily on those that profess not Repentance credibly; lest thou
make thy self partaker of the guilt of the sins of unworthy Ministers, and
unsound penitents. Keep thy self pure from the sins which thou must reprove in
others.

23. Drink no longer Water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and
thine often infirmities.

23. Note, 1. That Diet must be fitted to health; and Men should know what is
fittest for it. To use Wine, yea, much Wine or strong Drink for mere Appetite
instead of a little for health, is sinful sensuality. 2. Even then the Apostles
that had the gift of Healing could not use it commonly, but must help
Infirmities by ordinary means.

24. Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some men
they follow after. 25. Likewise also the good works of some are manifest
beforehand: and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.

24, 25. I know that when the best is done, Church Discipline will not cleanse
out all sin. It deals not with secret, but with open sins: Some Men's sins are
open and proveable of which God will have the Church judge them before his
Final Judgment; and some Men's are unknown, and those not we, but God must
judge. And so Men's good Works and Sincerity of Repentance and Obedience are
manifested to the Church to judge of; and Hypocrites that counterfeit such, God
will open in his time.

CHAP. VI.
1. LEt as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own masters worthy
of all honor; that the name of God, and his doctrine be not blasphemed.

1. Let all that are Servants under that Yoke, whether their Masters be
Christians or Heathens, account it their Duty to give them all the Honor and
Obed^ence which is due in that Relation, and not think that Christianity gives
them liberty to disobey them, nor despise them, because of their defect of
Religion: Else Heathens will reproach Religion, and Christ, and say, that we
teach Men to be unfaithful, disobedient, and proud.

2. And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them, because
they are brethren; but rather do them service, because they are faithful and
beloved partakers of the benefit. These things teach and exhort.

2. And let none despise their Masters because they are both Believer, and so
Brethren in Christ, for Christian Brotherhood consists with Inequality of
Place and Relation, and with Subjection, and does not level Men in other
things, nor encourage Pride or Disobedience: But such must the more willingly
do Service to their Christian Masters, because they are faithful, and Partakers
of all the same Blessings of Christianity with themselves, and so more amiable;
and therefore should be served out of special Love, and not only for Fear, or
Wages. These Duties are of great moment; therefore teach and press them
earnestly.

3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness; 4. He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and
strifes of word, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 5.
Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
supposing that gain is godliness:

3, 4, 5. There be some risen up that teach otherwise, on pretense of Christian
Liberty, and Excellency above Heathens: But they go contrary to the Words of
Christ our Lord, which are the Words of Truth and Life, and to the Doctrine
which is formed to true Godliness; and they are a sort of proud, self-conceited
Men, puffed up with a false Opinion that they know more than others, and are
but Brainsick, doting about unprofitable Questions, and striving about Words;
and in stead of edifying Men to Salvation, the Fruit of all their proud
Contention is but the increase of Envy and Strifes, and Railings at one
another, and evil Surmisings and ill Thoughts of one another, (or ill
Opinions;) paltry and frivolous Disputings against each other, coming from
Minds corrupted by Pride and Error, that are void of true Knowledge, and fly
further from the Truth, striving for Victory, and for their own Conceits;
taking the Side that is most for their worldly and fleshly Advantage,
preferring Gain before true Godliness, and fitting their Cloak of pretended
Godliness and Wisdom to their worldly Gain.

5, 6. From such withdrawthy self. But godliness with contentment is great gain.

5, 6. Such Men as these, being not only Heretics, but also proud Defenders
of their Heresy, are neither fit for thy Communion, nor to be disputed with,
but to be avoided, if they repent not. But resolve thou to adhere to sincere
Godliness, which, with Contentedness with Gods Allowance of daily Bread, is the
true and great Gain, and better than the Wealth of the World, which those
Hypocrites prefer.

7. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out.

7. As for Bodily Provision and Wealth, as we brought none of it with us into
the World, so it is certain that we can take none of it away with us; and
therefore truly have no more than we profitably and well use while we are alive.

8. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

8. If we have Food and Raiment, and what is needful to the well-doing of our
Work, we have enough, and must be contented with it: For, desire of more,
except to do good with it to others, is but the sinful Disease of the Mind.

9. But they that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.

9. But they that love and set their Hearts on Riches, and seek after them, do
thereby cast themselves into dangerous Temptations and Snares, and kindle and
pursue such Desires as show their gross Folly, and in stead of Gain, do but
hurt themselves, and cast themselves into the Gulf of Destruction and Damnation.

Note, 1. Oh how little then do the most of the World, that study and scramble
for Riches, think what they are doing all their Lives against themselves! 2.
And is it not doleful Blindness in those Roman Prelates, that for Wealth and
Worldly Greatness have corrupted Christian Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Conversation, and overthrown the Churches Peace, that yet they can say, That
Paul here condemns the Gnostics and Heretics, for that in which they
incomparably exceed them.

10. For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted
after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows.

10. For very much Evil springs from the Love of Money: (From hence is sinful
Care, and Desire, and Grief, and Anger, and Malice, and Envy, and Oppression,
and Deceit, and Lying, and Theft, and Murders, and Wars, and Persecutions, and
Church-corruptions, and Divisions, needless Lawsuits, Bribery, False-Witness,
Perjury, Slander, Railings, and much more such.) And by coveting Money, many
have been their own Tormentors, piercing themselves through in Body and Mind
with many Sorrows, (vexatious Labors, Cares, Fears, Trouble for
Disappointments, and torment of Conscience for their Guilt, and often come to an
untimely reproachful Death.) Yea, it has drawn them to forsake or corrupt the
Faith, for worldly Ends.

11. But thou, O man of God, flee these things: and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.

11. But thou, that art devoted to God and his special Service, abhor and avoid
this Love of Money, and all these its odious Fruits; and follow after the
Spiritual Riches, Righteousness, Godliness, etc.

Note, That is best which is most Divine, likest to God, and most pleasing to
God, and which is the welfare of our best Part, the Soul, which will never
die and fail us, as worldly Riches will.

12. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou
art also called, and have professed a good profession before many witnesses.

12. Go on by Faith to overcome all Temptations, Difficulties, Sins, and
Adversaries, and to propagate and defend the Faith: Press toward the Mark,
till thou lay hold on Eternal Life, which is the Prize. This is the Life that
thou art called out to hope for, to seek, and to obtain, and the Work thou art
to do, and have well begun, and before many Witnesses openly and manfully stood
to the Truth.

13. I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and
before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession; 14.
That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ:

13, 14. I must urgently charge thee, before God, in whose Power are all our
Lives; and before Christ, who went before us by the Example of a good
Confession, not denying the Truth to save his Life, that thou keep this
necessary Law of thy Ministry, as spotless and unrebukable, that thou may be
found such at the coming of Jesus Christ.

15. Which in his times he shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate,
the King of kings, and Lord of lords; 16. Who only has immortality, dwelling
in the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can
see: to whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen.

15, 16. Which in his due appointed Season God will show, who is the blessed
and only Potentate, etc. who only is essentially and necessarily of himself
Immortal, whose glorious Abode is in the Light inaccessible to us Men, and who
is to us Invisible: to him be Honor and Power for ever. Amen.

17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy:

17. And knowing to what Sins Riches most tempt Men, charge the Rich that they
be not high-minded, nor think highly of themselves for their Wealth, nor look
to this for their Safety and chief Comfort, as if it were their best: But that
they take God for their Portion and Security, and wholly trust him for Soul and
Body, who will give us enough for our Comfort and Content.

18. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate; 19. Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they lay hold on eternal life.

18, 19. That they use their riches to do all the good that they can in the
World, that so they may be rich in good Works, which are a far more excellent
sort of Riches than bare Money; that they distribute to others necessity with
readiness, and Communicate with a willing, forward mind, and not with grudging
or backwardness, as against their Wills; that so they may not lose their
Riches, but as they love themselves, will lay up by them a Treasure for
themselves, even a good fund and security by coming under Gods faithful
Promise, for the time to come, that so as good Runners lay hold on the Prize,
they may lay hold on Eternal Life.

20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and
vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so called: 21. Which some
professing, have erred concerning the faith. Grace be with thee. Amen.

20, 21. O Timothy, be sure to hold fast and keep safe these necessary Precepts
which I have given thee, as from God by his Spirit, containing the true Wisdom,
tending to Salvation, in trust that thou teach them others: But avoid those
frivolous Tricks, and wordy Arts, and disputing strife about their falsely named
Sciences, even the Logical and Philosophical triflings of Sto^cks,
Peripateticks, and all the Sects of Heathen Philosophers, in which they think
the excellency of Learning consists, (despising the simplicity of
Christianity as Ignorance) Some Christians being taken with this sort of
Learning, have been tempted to corrupt Religion by it, and to turn such
Heretics as are but Mungrel Christians, and not sound and truly such. The
Grace of God preserve, sanctify and save thee, Amen.

N^te, I have before showed, that it was Philosophers, who by their pretense of
greater Learning were then the Despisers, and Powerfullest Adversaries of
Christianity* and the generality of them were taken up with mere useless
quibling and trifling, and striving about Words, and barren Notions instead of
needful, useful Knowledge; so that their famed Sciences were but like Dreams
and Childish Babbling: So that it was the Honor of Socrates to call them off to
the study of Virtues and things of use, whom Plato followed with a mixture of
Vanity: And a smattering in these Sciences, bewitched the Heretics of that
age. But Paul does not hereby condemn the true Philosophical Knowledge of God
in his Works, nor a carefulness of exact speaking as to Words and Method, or
the accurate fitting of Words to things, and using Art in due measure, and in
subservance to great and saving Truth. But further than it thus subserveth to
the Saving Truth of God in Christ, and our duty and hopes of Life Eternal, all
that is called Learning and Wit is but Fooling.

ANNOTATIONS.
Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus are the Church-Canons, which the Holy
Ghost indicted: And sufficient to their proper use and End, though still there
will be use for Pastoral Determination of such Circumstances, as must be varied
according to variety of Persons, Occasions, Times and Places. And no Canons of
Men that are contrary to any of these Divine Rules, (I mean such of them as are
of universal fixed Obligation) are Obligations to the Faithful. O how happy had
the Church been if these had better observed, and the Churches not corrupted or
torn, by such as by Men are destructively or needlessly added, by badness,
doubtfulness, or numbers a^^wering, or overwhelming the Consciences of those
that are most obedient to God.

The Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to TIMOTHY.
CHAP. I.
1. PAul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to to the
promise of life, which is in Christ Jesus: 2. To Timothy my dearly beloved son:
Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord.

1. Note, 1. It is Gods calling Will, and not only his permitting Will, which
must warrant any to assume the Sacred Ministry, and prove him a true Minister
of Christ.

2. The Promise of Life in Christ, must have Ministers to proclaim it, and to
preach this is their Work.

3. I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, that
without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day:

3. Note, It seems strange, that a Persecutor, and the chief of Sinners,
should say, That from his Forefathers he served God with pure Conscience; and
to the High Priest, That he had lived in all good Conscience to that day. Ans.
1. Some think he means, [Since I was a Christian, I have served God
sincerely, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did.] Others think he means, [Not
only since my Conversion, but before, I designed only to serve God; and
though through ignorance I mistook the Matter, I did it in zeal to please God,
and faithfully obeyed my Conscience.] Which ever be the Sense, there is no
Doctrinal Difference depends on the Controversy.

4. Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be
filled with joy: 5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in
thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I
am persuaded that in thee also.

4, 5. Note, 1. Though we must love all Christians with a special Love, yet
with great difference, as they differ. Choice, Christians, and very loving
Friends, must be loved above the rest.

2. The more unfeigned and free from Hypocrisy, in Faith and Godliness he
appears to be, the more amiable is that Christian.

3. God often blesses the Labors and Examples of Godly Women, to raise up
excellent Instruments in his Church.

4. It renders a good Christian more amiable and honorable, to be the
Offspring of Godly Parents.

6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God,
which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.

6. Note, 1. Gods Spiritual Gifts must be used by our own stirring them up.

2. It is here controverted, 1. Whether it be the Gift of the Ministry, and its
proper Necessaries, that is here meant, or the foregoing Gift of the Holy
Ghost? 2. Whether it be meant of Paul's laying on his Hands for the former, or
the latter?

To these, it may suffice us to know, 1. That Timothy was converted by Paul;
and then it was usual for Converts to receive the Holy Ghost for some wonderful
Gifts, by the Laying on of the Apostles Hands: And it is not to be doubted, but
so did Timothy, long before his Ordination to the Ministry. And who was so
likely to do this as Paul? 2. It Is not to be doubted, but Timothy, after this,
had Imposition of Hands at his Ordination. 3. It is certain, that it was then
by the Hands of the Presbytery. 4. It is probable, that Paul was one of them,
and the ^^ief. 5. Therefore, as the next Verse shows, that he speaks of the
Spirit or Gift of Sanctification, not proper to Ministers; so it is certain,
that Paul meant this, but not improbable that he meant the other also, but
comprehended both.

7. For God has not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love,
and of a sound mind.

7. For though Jews are under the Spirit of Legal Fear and Bondage, and
Unbelievers have a cowardly Fear of Men, this is not the Spirit given us by the
Gospel; but it is the sanctifying of the three great Faculties of the Soul, the
Executive Faculty by Holy Power, the Will by Holy Love, and the Intellect by
sound and sober Judgment: This is the Spirit of Christ.

8. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his
prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel, according to
the power of God;

8. Be not therefore ashamed of preaching and owning the Gospel, or of any
Suffering that this will bring, nor of me, who am Christ's Prisoner, as
suffering for his Work: But whatever hard usage Men exercise against the
Gospel, and the Preachers of it, be content to bear thy part with others, as
strengthened by the Power of God.

9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ
Jesus, before the world began.

9. Who has saved us from our servitude to sin and Satan, and called us out of
the World to be a Holy People, separated to himself; not because by our Works
we were a more Deserving People before than others, but according to his own
Purpose and Gracious Decree of saving us by Christ which he had for us before
the World or Ages began.

10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who
has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to light, through
the gospel:

40. But now this purpose is opened by Christ's appearing in Flesh, who has now
delivered us from the Power of that Death which was the Wages of sin, assuring
us of a Resurrection, and has brought future Life and Immortality to our more
full assured notice by his Gospel.

Note, That though the Souls Immortality, and a life of Retribution be knowable
by the light of Nature, yet, 1. It is with far less Certainty than the Gospel
gives us. 2. And Nature tells us not with any clearness of a Resurrection of
the Body. 3. Nor does it give Men ^ear notice of the Conditions of our
attaining that Felicity: But Christ by the Gospel has given us assured notice
of all this. And this is the chief thing in which Christ's plain teaching
excels all the Subtilties of the Trifling, Heathen Philosophers.

11. Whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the
Gentiles.

11. To Preach this, and teach the Gentiles I am a Commissioned Apostle, and
for this I suffer.

12. For the which cause I also suffer these things; nevertheless I am not
ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to
keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.

12. But I am not ashamed of my Preaching or Suffering; for I know whom I have
trusted, and am persuaded that he can and will keep me in safety, who have
committed my self wholly to him, even to the great day (in which all his
promises shall be performed.)

13. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me in faith,
and love which is in Christ Jesus.

13. Keep before thee the Form, or Summary of Sound Doctrine which thou
heardest of me, which consists in the Articles of Faith, and the Precepts of
Love, of both which Christ is the Object and Sum, (or which form of Sound
Doctrine thou must hold fast by a Firm Belief, and Practical Love of Christ and
his Cause).

14. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep by the holy Ghost
which dwells in us.

14. That good and sure summary of Sound Doctrine which I committed to thy
keeping, hold close to, by the Spirit of God who dwells in us, to help our
Memory, Love and Practice.

Note, Tho it be not certain that Paul means our Creed in the very Words as
now we have them, it is more than probable that he means the same Articles in
Sense, which he recites, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4, 5. and elsewhere.

15. This thou know that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me;
of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.

15. I suppose thou know that all the Bishops or Teachers in Asia have
forsaken me in my Sufferings, and rejected my Apostolic Authority, or neglect
it; of whom are, etc.

Note, 1. That he accuses them not of Apostacy from Christ, but forsaking
him. 2. That those that forsake not Christ or his Church, may forsake a
particular Ruler of it, even an Apostle especially if he be in Prison. 3. That
all the Churches or Bishops in Asia were conjoined in this sin: Sin may have
the Major Vote of the Bishops. 4. Its like then Timothy was no Bishop of
Ephesus which was in Asia, for Timothy forsook not Paul.

16, 17. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. But when he was in Rome, he
sought me out very diligently, and found me. 18. The Lord grant unto him that
he may find mercy of the Lord in that day: And in how many things he ministered
unto me at Ephesus, thou know very well.

16, 17, 18. Note, That the particular Acts of Christian Charity are here
rewarded with the most Hearty Prayers of the Saints, and in the day of the Lord
with special mercy. 2. That it is no sinful selfishness to return a Special
Gratitude, Love and Prayer for those that have been specially kind to us in
distress; especially when by it they manifest a special degree of love and
fidelity to Christ.

CHAP. II.
1. THou therefore my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.

1. Let other Men's Cases provoke thee to grow strong, confirmed and resolved in
the Doctrine, Practice, Comfort, and Patience of that Grace which is treasured
up for us in Christ.

2. And the things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same
commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.

2. Note, 1. That the Senior Pastors must train up others to Preach the Gospel:
And this seems the Original of Eminent Episcopacy: The Elders introducing
their own Scholars were as Fathers to them, and fit to be their Guides. 2. None
should be trusted with the Ministry but Men Faithful and able to teach others.
3. It is the same Doctrine which was delivered by the Apostles which must be
committed to Ministers to teach the People. 4. While the Scriptures were yet
unwritten or unfinished, the words which Men heard from the Apostles, were to
be their Rule of Doctrine.

3. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.

3. Note, The Life of a Minister or Bishop is not a Life of Ease, and Idleness,
and Safeness, and Dominion, and fullness; but like a Soldiers, a Life of
Hardship, hard Labor: hard usage by the World, Hard Sufferings, requiring
Resolution, Fortitude and Patience.

4. No man that warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that
he may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier.

4. A Bishop or Minister must be like a Soldier who makes it his whole
Business, and does not join any other Trade of Life that would take up any of
his time.

5. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except he
strive lawfully.

5. And in the Games in which Men strive for Masteries for a Prize (as Running,
Wrestling, Fencing, Fighting) it is not every one that striveth that has the
Crown or Prize, but only he that wins it by getting the better: And so must
a Minister of Christ strive for the Crown of Life, by putting forth all his
care and strength.

6. The husbandmen that labors must be first partaker of his fruits.

6. The Husbandman must labor (Plow, Sow, etc.) before he reap and gather the
Fruit.

Note, God will reward no Pastors but the Laborours, though Men may advance the
Proud and Idle.

7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

7. Note, They that will have Gods Word and good Council blessed by God to their
Understanding, must consider of it, even of its meaning, truth, and use.

8. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead,

8. If thou deeply consider and remember that Christ was raised from the Dead,
as it will infer the truth of all the rest of the Gospel to thee, so it will be
to thee a powerful example of Patience and Hope in all thy Sufferings for
Christ.

8, 9. According to my Gospel: Wherein I suffer trouble as an evildoer, even
unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound.

8, 9. This Resurrection of Christ is it which I Preach, for which I suffer as
reputed a Malefactor, and that even to Imprisonment and Bonds, but God^ Word
still prospers and is not bound.

Note, So blind and Devilish is Malignant Enmity to Truth and Godliness, that
Christ's best Servants. are reputed and used as Malefactors and Rogues, even for
the best of their Duty to God, and that which is most profitable to the World.

10. Therefore I endure all things for the elects sakes, that they may also
obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.

10. And I think not any Suffering too dear for the sake of Gods Elect, (though
the rest of the World reject the Gospel) that it may but further the Salvation
of them by the Grace of Christ to bring them to Eternal Glory.

11. It is a faithful saying. For if we be dead with him, we shall also live
with him: 12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him:

11, 12. Believe this as a Gospel Maxim, if we be dead to the World for him, as
he died for us, we shall live in glory with him: And it we suffer for and with
him, we shall follow him also in Exaltation unto Glory.

12, 13. If we deny him, he also will deny us: If we believe not, yet he abides
faithful; he cannot deny himself.

12, 13. If for fear of suffering we deny him, he will disown us, and deny us
his Salvation: And if we be unfaithful, and forsake him and our own Salvation,
yet he will be true of his Word, and will not deny and forsake his own Cause,
but make good his threatenings against them that forsake his Mercies.

14. Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord,
that they strive not about words, to no profit, but to the subverting of the
hearers.

14. Note, Bishops and Ministers have great need to call Men to the serious
study of fundamental practical truths, from vain diverting kinds of study, 2.
Such are the Disputes and Contentions about Words or Grammatical Criticisms,
and Barren Speculations in Arts and Sciences, which profit not by their due
subserviency to Saving Truths, but subvert Men, by diverting their Thoughts,
Love, and Labor.

15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.

15. Study not for applause, and to humor sick-brains, but to please God, and
do all as approved to him; with such skill, and care, and diligence, as
beseems, a good Workman that need not be ashamed of his Work, and disgrace
not the Work by an ignorant bungling, confused handling; but take great care
rightly to order, methodize and distribute the word of Truth.

Note, That tho curious unprofitable trifling with Words be sinful, yet the
more accurate ordering, methodizing or distributing Truth, setting each in its
proper place, and giving every hearer his due part is the part of a skilful
Teacher.

16. But shun profane and vain bablings; for they will increase unto more
ungodliness. 17. And their word will eat as does a canker:

16. But avoid profane and vain Clamors and Bablings of Heathen Philosophers or
Heretics, who set up a course of Ostentation of their Wit by unprofitable
Disputes; for the Fruit will be but the Increase of ungodliness: And Vain Proud
Wits are so liable to the Infection, that their words will eat like a Gangren.

17, 18. Of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus; who concerning the truth have erred,
saying, That the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some.

17, 18. Note, It is not certain on what account they said the Resurrect^on was
past, 1. Whether as the Familists and Quakers by pretending that it is but an
inward Resurrection from sin, that is meant. Or, 2. As Pythagoreans, saying,
That it is but the Transition of Souls into other Bodies which is done here, and
no more to be expected. I incline most to this last: It is that which Paul
Disputes against, 1 Cor. 15. that is here meant. And the Doctrine of
Transmigration was then so common, and the Heretics had so much from the
Pythagorean Philosophers that it is most likely to be this.

19. Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The
Lord knows them that are his. And, Let every one that names the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity,

19. But whoever falls away, God's Foundation on which we build our Hope is
sure, and has a Seal as it were, with this double Inscription; on one side [
The Lord knows them that are his] (for he has Decreed their Salvation, and
will not lose them, and he has marked them out by his Spirit, and written on
them Holiness to the Lord: And therefore on the other side is written, [ Let
every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity.] For Gods Decree
conjoyneth the End and Means, and he Decrees none to Salvation that are not at
once Decreed to Sanctification: As his Covenant on his part promises us Life,
so our Covenant to him obliges us to Holiness.

20. But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold, and of silver,
but also of wood, and earth; and some to honor, and some to dishonor.

20. But it is not to be wondered at, if in Gods House which is his
Church-visible, or the Professors of Christianity, there be Errors and
Scandals and some Backslide. For it is usual in great Men's Houses to have some
Wooden and Earthen Vessels for low and base usage, as well as Silver and Gold
for the Table, etc.

21. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto
honor, sanctified and meet for the masters use, and prepared unto every good
work.

21. All that (by Gods Grace) do purge themselves from Heresy and Iniquity,
are Vessels of Honor, sanctified, and meet to serve and honor God, and
disposed to all good Works.

22. Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace,
with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.

22. Note, 1. That the Flesh and its Lusts, especially in Youth, are such
dangerous Enemies to our Holiness and Salvation, that we have greet need to be
warned to avoid those Lusts; and consequently all that cherishes them,
(Fullness, Idleness, loose Company, etc.) 2. Righteousness, Faith, Charity, and
Peace are the Sum of a Holy Life. 3. Charity and Peace must extend to all that
call on the Lord out of a pure Heart (though not in our Forms or Ceremonies.

23. But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender
strifes.

23. But whereas the more ignorant and unsound Professors are apt to turn
Practical Godliness into Self-conceited, Ignorant Controversy and Disputes,
avoid this ill Practice as knowing that such wranglings do but but breed
strifes.

24. And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men,
apt to teach, patient, 25. In meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging
of the truth; 26. And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.

24, 25, 26. But God's Servants, especially Bishops and Teachers must not
provoke D^ssenters by striving Debates, but be gentle to all Men, even the
Erroneous; apt to teach them, and patient with them in Error, Instructing them
in Meeekness, and in a gentle sort, even when they oppose the Truth; and thus
to wait in the right use of Gods means, to see whether God will convince them,
and turn them by Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth, and that by
consideration of what you teach them, they may recover themselves out of the
Snare of the Devil, who captivateth them alive to do his Will.

Note, 1. If Men will not hear gentle teaching, much less will they yield to
provoking Disputes. 2. Yet Disputes like defensive Wars are often necessary to
the defense of the Truth and Church, tho it be not the way to win the Opponent.
3. Till sinners by consideration can be brought to be Agents in recovering
themselves, no Teaching or Disputing is like to recover them. 4 Fire and Water
are not more contrary than this word of God, and the way of Romish Prelates,
who Hereticate, Imprison, Silence, Ruin, and Murder True Christians, for
conforming to all their Superstitious Canons and Ceremonies, and not swearing
obedience to their usurped Domination.

CHAP. III.
1. THis know also that in the last days perilous times shall come.

1. Before the End the times will grow yet harder, more difficult and dangerous.

2, 3. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, 4. Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God; 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof: from such turn away.

2, 3, 4, 5. The sins which will abound are these, 1. They will be enslaved by
selfishness, and little care for any but themselves, 2. Lovers of Money and
Covetous, 3. Open boasters and Vain glorious, 4. Proud, 5. Blasphemers and
r^^^oachful, 6. Disobedient to their own Parents, 7. Unthankful, 8. Without
Holiness, Profane, 9. Having no true, friendly love, no not Natural. 10. Men
that will not live in Peace, but are unreconcilable, 11. Devils, or false
accusers of others, especially of the best, 12. Distempered, Ilconditioned,
Incontinent, 13. Fierce and Cruel, 14. Having no love to Goodness, or Good Men.
15. Betrayers of others, or Treacherous, 16. Rash, Precipitate Heady Men, 17.
High-minded, puffed up with selfconceit, instead of Solid Knowledge, 18. Lovers
of Pleasure, (Sensual and Fantastical, as Carnal Men,) more than lovers of God,
19. Having an Image, or form of Godliness, a show and outside, in Words,
Gestures, Liturgies, Ceremonies and Professions: 20. But the Power of it for
Sanctification, mortifying the Flesh, and overcoming the World, and living
above, they Savor not, but deny and do oppose. From this sort of Men turn
away, and have no communion with them.

Note, If the Apostle had written thus in these latter ages of the Church,
Guilt would have made many accuse him as Describing and Defaming them and their
Church Rulers.

6. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly
women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, 7. Ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth.

6.7. This Evil Spirit is already gone forth, and these Mischiefs are begun,
(and will increase) for such are they that thrust themselves into Houses, and
there by deceit lead captive silly women, who being under a heep of their own
sins, and acted and led by diverse lusts, or ill desires, come to the Christian
Assemblies, and are still learning, but grow not in sound Religion, nor come to
any sound knowledge of the truth, and so are very capable Receptive Objects for
any such deceivers to draw away.

Note, That all the said twenty foresaid Vices which cleave to creeping
Heretics while they are low, do work with greater power and confidence in
them, when they get into Domination.

8. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.

8. And as the Egyptian Magicians withstoud Moses to keep Pharaoh from
believing him, and that by Magic, so do these resist the True Preachers of the
Gospel, by their Magic and Arts now, and by the Sword and Cruelty when they
can get into Power): Men of Corrupt Minds, reprobate concerning the Faith,
Unbelievers under the Name of Christians.

Note, That the Names of Jannes and Jambres are taken by Paul from the
Tradition of the Jews.

9. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto
all men, as theirs also wa^

9. But as Moses's Miracles overcame the Magicians, and shamed them, so these
shall be stopped in the pursuit of their Deceit and Heresy and Opposition to the
Truth, and shall not proceed much further; but God will confound them and
manifest all their folly.

10. But thou have fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith,
long-suffering, charity, patience, 11. Persecutions, afflictions which came
unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra, what persecutions I endured:

10, 11. But for thy establishment, I set before thee the example of my
ministry: Thou have been fully acquainted with the Doctrine which I have
taught, with the course and ordering of my Life, my purpose and design, my
faithfulness in my Work, my long-suffering and freedom from wrath, my love to
others, my patient suffering, my persecutions and sufferings at Antioch, and
other places where I have Preached, and what the Ministry has cost me.

11, 12. But out of them all the Lord delivered me. Yea, and all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

11, 12. But out of them all God delivered me, so that I went on to do his
Work: Yea, such is the malignity of the Carnal World, against that which
crosses their Lusts and Error, and Carnal Interest, that all that resolve in
a thoroughly Godly Life, and not by flattery or sin to comply with the wiles of
Proud Ungodly Men, but to be true to Christ, shall suffer some sort of
Persecution.

13. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived.

13. But the sin which hardens these Wicked Men to be Persecutors of Godly
Christians, will harden them so far as to justify it, and stand to it
impenitently, and think they do God service by Persecuting his Servants,
pretending that it is they that are erroneous and bad men, and do deserve it;
and being deceived themselves, will by deceit draw others to do the like.

14. But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been
assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them;

14. But do thou continue in that Doctrine which I have taught, and thou have
received as assured truth* as knowing that thou had it from Christ by an
Authorized Apostle.

15. And that from a child thou have known the holy scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

15. And from thy Childhood thou have been trained up in the knowledge of the
Old Testament, whose Prophesies of Christ, and sacred Precepts, now Illustrated
by the Gospel of Christian Faith, are sufficient to make thee wise (by the
Spirit of Grace) in all that is neeedful to Salvation.

16, 17. All scripture is given by inspiration of of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

16, 17. All those Writings which are of Divine Inspiration, are also
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Amendment and Correction, and for
Education and Discipline in Righteousness, that so all Gods Servants, and
especially Teachers may be complete and fully instructed and furnished for
every good work required of God, for the Ministerial Service, and for Men's
Salvation.

Note, Tho this exclude not the use of any Subservient Arts or Knowledge, yet
certainly this is little understood or believed by the Roman Clergy, who have
made it necessary to a tolerated Minister to know and observe their numerous
Canons, and Oaths, Subscriptions, and Ceremonies, besides many Books of theirs,
while they admit Priests that are ignorant of the Scripture, and forbid the
reading of them to the People.

CHAP. IV.
1. I Charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: 2. Preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long suffering and doctrine.

1, 2. So dreadful is the sin Sacrilegiously to deny Christ the Service which
thou have vowed him, and art ordained to, and to betray the Gospel, and Men's
Souls by so doing, that I do adjure thee with all possible earnestness, as
before God, and as thou will answer it to Christ in Judgment, when he comes in
the Kingdom of his Glory, that thou forbear, not by any Persecution, as far as
possibly thou can, to Preach the Word, be instant and urgent, in season, or
fair opportunities, yea, Out of season, (necessity must take place of
Convenience and Circumstantial Decencies,) Reprove the faulty, Rebuke gross
sinners, Exhort all Men, with unwearied long-suffering and sound Doctrine.

Note, How dreadful a thing it is to cease Preaching the Gospel while we can,
whatever we suffer for it, and whoever forbids it. Let them that think that
the Apostles only were exempted from yielding to Men's Prohibition, remember
that Timothy had his call and Commission from Men: Qu. But may not Church
Rulers silence Ministers? Ans. Yes, when they so deserve it, by doing more hurt
than good, that Christ's Law does silence them; else not: Tho they may determine
of Place, and Circumstances, and Magistrates may also dispose of their own free
encouragements, and may restrain Men from evil doing.

3. For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears.

3. Note, 1. That the foresight of Evil times by tempting Teachers, should make
Faithful Ministers labor the harder in their time.

2. It is no new thing for Professed Christians not to endure Sound Doctrine,
but to follow false Teachers.

3. It is by their own Lusts, or Erroneous Wills and Choice that Professors are
seduced by false Teachers.

4. Itching Ears is a dangerous Disease.

5. False Teachers may be heaped up, and to have the Major Vote, when Sound
Teachers cannot be endured.

4. And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables.

4. Note, That Chuches, Pastors and People may turn away from the Truth to
Fables.

5. But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an
Evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry.

5. Note, That great watchfulness, patient laboring and suffering, and
fulfilling their Ministry approvedly in all Trials, is the Description of a
True Minister of Christ.

6. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.
7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love his appearing.

6, 7, 8. Note, That, 1. Our Ministry and Life is like a Battle, Combat or Race
for Life or Death. 2. Only they that overcome shall be Crowned. 3. Faithful
Men may take great Comfort when when ^eath is at hand in the Conscience, and
review of a well spent victorious Life and Ministry. 4. Their Reward will be a
Crown of Righteousness, given by God as a Righteous Judge, on Gospel
worthiness, tho not on legal merit, but supposing free Grace in Christ.

5. To love Christ's appearing is the effect of a Saving Faith.

9, 10, 11. Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me. For Demas has forsaken
me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica:
Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia. Only Luke is with me. Take Mark and
bring him with thee: for he is profitable to me for the ministry. 12. And
Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.

19, 10, 11, 12. Note, That, 1. It is not Christ that Demas is said to forsake,
but Paul, and not to turn Worldling, but to go about his Worldly Business
unseasonably. 2. Timothy was not then at Ephesus.

13. The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou come bring with
thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.

13. Note, The word translated [ the Cloke] is very probably by others
translated [ the Roll] viz. of Parchment.

14, 15. Alexander the copper-smith did me much evil: the Lord reward him
according to his works. Of whom be thou aware also; for he has greatly
withstood our words.

14, 15. Alexander an Excommunicate Man has much wronged me: God will reward
him according to his works,

Note, Excommunication enrageth impenitent, bad Men.

16. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: I pray
God that may not be laid to their charge.

16. Note, 1. This was not a forsaking Paul's Cause, but his Person in danger,
which is too usual a case: Herein he followed Christ, whose Disciples all
forsook him and fled. 2. It Is like Peter was not then at Rome among the
forsakers of Paul.

17. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me
the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear: and I
was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.

17. But God forsook me not when all Men forsook me, but was with me and
strengthened me in Vindicating my Person and Cause, that while I was admitted
to answer for my self, the Hearers might know and fame might tell abroad, what
Doctrine it is that I suffer for Preaching, and so all the City of Rome, and
others by their report might hear and have notice of it: And so I was delivered
from the present danger of Death by the Roman Persecutors, as from the Jaws of
a Lion.

Note, 1. Some think that the words [ that the Preaching might be fully known]
refer to Paul's longer time to Preach: I exclude not this, but prefer the other
sense.

2. It was not Treason nor sin for Paul to call his Deliverance from the unjust
Judgment of the Civil Power, his being delivered out of the mouth of the Lion.

18. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me
unto his heavenly kingdom, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

18. And I doubt not but God will still keep me from all the ill Designs and
Attempts of Men against me, at least so far that they shall not draw me to do
evil, and will keep me in a state of right and preparation to his Heavenly
Kingdom: In the hopeful Sense whereof I rejoicingly desire that he be Glorified
for ever. Amen.

19, 20. Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus. Erastus
abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.

19, 20. Note, That Trophimus was sick though Paul had the Gift of Healing,
because it was not to be common, nor at the Will of Man;

21. Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens,
and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.

21. Make have to come, etc.

22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Grace be with you. Amen.

22. The Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Mediator and Head, and has purchased,
chosen and called thee, performed for thee his saving Office, in keeping thy
Soul in Holiness and Peace: His Grace (which is the greatest Treasure on Earth)
be with you, to keep you and prepare you for Glory. Amen.

Note, The Suscriptions to the Epistles, are no part of the Holy Scripture.

ANNOTATIONS.
FAithful Ministers whose Work is to Preach the Gospel of Salvation, should
have so much of the Form, Belief, and Power of it in themselves, as to pass
triumphantly out of the World in suffering for it, and not to think that God
uses them hardly: And to be satisfied in God's acceptance, though their
Brethren and Converts should forsake them, as the Bishops and Churches of Asia
did Paul.

The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to TITUS.
CHAP. I.
1, 2. PAul a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the
faith of Gods elect, and the acknowledging of the truth, which is after
godliness: In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before
the world began.

1, 2. Paul, etc. for the propagating of the Faith of God's Elect, and the
acknowledgment of that sound Doctrine, which is suited to the promoting of
godliness, (in opposition to profaneness and heresy;) in hope of eternal
life, which is the end of all our faith and godliness, and all our preaching
and suffering; which God, that cannot lie, promised before many Ages past.

3. But has in due times manifested his word through preaching, which is
committed unto me, according to the commandment of God our Savior.

3. But what he so long ago purposed, and darkly promised, he ha^h in the
fittest appointed season manifested by his Gospel through preaching, which is
committed to me by the Commission and Commandment of God our Savior.

Note; That it is doubtful whether by God's Promise, be meant only his secret
purpose; or by [(...)] be meant [ many Ages ago.] One of the two it must be;
for we cannot feign an actual Promise before the world began, distinct from his
purpose.

2. It is not unlikely that he means the Promise first made to Fallen Man, of
the Woman's Seed, and after often renewed; and this obscure word was made plain by
the preaching of the Gospel upon Christ's Incarnation, Life and Resurrection,
etc.

4. To Titus mine own son after the common faith, grace, mercy, and peace from
God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.

Note; The Church has but one Faith (or Creed) common in the Essentials to
every Christian.

5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed
thee.

5 Note, 1. That Titus is not said to be settled in Crete as their fixed
Bishop, but left there in his Travels, to settle fixed Bishops there. The
Scriptures tell us that Timothy and Titus were Itinerant Evangelists, that went
about where Paul sent them to plant and settle Churches. But the plain truth
is, that Apostles, and such Evangelists as these, wherever they came, had as
great Authority as any mere Bishops, and more; and that they stayed in some
Countries longer than in others, to settle the Churches; and that the Churches
after their Age thought it an honor to be their Charge, and so called them
their Bishops. In which sense one Apostle might have twenty or forty
Bishoprics, as he planted and settled so many Churches: But none of them were
Bishops fixed and confined to one Church, as those usually called Bishops then
were; so that to controvert whether Peter, Paul, Timothy, Titus, Luke, etc.
were Bishops, is a mere ignorant strife de nomine, about the name, while we
are, or easily may be, agreed of the thing, what work for those Churches they
performed. They were Bishops eminenter, transient from Church to Church; but he
degradeth them that feigneth them affixed to any one as their sole and proper
Flock.

2. Note further, That Titus ordaining Elders (that is, Bishops, as Dr. Hammond
notes) implies the peoples consent; for Titus had no forcing power.

3. That Crete is said to have an hundred Cities in it, being but a small
Island; and so must have an hundred Bishops, if every City had one. But
doubtless Paul means every City that had Christians in it enough to be a
Church.

4. That by (...), is meant any big Town, such as our Corporations are, and
(...), oppidatim, is meant from Town to Town, where there is matter for a
Church. And Paul never meant by this to confine Bishops to Cities, and forbid
them to Villages, but he names Cities or Towns, because then no other places
had Christians enough for a Church.

5. Dr. Hammond thinks that these Bishops then were only the single Pastors of
single Congregations, having no Sub-Presbyters, but Deacons.

6. The ordering of things wanting was not adding to their Faith and Religion,
or making them a Book of Canons; but seeing them reduced to the obedient and
orderly practice of that which the Apostles every where taught and settled.

6. If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not
accused of riot, or unruly.

6. Note; If God bless not the Education of his own Children, 1. The Church
would doubt of his Fidelity, or whether God will bless his greater undertaking.
2. And his Family would be a scandal to Religion.

7. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not self-willed, not
soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre:

7. Note; That the same man is called a Bishop here, who was called an Elder,
v. 5. If then they were distinct Offices, Paul neglected to describe one of
them, which is not credible when he describes Deacons and Deaconesses, Dr.
Hammond confesses that there were in Scripture-times no Subject-Presbyters,
save Bishops, that were under the Apostolic Order; but he thinks that Bishops
had power from the Apostles to institute another Order of Presbyters under them
afterward: But 1. Where is there any proof of that? Must Church Government
cast out all Ministers who believe not such an unproved Assertion? 2. It Is thus
disproved: Paul gives Timothy and Titus sufficient Instructions what Officers
to Ordain in the Church (which Canons were to be a Guide to all after-Ages.)
But Paul gave them no Instruction or Canon for the Instituting of any New Order
between Bishops (or Elders) and Deacons: Therefore it is not credible that any
such power was then given to other Bishops, which he gave not to Timothy and
Titus.

But as to others, who say that the Apostles and Evangelists were then the only
Bishops, I answer, de re, we confess that these had power to go about to gather
and settle Churches; and de nomine, whether such may be called Bishops, let
them quarrel that have nothing else to do. But besides them, every Town or
Church had then their own fixed Bishop (one or more) and Deacons. If Diocesans
or Metropolitans will be Successors of the Itinerant Apostles and Evangelists,
or General Bishops, let them restore to every Church their particular proper
Bishops, and not make Pastors that have not the power of the Keys.

As for them that say, Paul includes both Orders under the same names, Bishops
and Presbyters, I answer, Paul uses not only the same name, but the same
description, and so the Order or Office also must be the same; and both Name
and Thing the same.

2. Bishops are God's Stewards, entrusted to govern by his Law; and not Lords
of his Church, or of their Faith.

3. By [ self-willed] is meant [self-conceited, proud men, that must be
pleased, and have their own will] and cannot become all things lawful to all
men, for their good, but will silence, and excommunicate, and reproach those
that are most careful to do God's will, if they do but cross their Wills, and
Canons.

4. Not [ soon angry] rather [an angry, wrathful man] The rest see on 1 Timothy 3.

8. But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy,
temperate,

8. But one that loves to entertain men in his house, a lover of goodness, and
good men, of a sound and sober mind, righteous, holy, as devoted to God,
continent and abstemious.

9. Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may be able
by sound doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.

9. Faithfully holding fast the word of Faith, even that which we have preached
and taught from Christ, that so he may be able to use sound doctrine, both in
Exhortation, and in Confutation of Opposers.

10. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they
of the circumcision. 11. Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole
houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake.

10, 11. For there are many disorderly and unruly, foolish vain talkers,
deceivers of men's Judgments, specially those Jewish corrupt Christians, (before
often described.)

Note, That here it appears whom Paul means in his Invectives in many
Epistles, even those mentioned Acts 15. that would have made Christianity but a
Supplement to Moses Law; and not Gnostics only or chiefly: Ebion and Cerinthus
were of the worser degenerate sort of them, and the Nicolaitans next.

2 Note; That Paul means not stopping the Seducers mouths by force, but by
confutation by the word: For Titus had no power of the Sword.

3 Note; That so great is the weakness and unstedfastness of many Christians,
that whole households may be subverted by the most gross deceivers. If the
Apostles Converts were such, no wonder if ours be so.

12, 13. One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, The Cretians are
always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies: This witness is true;

12. Epimenides, an esteemed Poet of their own, says, that the Cretians are
false, bad and savage, gluttonous and idle; and his words are true, of too many
of them, who are not converted from these sins.

13. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith;

13. Note; That sharp or cutting Rebukes are necessary to some, that they be
sound in Faith and Religion.

14. Not giving heed to Jewish fables and commandments of men, that turn from
the truth.

14. Not believing the Jewish Fables, and Traditions, and Commands of Men,
which the Pharisees uphold, and which turn men from sound Faith.

Note; Do you think that Paul then was for introducing all the vast body of the
Popish Canons, and all their corrupt Traditions and Ceremonies?

15. Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled, and
unbelieving, is nothing pure: but even their mind and conscience is defiled.

15. They pretend that men are defiled by eating things unclean, not keeping
their Days, Traditions, etc. But to Believers who are purified from guilt and
sin, all Meats and Days, and things of that nature are clean and lawful, yea
sanctified, to further them in serving God. But all things are made unclean as
abused to sin and evil ends, by them that are unclean and unbelievers; their
defiled Minds and Consciences defile all to them.

16. They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.

16. It is not these Judaizers and Heretics Profession that they know more of
God, and his Will, than others, that will prove them wise or good: For their
deeds contradict their tongues: They are practical Atheists, while they deny
God by their works, and lives, as if they knew not God to be the Holy and
Righteous Governor and Judge of all: For they are abominable and disobedient,
and averse and unmeet for all good works.

CHAP. II.
1. BUT speak thou the things which become sound doctrine: 2. That the aged men
be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience.

1. Note; Sound Doctrine is practical, teaching men their duties.

2. It was so ordinary with the Jews for the Younger to reverence and obey the
Elder, that Officers being chosen by seniority (caeteris paribus) it is of no
great moment whether we here expound this of Office or Age (as most do.) They
that take [ Aged] to signify Rulers, some mean Deacons, some Elders that ruled
only, either as some, not Ordained to Preach, or as others, not Ordinary
Preachers: But all unproved.

3. The aged women likewise, that they be in behavior as becomes holiness,
not false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good things,

3. That the Aged women who are in the Church-Catalogue or List, that they
behave themselves as becomes holiness, not to diabolize or calumniate, not
addicted to Wine, Teachers of the younger sort in good things.

Note; Whether these were Deaconesses by Office or not, it is certain, 1. That
all Aged women should instruct the younger. 2. But because few do their duty to
purpose, it is of great use in a well ordered Church, that some few of the
fittest be by Office chosen to this work, that the Ministers may direct these
Aged women in it, and not be themselves too often with the younger sort in
private.

4. That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to
love their children, 5. To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient
to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.

4, 5. It is their work to teach the younger women to be wise, and of sound
Judgment, to love their Husbands, and Children, and show it in their care and
behavior, to be discreet and chaste in mind and behavior; to keep at home, and
look to their household business, and not affect to be needlessly abroad in
idleness, or under temptations; to be good, and subject to their Husbands; for
there is danger that the miscarriages of young women may bring reproach on
Religion and the Gospel which they profess.

6. Young men likewise exhort to be sober-minded.

6. Note, 1. By Sober-mindedness, is meant a mind settled in the Truth, guided
by sound Judgment, and not by Passion, nor seduced by Sense and Appetite, or
Evil company, or proud Self-conceit, or hasty Judging, into evil ways. 2. By
Paul's warnings we may note, what the Vices are that young men, and all sorts,
are most in danger of.

7. In all things showing thy self a pattern of good works: in doctrine showing
uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity; 8. Sound speech that cannot be condemned,
that he that is of the contrary part, may be ashamed, having no evil thing to
say of you.

7, 8. In all the good which thou would persuade thy hearers to, be an
eminent visible Pattern thy self, that they may see in thy self what thou
meanest in thy Preaching: Let thy Doctrine be entire and sincere, without
corrupt mixture, and grave, without levity, sound words that deserve not blame,
and cannot be confuted; that gainsayers (for such you must expect) may be
ashamed, having no ill to charge on your Doctrine or Life.

9, 10. Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please
them well in all things, not answering again: Not purloining, but showing all
good fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all
things.

9, 10. Servants, even the lowest, are thy Charge, and must be taught to be
obedient to their Masters, and in all things lawful belonging to their
Government, to make it their care to please them, not crossing and
contradicting them, nor stealing the least thing, nor taking any thing that is
theirs, which is not allowed them by their consent, but showing all
conscionable trustiness; that while Christian Servants thus excel all others,
it may honor the Gospel and Religion (more than opinionative proud Professors
do.)

11, 12. For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all
men, teaching us, That denying ungodliness and worldy lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world:

11, 12. For the Grace of God by a Redeemer, which brings Salvation, is made
known now to all sorts of men, and extends to Servants as well as Masters,
teaching us all (not the vain speculations of the world, but) to deny all
Doctrines and Practices which are ungodly, and all worldly lusts, of sensuality
or covetousness, and that we should live in this present world, soberly and
temperately to our selves, righteously and charitably to others, and holily and
obediently to God.

13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ,

13. Animated herein by our believing expectation of our hoped blessedness, and
the appearing of the glory of that great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ
(according to his faithful Promise.)

14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

14. Who gave himself as our Savior a Sacrifice for our sins, and a Ransom for
our deliverance, that thereby he might redeem and save us from the guilt,
punishment, and power of all our sins, and purify and sanctify a Church to
himself, as his Body and Spouse, for his Glory, and delightful Communion with
them* a peculiar people segregate from the polluted wicked world, and by his
Spirit made zealously devoted in Love and Diligence, to all good works, of
Holiness to God, and Justice and Beneficence to Man.

Note 1. It was to Redeem us from our own sin, and its effects, that Christ
gave himself as our Savior to be a Sacrifice for us. 2. The Redeemed of Christ
(not only as to sufficiency, but efficacy) differ not from the polluted world
only by name and profession, and common things, but are a purified and peculiar
people, possessed by Christ's Spirit with a Zeal for good works. 3. True Zeal
is for Good works, and not for dead Ceremony, or worldly Interest, or odd
Opinions, and dividing Sects. It is not furious, and hurtful, and envious, but
first pure, and then peaceable, and sets men upon earnest endeavor to do good.
4. It is not only for us that Christ Redeemeth and Purifieth a Church and
chosen People, but ultimately for himself, and for his own and his Fathers
Glory and Complacence. As he made the world not as needing it, but as pleased
in his own expressed Glory.

15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man
despise thee.

15. These necessary practical saving Truths must be the matter of thy
Preaching: And according to the Authority of thy Office, rebuke gainsayers, and
the disobedient: And let thy Doctrine and Behavior in wisdom and gravity, keep
thee from all men's contempt.

CHAP. III.
1. PUT them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
magistrates, to be ready to every good work,

1. Teach them often to live in due subjection to Chief Rulers or Princes, and
those that have Governing-Authority, and to obey Magistrates, in all things
which belong to their Office and Authority to command under God; and to do all
the good they can to all men.

2. To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness unto all men.

2. To avoid all reproachful and evil speaking of any men, without a necessary
cause upon sufficient evidence, to be no contentious strivers, but apt to take
all things in the most favorable sense, using all meekness to all men.

3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and
hating one another.

3. In our dealing with others we must use compassion, remembering that before
our Conversion to Christ, we our selves had those Vices which are reproachful
in others; we were witless, unpersuadable, and disobedient, deceived in the
greatest things, the servants of diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice
and envy against others, odious our selves, and with hatred pursuing one
another. This was the Gentill life.

4. But after that the Kindness and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared; 5. Not by works of righteousness, which we have done, but according
to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration; and renewing of the
holy Ghost. 6. Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

4, 5, 6. But when the Saving-kindness and Love of God our Savior to Fallen
Man appeared to us by the Communication and Illumination of his Grace, not for
any good works or deserts of ours (for we were as bad, as aforesaid) but of his
mere free Mercy he saved us from that state of sin and misery, by Regeneration
signified and sealed in Baptism, and by the renewing work of the Holy Ghost,
which he poured out upon us in the extraordinary measure promised after Christ's
Resurrection, both for Sanctification and confirming Miracles.

7. That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life.

7. That thus by his Grace, being of wicked Enemies made acceptably righteous,
by pardon of sin, and renovation by the Merit and Spirit of Christ, we should
be adopted Sons and Heirs of Eternal Life, according to his Promise, on which
we safely build our hope.

8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good works: these things are good and profitable unto men.

8. This is a point of great importance, which I require thee often to press upon
them, that they which are Christians think not that they have nothing to do,
but to mind Heaven, and pray, and worship God; but that they live in such
Callings or Trades in the world, in which laboring diligently, they may be
profitable to others, and the public good, and not make Religion a Cloak for
Idleness, but spend their time in that which is good and profitable to men.

9. But avoid foolish questions and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings
about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.

9. Note; That though some of these things were pretended to be Learned
Speculations, and others to be parts of God's own Word, yet to be employed in
controversial strivings and disputings, or study, or talk about such little
things, to the diverting of us from the study, discourse, and exercise of
practical godliness, is fruitless vanity.

10. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject:
11. Knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of
himself.

10, 11. The overvaluing of such conceits, and trifling disputes, and thinking
themselves rare wise men for these, and gathering Parties to themselves from
the Church, to propagate them in Separation, and to draw Disciples after them,
is the way of Heretics: Whoever is such a one (supposing private men do their
part) do thou that art a public Minister duly admonish him by meekness and
convincing evidence of Truth, once and again; and if he hear not, reject him
from the Communion of the Flock: For such a man is fixed in his sin by pride,
self-conceit, and a depraved Judgment; and being subverted into a sinful
Separation, is self-condemned, both by the open profession of his sin, as if it
were some glorious Truth and Duty, and by casting himself out of the Communion
of the Church, so that he needs neither Witness nor Judge to cast him.

12, 13. When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to come
unto me to Nicopolis: for I have determined there to winter. Bring Zenas the
lawyer, and Apollos, on their journey diligently, that nothing be wanting unto
them.

12, 13. Note; God's Ministers must further all others in his work, as well as
work themselves.

14. and let ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that
they be not unfruitful.

14. And let all that keep in our Communion, as sound Christians, see that they
live not idly or unprofitably, or on other men's cost and labor, but that they
live in some Trade and diligent labor, by which they may be themselves
maintained, and be fruitful in pious and charitable Communications.

15. All that are with me salute thee: Greet them that love us in the faith,
Grace be with you all. Amen.

15. Note; Mutual kind salutations, and benedictions are meet expressions of
Christian Love.

The Epistle of Paul to PHILEMON.
1. PAul a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto Philemon our
dearly beloved, and fellow labourer, 2. And to our beloved Apphia, and
Archippus our fellow-souldier, and to the church in thy house: 3. Grace to you,
and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Note; That to be a Labourer, and Soldier, and a Prisoner for Christ, are
the Titles that Paul glories in, and not in worldly dignities.

4. I thank my God, making mention of thee always in my prayers, 5. Hearing of
thy love and faith, which thou have toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all
saints;

4, 5. Note; That 1. Paul made particular mention of Persons and Churches, yea
many of both, in his prayers. 2. True Faith in Christ will produce Love to him,
and to all Saints, and not only to those of a Party with us.

6. That the communication of thy faith may become effectual by the
acknowledging of every good thing, which is in you in Christ Jesus.

6. That thy Faith may be manifest to be effectual by the evident production of
all sorts of good fruits, which Jesus Christ has taught thee, and wrought in
and by thee.

7. For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels of
the saints are refreshed by thee, brother.

7. Note; That when Faith brings forth the fruits of liberal Charity to the
relief of others, it mak^s it and the agent much more amiable, than when it
does not, though it should be sincere and want only ability (as a good Tree
laden with choice fruit is more lovely than in the Winter): Much more than when
Hypocrisy makes Faith fru^tless.

8. Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ, to enjoin thee that which
is convenient, 9. Yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee, being such a one as
Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.

8, 9. Church-Rulers must not plead and use mere commanding Authority, when
Love and Entreaty is more fit for the end, as usually it is with Brethren, and
works more kindly and effectually.

10, 11. I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds:
Which in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and to
me.

10, 11. Note, 1. That true Conversion makes good Servants, as well as good
Christians. 2. That the faults of converted Servants should be pardoned by us,
as ours be of God. 3. That God's word by a Prisoner may save Souls. 4. That a
converted Servant should be valued by the greatest Apostle.

12. Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him that is mine own bowels.

12. Note; How dear are the Souls of the meanest to a faithful Minister, and
how lovely when converted?

13. Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have
ministered unto me in the bonds of the gospel.

13. Even thou thy self owe me service while I suffer bonds for the Gospels
sake; and I would have kept him to do it for me in thy stead.

14. But without thy mind would I do nothing that thy benefit should not be as
it were of necessity, but willingly.

14. But I would not, without thy consent, so dispose of one who is rightfully
thy Servant, though a fugitive; that thy kindness to me may not be necessitated
by my will, but be free as thy own will.

15. For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou should
receive him for ever. 16. Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother
beloved, specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh and in
the Lord?

15, 16. His temporary departure may end in a durable reception and
entertainment; and that not only as a Servant, but a Brother, beloved specially
by me who converted him, much more by thee to whom now he is doubly related,
both as a Servant, and as a Fellow-member of Christ.

17, 18. If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as my self. If he
has wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put that on mine account.

17, 18. If thou judge me to have right in thy affairs, by the bonds of
Christian friendship, receive him if thou would receive me: Set thy losses by
him, and wrongs on my account, and I will give thee satisfaction.

19. I Paul have written it with mine own hand, I will repay it: albeit I do
not say to thee how thou owe unto me even thine own self besides.

19. Rather than money-matters shall continue a breach, I here give thee a Bill
under my hand, that I will repay all that he owes thee; tho I might tell thee
that thou owe me even thy self.

20. Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord: refresh my bowels in
the Lord.

20. I pray thee, Brother, comfort me with this expression of thy Christian
Love and Forgiveness.

21. Having confidence in thy obedience, I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou will also do more than I say.

21. I write this as encouraged by a strong persuasion that thou will not only
obey my desire, but do more for him than I think meet particularly to urge thee
to.

22. But withal prepare me also a lodging, for I trust that through your
prayers I shall be given unto you.

22. Note; That our deliverances must be expected by the means of the prayers
of the faithful.

23, 24, 25. There salute thee Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus:
Marcus Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my fellow laborers: The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with your spirit Amen.

23, 24, 25. Note; Paul was not without fellow prisoners, or fellow laborers,
in his bonds.

The Epistle to the HEBREWS.]
[Whether by Paul, Luke, or whom, is uncertain.]
CHAP. I.
1. GOD, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto
the fathers by the prophets, 2. Has in these last days spoken unto us by his
Son,

1. God who has not left us only to the light of Nature, to know him by his
works of Creation, but in mercy has more fully informed us by supernatural
Revelation, was pleased to do this variously as to Times, and Manner, and
Degree, and of old spoke to our Ancestors by several Prophets, who were the
Messengers of his Word: But in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son
(greater than all Prophets.)

2. Whom he has appointed to be heir of all things, by whom also he made the
worlds.

2. Whom he has appointed to be Owner and Lord of all things, as he is God and
Man, not only by the prime right of Creation, but as the Redeemer of Man, all
power in Heaven and Earth, and all things are delivered to him for the ends of
Redemption: And by him, (his Wisdom and Word) he made the Worlds, and all
therein.

3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person,
and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself
purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high:

3. Who being the shining Beam, or Splendour of his Glory, by whom God shines
forth, or gives the knowledge of himself to us (as the Sun is known to us by
its light) and the Character of his Subsistence, and upholding and ruling all
things by the Word of his Power (as by that Word of God's Power they were made)
when he had by his own Merits, and Sacrifice, and Covenant, made a sufficient
Purgation to take away the guilt of our sins, and so far purged them away, as
to enact a pardoning Covenant for all that will believingly accept it in him.
So that now the general Pardon wants nothing but Acceptance, (and none shall
perish for want of sufficiency in the Sacrifice or Covenant) he then ascended,
and is in heavenly Glory, at the Right Hand of God's supreme Celestial Majesty,
Head over all things to his Church, that thence he may send down the Holy
Ghost, to gather his Chosen, and bring his Mystical Body to Glory.

4. Being made so much better than the angels, as he has by inheritance
obtained a more excellent name than they.

4. Being in Excellency and Superiority, set above the Angels, as he has by
Lot or Inheritance, obtained higher Titles, Power and Offices than they.

5. For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son. 6. And again, when he brings in the first begotten into the world,
he says, And let all the angels of God worship him.

5, 6. He calls Christ his Son in diverse Texts (which, though it speak partly
of David, yet ultimately means Christ;) and he commands the Angel^ to
worship him. But none of this is said of Angels.

7. And of the angels he says, Who makes his angels spirits, and his
ministers a flame of fire:

7. But he calls his Angels Spirits, and Servants, and a Flame of Fire.

8. But unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom. 9. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity, therefore God even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

8, 9. But to the Son he ascribes the name of God, and an Everlasting Throne
and Kingdom, and a Scepter of Righteousness, and a Superiority, by Divine
Unction, above all others.

10. And, thou Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth:
and the heavens are the works of thine hands.

11. They shall perish, but thou remainest: and they all shall wax old as does
a garment. 12. And as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be
changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

10, 11, 12. He is said to be the Lord who made Earth and Heaven; and who will
remain when they perish, and be the same when they are changed.

13. But which of the angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool?

13. He never said to any Angel, what he said to Christ of his Kingdom, and the
subduing of his Enemies, etc.

14. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of Salvation?

14. All those Spirits that are properly called Angels or Messengers, are
Spirits appointed and sent forth by God, to minister for them who shall be
Heirs of Salvation, under Jesus Christ.

Annotation.
THE great difficulty here is, to understand how this description belongs to
the Person of Christ. Whether it be the Divine Nature that is said to be [
appointed Heir, etc. the Brightness of God's Glory, the Character of his
Subsistence, or Person, made better than Angels, begotten this day, set on
God's right hand in power, etc.] or the Humane: Or whether it be spoken of the
Person of Christ as in both Natures: and we must not enquire according to which
Nature the words are spoken of Christ? I have before said, on Col. 1.15, 16.
how many Opinions about the Person and Natures of Christ have been pleaded for.
1. That of the Orthodox, who assert but one Person of Christ, and two Natures;
though the word [ Person] was long refused by many, as not meaning the same
with Hypostasis. And subtle Philosophers say, that the Humane Nature can be no
part of Christ's Person, but an Adjunct; because his Person was complete from
Eternity, and the Deity cannot be a Part. But if it were not that the
Hereticators will quarrel with it, it may be said, that the word Person is
equivocal; and that as Hypostasis is a Person, the Divine Nature is the whole
Person; but not as it is (...), or a Relative Person.

2. That of the wretched Socinians, who feign Christ to be mere Man advanced.

3. That of the Arrians, who make him only the first Creature, or Emanation of
God incarnate, super-angelical, Light of Lights, Very God of very God, begotten
by Emanation; not made, as other Creatures, but making them all, but yet not of
the same Essence or Substance with the Father, but from the same, as a Beam or
light from the Sun. This the Church has condemned these 1300 years, and more.

4. That of some of late, who say that Christ has three Natures; 1. The
Divine. 2. The aforesaid Super-angelical, assumed by the Divine to nearest
Union.

3. The Humane, assumed by Both. And they think that this Text speaks chiefly
of the second, as assuming the third. As it is dangerous to err about any
necessary point concerning Christ's Person, so it is dangerous to be rash in
taking up any unnecessary Opinion about so incomprehensible a Mystery, and
worse to urge it with pride and fury, to the dividing of the Church, and the
damning of Dissenters. To say about many Cases that have torn the Churches [ I
know not] is more pardonable than turbulent Error.

CHAP. II.
THerefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard, lest at any time we should let them slip.

1. Therefore we that have heard the Gospel of Christ, and specially who have
professed to receive it, should with great earnestness set our minds and hearts
unto it, lest by negligence or unbelief, we should lose what we have heard, and
be as leaking Vessels, and be lost our selves.

2. For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward:

2. For if the Law which God delivered to Moses, by the ministry of the voice
and appearance of Angels, was yet firm and sure, and every sin against it, and
threatened by it, was punished.

3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard
him, 4. God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his own will?

3, 4. Much less shall we escape, if we neglect this far greater Salvation, and
more excellent manifestation of the Will of God; even that Gospel which Christ
first preached himself, and those that heard him confirmed by their testimony
and preaching; God also confirming to us their testimony from Heaven, by many
such signs and wonderful works, and with many sorts of miracles or acts of
Power, and distributions of the Holy Ghost to others when they believed, as
were a certain proof of God's attestation, and the approbation of his own Will.

Note, That here we have the true evidence of the truth of the Gospel, on which
Believers may build their faith.

5. For unto angels has he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we
speak:

5. God has not made Angels the Sovereigns of the World to come, and put the
Kingdom of Glory so under them, that all must be their Subjects.

6. But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man, that thou art
mindful of him: or the son of man, that thou visitest him? 7. Thou made him a
little lower than the angels, thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and
did set him over the works of thy hands: 8. Thou have put all things in
subjection under his feet.

6, 7, 8. But the Psalm is ultimately to be understood of Christ and his
Church, which says, What is man, etc. Though Christ was a while on Earth, in a
state of Humiliation, below Angels us to the Flesh; yet it was in order to the
Glory, and victorious Power of his Kingdom.

8. For in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not
put under him. But now we see not yet all things put under him.

8. By this it is sure that all things are to be subdued to Christ, though yet
we see it not done.

9. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God
should taste death for every man.

9. But we see that Jesus, who was made lower than Angels, for and in his state
of Humiliation and Crucifixion, is already ascended up into Heaven, where he is
crowned with Glory. And as his death was suffered in the common nature of Man,
and the sins of all men had a causal hand in it, and it was by God's Grace the
purchasing Cause of the conditional Covenant of Grace, and of all the good that
men receive, so he dyed to bring Man to Glory with himself. And therefore that
Text may well be understood of the advancement of Man, both in Christ, and his
Church, that shall be advanced by him.

10. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect
through sufferings.

10. For it seemed meet to the God of Wisdom, for whom, and by whom all things
are, to make Christ the Captain of their Salvation, a perfect performer of his
Saving-Office, and to obtain his own Glory in heavenly Perfection by the way of
suffering, and to bring all God's adopted Sons to Glory by the Merit of it, and
by following him in the same suffering way.

11. For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one:
for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, 12. Saying, I will
declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing
praise unto thee. 13. And again, I will put my trust in him: and again, Behold,
I, and the children which God has given me.

11, 12, 13. And that it is in and by Christ, that Humane Nature is advanced,
as the Psalm. 8. says, is proved by the Union that is between Christ and us. He
that sanctifies us, and we that are sanctified are of the same Humane Nature,
and are as one Body: And therefore, as we must suffer with him, we shall reign
with him. Therefore in the Texts that, under other typical persons, speak of
Christ, he calls us his Brethren, and Children given him, to whose trust we are
committed.

14, 15. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil: And deliver them,
who through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

14, 15. And that he might bring us to Glory with him, as we have flesh and
blood, he would first be so far made one with us, as to take also flesh and
blood, that he might be capable of suffering and dying for us; and so, by
undergoing death, which we by sin had brought our selves under, and by rising
from the Dead, he might conquer Satan and Death, and destroy his Kingdom and
Power of Death, which he had obtained by conquering Man by his Temptations, and
by God's letting him be the Executioner, where he had been the conquering
Tempter; and so that Christ might deliver the Faithful by his Conquest of Satan
and Death, from continuance under Death, and from the danger of Hell, and from
the slavish fear of both (Death temporal and everlasting;) who else, by their
guilt, and liableness to both these, must be all their life time in bondage,
both by their danger and their fears.

16. For verily he took not on him the nature of angels: but he took on him the
seed of Abraham.

16. For it is not Angels that he took hold of, or whose Natures he assumed,
and came to save; but he took on him the Nature of Man, the Seed of Abraham, to
save Man.

17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest, in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

17. So that he must be in all things like Man, whom he would save, that he
might be fit for his undertaken Office, to be an High Priest for us to Godward,
and to be merciful and faithful therein, to make Reconciliation for our sins.

18. For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted.

18. For he himself having been tempted and tried by Sufferings, and having
overcome them all, he is now more meet to be a Compassionate Helper, the
Example, the Teacher, and the Trust of them that must follow him through
temptations; and by his Merit and Victory, has obtained power to deliver them.

CHAP. III.
WHerefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the
apostle and high priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, 2. Who was faithful to
him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house.

1. Wherefore you who are holy Brethren, by Faith and Dedication given up to
Christ, and in him made partakers of that Calling from Heaven, which makes you
Heirs of Heaven, study and consider Jesus Christ, the great Apostle, sent of
God to be the prime Preacher of the Gospel, and the High Priest, and chief
Guide and Mediator to Godward, of our Religion and Profession; who faithfully
did all that belonged to his undertaken Office (in sacrificing himself for our
sins, and fulfilling all Righteousness, and conquering Satan and Death, and
ascending to intercede for us in Glory, and sending down the Holy Ghost, and
making and sealing the Law of Faith) even as Moses in his time was faithful,
though with disparity of Honor and Work; Christ in his own House by a more
perfect Administration, and Moses but as a Steward.

3. For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, in as much as he
who has builded the house, has more honor than the house.

3. For Christ is as much more honorable than Moses, as the Maker and Master
is than the House; for Moses was but a Member of the Family, but Christ the
Maker and Master of it.

4. For every house is builded by some man: but he that built all things is God.

4. All Families or Houses are founded by some man, but he that built the
Church, is the same that built or made all things; and that is God.

5. And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a
testimony of those things which were to be spoken after. 6. But Christ, as a
son over his own house,

5, 6. And Moses, as a Servant, was faithful for the Delivery and Confirmation
of so much of God's Word as was to be spoken to the Jews by him: but Christ, as
the Son and Heir, and Master of the House, as his own.

6. Whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of
the hope firm unto the end.

6. This House is the Church, of which we are parts, so be it we hold fast the
confident Profession of our faith, and the joy and glorying in our hopes of the
promised Blessedness, firm to the end.

7. Wherefore, as the holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice, 8.
Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the
wilderness: 9. When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty
years. 10. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do
always err in their hearts, and they have not known my ways. 11. So I swear in
my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.

7, 8, 9, 10, 11. But seeing he will take none to dwell with him in Glory, but
those that persevere, hear and consider what the Holy Ghost said to and of the
Israelites; To day, etc. Neglect not his present Call, and your present Day, to
the hardening of your hearts, as your Fathers did in the Wilderness; by which
God's Justice was engaged against them, as a People whose hearts were
habituated to evil, and have not the obedient knowledge of his Ways, and Works,
and Will: So that he swear in his just displeasure, that that Generation should
not enter into the promised Land.

12. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God.

12. Take warning by these Israelites, and see that there be not in any of you
an evil, unsound heart, that is prepared by secret Unbelief, to depart in Trial
from the Living God.

13. But exhort one another daily, while it is called, To day, lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

13. To this end, one means appointed by God for your perseverance is, speedily
and daily to exhort and stir up one another; the Pastors in the Church and
Assemblies, and all in their Places and Converse: And the rather, because Sin
of which you are in danger, is a deceitful thing, and they that revolt are made
believe that it is but a receiving of the Truth, or a necessary Self-saving,
and no forsaking of Christ, or Truth, or Godliness.

N. Qu. But what if Rulers forbid us to meet daily for such Exhortation? Answ.
God commands you to do it in the manner and time that the End requires, and
no man can dispense with his Law. The Christians, for three hundred years,
assembled, when forbidden.

Qu. But what if Christian Rulers forbid it? Ans. Christians have more
Obligation than Heathens to do good, but no more Authority to do evil, or null
God's Laws.

Qu. But what if Violence or Prisons restrain us? Ans. God requires not
Impossibilities.

14. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end.

14. We are i^itially made partakers of Christ as our Savior: but if we will
attain Salvation by him, we must hold the subsisting faith (or the confidence)
in which we have begun (or which is our Principle) firm to the end: (For
Perseverance is made a Condition of the Promise of Salvation)

15. Whilst it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, as in the provocation. 16. For some, when they had heard, did provoke:
howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses.

15, 16. The words tell us, that some that heard, after Deliverance from Egypt,
provoked God; but it was not all.

17. But with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had
sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness?

17. With whom was God so displeased, as Grief here signifies? Nothing
displeases him but sin. It was with backsliding, disobedient, unthankful
murmurers, that would not rest in the Will, and Word, and Providence of God,
but must have their own carnal will fulfilled, and so God in Justice killed
them in the Wilderness, after so many Miracles had led them many years toward
the promised Land. Take heed lest you follow them in the like sin, to greater
punishment, for abusing greater mercies.

18, 19. And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but to
them that believed not? So we see that they could not enter in, because of
unbelief.

18, 19. It was the sinning Unbelievers that he swear should not enter: and it
was because of their Unbelief, that they could not enter. Take heed therefore,
lest ye fall by Unbelief in Trial: for there is more required to our complete
Salvation, than to our first part in Christ.

CHAP. IV.
1. LEt us therefore fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his
rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.

1. Seeing then that this Promise of Rest is conditional, if we persevere, and
among so many Trials we are in so much danger of our own heart, let careful
fear prevent your falling, and missing the benefit of that Promise.

Note; Qu. Why should we fear that which God*s Decree and Grace have made
impossible? Ans. 1. God has not made it impossible in it self, but only
hypothetically or by consequence from his Decree and Foreknowledge, to any man.
2. His Decree and Foreknowledge conjoyn the End and Means; as if he said [This
man shall be saved by persevering Faith, and shall persevere by fearing to fall
away, and avoiding the occasions.] 3. Weak Christians have not the assurance of
God's Election, and therefore can gather no such consequence. 4. So few (if any
known) did for many hundred years hold that no initial right to Salvation is
lost, or that all true Christians, besides strong confirmed ones, did
persevere, that it is not safe for doubting persons to lay their Salvation on
such a controversy, specially when it tends to abate necessary fear. The
Fathers of the first four hundred years thought that some beginnings of
Justifying Faith were loseable, as Adam't Innocence was. And Calvin says,
Semen qualecunque fidei perditur.

2. For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them; but the word
preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.

2. They heard God's Word, and so do we: But it did not profit and save them,
because they received it not by a sound, confirmed, practical Belief.

3. For we which have believed do enter into rest, as he said, As I have sworn
in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the works were finished
from the foundation of the world.

3. There is a Rest promised to us Believers, as well as the Typical Rest was
to the Israelites, and the seventh day separated for a Sabbath from the
Creation, which signified our better Rest.

4, 5. For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise, And God
did rest the seventh day from all his works. And in this place again, If they
shall enter into my rest.

4, 5. The Text tells us, that besides the Sabbath Rest, there was another
promised.

6. Seeing therefore it remains that some must enter therein, and they to
whom it was first preached, entered not in because of unbelief: 7. Again he
limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day, after so long a time; as it is
said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. 8. For if Jesus
had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of another day.

6, 7, 8. It is plain then that some must enter into Rest; and Unbelief kept
out them to whom it was then Preached; and David, long after their entering into
Canaan, se^s them a day for their further entrance, which he would not have
done if Joshua's bringing them into Canaan had been the full obtainment of the
promised Rest, it follows that more than that was promised.

9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God.

9. The great Sabbatism or Rest, then promised to the People of God is yet to
come.

Note; This Sabbatism or Rest, no doubt, is All the state of the Churches
deliverance and felicity by Christ Incarnate and Glorified, which in the
first fruits is all the Grace which he gives us on Earth, but in the proper,
full performance it is the state of Glory.

I have before said why I assent not to Dr. Hammond, whom makes it to be the
deliverance of Christians from Persecution, and enjoying peaceable Assemblies
by the destruction of Jerusalem, as if this were the main sense of the Text. 1.
How little a thing was that in comparison of Saving Grace and Glory? 2. Most of
the Christians to whom Paul wrote, were to die before that, and so not to see
and enjoy it. 3. The Apostles themselves were not to see it and enjoy it. 4.
Christianity continued, after that, a persecuted hated thing under the Heathen,
till above three hundred years, till Constantine's time, though with
intermissions between the Ten Persecutions. Multitudes more were martyred by
the Heathens than by the Jews, who were in servitude themselves. 5. And if any
apply it to the time after Costantine, the mercy indeed was unspeakable, but
those that were here written to, were not to see it: And the Voice that is
reported to say, Hodie venenum funditur in Ecclesiam, has by experience been
so far credited, that we must not prefer the Prelatical Grandeur and Power,
which shortly was set up, before the better Rest of Saints; while we think how
much Peaceable Assemblies (which the Doctor calls that Rest) through a great
part of the Christian World, have been hindered and persecuted by Violence,
Inquisitions, Prisons, and the Blood of many hundred thousand more than the
Jews killed, by the Canons, and Executions of Papal Greatness, and for its
Interest.

And it is incredible that to the suffering Believers of that Age, the Holy
Ghost comforting them with this great Promise or a Sabbatism or Rest, should
not principally mean the great and glorious final Rest.

10. For he that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own
works, as God did from his.

10. For as God is said to rest and sanctify the Sabbath, when he ended his
six days work; so our Sabbatism or Rest must be a ceasing from our own works,
that is, 1. From Sin. 2. From those Wilderness Labors, or troublesome means (as
sorrow, fear, conflict, etc.) which are short of the End. And 3. From Suffering.

Note; This Verse shows that it is the Heavenly Rest, with the beginning of it
by Holiness, which is here meant, for Church-grandure, and full prosperity,
have been the cherishers of our own works, and not the ceasing of them.

11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after
the same example of unbelief.

11. Let it then be the care and diligence of heart and life, to attain that
Rest, and not to lose it by Apostasy, but to take warning by those Unbelievers.

Note; is it liker to be the destruction of the Jews, and freedom from this
Persecution, that should be meant, by an Apostle that gloried in suffering,
rather than that Glory which is indeed the end of Christian care and labor?

12. For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

12. For though some may be deceived by a self-flattering heart, and seducing
reasonings, and some think to conceal their sin, God's Word is quick and
powerful, and sharper than a two-edged Sword, being fitted by the all seeing
God, to search hearts to the bottom, and to discover and separate evil from
good, in the secretest thoughts and intents of the heart.

13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

13. It is (as the Light from the Sun) the word of that God, before whose Eyes
all hearts and things are in open view, as a diffected body; and such a
searching Light is his Word with whom we have to do (or which we are speaking
of.)

14. Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the
heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession.

14. Having then so great a High Priest ascended into Heaven, (the Eternal
Word, who sends forth his searching Word) who is able to save, and help us,
or destroy us, if we revolt; Let us hold fast our professed Faith and Hope
through all our Trials.

15. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities: but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.

15. For we have not a High Priest that is so far from our natures and case, as
to be unconcerned, and void of compassion toward us, as much as we are toward
the brutes; but one that was man, and tempted, and persecuted, as much as we,
but without sin.

Note, That Temptation may be without sin: It is not our sin merely to be
tempted.

16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

16. Let us therefore so fully trust to the sufficiency and mercy of our High
Priest in the Heavens, as to come (though with filial Reverence, yet) with
boldness in the belief of our acceptance, that we may obtain mercy, and find
suitable and seasonable help in all our dangers and needs. (For God will yet be
sought unto for all.)

CHAP. V.
1. FOR every high priest taken from among men, is ordrained for men in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.

1. For among men, the High Priest that is one of them, is a person consecrated
to officiate for them Godwards, or in things of their concernment toward God,
specially in offering Gifts and Sacrifices for sin.

2. Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the
way, for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity.

2. Who can the more compassionately offer for those sins of ignorance, error
and weakness, which the Law allows Sacrifice for, as being liable to
infirmity himself.

3. And by reason hereof he ought, as for the people, so also for himself, to
offer for sins.

3. And being liable to sin himself, he must offer for his own sin as well as
theirs.

4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron.

4. And so Sacred an Office was not to be invaded by Usurpers, without God's
call, for by it Aaron was made Priest.

5. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest: but he that
said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee.

5. And Christ usurped not this honor, but God gave it him, who said, Thou art
my Son, etc.

6. As he says also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedec.

6. And Psalm. 110. he says, Thou art, etc. Thou art a King and Priest, as
Melchisedec was, and that for ever.

7. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard, in that he feared:

7. Who in the Garden, and on the Cross, when he had offered Prayers with
Agony, sweating like Water and Blood, and cried out on the Cross, [ Why have
thou forsaken me?] to him that could have prevented his death, and all the
pains which he feared (not with any sinful distrust in God, nor any opposition
to his Fathers Will, but from that strong aversation to suffering and death as
such, which is a property of Humane Nature, and did consist with a full
submission to his Fathers Will, and consent to be a Sacrifice for us:) and he
was heard in that he feared, though he must first suffer before he was raised.

8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience, by the things which he
suffered:

8. Though he was a Son, (and sinless) yet did he by his suffering,
experimentally know and show what it is to obey at the dearest ra^e, as
absolutely subject to the Will of God.

9. And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all
them that obey him,

9. And being consummate, or made by the perfection of his performed part on
Earth, a perfect Redeemer, he is in the fullness of Power in Heaven become the
Author of Eternal Salvation, by Intercession, Pardon, Communication of his
Spirit, and by actual Glorification, to all that hearken to him, and obey him.

Note 1. That these Texts do not intimate any privative imperfection in
Christ's Knowledge or Obedience, or any qualification before; but a negative
imperfection cannot be denied to his Humane Nature. As Adam new made knew not
all sensible Objects remote, as he did when they came before his senses; so
Christ in his Infancy, and in the Stable at Bethlehem, must not be supposed to
know as man, all that after he knew: Yea himself says, that after he knew not
the day and hour, etc. so he had no sensible experimental knowledge of passive
Obedience before. 2. He is said to be made perfect in two respects. 1. In the
perfect performance of his Work on Earth; as any undertaker is called perfect
when he has perfected his undertaking. 2. In his own perfection in Heaven. 3.
Obeying Christ is part of the condition of final Justification and Salvation.

10, 11. Called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec: Of whom
we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of
hearing.

10, 11. Of which Priesthood of Christ, as compared to Melchisedec, we have
much to say, which it is not easy to make intelligible by words, to those that
are so unprepared, as you are, by ignorance, and a dull and slow understanding.

Note 1. All great Scripture Truths be not equally easy to be understood.

2. It is the incapacity of hearers, through dullness and want of preparatory
knowledge, which makes Scripture and Teaching not understood.

3. It is no uncharitable dishonouring of professed Christians, but an
undeniable thing, to say, that great numbers of them are dull hearers, and by
ignorance incapable at the present of hard things.

12. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach
you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God, and are become
such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

Note 1. Men ought to grow in knowledge, according to the time they have to
learn. 2. Many after long Teaching are ignorant, and must be taught again the
same things which they have long ago heard. 3. God's Oracles have Principles
which must be first learnt.

13. For every one that uses milk, is unskilful in the word of righteousness:
for he is a babe. 14. But strong meat belongs to them that are of full age;
even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both
good and evil.

13, 14. Milk is the diet for Babes, and plain things for young and dull
Christians; harder things will but hurt them: These are for them that by long
study and practice have got preparatory knowledge, and a habit of quick, clear,
and sound discerning Truth and Error, Good and Evil.

Note 1. People must be taught but according to their capacity. 2. Harder
things in Divinity must be taught them that have learned the easier, and are
fit for them. But by [ hard things] is not meant unnecessary curiosities of
humane Arts, nor unprofitable, words, or triffling controversies; But 1. A more
clear, distinct and satisfying knowledge of the Evidence of the truth and sense
of the Essentials. 2. A more orderly knowledge of their method and mutual
dependence as one Systeme, that as in a Table or Scheme we may set each member
in its proper place. 3. A more extensive knowledge of the useful consequences
of the Essentials and Principles.

CHAP. VI.
1. THerefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on
unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works;
and of faith toward God, 2. Of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of
hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.

1, 2. Therefore supposing the Principles of Christian Doctrine, I now pass
over such discourse, and will go to lead you to some additional knowledge
belonging to the more perfect; not now discoursing of these Principles as to
men that have not received them; I mean, 1. Repentance and Conversion from a
state of Death, and from Infidelity, and a wicked, ungodly life. 2. A lively
belief and trust in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 3. The preparatory
Baptism of John* and the Baptism of Christ, which constituteth us professed
Christian; what profession is prerequisite in the Adult, and what Covenant it
solemnizeth, what Duties it binds us to, and what Benefits it delivers and
seals. 4. The great Gift to Christ's Apostles and Ministers of Authoritative
Imposition of hands, by which the same Holy Ghost was given to others, and
Miracles wrought for the confirmation and propagation of the Christian Faith.
5. The certainty of a Resurrection, and future Life, including the Immortality
of Souls. 6. The final Judgment which will sentence men to their everlasting
state, and use them accordingly.

3. And this will we do, if God permit.

3. And so I will now pass to some additional further Truths, by God's
assistance.

4. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, 5. And have
tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; 6. If they
shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance: seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

4, 5, 6. I will not now go back to Preach Regeneration to you that profess to
be already regenerate, though you are tempted to Apostasy: For it is impossible
for those that were illuminated to believe in Christ, and were baptized, and
have not only heard of the signal Gifts of the Holy Ghost from Heaven, but have
themselves had an experimental taste thereof, and been themselves partakers of
the Holy Ghost, as well as seen his miraculous Gifts in the Church, and have
had an inward experimental taste of the truth and goodness of the Gospel, and
the powerful preparations and hopes of the World to come; If they shall really
lose all this, and fall from the belief of Christianity, to regenerate or renew
these men again to saving Repentance, seeing after believing Christ to be the
Messiah, they are turned to take him for a Deceiver and Blasphemer, and consent
to the pretended Justness of his Crucifixion, and so expose him by slander to
the same reproach, as his Crucifiers did.

Note 1. That the Apostle speaks of no other falling away, but to Infidelity,
denying Jesus to be the Christ. 2. That it is not Temptation to Unbelief, nor a
degree of Unbelief mixed with Faith, or doubting, that he speaks of, but a
forsaking and renouncing Christ. 3. He speaks not of the mere denial of the
Tongue in a passion or fear, but of the renouncing Christ by heart and tongue.
4. He speaks not of the act of a man in madness, or melancholy, who is not
himself, but of a man's deliberate act, that has free use of reason, 5. He
speaks of no Infidels, or total Apostates, but those that had themselves been
partakers of the signal Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and were convinced by
experimental gust of the Truth. 6. Therefore it must be noted, that not only
truly holy persons, but abundance (if not the greatest part) that did but so
believe as to imbody with the Church, had then one sort or other of these
miraculous, or rare Gifts for Confirmation of the Gospel, which made Christ,
Matthew. 7. bring in the workers of iniquity as wonder-workers in his name; and
Paul, Gal. 3.3, 4, 5. appealeth to the quarrelsom Galatians, which way they had
the Spirit and Miracles. 7. That this must needs be the same Blasphemy of the
Holy Ghost, which Christ pronounces unpardonable: For they who had not only
seen the Miracles, but had the Holy Ghost themselves for some such wonders,
could not doubt of the matter of fact, whether such Miracles were extant or
not: So that there was no possible way for such to turn Infidels, but by
believing that this Witness of the Spirit of Miracles, was a false, deceiving
Testimony of Satan, and not God's Testimony: And this was the Blasphemy against
the Spirit, Mat. 12. 8. That it is not all that is here meant, that such are
not to be absolved by the Church (which ought but to fore-judge, as God will
judge, as far as they can:) But that also such can never truly be regenerate
and saved. 9. The reason is, because God gives Faith by means, and the Witness
of the Spirits signal Gifts is the last means for proof that God will give
them; and they that after receiving this, reject it by such Blasphemy, are
forsaken by the Grace of the Spirit, whom they blasphemously renounce. 10.
Crucifying Christ afresh imports charging him to deserve Crucifixion, as
guilty of the deceit and blasphemy for which he was crucified: So that none
that believe not the Spirit's Miracles in fact, are guilty of this sin, though
they be Infidels. Some Ancients, and most Papists expound [ Impossible] by [
Difficult;] but I think ungroundedly. 11. Yea, the Jews that crucified him were
not such as here are described; for they had not before believed and received
the Holy Ghost: It is the worst reproach of Christ for a professed Christian to
say [I did believe in him, and had the Spirit my self, and saw and did signal
Works or Miracles, and I found at last that he was but a Deceiver, and all
these Gifts were the operations of evil Spirits.]

7, 8. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing
from God. 8. But that which bears thorns and briers, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

7, 8. For as the Earth is blessed, or justly praised, which brings Fruit when
it is watered and manured; but that is called cursed, and bad, whose fruit must
be for the fire, which brings forth but Thorns and Briars: So God will bless
and reward them who fruitfully answer the means which he uses in them; but
will curse and burn those who, after the greatest means, and experimental
partaking of the signal gifts of the Spirit, shall turn to reproach and
blaspheme him whom they believed in.

9. But beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany salvation, though we thus speak.

9. But though, in the dangerous times, and temptations to Apostasy, I think
meet to tell you the dreadful case of such, for your safety; do not interpret
i^, as though I thought this is, or would be your case: We have reason to hope
better of you, that you have the Grace which will bring you to Salvation.

10. For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which
ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do
minister.

10. For God, who is our most righteous Governor, even in this Life
distributeth Rewards and Penalties in Justice: And as, in Justice, he forsakes
the foresaid Apostates, who scorn his Mercy, so he will reward your faithful
use of his Grace with more Grace, and will not forsake you who have showed so
much fidelity to his Name, and charity to his Saint.

Note, That the additional Grace, which is necessary to Perseverance, is given
(often) by way of Reward for former fidelity, and not merely without such
respects.

11. And we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the
full assurance of hope unto the end:

11. Therefore, seeing this is God's ordinary way, to reward well used Grace
with more, I desire that you will hold on in the same diligence, till you reach
to the Consummation, or full Assurance of your hope of Perseverance and
Salvation, which every young Beginner does not attain.

12. That ye be not slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and
patience inherit the promises.

12. And that tired, weary sluggishness make you not desist, and lose your
reward; but that in unwearied diligence to the end, you follow them, who,
through faith and enduring patience, have won the prize and possess the
promised felicity.

13, 14. For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no
greater, he swear by himself, Saying, Surely, blessing I will bless thee, and
multiplying I will multiply thee. 15. And so after he had patiently endured, he
obtained the promise.

13, 14, 15. So God, who swear by himself to Abraham (having no greater to
swear by) confirmed his Promises of the Multiplication of his Seed, which yet
Abraham lived not to see fulfilled; but he patiently waited and dyed in faith,
and all the Promises were fulfilled in due time.

16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is to
them an end of all strife.

16. For men use, by Oath, to appeal to him that can discern and revenge
Perfidiousness; and when other Evidences fail, they end their Strifes by the
Confirmation of an Oath.

17. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the
imm^tability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath:

17. And God knowing our weakness of faith, to confirm the Faithful, who are
the Heirs of his promised Happiness, of the truth and immutability of his
Decrees, confirmed his Word to us by his Oath, that we might be put quite out
of doubt.

18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie,
we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon
the hope set before us.

18. That so, by his Word and his Oath, which are both immutable, and therefore
infallible Security, seeing it is impossible for God to lie, we who are fled
for refuge from guilt, and sin, and danger, and misery, to lay hold on the
proposed hope of Everlasting Life, might have well grounded and strong
Consolation, and not be shaken by any doubts of the Fidelity or Promises of God.

Note, God would have us to have strong Consolation in our Faith and Hope.

19. Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and
which enters into that within the vail.

19. Though the things of this Life are much uncertain, this Hope, which is our
Support and Comfort, is founded on firm and steadfast Security; and is fetched,
by faith, from the most holy and invisible things, which the Vail of Mortality
yet hides from our sight.

20. Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an high priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedec.

20. Into which invisible, heavenly Glory Christ is entered, not only for
himself, and his own Consummation, but as a Fore-runnner for us, to intercede,
and prepare felicity for us, and from his fullness of Power, to send down his
Spirit, and consummate all that concerns our Salvation, as a Royal Priest,
typified by Melchisedec.

CHAP VII.
FOr this Melchisedec king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met
Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him: 2. To whom
also Abraham gave a tenth part of all: first, being by interpretation king of
righteousness, and after that also king of Salem, which is, king of peace:

1, 2. This Melchisedec, to whom Abraham gave the Tenths of the Spoils, was
King of Righteousness by the signification of his name; and King of Peace,
interpreting his place: which Christ is eminently, whom he typified.

3. Without father, without mother, without descent; having neither beginning
of days, nor end of life: but made like unto the Son of God, abides a priest
continually.

3. The History of him makes no mention of his Father, or Mother, or Descent,
nor of his Birth or Beginning, nor of his death or end; but describes him like
a continuing Priest, and a Type of the Son of God, who abides a Priest
continually.

Note, The Jews think he was Shem, whose Beginning was not seen by the new
World, nor his End by the Old, nor his Death mentioned: But this is a
presumption: Had it been good for us to know more of him, God would have told
us more.

4. Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the patriarch Abraham
gave the tenth of the spoils.

4. When Abraham, from whom the Levitical Priesthood, and the peculiar Seed,
sprung, gave him the Tenths of all the Spoils, it tells us how great a man
Melchisedec was.

5. And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office of the
priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people, according to the
law, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham.

5. The Law allowed Aaron, and the other Priests, to take Tithes of their
Brethren that sprung from Abraham.

6. But he whose descent is not counted from them, received tithes of Abraham,
and blessed him that had the promises. 7. And without all contradiction, the
less is blessed of the better.

6, 7. But Melchisedec received Tithes of Abraham, who was none of his people;
and blessed him, who had from God the promise of a peculiar Offspring: Which
is a certain sign that he was greater than Abraham* And so is Christ greater
than the Jewish Priests.

8. And here men that die receive tithes: but there he receives them, of whom
it is witnessed that he lives. 9. And as I may so say, Levi also, who
receives tithes, paid tithes in Abraham. 10. For he was yet in the loins of
his father, when Melchisedec met him.

8, 9, 10. And here it is Mortal Men that take Tithes; but Melchisedec is
mentioned as if he had not dyed: And Levi, who receives Tithes, paid them,
then being in Abraham's Loins.

11. If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood (for under it the
people received the law) what further need was there that another priest should
rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?

11. This proves that the Levitical Priesthood (and consequently the Law) was
not perfect, nor gave perfection: else what need had there been of another more
excellent Royal Priesthood which was promised.

12. For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also
of the law.

11* 12, And if there must be a more excellent Priesthood than the Legal, there
must needs be some other more excellent Laws, appointing them their work: For
the old Priesthood had their work prescribed them by the Law of Moses.

Note, That they who deny Christ to be a Lawgiver, deny his Royal Priesthood,
and deny him to be Christ.

13. For he of whom these things are spoken, pertains to another tribe, of
which no man gave attendance at the altar. 14. For it is evident that our Lord
sprang out of Judah, of which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood.

13, 14. And the translating the Priesthood to Judah, the ruling Tribe, of
which Christ was, proves the Change of the Law.

15. And it is yet far more evident: for that after the similitude of
Melchisedec there arises another priest, 16. Who is made not after the law of
a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life.

15, 16. And it is yet more evident, that there must be a higher Priesthood
than Aaron's, because he must be made as Melchisedec; not by Lineal Succession,
according to the Law of Moses, but with reference to a state of Immortality, as
to its Rise and End.

17. For he testifies, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec. 18. For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going
before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.

17, 18, And this express testimony of another sort of Priesthood shows, that
the Law, which they were to execute, was to cease, as weak, insufficient and
unprofitable.

Note; Quest. Is not the Gospel-Priesthood then, in Conformity to Christ, to be
Kingly, and above all Kings, under Christ the King? or Kings and Priests to be
the same? Answ. 1. Let them here on Earth follow Christ in his Humiliation, who
said, My Kingdom is not of this World; and then, when they come to him in
Heaven, they shall reign as Kings. 2. Our uncertain Collections are not so sure
a way to know Christ's Will, as his own words; who has plainly forbidden
Secular Dominion to his Ministers, and given them a far other Description and
Canon. 3. But by the use of the Church-Keys, they have the Government of
Church Communion; which, as it has a nearer relation to the heavenly Kingdom,
is therein nobler than Secular Power.

19. For the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope
did: by the which we draw nigh unto God.

19. For the Law of Moses did all as an imperfect thing, which was not, of it
self, to make Man, or his Service perfect, or his Hopes and Comforts, but to
lead him toward a better Revelation; which bringing a fuller notice of Pardon
and Grace, Life and Immortality, advan^eth us nearer to God, and gives us more
bold and comfortable Access to him, in order to our heavenly Fruition.

20, 21. And in as much as not without an oath he was made priest, (For those
priests were made without an oath: but this with an oath, by him that said unto
him, The Lord swear, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedec;)

20, 21. And this Change God swears to, which was not done by Aaron's
Priesthood: which shows its Certainty and Immutability.

22. By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament.

22. Note, 1. The word here translated [ Testament] signifies, God's
Statute Law, proposed to us for our Covenant-Consent and Obedience, and
promising us Grace and Glory; and signifies the same thing as [ the Law of
Grace.] And not a mere absolute Promise, without Precepts, Condition or Penalty.

2. The word translated [ Surety] signifies an interceding Administrator and
Mediator, giving Man Assurance of the Will of God (as Moses did in delivering
the Law) and consenting to receive God's Terms and Promises in the nature of
Man, and to perform his own part and undertaking, for the gathering and
glorifying his Church thereby: But not that he undertook that all that he
mediated for, should do all that is their duty.

23. And they truly were many priests, because they were not suffered to
continue; by reason of death. 24, But this man, because he continues ever,
has an unchangeable priesthood.

23, 24. And so the Levitical Priesthood was in many successively, because they
were mortal: But Christ living for ever, is only one and the same, and there is
no other.

Note, Therefore Christ has no mortal Vicar, to be an universal High Priest.

25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

25. And this is the great Comfort of Believers, that he is able to save us in
all Extremities, even at Death, and to Eternity of Blessedness, seeing he ever
lives, by his Intercession, to finish his saving Work for all that come by him
to God^ Friends dye, and all Worldly Helps may fail, but Christ will never dye.

26. For such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens.

26. For our Condition required such an High Priest, who is holy, free from
doing ill, or suffering any more from any Enemies, clean from all sin of his
own, and is separated from the Condition of sinful Man that dwells on Earth.

27. Who needs not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first
for his own sin, and then for the peoples: for this he did once, when he
offered up himself.

27. Who had no sin of his own, as the High Priests had; and therefore, for his
own sin he needed not to offer any Sacrifice, though he did it to perfect his
undertaken Work for us. Nor needed he offer often for the sins of the people;
for his once offering up himself, was a sufficient Expiatory Sacrifice.

28. For the law makes men high priests, which have infirmity; but the word of
the oath, which was since the law, makes the Son, who is consecrated for
evermore.

28. For the Law had none to make High Priests of, but mortal Sinners; but the
Word of the Oath, Psalm. 110. which was since the making of the Law, makes the
Son of God High Priest, who is holy, sinless, immortal, and consecrated to an
everlasting Priesthood.

CHAP. VIII.
1. NOw of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum: we have such an
high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the
heavens: 2. A minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched, and not man.

1. The sum of all that is said is this, We have such an High Priest, who is
advanced to the highest honor and power in Glory, called God's Throne of
Majesty in the Heavens. As Man, a Minister indeed, or the prime Administrator;
but it is of the true and heavenly Sanctuary and Tabernacle, not like that
which was made by Man, but which the Lord has made for the glorifying of
himself in his glorified Saints with Christ, where we shall in presence worship
him for ever.

3. For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore
it is of necessity that this man have somewhat to offer.

3. And he were no High Priest, if he had nothing as Gift or Sacrifice to offer.

4. For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that there are
priests that offer gifts according to the law.

4. And if he were on Earth, he should not be a Priest according to the Law,
because there are such already, and it was entailed on the Line of Aaron: (And
Christ's Sacrifice when he was on Earth, was not according to the Law, but
supralegal.)

5. Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was
admonished of God, when he was about to make the tabernacle. For see (says he)
that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount.

5. And the Levitical Priesthood on Earth, was made to perform those
Administrations, which are but shadows of the heavenly things, having some
notifying and instructing resemblance to them as figurative; which God darkly
intimated to Moses, when he charged him to make the Tabernacle in the
Wilderness according to the pattern which he had seen in the Mount. So that the
earthly Tabernacle and Worship is but a figure or shadow of the Heavenly.

6. But now has he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is
the Mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.

6. But Christ's Priestly Ministry is more excellent, as he is the Mediator of
a better Covenant, than the mere Law of Moses was. (Though the Promise that
went before and with the Law, was an obscure Gospel.) It is better, as having
better Promises; even clearer and fuller, and more confirmed by God's Oath, and
Seal, and Earnest. It has Promises of fuller Pardon, greater Grace and
Privileges, and surer and greater Glory.

Note, That both the Mosaical and the Christian are named in Scripture, both a
Law and a Covenant; for they have the same parts, viz. Precepts, Promises and
Threats, and Obedience must be consented to. As proposed by God, with his
Antecedent Mercy, it is a Law, and a proposed Covenant ((...).) As consented to
by Man, it is a Law accepted by Subjects, and a mutual Covenant ((...).) See
Grotius his Preface to Annotations on the New Testament of the Names.

7. For if that first covenant had been faultless, then should no place have
been sought for the second.

7. For if the first Covenant had been perfect, God would not have made the
second better.

Note, 1. That it is not sinful Faultiness, but such Imperfection as the
beginnings of Art and Nature have, compared with the Perfection that is here
meant.

2. It is not here called, the First Covenant, as if no other had gone before
it; for there was a former with Adam, Noah, Abraham: but as it is the first of
these two. And it was a Covenant of Peculiarity, distinct from the common one,
and the Promise.

8. For finding fault with them, he says, Behold, the days come (says the
Lord) when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and the house
of Judah: 9. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in
the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt,
because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, says the
Lord.

8, 9. For he intimates the defect of the Mosaical Covenant, when he says,
Behold, the days come, etc. I will make with them a new Covenant, of greater
and surer Mercy; for the former they quickly forsook, and I forsook them.

10. For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after
those days, says the Lord, I will put my laws into their mind, and write them
in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.

10. But this is my new Covenant which I will make with all Abraham's believing
Seed: I will sanctify them by my Spirit, and thereby give them a saving
knowledge and love of all my necessary Laws, and their Duties, as if they were
written in their minds and hearts; and I will be to them a God (which is their
All) and will love and cherish them as my peculiar people.

Note, That this Promise is not made to Israel, as a peculiar, political Body
(for their Policy was to be dissolved) but as a part of the Catholic Church,
which are Abraham's believing Seed: 2. Therefore it being supposed that it is
to Believers that this Promise is made, it follows, that it is a Promise on
condition of preceding Faith: As Vocation gives Faith, which is the Condition
of consequent Justification and Sanctification. Though all be of Grace, God's
Wisdom makes the Condition a means to introduce the rest.

11. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the
greatest.

11. And it shall not be doubtful to them, whether the Lord or Baal be the true
God, as it has been with this unstedfast People, who have so long lived in
Idolatry: For all the Church of Believers, from the least to the greatest,
shall know and own me to be their God, and not need to be again taught it, as
an unknown thing.

Note, That this speaks not against the necessity of Humane Teaching: for it
is by such teaching that God is supposed to give them the knowledge of himself.
Nor does it mean that it shall be needless to teach the best to know God
better: for to know him is the sum and perfection of Knowledge, and it is Life
Eternal. But the meaning is, That it shall not be an unknown thing, that the
Lord is our God.

12. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember no more.

12. For the greatness of my Mercy shall forgive all the sins of their
unconverted state, and not charge them upon them, to their destruction, and all
the infirmities of their regenerate state.

Note, That this Promise of Justification, as well as the former of
Sanctification, supposes them to be Believers in order of Nature first, as the
Condition.

13. In that he says, A new covenant, he has made the first old. Now that
which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away.

13. This term of a new Covenant implies, that the old one must then be
abolished: and the time is come.

CHAP. IX.
1. THen verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a
worldly sanctuary.

1. The Mosaical Covenant had its proper Ordinances of Service to God, and an
earthly, temporary Tabernacle.

2. For there was a tabernacle made, the first wherein was the candlestick, and
the table and the shewbread, which is called the sanctuary. 3. And after the
second vail, the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all.

2, 3. This made Tabernacle had two parts: In the first, called the Sanctuary,
was the Candlestick, etc. And within the second Veil was the Holiest of all.

Note, Some out of Philo say, that the Tabernacle (and the Temple after) was
made as an Image, or Figure of the World, and therefore called Worldly: the
outer part figuring the lower World, in which was the Candlestick with six
Branches; and one in the midst, signifying the Planets; and twelve Loaves on
the Table, signifying the Fruits of the Earth: The inmost signifying the
highest Heavens. But it is presumptuous to trust our Wit too far in feigning
Divine Significations: And it is groundless, hence to gather, that it was called
a Worldly Sanctuary.

4, 5. Which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round
about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod
that budded, and the tables of the covenant; And over it the cherubims of glory
shadowing the mercy-seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.

4, 5. In it was the Golden Censer, for Incense brought when the Priest went
in; and the Ark overlaid with Gold, in which, or near it, was the Pot of Manna,
and Aaron's Rod, and in it the Table of the Commandments of the Covenant; and
over it, the Images of Angelical Cherubims, showing God's Glory, when it
appeared to men; which also shadowed the Covering, or Mercy-Seat.

6. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the
first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. 7. But into the second went
the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for
himself, and for the errors of the people.

6, 7. Into the first part of this Tabernacle, the Priests went to perform the
ordinary Service: But into the second, went only the High Priest once a Year,
but not without the Blood of Calves and Goats, which he offered for such sins
of himself and the people as were expiable.

8. The holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all, was
not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing:

8. By this the Holy Ghost signified that under that Law, or Tabernacle-state,
the Access of Sinners to God, for assured Acceptance here, and Glory hereafter,
was not yet clearly, fully, and with satisfiing Assurance revealed, nor by that
Law, as such, conferred: for it was reserved to the coming of the Messiah:
(Though the Promise, or Law of Grace saved men then.)

9. Which was a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both
gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as
pertaining to the conscience.

9. Which figuratively signified the time then (or now) present, when the Gifts
and Sacrifices were offered, which could not suffice to perfect the Acceptance
of the Offerer with God, or to cleanse him from the Conscience and Guilt of Sin.

10. Which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
ordinances imposed on them until the time of reformation.

10. I speak not of the Laws of Nature, of Godliness, Charity, Justice and
Sobriety, which are common to the Jews with us and other people, but of the
((...)) positive Institutions of bodily Service to God, proper to Moses's Law.
And these Laws, in such Outward as the Body performs, called Rites and
Ceremonies, Meats, Drinks, Washings, which God indeed imposed on them, as a
material part of their Obedience; but it was as suited to their Carnality and
Minority, till the Messiah's Reformation set up a better Law and Worship

11. But Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a greater
and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this
building:

11. But Christ is come a High Priest of the future Felicity, promised in the
Gospel, even to procure us Grace and Glory, officiating in a greater and more
perfect Tabernacle, even his Body, now glorified in Heaven (having done his
preparatory Work on Earth) which was not built as Tabernacles are on Earth.

12. Neither by the blood of goats and calves: but by his own blood he entered
in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.

12. And not as the Levitical Priests, by the Blood of Goats and Calves,
offered for Expiation; but by obedient and voluntary offering his own Blood a
Sacrifice for the sins of the World, he obtained his Entrance into the state of
Glorious Exaltation, there to intercede for us, and rule us, having here, by
his Merit and Sacrifice, purchased Eternal Redemption for us, which thence he
will bestow.

13. For if the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh.

13. If these be by Divine Institution effectual against corporal Legal
uncleanness, by a ceremonial Sanctification, the figure of the spiritual.

14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit,
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to
serve the living God?

14. Most certainly then shall the Blood of Christ, who by the Eternal Spirit
offered himself, Soul and Body, a spotless Sacrifice to God the Sovereign
Righteous Judge, to cleanse Soul and Conscience from the power and guilt of
dead works (which signify a death in sin, and tend to death for sin) to serve
the Living God, who will accept us to an Everlasting Life.

Note; By the Eternal Spirit, by which Christ offered himself, some Expositors
understand Christ's Immortal Soul voluntarily resigning his Life, 2. Others
understand the Holy Ghost, the Third Person in the Trinity, by whom Christ is
said to be conceived, and to do his Miracles. 3. Others understand his own
Divine Nature, as the Second Person: It Is hard to be sure which is meant, but
it is of no great moment, seeing it is certain that indeed he did it by all
these three. There is a fourth Opinion of some that understand it of a prime
superangelical Nature of Christ, which they think, by Eternal Emanation, comes
from the Deity united to it, which they make a middle Third Nature in Christ;
and in which they suppose it is that, as a Creature, he is advanced above all
Angels; because they take Angels and Men to to be specie distinct, and that if
Humane Nature must be set above Angels, in it self, it must thereby change its
species, and be no more humane. But to be wise to sobriety in such Mysteries is
safe, and not to presume.

15. And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means
of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first
testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance.

15. And for this cause Christ became Mediator between God and Man, to procure,
seal and promulgate the New Covenant, or Law of Grace, that his death doing
that which no other Sacrifice could do in expiation of the Jews sins, committed
under the Mosaical Covenant, (as well as of the rest of the World,) they which
are by his call made sound Believers, might by promise be secured of the
Eternal Inheritance, and possessed of it in due time.

16. For where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the
testatour. 17. For a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is
of no strength at all whilst the testatour lives.

16, 17. And Christ being by his Sponsion to be a Sacrifice, his Donation does
presuppose his Purchase; and thence his Covenant has also the nature of a
Testament, which supposes the death of the Testator, and is not of efficacy
till then, to give full right to what he bequeatheth.

Note; That the eminent Evangelical Kingdom of the Mediator, in its last full
Edition, called the Kingdom of Christ, and of Heaven, distinct from the obscure
state of Promise before Christ's Incarnation, began at Christ's Resurrection,
Ascension, and sending of the eminent Gift of the Holy Ghost, and was but as an
Embrio before.

18. Whereupon, neither the first testament was dedicated without blood.

18. Therefore the first as figurative of the second, was consecrated and
sealed in blood.

19. For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people, according to
the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water and scarlet wool,
and hyssop, and sprinkled both the Book and all the people, 20. Saying, This is
the blood of the Testament which God has enjoined unto you. 21. Moreover he
sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the ministry,
22. And almost all things are by the law purged with blood: and without
shedding of blood is no remission.

19, 20, 21, 22. Note 1. God purposely instituted all these bloody
Purifications to prefigure Christ. 2. The Custom of sacrificing from the Fall,
must arise from Divine Institution, and not without it from natural Invention,
as some now affirm: And no doubt but it is propagated among all Idolaters
through the World; 1. By Tradition from Adam; 2. Corrupted by Devils, who would
be worshipped as God, and to that end promote the imitation of God; 3. The
Papists sprinkling of Holy Water, is such another corrupt imitation, setting up
their Ceremony instead of Gods, which Christ abolished.

23. It was therefore necessary that the patterns in things in the heavens
should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better
Sacrifices than these.

23. These Ceremonies being ordained to prefigure and notify things that are
in Heaven, and belong to Heaven, it was meet that such blood should be the
purifying Ceremony: But the heavenly things themselves must be purchased, and
the Souls fitted for it purified, and the Covenant consecrated by a more
precious Sacrifice, even the blood of the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins
of the World.

24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands* which are
the figures of the true, but into heaven it self; now to appear in the presence
of God for us.

24. For it was not to officiate in a Tabernacle made by man, that Christ
became our High Priest, but (though his Sacrifice was offered on Earth) it was
to officiate by continued Intercession for us in the Heavens, in the presence
of God's Glory, of which the other was but a Type.

25. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest enters
into the holy place, every year with blood of others. 26. For then must he
often have suffered since the foundation of the world: but now once in the end
of the world, has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

25, 26. Note 1. Christ's once offering was sufficient: It may often be
commemorated, but only once done. 2. It is unspeakable joy to Believers, that
Christ is for us, as our High Priest, entered into Heaven. For he has promised
that we shall be with him where he is. And where else now should we desire to
be? 3. The days of Christ here, were the declining latter part of the World,
called the end, as fifty, or sixty years old is the end, that is, the latter
part of man's Life. How near then is it now to an end, 1684 after?

27, 28. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
Judgment: So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them
that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin, unto salvation.

27, 28. And as it is with the common state of man on Earth, who must all once
die, and then be doomed to their endless state; so Christ was once to die as a
Sacrifice for the sins many; and to them that wait for him in the prepared
state of Faith, Hope, Obedience and Patience, he shall appear again, but not
any more to bear the punishment of their sins, but to justify them publicly,
and take them to his glory.

CHAP. X.
1. FOR the law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image
of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they offered year by year
continually, make the comers thereunto perfect.

1. For the Law having but in its Ceremonies a shadow of the great heavenly
Blessings of the Gospel, and not the clear Image (or Draught or Map) of the
things themselves, does show by the frequent yearly iteration of those
Sacrifices, that it does not perfect the Sacrifices.

2. For then would they not have ceased to be offered: because that the
worshippers once purged, should have had no more conscience of sins.

2. For then they would have ceased to be offered, because the Worshippers once
pardoned and cleansed, should have no more conscience of guilt, or remaining
pravity.

3. But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins every
year. 4. For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats, should
take away sins.

3, 4. Note 1. This Text does not deny that the faithful Jews were then
forgiven, nor that the Law conduced to it, as used in subordination to the
antecedent Promise and Law of Grace: But without this Promise, the Law could
not do it. 2. Nor does this infer, that we may not mention, lament and beg
pardon for our old sin, while we live on Earth: Nor that renewed sins have no
need of a renewed pardon; but no need of a new Sacrifice.

5. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says. Sacrifice and offering
thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me: 6. In burnt-offerings, and
sacrifices for sin thou have had no pleasure: 7. Then said I, Lo, I come (in
the volume of the book it is written of me to do thy will, O God. 8. Above,
when he said, Sacrifice and offering, and burnt-offerings, and offering for sin
thou would not, neither had pleasure therein, which are offered by the
law: 9. Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, (O God) He takes away the
first, that he may establish the second.

5, 6, 7, 8, 9. David, as a Prophet, personating Christ, says, etc. taking
down Sacrifices as insufficient, and introducing Christ's obedient Sacrifice of
himself.

10. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once for all.

10. And by this Decree of God, giving us a Savior to be a Sacrifice for our
sins, we are (as far as belongs to the Expiating Sacrifice) made a holy
people unto God, the sins of the faithful, by this price being pardoned, and
Reconciliation made.

11. And every priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the
same sacrifices, which can never take away sins.

11. And the Priests must be still sacrificing the same things, never finishing
the Expiation.

12. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat
down on the right hand of God: 13. From henceforth expecting till his enemies
be made his footstool.

12, 13. But Christ having offered but one Sacrifice for sins, as sufficient,
for ever sat down in the possession of Glory, and universal Dominion in the
Heavens, on the right hand of God, where he will reign, till he has subdued
all his Enemies, even all that opposes the perfecting of his work of the
Salvation and Glory of his Church.

14. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

14. For all the faithful and sanctified are by that one offering, as a
sufficient Expiatory Sacrifice, freed from all guilt and sin now initially, and
shall be perfectly without any other Expiatory Sacrifice, for ever.

15, 16, 17. Whereof the holy Ghost also is a witness to us: for after that he
had said before, This is the covenant that I will make with them after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds
will I write them: And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. 18.
Now, where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.

15, 16, 17, 18. Note here 1. That when the price is given and taken, and a
free Act of Oblivion made on the bare condition of thankful acceptance, the
crime is said to be pardoned in the common custom of speech, it being done as
far as belongs to the Satisfier and the Rector, as such, though yet the
Resusers be all actually unpardoned: For a Conditional Gift puts nothing in
act, till the Condition be performed. 2. That here in the Promise, Pardon is
not in time before Renovation, and so not actually of any Infidels, or
unconverted, though elect thereto. 3. That even the pardon of the sanctified is
but such as excludes any more Sacrifice, but not any more Faith, Repentance,
Watching, Praying, etc.

19. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus, 20. By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us,
through the vail that is to say, his flesh: 21. And having an high priest over
the house of God:

19, 20, 21. And now I come to the Use of all that I have said in all the
foregoing Doctrine: We are not now deterred from access to God by unexpiated
guilt, but may come to him as a Father, with comfortable, reverent boldness and
hope as reconciled by Christ; even in confidence of the merit of his
Righteousness and Sacrifice, which is as a new and still effectual living way,
through the veil of his flesh consecrated for us: And we have now in the
Heavens a Glorified High Priest, who is Head over all things to his Church,
which is the House of God, and ever lives to do all for us in Heaven, which
belongs to a perfected High Priest.

22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.

22. Let us therefore draw near to God in holy Worship, and heavenly Desires
and Aspirings, with a heart that is sound, sincere and true to Christ, and our
convictions, and abounding with full belief and trust in Christ, for all that
he has promised, having our hearts cleansed by Christ's Blood (which the
sprinkling figured under the Law) from the conscience of guilt, and the love
and power of sin, and our bodily practice purified from uncleanness, (typified
by the washings under the Law, and federally signified by our Baptism,)

23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering: (for he is
faithful that promised.)

23. Let us against all subtle, deceitful Adversaries, and against all cruel
Persecutors, under all trials and sufferings, hold fast both our Hope and
Faith, and the open profession of it; For he is faithful who has promised us
the endless felicity, which will pay for all, and exceed all our expectations.

24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works.

24. Let none of us live merely to our selves, but set our selves with studious
diligence to promote the Sanctity and Salvation of each other, which is not
done by vain janglings and faction, but by provoking one another to love, and
to good works, and each to be a common blessing in his place, by profiting
others.

25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some
is: but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching.

25. Not forsaking either the more full Church Assemblies, or any Christian
Converse and Communion, by which ye may excite and edify one another; as some
do out of cowardly fear of suffering, and some through selfishness, and want of
brotherly love, and through coldness in Religion. And the more resolved should
you be in this, because the time of suffering is short, and the day of your
deliverance draws on, and cannot be far off.

Note; Qu. 1. What if the Rulers forbid Church Assemblies, or at least
inferior edifying Converse? Ans. So they did for three hundred years, when yet
Christians used it by command from Christ. And Christian Princes (as is said
heretofore) must do more good, but are not authorized to do more mischief, and
forbid good, than Heathens. But yet, though we may not statedly forbear the
duties of Piety and Charity, (no more than Daniel did praying, or the old
Christians preaching and meeting) when we can perform them; 1. We may forbear
this or that particular meeting or action, when it would do more hurt than
good, 2. And when imprisonment or banishment make it impossible, it can be no
duty.

Qu. 2. Who be they that must exhort one another? Ans. Not every one that has
a proud self-conceit, or masterly talkative disease, may needlessly gather
Assemblies to ease his stomach, on pretense of duty: But the truly qualified
and called Pastors must exhort in Church Assemblies, by Office, and
occasionally such other well qualified men; as he shall there call forth or
allow: And in inferior occasional Converse or Meetings, such qualified persons
as have best ability and opportunities to do good. Even as Overseers by Office
relieve the poor, but every man that can, must do it in charity. And as the
Physician by calling must heal the sick and wounded; but any in charity may
offer such help as others need, and he is able, not usurping the Function of
the Physician.

26. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, 27. But a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries.

26, 27. And the dreadful case of Apostates must deter you: For if you wilfully
forsake Christ, and Christianity, after you have received the knowledge of the
truth of it, by the Spirit, and all those miraculous Evidences by which it has
prevailed hitherto, you must never look for another Savior, nor that Christ
should come again to be sacrificed for you: Reject him now, and nothing
remains but a dreadful expectation of his Vindictive Judgment, when his
Enemies that refused his Reign, shall be brought forth to destruction, Luke
19.27.

Note; Of this see before on chap. 6. what this sin is.

28. He that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses. 29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood
of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done
despite unto the Spirit of grace?

28, 29. Capital, presumptuous sins, and contempt, were punished by death by
Moses Law. And as Christ brings greater mercy, the contempt of him deserves
far greater punishment, when men by renouncing Christianity, tread under foot
the Son of God, by calling him a crucified Deceiver, and count the Blood of the
Covenant (which was shed to sanctify them, and reconcile them to God,) which
they professing to believe, were joined with the Saints, to be the blood of a
justly crucified Malefactor, and a profane thing, and thus do despite also to
the Spirit of Grace, which is Christ's Witness on Earth, and by the Testimony
of whose miraculous and sanctifying Gifts, they once professed to believe in
Christ, and receive his Doctrine; and now they will reproach these Gifts and
Testimonies of the Spirit, as delusions, and not of the Spirit of God.

Note, The falseness of their Doctrine, who say, that the Gospel is a bare
absolute Promise, and no Law, and has no proper threatening of penalty.

30. For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will
recompense, says the Lord: and again, The Lord shall judge his people. 31. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

30, 31. Note; Grace puts us not out of fear of danger. 2. None so dreadful as
a Vindictive God. And 3. Apostates, who reject Christ and his Salvation, fall
into the hands of God's terrible Justice.

32. But call to remembrance the former days, in which after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions: 33. Partly whilst ye were
made a gazing stock, both by reproaches and afflictions, and partly whilst ye
became companions of them that were so used.

32, 33. But remember what you have formerly suffered for Christ: Will you lose
all that? Or cannot God strengthen you now, when you should be grown stronger?
Remember how you endured to be made the common spectacle and scorn of men, by
your own sufferings (for sufferers are usually disdained by the baser
multitude) and also by being the companions of those that suffered, and openly
owning them, and bore part of their afflictions.

34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of
your goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance.

34. For I for one, must bear you witness, that in my bonds, you did partake in
my sufferings, by compassion; and also you took not only patiently, but
joyfully, the loss and spoiling of your goods and bodily maintenance, by the
plunder and distreining of Persecutors: And what made you do this, but that you
firmly believed, yea knew, by the witness in your selves, attesting the
Promises of Christ, that you have (as to right) in Heaven a Treasure
incomparably better than that which you lose, and such as is endless, and none
can rob you of.

35. Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward.

35. Do not then for nothing at last, cast away the open, bold owning of your
Faith and Hope (and with it all your Hope, Labor and Sufferings) for the
recompense of reward is great.

36. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the promise.

36. For it is not enough to begin well: It Is like God will yet try you with
sharper Persecutions; so that you have need, not only of Conversion, but of
Patience, to hold out, and overcome Temptations, that having done the Will of
God, in all your Trials, and fully manifested your Sincerity by your Constancy,
you might receive the promised Reward.

37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry.

37. For (though to unbelief and impatience it seem long,) it is but a very
little time, till Christ will come to end your fears and sufferings, and fulfill
your hopes: And he will not delay or tarry at all, beyond the due approaching
time.

38. Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shall
have no pleasure in him.

38. It is by the firm belief of the Promise of Glory (purchased by Christ)
that the Just do overcome Temptations, hold on in duty and comfortable hope,
and are finally saved: But if any man forsake this Faith, and its profession,
either through fraud, flattery or fear of men, God will forsake him, and have
no pleasure in him.

Note; Dr. Hammond applies it to [ forsaking Public Worship] as the Gnostics
did; which indeed backsliders use to do when such assembling is persecuted: And
his note should warn them to take heed of such forsaking Public Worship, who
live where men are tolerated to be Atheists, and not to worship God at all, but
not to be Christians and to assemble for God's Worship, unless they will be
stigmatized with the profession or practice of some imposed wickedness; though
this Atheism and Persecution pretend Christian Order.

39. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition: but of them that
believe, to the saving of the Soul.

39. But I hope you will approve your selves faithful Christians, and not of
the loose unstedfast sort, who by Sophistry or Persecution are drawn to revolt,
and turn back to their own destruction; but of them who believe with sincerity,
firmness and constancy, to the saving of their Souls.

CHAP. XI.
1. NOW faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen.

1. And seeing it is by Faith that you must obtain all this Victory, and
Perseverance and Salvation, it greatly concerns you to understand rightly
what that Faith is by which the just must live, and how it differs from that
living by sight and sense on worldly things, which is the case and life of the
Children of perdition. This Faith is the subsistence, or firm and confident
expectation from God of the things which we believing hope for, and which
makes them by the security of his faithful Promise, to be effectual Motives to
us, as if they were even present: And it is the convincing evidence, or
demonstration in the mind, of the unseen things which God reveals, by which
they prevail with us against all the visible vanities of this World. This
realizing things future and unseen as certain by God's Promise, and overcoming
Temptations from things seen and present, is our Saving Faith.

2. For by it the elders obtained a good report.

2. It was by this effectual Belief and Trust in God's Promise for things
unseen, preferred before things seen and present, that the Ancients are said to
be approved of God.

3. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God,
so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.

3. How can we know but by believing God's Revelation, that Heaven and Earth
were compacted and formed by the Word of God, so that all this great and well
ordered frame which is seen, was made not of things which appear.

Note; This latter part is diversely expounded. 1. Some, as Calvin, expound it
thus [ The things that are seen were made to be as a Glass or Image of the
things that are unseen.] That they are so is true; but few receive this as the
sense of these words.

2. Others expound it as equal to [ the seen Worlds were made not of things
seen, therefore of nothing, or no praeexistent matter.] This most Protestants
receive.

3. Others take framing or compacting to presuppose existent matter to be
compact, and say, that was the Chaos in which the form was unseen.

4. Others following the Vulgar Latin, Erasmus, etc. translate it, [ the
things, which are seen, were made of things unseen:] And on this Text and
Supposition some build a frame of Philosophy, viz. that all things are made or
flow from God, so as that the nearest effects are the most pure and noble, and
the remotest most gross, and made by transmutation and condensation, and so
that Earth is but incrassate humor, and humor (or water) incrassate air, and
air incrassate fire, and fire incrassate vegetative spirit, and that incrassate
intellectual spirit: And so that all visible bodies are made of invisible
spirit debased, which again may be refined to invisibility. But these are the
frothy dreaming presumptions of unhumbled wits; and wise men will rest in the
measure of God's Revelations.

4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain, by
which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts:
and by it he being dead, yet speaks.

4. By this Faith it was that Abel offered to God a more excellent, and
therefore more acceptable Sacrifice than Cain: By which he obtained God's
Judgment and Record, that he was righteous (and so far was justified by it in
God's account) God by some notable sign showing, that when he rejected Cain's
Offering, he accepted Abel's: And by this Sacrifice, and God's attestation, tho
his malignant Brother murdered him, his acceptance, recorded by God in
Scripture, yet speaks his honor, and our imitation.

Note 1. That Abel's Faith producing his Offering, was not any other, but that
for which God judged him righteous.

2. That the brief History makes it not fully clear, wherein the difference of
their Offerings lay, save that 1. Abel's being of the firstlings of living
creatures, was in its nature more excellent than Cain's of vegetable^. 2. And
the nobler effect showed a nobler cause, or Faith.

But seeing 1. That it is most probable that the duty of Sacrificing came from
no Original, but Adam's Tradition of God's Command. 2. And that the use of it
under Moses's Law, expounds it after, we may conceive, 1. That it was to
signify that Man was to believe that Death was deserved by Man's sin: 2. That
by Death the Mediator was to redeem him: 3. And that as the Beast was offered
to God, they offered their own lives to him, in hope of the Immortality of the
Soul, and a better life, which death was the way to. And in this Faith Abel
excelled Cain.

5. By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not
found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this
testimony, that he pleased God.

5. It was by trusting God for a better, unseen life, that Enoch was made fit
for, and obtained to be translated by God without dying, and so was no more
seen on Earth: For before it is recorded of him, that he pleased God, who thus
rewarded him.

Note 1. That though Enoch died not by any corruption of his body, no doubt but
it had such change at its entrance into Heaven, as the bodies of the living
Saints shall have at Christ's Second Coming (which proves a transmutation of
Elements by Scripture Testimony) and as Christ's own body had, which made it
suitable to the heavenly Region: For flesh and blood cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. It is made a spiritual, incorruptible body, as ours shall be.

2. It is like that this intimates how God would have used Man, if he had not
by sin contracted the guilt of threatened death.

3. But it is certain, that it is recorded to tell us whither it is that Faith
and Holiness do tend, and that there is a better life.

6. But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that comes to God
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him.

6. Those that please God must needs be happy; for that is Happiness it self.
But it is impossible to have a heart or life that pleases God, without a
Trusting-belief of these two Articles; 1. That God is the very and only God,
infinite in all perfection; 2. And that he is as our Ruler and Benefactor, the
full Rewarder of all them, that with sincere diligence seek to please him, in
the obedience of his Governing Will, or his Law, revealed to them.

Note; He that thinks there is no God, can neither love, trust, or obey him:
And he that thinks he is impotent, ignorant, or bad, or any way imperfect,
thinks that he is not God, and gives him but the name of God, while he denies
and blasphemeth him. and he that thinks that he is not Man's Ruler morally by
Law, but only physically by Motion, like lifeless Engines, will never obey his
Laws; and therefore will live after his lusts, and be far wors^ than saya e
Brutes, as abusing a nobler Nature. And he that thinks that God will let men be
losers by their most costly and diligent obedience, takes him to be none of our
Governor, or to be unjust, and so not to be God indeed: Nay if he believe not
that his Holiness and Goodness will ^e pleased with, and abundantly reward such
sincere diligence. And he that believes not a life of great Reward after this,
cannot well believe that God is such a Rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, seeing what they suffer here.

Qu. But are these two Articles enough to Salvation?

Ans. He that sincerely and trustingly believes and practices these, shall
not perish; but what more is necessary, God will make known to him: For of a
truth (whoever deny it) God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he
that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of him. And if a Soul
that truly loves God, and is accepted of him, should be in Hell, Heaven it
self should be in Hell.

7. By faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with
fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house, by the which he condemned the
world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith.

Note 1. God's Revelation was Noah's warning. 2. The Flood neither seen, nor
likely in it self was the thing revealed and believed, with the way to escape.
3. True Belief will be effectual in an obedient use of God's appointed means of
Salvation. 4. The belief of God's Threatenings is a part of Saving Faith. 5.
Faithful Obedience to God, condemns the unbelieving, rebellious World. 6. All
these acts of Faith go to make us Heirs of the Righteousness of Faith, that is,
to be saved, as those that God accounts acceptably righteous. 7. To be moved
with the promised Glory, and threatened Misery that is unseen, is the Life of
Faith.

8. By faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which he should
after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither
he went.

8. Why did Abraham go, when God called him into an unknown Land, but that he
practically trusted and believed God, that he would give it his Seed for an
Inheritance?

9. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country,
dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac, and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same
promise. 10. For he looked for a city which has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God.

9, 10 And why did he (and Isaac and Jacob) sojourn there in Tents as
strangers? but because he believed that God would give his Posterity Cities
there (such as Jerusalem) strong and walled, instead of Tents, and would give
him in the Mean time a place in the heavenly Jerusalem, for his Faith and
Obedience to God.

11. Through faith also Sarah her self received strength to conceive seed, and
was delivered of a Child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful
who had promised.

11. And Sarah past age, brought forth Isaac, because she trusted God's
Promise, against natural probability.

12. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as
the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the Seashore
innumerable.

12. Thus the numerous Seed of Israel sprang from one, dead to generating, by
believing God.

13. These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen
them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the Earth.

13. Both Abraham and his posterity long lived as strangers, before the
promised Land was given to their Successors, which they received not
themselves. And Abraham, who foresaw Christ's day, and rejoiced, and his
believing Seed, died in that Faith, which saw him afar off, (and the heaven
Glory promised by him) and yet lived not to see the promised Messiah, but
confessed that they were Pilgrims on Earth, though they believed and embraced
the Promises.

14. For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country.

14. And as their taking themselves for strangers in Canaan, showed that they
were not yet at home, and were but seekers of a Country promised; so those
that were true Believers, confessing that they were but strangers and Pilgrims
on Earth, declare that it was a better place than Earth that they sought and
hoped for.

15. And truly if they had been mindful of that country, from whence they came
out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.

15. And it was not Chaldea, whence they came, which they sought; for they
might have returned to that.

16. But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore God
is not ashamed to be called their God: for he has prepared for them a city.

16. But it was a better Country which they desired; and though the carnal
Seed looked but to Canaan, the true Believers took Jerusalem but as a Type of
the Jerusalem above, and chiefly desired a heavenly Country; and it was
specially in relation to Heaven, that God condescended to be called The God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the God of Israel; for it is there that he will
gloriously own and govern them.

Note 1. The force of Christ's Argument against the Sadduces, from God's
relation to Abraham, etc. is here expounded. 2. They err, that think Believers
of old expected not a heavenly felicity: Though Moses's Law, as it was
political, to be the Rule of Magistrates Judgment reached not so high, yet as
subordinate to the Promise or Covenant of Grace it did.

17. By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had
received the promises, offered up his only begotten son. 18. Of whom it was
said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

17, 18. It was by believing and trusting the Promise of God concerning his
Seed in Isaac, that Abraham, when God thereby tried him, offered up even that
Son to death, to whom the Promise of Multiplication was made, and the Nations
to be blessed in his Seed.

19. Accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the Dead: from
whence also he received him in a figure.

19. For he believed that God's Promise must be fulfilled, and could not be
broken for want of Power, no more than for want of Wisdom or Goodness; and that
he would rather raise him from the dead, than break his word: And indeed he
received him again, as it had been from the dead (in which he prefigured
Christ's Resurrection and ours.)

Note; The great difficulty of Abraham's case was, how he was bound to take
that to be God's Voice, which bid him murder the Innocent, and so break God's
Law of Nature: Must not we try the Spirits by the standing Law of God in
Nature? Ans. 1. God is the absolute Lord of all Lives, and can do no man wrong;
And Abraham knew that he could make both Isaac and himself amends; yea, that he
could, and would presently raise him to life again. 2. And by full evidence and
experimental proof, he knew that it was God that spoke to him: But we are
supposed to have more cause of doubting, where we must try the Spirits. We must
believe no pretended Revelation against certain foreknown Truth; nor yet
disbelieve God upon a proud pretense that we know that to be Truth, which
indeed we know not.

20. By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.

20. It was by believing God's Promise of things to come, yet unseen, that
Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, foretelling what God would do with them.

21. By faith Jacob when he was a dying blessed both the Sons of Joseph, and
worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff.

21. It was by believing unseen future things, that Jacob, when he could scarce
sit up, and was ready to die, foretold what God would do with the posterity of
Joseph's Sons.

Note; Qu. When Isaac and Jacob both ignorantly preferred the younger before
the elder; how could that be said to be done by Faith, which they understood
not?

Ans. 1. They believed the promised Blessing to both. 2. And they believed the
inward Inspiration of God, which told them [This person on whom thou layest thy
hands, shall have this particular Blessing] though they knew not which of them
it was by name: It was to a determinate individual.

22. By faith Joseph when he died, made mention of the departing of the
children of Israel, and gave commandment concerning his bones.

22. How could Joseph foretell the Israelites going out of Egypt, and give them
order to carry his bones with them, but by believing unseen, future things, on
the credit of God's Testimony, by inward prophetical Inspiration (which was his
Word to him.)

23. By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents,
because they saw he was a proper child, and they were not afraid of the Kings
commandment.

23. It was by believing some intimation from God, partly inward, and partly in
his personal appearance, what Moses should prove, as to unseen future things,
which encouraged his Parents to hide him, notwithstanding the murderous
commandment of the King.

24. By faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaohs daughter. 25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: 26. Esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had
respect unto the recompense of the reward.

24, 25, 26. It was by trusting God's Intimations o^ unseen future things, that
Moses, being grown up, refused the wealth and honor of an Adopted Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, preferring affliction among the People of God, before the
short enjoyment of sinful pleasures; yea, esteeming such reproach, as we
Christians now undergo for Christ, and as the Believers of the future Kingdom
of Christ, then suffered, to be not only tolerable, but greater riches than all
the Treasures of Egypt; because he had a believing respect to the recompense of
Reward, to which such sufferings did conduce.

27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king, for he
endured as seeing him who is invisible.

27. Why left he Egypt to go into a Foreign Land and Wilderness, and after
fearlesly faced a wrathful King, when he spoke from God? but because, as his
Eyes saw the flaming tokens of the presence of God, so his Faith was instead of
a sight of him that is invisible: He believed in an unseen God for unseen
future things.

28. Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he
that destroyed the firstborn, should touch them.

28. Why kept he the Passover, and sprinkled the door-posts with blood, but
because he believed God for unseen future things, even that the destroying
Angel should spare such houses?

29. By faith they passed through the red sea, as by dry land: which the
Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned.

28. How durst they have ventured into, and through the Red Sea, but that they
believed God, that he would there deliver them by that Miracle? when the
Egyptians were drowned, who went not in by Faith, but by Presumption.

Note; It is a great Controversy among Expositors, whether the Israelites
passed quite through the Sea to the other side, or rather went in, and came
out, as in a semicircular course on the same side; because their Journeys are
after said to be on the same side where they entered, and so they think it was
but to draw in the Egyptians.

30. By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about
seven days.

30. How came the People to go about Jericho seven days, and the Walls to fall,
but because they believed and trusted the Promises of Almighty God?

31. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when
she had received the spies with peace.

31. How came Rahab (who was formerly a Heathen Harlot, and then kept an Inn,
or House of Entertainment) to escape when Jericho was destroyed, but because she
believed that the God of Israel was the true God, and would deliver them that
trust him?

32. And what shall I more say? for the time will fail me to tell of Gideon,
and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jephtha, of David also and Samuel, and of
the prophets. 33. Who through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions.

32, 33. By believing and trusting God for unseen future things, some conquered
the Nations of their Enemies, (as Joshua, the Judges, David, etc.) the truly
faithful lived righteously in a sinful World, obtained what God had
conditionally promised, and promises of yet further mercies for their fidelity
(as Abraham, Phineas, etc.) and God stopped the mouths of Lions to deliver
them, (as he did by Daniel.)

34. Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies
of the aliens. 35. Women received their dead raised to life again: and others
were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection.

34, 35. God made the fire harmless to them; (as, Dan. 3.) Diverse escaped the
Sword of bloody Persecutors; (as David, etc.) recovered from Sickness; (as Job,
Hez^kiah, etc.) fought valiantly, trusting on God for Victory, and so overcame:
Had their Dead raised; (as, 1 King. 17.21. 2 King. 4.) Others endured Torment,
and would not sin to be delivered; believing and hoping for Resurrection to a
better Life; (as, 2 Maccab. 19.30. and 7.9.)

36. And others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings; yea moreover, of
bonds and imprisonment. 37. They were stoned, they were sawn asuder, were
tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheep skins, and
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented:

36, 37, And by believing the promised, unseen Reward, others endured the Trial
of cruel Mockings, and scornful Reproach, and to be whipped as Rogues, and bound
and laid in Gaols as Malefactors; some were stoned, some sawn asunder, others
tried by hot Irons, and other fiery torments; some slain with the Sword,
others, like contemned Vagabonds, wandered in base Clothing of Sheepskins, and
Goat Skins, destitute of outward things, affl^cted and tormented.

38. Of whom the world was not worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in
mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth.

38. All these were accounted and used as bad men, unworthy to live, as others,
peaceably in the World. But were they such indeed? No; but such, of whom the
World was not worthy. And many of them retired from the Converse of the World,
into Dens, Caves and Mountains.

Note; Oh, the difference between God's Judgment of a Saint, and Man's! The
World is not worthy of those scorned, persecuted Saints, whom their Persecutors
call Rogues unworthy to live. They are not worthy of their Company, Example,
Counsel, or other benefits: For they know not what a Saint is, nor the worth of
a Saint, nor how to use him; yea, they hate him, and drive such away, as they
do the Offers of Christ and Grace.

39. And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not
the promise: 40. God having provided some better thing for us, that they
without us should not be made perfect.

39, 40. And all these true Believers were justified by God's own Testimony,
left on Record to their praise. But still it was things unseen and future which
they believed, and for which they suffered all this Martyrdom and pain: And
though God gave them their Reward in Heaven, they lived not to see the
Incarnate Savior, and the Kingdom of the Messiah, the Catholic Church
advanced by the pourings out of the Spirit of Christ; which were the promised
Blessings, which God had told them, he would give in the fullness of time. For
God had provided these greater Blessings, of the Kingdom of Christ in its more
perfect state, and the fullness of that Spirit, for this Age of the World in
which we live, and would not let them, in those former Ages before our time,
partake of this more perfect Church State: Even as we now believe Christ's
Glorious Coming, and wait, and suffer Persecution of Hope; and yet must not
live on Earth to see it, as the last Age will do; but must dye first, and be
raised to enjoy that sight.

CHAP. XII.
1. WHerefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.

1. Seeing then we that are now called out to Trial, have before us the
Instances of all the Faithful that have been before us, who have conquered all
the impediments of their Salvation, by the effectual Belief of God's Promise of
unseen things, let us quit our selves like men; and, as Runners in a Race, let
us be so far from turning to the World, as to cast off all worldly Encumbrances
which would hinder us, and to avoid all sin, in which, without great care, we
shall be entangled, and let us run with patience and perseverance the Race, in
which, by God and our Covenant, we are engaged; (for it is for our Salvation.)

2. Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy
that was set before him; endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the throne of God.

2. Let us fix our eyes on Jesus, the Author and Leader of our Christian Faith
and Course, and the Perfecter of it; who has by his Doctrine and Example,
proposed it to us in that perfect form which he will own and crown; who himself
was moved by the future proposed Joy, which was to be the Reward of all his
Mediatorial Works; for which he endured the pains of his Cross and Sufferings,
and despised the Shame and Reproach that attended it, in comparison of the
desired End, which he has now attained; and is set down in Triumph and Glory,
next the Throne of God.

3. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest ye be wearied, and faint in your minds.

3. If you will well study Christ, and consider how, and why he endured such
Opposition and Contradiction of wicked men, who by sin, falsely accused him of
sin, it will greatly strengthen you against weary Tiredness, or fainting
Cowardice.

4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin.

4. It is but little which you have yet been put to. If you will be crowned,
you must be prepared to lay down your lives, rather than wilfully to sin.

5. And ye have forgotten the exhortation, which speaks unto you as unto
children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art, rebuked of him.

5. Have ye forgotten the Lord's gentle words, as of a Father to his Children:
My Son, etc. Prove. 3.11.

6. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives. 7. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons: for
what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? 8. But if ye be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.

6, 7, 8. Note, 1. Chastisement is one sort of punishment, distinguished from
destructive punishment, in that it is not only for a warning to others, but
also for the amendment of the Offender. No man corrects another; but for a
fault, and that makes it punishment. 2. It is not any derogation from the
perfection of Christ^s Satisfaction, that we are punished; for he never
intended to make us lawless, or that our sins should not be punished at all:
His Law of Grace has penalties annexed. A Father has fatherly justice and
punishment for his Children; and Christ is not a King, without such Justice. 3.
Even the Sufferings of Martyrs are of a mixed nature, partly for sin, even
Adam's and their own, (God not on Earth taking off all the first curse, but
making a Medicine of it for good) and partly for the trial and reward of Faith.
4. Pardon of sin is not perfect in this life; else, no chastising penalty would
remain.

9. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we
gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father
of spirits, and live?

9. We reverently submitted to the Correction of our Parents (whose Authority
was less, and they were liable to do it amiss:) And shall we not much more
submit to God, who is the Infinite Spirit, and Father of Spirits, as well as of
our flesh (and is of infallible Wisdom, and never does amiss) and will fit our
Spirits by suffering, for a better Life.

10. For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure, but
he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.

10. For they chastened us as fallible and passionate men, as they thought
good, though sometimes in causeless anger; but God does all in Wisdom and
Mercy, for our good, to make us more holy, which is to be more happy, as liker
to himself.

11. Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous:
nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby.

11. Indeed, Suffering, as such, is grievous, as a hurt to Nature (and a Fruit
of Sin to be chastised:) It is not to be expected that Pain should be pleasant;
but it is the Fruit of it which is good, which is Peaceable Rig^teousness,
making us more righteous and holy, which is Peace to the Soul, as Health is to
the Body. This is the Fruit, when we have been tried and exercised by it.

12. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees: 13. And
make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the
way, but let it rather be healed.

12, 13. Therefore seeing Nature is weak, and young unsettled Christians are
apt to discouragement and fear, and fainting, labor to strengthen and
encourage your selves and one another, and avoid tempting Seducers, and keep
under the ^elps, in public and private, which God has appointed for you; and
avoid all Scandals which may turn the Weak out of the way, who already go but
lamely in it; but rather labor to heal such weakness.

14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord.

14. Let Peace with all men, as much as in you lies, be (not only your desire,
but) your study, care, and diligent pursuit; and holiness and purity of heart
and life, without which, none are capable of the blessed sight of God's pleased
Face, either here by faith, or hereafter in glorious fruition, Mat. 5.8.

15. Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any root
of bitterness springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled:

15. Make it your diligent care that none of you fail of sound believing,
obeying and enjoying that Grace which is offered you by Christ in the Gospel,
and you have professed to accept; lest any ill and dangerous Doctrine, or
fleshly Lust or Practice spring up among you, and cast you into trouble and
danger, and the Churches be defiled by them, while the Weak and Unstedfast are
carried away, and catch the Infection.

16. Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one
morsel of meat sold his birthright.

16. Lest Seducers and fleshly Lust draw any to Fornication; or any be so
profane, and set so light by Christ and Grace, and Glory, as to lose them all
for the base things of the World, and to prefer Wealth and sensual delights
before them: Like Esau, that set so light by his Birthright, as to sell it for
one Dish of Meat.

Note; What a base price all ungodly men do set on Christ and their own
Salvation! What has the Fornicator, the Drunkard, the Glutton, the Worldling,
the Ambitious, Proud, and Oppressors, for all, but the base portion of a Beast?

17. For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing,
he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears.

17. For the Text tells you, that after, when he would fain have had that
Blessing of Primogeniture which he sold, and sought it of Isaac with tears,
Isaac rejected him, and would not retract what he had said of Jacob.

Note; This intimates a warning of the danger of the contempt of Grace, lest
God withdraw the Offers, or leave men to the power of Temptation as deserted.
But, 1. It determines not any thing about the damnation of Esau. 2. Nor that
he truly repented of his sin against God (but only of his loss of the
privilege of the elder Brother;) and yet could not be forgiven (but that this
loss could not be recalled.) 3. Nor that any one that truly repents, and is
converted, shall not be forgiven: For the contrary is a great part of the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

18. For ye are not come into the mount that might be touched, and that burned
with fire; nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest, 19. And the sound of
a trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice they that heard, entreated that
the word should not be spoken to them any more.

18, 19. For ye are not in the Infant and Wilderness-state of Israel, when they
must hear from God out of a Mountain on Earth, which was touchable (but must
not be touched) and which terrified them with flames of Fire, and Blackness,
and Darkness, and Tempest, signifying the distance of unreconciled Man from
God: where they heard the sound of a Trumpet, and a terrible Voice of words,
which fear made them desire that they might hear no more.

20, 21. For they could not endure that which was commanded: and if so much as
a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart.
2. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake.

20, 21. This signified, how little they could bear the things commanded. And
the distance and dreadfulness was such, that a Beast must dye if it touched the
Mountain. And Moses himself (as we may gather by Consequence and Tradition) did
fear and quake.

22. But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels: 23. To the general
assembly, and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God
the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect: 24. And to Jesus
the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks
better things than that of Abel.

22, 23, 24. But the state of Relation to which ye are brought, as Christians,
is more spiritual and sublime: You are come in Faith, Relation, Hope and
Initial Participation, to that state of holy Worship which Mount Zion typified,
and to that blessed Church which is gathering on Earth, and consummate in
Heaven, which Jerusalem typified, and may well be called the Heavenly
Jerusalem, the blessed City of immortal ones dwelling with the living God: And
to Myriads, or numberless multitudes of Angels, inhabiting those vast and
glorious Regions (where you shall see that the number of the glorified Spirits
were not few:) And to that advanced state of the Church, in its triumphant,
joyful Communion, which answers a General Assembly of the Princes of the
Tribes of Israel, who had the honor of Primogeniture; even those who are the
enrolled Citizens of Heaven; (here they have Right, and there Possession.) And
more than all this, you are come as adopted Sons to God the Judge of all; and
to the Spirits of the consummate, or perfected, just Men, with whom, as we are
here united by one Spirit and Love into one Body, so there we shall live in the
perfection of this Love, and Union, and Communion: And to our Glorified
Savior, the Mediator of the New Covenant; by whom it was purchased, made,
sealed and executed; and who, according to the Tenor of it, mediateth for us
with God, and from God to us: And, as the way hereto, to the real Purification
by his Sprinkled Blood, which the Blood of the Passover and Sacrifices
typified; and which cries not against us, as Abel's Blood did, for Revenge,
but saves us by satisfying Vindictive Justice. This is the Society and State
of the Faithful.

25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not, who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from heaven.

25. Therefore your Motives, both of Fear and Hope, being so exceeding great,
with your greatest care, see that n^ Temptation draw you to refuse him that is
the great Teacher and Author of Salvation; for if they escaped not who rejected
Moses, and the Law delivered by him, who was but a man like us on Earth,
certainly we shall not escape, if we turn away from God, who sent his Son from
Heaven, and thence also speaks to us by his Spirit.

26. Whose voice then shook the earth, but now he has promised, saying, Yet
once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. 27. And this word Yet
once more signifies the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things
that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.

26, 27. Whose Voice shook the Earth, when he delivered the Law. But now he
has promised, once more to shake even Heaven, as well as Earth. Which
signifies, that he will remove the things so shaken, as made to be transitory
in their use; that the things, whose designment, use and nature are perpetual,
may remain without them: that is, that the Law of Moses shall be removed, to
make way for Grace; and the corrupted form of Heaven and Earth to make way for
Glory, even the new Heaven and Earth that must follow.

28. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. 29. For our
God is a consuming fire.

28, 29. Seeing therefore that the Gospel is the Doctrine and Gift of an
unmovable Kingdom of Christ in Glory, which we receive in Right when we are
true Believers, and in possession at the last; and so we have the strongest
motives to Holiness and Perseverance; let us serve God with the greater
diligence and reverence, that we may be meet for his Acceptance, and with a
Godly fear of falling off, and of his Displeasure if we should prove Hypocrites
or Apostates. For the Gospel is not only a word of Promises, but has its.
Threatenings and Terrors, as well as the Law, against all refusing Unbelievers,
Hypocrites and Apostates, to whom even our God, so rich in Grace, will yet
prove a Consuming Fire.

CHAP. XIII.
1. LEt brotherly love continue. 2. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers,
for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.

1, 2. And as to to your particular Duties, I subjoyn these brief Precepts of
Christian Morality. 1. Be sure to keep up that Special Love which Christians
owe to one another (notwithstanding tolerable Infirmities and Differences)
above the common Love which they owe to all men: and avoid all that would
destroy this Love.

2. Show this, among other means, by your Hospitality, entertaining Travelers
that need Entertainment: For so Abraham, Lot and others, have entertained
Angels, thinking that they were men: (And Christ, at Judgment, will say, I was
a stranger, and ye took me in.)

Note; That in those Countries, Inns were not so ready as with us; and
Christians were most poor men, not able to bear their own Charges in their
Travel.

3. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the body.

3. Seeing all the Members of Christ's Body must suffer if one suffer, think of
those that are Prisoners, especially for Christ or Righteousness, with such
Compassion, as if their Case were your own; and so in all other Cases of
Adversity, remembering also, that you are yet in a Body liable to as great
Affliction.

4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge.

4. Account and use Marriage as God's Institution, honorably, and keep the
Marriage Bed undefiled: But Fornicators and Adulterers God hates, and will
judge.

5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as ye have. For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

5. Let your hearts be kept free from the love of Money, and the sinful
desires, cares, and fears and troubles which thence arise; and be content with
God's Allowance, be it less or more: for his Promise to Joshua is applicable to
all the Faithful; [ I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee.]

6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what
man shall do unto me.

6. And as to our Dangers or Sufferings from men, on the same account we may
say as David did, having the same Relation to God, and the same Promises, The
Lord is my helper, I will not fear man, etc. (further, my sin gives me cause
to fear, that God may use them as the chastising Instruments of his
Displeasure.)

7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the
word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. 8.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

7, 8. Remember your Bishops, or Guides (both the Dead and Living) who have
spoken to you the Word of God: Remember what Doctrine they taught you, and how
faithfully they preached, and owned it in suffering: and consider what was the
main end of all their Doctrine and Life; even Jesus Christ, who is and will be
still the same, and no new Gospel, or Doctrine, which Corrupters do cry up.

9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines: for it is a good
thing that the heart be established with grace, not with meats, which have not
profited them that have been occupied therein.

9. Be not carried about (as Children in a strong Wind, Ephesians. 4.14.) with
various Doctrines, or such as are new and strange to the Church of God: for
Christ and his Gospel being but one and the same still, your duty and interest
lies in establishing your hearts in the Doctrine and Covenant of Grace through
Christ, which is your Strength, and the Bread of Life; and not to Judaize and
turn back to the shadowy, abolished Ceremonies, in Sacrifices and difference of
Meats, which did not truly purify, save and profit those that used them.

10. We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
tabernacle.

10. We are not without a more holy and profitable Sacrifice and sacred Food
than theirs, even Christ (who is The Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the World) whose saving Sacrifice we feed on by Faith, and commemorate in our
Communion; whose broken Body, and his shed Blood they did not partake of, who
offered Beasts in Sacrifice, in the Service of the Tabernacle, as we now do;
but were employed about the shadows of it: And those that stick still in these
abrogated Rites, have no Right to our Altar.

11. For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary
by the high priest for sin, are burnt without the camp. 12. Wherefore Jesus
also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without
the Gate.

11, 12. For as the Beasts slain for Atonement, whose Blood was brought into
the Sanctuary* was not to be eaten by the Priest, but burnt without the Bounds
of the Camp of Israel: So Christ, when he was to be offered, to sanctify the
People with his Blood, went without the Gates of Jerusalem to suffer,
signifying that (as they rejected him, as unworthy to live with them, so) he
departed from them, and their Political and Legal State.

13. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp bearing his reproach.
14. For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come.

13, 14. So let us go out to him, from the Jewish State, and Ceremonial Law
(and also from the Heathen World) and submit to the Reproach of the Cross,
which must be expected: We must forsake both the Jewish Policy, and the World*
or else we cannot follow Christ; for the Christian Church is not fixed, as the
Jewish was to Jerusalem, to one City; nor have we any fixed state on Earth, in
which we may glory, as our Home or abiding place; but by faith in God's
Promises, through Christ, we hope and seek for one to come, even the new and
heavenly Jerusalem.

15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually,
that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name.

15. Therefore, instead of Jewish Sacrifices, let us by Christ, our great
interceding High Priest, offer daily to God the Sacrifice of Praise from a
believing, thankful heart, and give thanks to him for Christ and all his Gifts;
and this hearty, sincere Fruit of our Lips will be more acceptable than the
Fruits of the Earth, or any bloody Sacrifice of Beasts.

16. But to do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased.

16. But there is another sort of Sacrifice very pleasing to God also, which
you must not forget, even Beneficence and Bounty; doing all the good you can,
and communicating to the relief of those that need.

Note; The name of Sacrifice and Altar, as well as Priests used, as here, by
allusion or similitude to those of old, may lawfully be used, as here they are,
and were by the primitive Christians, even as the Lord's Day was called the
Christian Sabbath. It is no dishonor to Christ, to say that we may offer
Sacrifices acceptable unto God, so it be but in subordination to his Sacrifice,
as our Gospel-worthiness is but subordinate to his Meritorious Righteousness.

17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.

17. God that has made the Bishops or Pastors to be your guiding Rulers in
Church Affairs, obliges you to obey them, and to submit your selves to their
Government, and not to live as unruly, or in confusion: for the charge of
watching for your Souls is committed to them, so far as belongs to their
Office, by teaching, publicly and privately, and personally watching over the
State and Conversation of every single Person to their power, and instructing,
exhorting, reproving, comforting; entrusted with the Administration of the
Seals of God's Covenant, and with your public Church Communion, by judging of
men's capacity, and receiving or excluding, binding or loosing, by the power of
the Keys. And of all this they must give account to God; which, as it will be
terrible to them if they be unfaithful, so it will be to you, if their
faithfulness be without success; which else, will be to the joy of them and
you. And they have not any constraining power of the Sword and can govern and
profit you only as voluntary, by your own consent: and therefore, as you love
your comfort, and regard them, and their Labors and Comfort, obey them, by
obeying God's Word, which they preach.

Note, 1. That those Bishops which God commands men to obey, are those that
watch for the Souls of all the Flocks, as men that must give account of all;
and not those that have many hundred, or score of Churches, without any other
Bishop, save one, and never see, or know, or once hear the names of one of many
hundred, called their Flock; much less ever taught them, or gave them the
Sacrament.

2. That God having trusted the Pastors, by Office, with Church Government by
the Keys, it is very false that the people should govern it by Vote: Though it
is true, that being governed but as Volunteers by the Pastors, their Consent is
needful to their Subjection, and to their Profit and Salvation.

18. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience in all things, willing
to live honestly.

18. Our Work and Charge being so great, and of such importance to your selves,
while some revile and persecute us, and some turn from us, and disobey our
Doctrine, do you pray for us, that God will guide, strengthen, support and
prosper us: For our Conscience is our Witness, that we are faithful in our
Ministry and our Lives.

19. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the
sooner.

19. And put up this one Request also for me, that I may the sooner be restored
to the comfort of your Service.

20. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, 21.
Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

20, 21. My chief Benediction and Prayer for you is, that God, who will be
called, The God of Peace, as being the Giver, the Lover, and the Objective End
of Love and Peace, who raised our Lord and Savior from Death, whose
Resurrection is the great Encouragement of our Hope, even him who is the chief
Pastor of all his holy Flock, by the Purchase of the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant; compact, frame and fit you, by Holiness and Union, for every good
Work, to do his Will, and work in you (by his Spirit, as he commands you in
his Word) that which is well pleasing in his sight: (To please him being the
ultimate End of the whole Creation, and as here begun, the way thereto.) To
whom be Glory in this perfect fulfilling of his Will, for ever and ever. Amen.

22. And I beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation, for I have
written a letter unto you in few words. 23. Know ye that our brother Timothy is
set at liberty, with whom, if he come shortly, I will see you. 24. Salute all
them that have the rule over you, and all the Saints. They of Italy salute you.
25. Grace be with you all. Amen.

22, 23, 24, 25. Note, 1. So bad is Man, even Christians, through the Relicts
of their Corruption, that when the most important, comfortable Doctrine is
delivered to them, for their own good, and that with the most convincing
Evidence, there is need of earnest Entreaty and Exhortation that they would
bear it, and not fall out with it, neglect it, or reject it.

2. For people to know and regard their faithful Pastors, or Church-Guides, or
Rulers, is of so great importance to their Salvation, and the Churches Union,
Strength and Safety, against Ignorance, Unbelief, Error and Unruliness, that
they are three times minded of it in this one Chapter.

The General (or Catholic) Epistle of JAMES (the Apostle, say most Copies.)
Whether the Writer was one of the Twelve, called the Son of Alpheus; or
rather, the Son of Cleophas, Cousin-German to Jesus, and called his Brother, is
uncertain.

The drift of the Epistle is; 1. To establish the Christian Jews in a well
ordered, religious Course of Life, and fortify them against Tribulations. 2.
To shame a sort of Sectaries, who misunderstood, and abused the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, and turned Religion into Opinion; and yet were not only
Magisterial Boasters of their great Knowledge; but did it by a censorious,
contentious Contempt of others, and making Ostentation of their supposed
Wisdom, as Heretics use to do, by a proud and wrangling self-exalting way. 3.
To reprove the Over-valuing of the Rich, and their Contempt of the Poor, and
the Guilt of Sensuality, Worldliness and Pride, that had corrupted some among
them.

1. JAmes a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes
which are scattered abroad greeting.

1. Note 1. Ten of the Tribes, ever since the Reign of King Hoshea, were
scattered by Captivity, and the rest were in great numbers dispersed through
much of the Roman Empire; partly by the many Insurrections and Wars which had
brought them to Ruin by Conquerours; and partly, by smalness and poverty of
their Country; so that at first the Apostles, when they traveled into Heathen
Countries, began their Preaching, and Church-gathering with the Jews
Synagogues, which they found there.

2. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. 3.
Knowing this, that the trying of your faith works patience.

2, 3. Note 1. He speaks not of direct Temptations to sin, as cast into us by
the Devil, or carnal allurements, and fleshly appetite and lusts; but of Trial
by suffering for Christ and Righteousness, chiefly; and partly next for such
correcting Trials from God, as tend to our amendment.

2. It is not the suffering that is matter of joy, in it self, but the good
effects of a proved Faith, and increased Patience. Trials, because they tend to
this, should be received with joy; but when they cause this, much more.

4. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing.

4. Note 1. The care of a tried, suffering Christian should be to look to his
Faith and Patience (as the Goldsmith does to his Gold in the fire) and to see
that they be duly and fully exercised, and have their perfect work.

2. A full or perfect exercise and use of Patience in great Trials, shewe^h a
strong, entire Christian, and has great joy; when a lame use of Patience mixed
with much impa^ience, shows a lame Christian, and gives but little joy.

3. To despair, or fret, or swell, with bitter, revengeful thoughts against our
Persecutors or Enemies, is contrary to sound Christianity.

5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

5. Wisdom is necessary both for the guidance of you in all your difficulties
and duties, and the management of all your religious affairs: And all Parties
pretend to the greatest Wisdom, to draw People to be their Disciples. But if
you would be truly wise, seek it not by running unto Heretics, but by sincere
prayer to God, who is the bounteous giver of it, and does not, as Heretics,
reproach you with your weakness, but mercifully vouchsafes to teach the humble.

Note 1. Prayer is a great and necessary means to get true Wisdom. But as for
outward things, so for Wisdom, we must not only pray, but labor, and use God's
other helps. Study without Prayer, makes but ungodly talkers, whose dreaming
knowledge will but condemn them: And Prayer without Study, and learning of the
wise, is but a self-deceiving idle tempting of God.

6. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering: for he that wavereth is like a
wave of the sea, driven with the wind, and tossed. 7. For let not that man
think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.

6, 7. But see that your Belief of God's Power and Goodness, and the truth of
his Promises to faithful Supplicants, be firm and sound; for if you doubt and
waver in this, you will but be tossed about like a wave of the Sea: When you
cannot trust God, every temptation and difficulty will overthrow both your
hope, and your innocence: And such have no promise that God will hear them; it
is but presumption to expect it.

Note; That the Faith here mentioned is not an assurance of our own sincerity,
and that God will give us what we ask, as being surely fit to receive it: But
it is a resolute cleaving to the Christian Verity, and a sound belief that God
is most able, and faithful in performing all his Promises, and will give all
the good which we ask, and are meet to receive. Distrusting our selves is not
distrusting God.

8. A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways.

8. A man whose mind and heart hangs doubtful and unresolved between God and
the World, Christ and Infidelity, Heaven and Earth, Holiness and Sin, is
fickle, and still untrusty.

9, 10. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted; But the
rich, in that he is made low:

9, 10. You must not judge of your felicity by your outward things, but take
that for best which God, as a Father, provideth for you. If he advance you,
gladly and thankfully acknowledge it; if he take you down, and deprive you of
riches, be not only patient, but thankful that God will choose for you,
according to his wisdom, who knows better what you are fit for, and what is
fit for you, than you can know.

10, 11. Because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away. For the sun is
no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withers the grass, and the flower
thereof falls, and the grace of the fashion of it perishes; so also shall
the rich man fade away in his ways.

10, 11. For riches are too inconsiderable things to make any great, just
alteration on our minds: They are transitory, and so is man, like the flower,
whose sweetness you may use for a moment, but it fades presently before the
heat of the scorching Sun.

12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

12. It is the tried Christian that is the blessed man, who after suffering and
temptation holds fast his integrity. God will give him that Crown of Life,
which he has promised to all that sincerely love him.

13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man.

13. But as to the seducing sort of temptation, which is not to try our
constancy, but to draw men to sin and ruin; let no man charge that on God as
his doing; for as God cannot be tempted to sin, nor possibly love it, so he
tempts no man to it (much less forces them to it, or unresistibly, by
determining premotion, makes them sin.)

14. But every man is tempted, when he* is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed. 15. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin,
when it is finished, brings forth death.

14, 15. But the course of temptation, sin and death, is this: First, fleshly
appetite, lust and fantasy, by strongly inclining men to their carnal objects
and interests, prevail with their Judgments, either to take part with these
lusts, or not to oppose them; and so, by these lusts, Satan, the greater
tempter, does his work, which he could not do without them. And when these
lusts, or carnal affections, have bribed the understanding to be erroneous or
remiss, and have drawn the will to a sinful yielding or consent, this sin
conceived by lust in the heart, does bring sorth the fruits of a sinful
practice in the life, and then God's Justice punishes it with death, when it
has resisted and driven away his offered grace.

16, 17. Do not err, my beloved brethren. Every good gift, and every perfect
gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning.

16, 17. Be not deceived about the causes of good and evil; sin and death are
from our selves; but every good and perfecting gift is of God's free grace and
donation, even from above, from the Father of Lights, who (as the Sun is the
same in its nature and action, though Earth and Clouds, often interposing, make
it seem to us as varying by its rising and setting, and turning away its light
into shadows, when the change is not in it, so) God is unchangeable, and our
changes and shadows are not from any mutability, or shadowy alteration in him,
but from our selves.

18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a
kind of first fruits of his creatures.

18. It was of his own good will and grace that he has regenerated us by the
true word of the Gospel (and not of any desert of ours) and has made us as the
first fruits, sanctified to him (so that all good is of God, and all evil of
our selves and the Devil.)

19. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to
speak, slow to wrath.

19. Therefore watch over your selves, if you would be safe; and particularly
observe these three Rules: 1. Be swift to hear as humble Learners, while proud
men are forward to be Teachers, before they were ever profitable Learners. 2.
Be slow to speak, and not as proud men, full of words because full of
self-conceit, readier to teach than to learn, telling what they think they
know, while the humble are learning to know more; and when in multitude of
words there is seldom innocence; but the rash and talkative say that which must
be repented of. 3. Be slow to wrath.

20. For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.

20. For a wrathful mind is very unfit for that righteousness which God
requires in and of us: It puts the mind out of a composed, holy frame, and
unfits it for communion with God: It blinds and perverteth the Judgment, and
destroys holy love and peace. A wrathful man scarce loves his neighbor as
himself, nor does as he would be done by.

21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.

21. Also cast away all filthiness out of your thoughts, affections, speech and
practice, and all excrementitious naughtiness, (or that superfluity, which is
but provision for the flesh, to satisfy its lust;) and with humble, tractable
meekness, receive God's Word, not only opinionatively, but as the graff is
taken into the tree, or your food, when it is digested into blood and flesh,
thus made an innaturalized Word; and so received and digested, it will save
your Souls.

22. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves.

22. But to think that bare hearing the Word will save you, is but self-deceit:
There must be inward practice by meditation, and outward practice in true
obedience.

23. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man
beholding his natural face in a glass: 24. For he beholds himself and goes
his way, and straightway forgets what manner of man he was.

23, 24. An unprofitable custom of bare hearing, and not doing, is but like a
man's looking his face in a glass, who so goes away, and minds it no more, or
forgets it, which neither feeds nor cloatheth him, nor cures his diseases;
such are these customary, dull Speculators.

25. But whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein,
he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be
blessed in his deed.

25. But he that well considers the Covenant of Grace, or the Gospel, which
is Christ's Law of Liberty, or Liberation, giving us deliverance from the
Jewish Law, and from sin, and guilt, and wrath, and death, and dwells in the
study of it, till it turn to spiritual life digested and ingraffed in him, and
is not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of that which is required to Salvation*
even sound Faith, Repentance, sincere Obedience, and Patience, this man shall
be blessed in so doing.

Note 1. They grossly deny Christ to be King, which say that he has no Law. 2.
His Gospel Covenant has Precepts, Rewarding Promises, and Penal Threats, and
therefore is a proper Law. 3. It gives pardon on condition of Faith and
Repentance (to be performed by Divine Grace) and Salvation on condition of
added Obedience and Perseverance, and so is a Law of Liberty. Christ is the
Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. 4. This doing his
commands, which is made his imposed condition, is the necessary entitling
qualification for blessedness, Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in by
the Gates into the City.

26. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue,
but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

26. If any man among you seem to others, or himself, to be religious, (and
perhaps of a higher form than others) and yet bridleth not his tongue from
backbiting, slandering, or reproaching his Brethren, to render them
contemptible and unlovely, and from speaking ill of men without either truth,
or a just call; this man's sinful practice does show that his Religion is but
ineffectual and vain, and does but serve to deceive his own heart: For that
which does not save men from sin, will not save them from justice.

27. Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit
the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted
from the world.

27. There is great contending among Christians, whose way of Religious Worship
is the purest, and best pleasing to God. That is the pure and undefiled
Religion in God's sight, who is our Father, which is effectual to sound
practical Charity, and to a pure, unspotted, holy life; even with true Love and
Liberality, to relieve those that are in distress, and to keep heart and life
clean from the love of the World, and the temptations of wicked, worldly men,
(as seeking in hope for a better World.)

CHAP. II.
1. MY brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons.

1. And you that profess to believe the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
the poorest Christians shall partake of equally with the rich, and to which all
worldly glory is but vanity, must not now make a great difference in the Church
between rich men and the poor, by a worldly respect of persons for their riches.

2. For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly
apparel, and there come in also a poor man, in vile raiment: 3. And ye have
respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and and say unto him, Sit thou
here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under
my footstool: 4. Are ye not then partial in your selves, and are become judges
of evil thoughts?

2, 3, 4. If in your Church Assemblies you inordinately show respect to men for
gay clothing, as rich, and set light by men, that by their garb seem poor, do
you not show a carnal partiality, by overvaluing wealth, and a Judgment
misguided by evil estimation?

Note 1. That this speaks not against honoring Magistrates, but Riches. 2.
Nor against a prudent respect to the Rich, so far as by their wealth they may
be engaged to do more good than others. 3. And I think those mistake, that
rather expound this of meetings of Bishops for Judicature (as Dr. Hammond) than
other Church Assemblies: For, 1. If they mean any forcing Judicatures,
Christians had none such, there being then no Christian Magistrates that had
the power of the Sword. 2. And if Bishops had been like our Diocesans, and so
distant, they could not have traveled so far as such must do to keep up
ordinary Judicatures, without a total deserting their chief work for their
Flocks. 3. And as they truly were (Congregational Bishops) over no more than
one of our Parishes, their distance between City and City was too great for
this, without the like omissions. 4. Christians having then no Judicial Power
but as Arbitrators, the Contenders chose what Arbitrators they thought best. 5.
Their Public Church Government was exercised in the same Assemblies which met
for Worship, which therefore are liker here to be mentioned with respect to
their most usual business, and not the rarer. 6. It is the whole Church, and
not the Bishops only, that is here admonished. 7. It is too hard a censure for
such men to use, as are pleading for too much honor to Bishops, to suppose
them so early guilty of so much partiality and carnal respect to fine cloths
and riches, and so much Injustice in Judging as this Doctor's Exposition does
suppose: It Is liker to be the vulgars fault.

5. Hearken my beloved brethren, Has not God chosen the poor of this world,
rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that
love him?

5. Consider how God himself confuteth your overvaluing rich men, and vilifying
the poor: Is it not mostly of the poor that your Churches consist? Is it not
them that God has chosen, poor in the World, but rich in Faith, to be here
made Heirs, and hereafter Possessors of that Kingdom of Glory, which he has
promised to them that truly love him.

6, 7. But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you
before the judgment seats? Do not they blaspheme that worthy name, by the which
ye are called?

6, 7. Yet you despise the poor, whom God himself chooses and honors: And
does not your own experience and suffering condemn you? Who is it but rich men
that oppress you by tyranny, and draw you, like Malefactors, before their
Courts of Judicature? Do they not blaspheme the name of Christ, and reproach
your Religion?

8. If ye fulfill the royal law, according to the scripture: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, ye do well.

8, I persuade you, not to hate men for their riches, but not to think that
these allow you so partial a differencing: If you obey God's great Command, as
the Scripture teaches you; to love all sorts of your neighbors as your
selves, according to the various degrees of their truest amiableness (be they
rich or poor) you then do well.

9. But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the
law as transgressors.

9. But if you thus inordinately respect men differently for their wealth, not
only the Gospel of Love, but the Law of Moses convinces you as sinners, Exodus
23.3. Lev. 30.15. Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.

10. For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. 11. For he that said, Do not commit adultery; said also, Do not
kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a
transgressor of the law.

10, 11. And that Law condemns all that continue not in all things therein
written, to do them; and we are bound by God's Law enforce to universal
Obedience. If you keep all other Commands, and presumptuously break one, you
are contemners of the Law, and so interpretatively break all.

12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty.

12. And though you are delivered from Moses's Law, and the Covenant of Works,
remember that Christ is your King, and Lawgiver, and you are not lawless;
therefore so speak, and so do, as they that are under his Law of Liberty and
Grace, and shall be judged by it, by Justification or Condemnation.

13. For he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy; and
mercy rejoices against judgment.

13. For though this be a Law of Mercy, it will condemn the unmerciful without
mercy: It has its conditions of life or death, though none but what consist
with Grace: But the merciful shall find mercy at Judgment: And God's mercy in
Christ as the cause, and their mercy to men for his sake, as the condition,
will prevail against condemning Judgment.

14. What does it profit, my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and have
not works? can faith save him?

14. Is not a mere wordy Profession an unprofitable thing to your selves, as
well as to others? Will professing Christianity, and saying you believe, profit
you to Salvation, if you obey not Christ, and live not according to the Gospel.

15, 16. If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, And one
of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled:
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body:
what does it profit?

15, 16. Will good words cloth the naked, or feed the hungry? Is it not like a
mocking of them?

17. Even so faith, if it has not works, is dead being alone.

17. Even so your notional knowledge and belief, and the bare professi^n of
Faith, if it produce not the fruits of Obedience, Love and Mercy, is but an
uneffectual, dead thing in it self, showing a dead Soul, and is dead as to your
Justification and Salvation.

18. Yea, a man may say, Thou have faith, and I have works: show me thy faith
without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.

18. Any one may say to this man, if thy Religion be sound, it will have life
and power, and be known by its fruits: Can thou show and justify thy
Religion or Belief, without any good works or fruits, as I can do mine by them?

19. Thou believe that there is one God, thou do well: the devils also
believe, and tremble.

19. It is part of thy Religion to believe that there is One God: This is well
done; it is a most fundamental Truth, but it saves not the Devils that believe
it and tremble.

20. But will thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? 21. Was
not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son
upon the altar?

20, 21. But art not thou a vain man, that know not that Faith is but a dead
Opinion, uneffectual to justify and save, if it be uneffectual to Works? Do
thou not discern how plainly the Scripture confuteth thee? Was it not Doing in
Faith, or a Faith that caused working Obedience, by which Abraham was
justified, who was the Father of the Faithful? when he offered his Son Isaac,
and God said, Genesis 22.16. Because thou have done this thing, and have not
withheld thy Son, thy only Son, in blessing I will bless thee, etc.

22. See thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made
perfect?

22. You may see that his Faith made him obey God's Command, and the obedient
working of it, did constitute it a sound, effectual Faith, without which it
could not justify him.

23. And the scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God.

23. And this is the true sense of the Scripture, which says, Abraham
believed, etc. that is, he so far believed and trusted God, as to offer up his
Son; and this trust working by such Obedience, or this practical effectual
trust, was so accepted by God, that though he was not perfect without sin, God
accounted him a righteous man, that was meet for the free Salvation of his
Grace, and to be called, The Friend of God.

24. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.

24. You see then that by such necessary doing God's will, which is the product
of an effectual Faith, and shows it to be lively and sincere, and not a dead
Opinion, a man is accounted just by God, according to the Covenant of Grace
through Christ, and not only by bare believing, or not by believing only
without obeying.

25. Likewise also, was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had
received the messengers, and had sent them out another way?

25. And was it not by Doing by Faith, or a Faith causing Obedience that Rahab
was justified?

26. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead
also.

26, For as it is a dead spiritless body that cannot stir so it is a dead,
notional, uneffectual belief, that commands not a man's life and action: It Is
dead in it self, and dead as to men's Justification and Salvation.

Annotations:
NOthing but men's misunderstanding the plain drift and sense of Paul's
Epistles, could make so many take it for a matter of great difficulty to
reconcile Paul and James, where there is no considerable show of contradiction.
I have showed the scope and sense of Paul before the Epistle to the Romans, 1.
That his arguing is to prove that it is not the Law of Moses that can justify
any man as a mere doer of it; nor any works at all in commutative Justice,
making the reward to be of debt for the value of the works, and not of free
grace; but that Justification must needs be of Gods free gift, and therefore by
the Merits of our Redeemer; and therefore that a fiducial accepting practical
Belief of Gods free Gift, Covenant or Promise, of Grace and Glory, for, in, and
with Christ, is the condition on our part (to be performed by his Grace) which
is our Moral Qualification, or receptive disposition, on which God by his
Covenant gives us right to the foresaid free Gifts (Christ's Grace and Glory.)
This Faith Paul never described by some one single Physical act of the Soul,
but as a Moral act of the man; as we use the Word in humane converse: As if one
say, if you will trust me as your Physician, I will cure you, if you take me
for your Tutor, I will teach you; Here to trust or take him, signifies a
consenting trust, to be medicined and to be taught by such a one. If one say to
a condemned Beggar, trust me and I will give thee a Lord-ship in a Foreign
Land; it signifies a trust consenting practically to go with him and trust his
Convoy, and forsake his own Country. And James never questioned this Doctrine;
But some Vain Men (as James calls them) misunderstand this and spin us out a
Web of their own Vanity, and feign it to be Paul's Doctrine. 1. They say that
Paul by Faith means not Faith, by which we are said to be justified, but only
Christ, (who doubtless is a chief object of that Faith.) 2. That God the
Father, or the Holy Ghost, are none of the object of Faith as it is justifying.
3. That it is not Christ himself, as Prophet or King, but only as Priest that
is this object. 4. That it is not all Christ's Priesthood, but only Sacrifice
and Righteousness, that is this object, and not his Heavenly Intercession. 5.
that it is not Christ's Sacrifice and Righteousness as merely meritorious of our
Pardon and Life, but as it was paid and performed by Christ as our surety in
our Legal Reputative Person, and so is imputed to us as our own, because done
by another in our name and stead, as one pays a debt by another that was
bound for him. 6. That so far as Faith is here meant, it is but one single
Physical act of Faith in Specie: and there they are utterly disagreed. 1.
Whether it be an act of the understanding, or will, or both? 2. Whether one act
can be the belief of many objects, viz. of Christ's Sacrifice, Obedience,
Promise, Pardon, Heaven? etc. 7. Yea many say that it is but one individual act
that we are justified by (which no mortal man can know, the individuation of
the Souls acts being obscure and the objects being always many conjunct) and
they say that it is only our first act of Faith, and that all following acts of
the same species, finding us justified, cannot justify us any more than works.
8. They say that Faith justifies only as an Instrumental Cause, and not as a
Moral qualifying receptive condition or disposition. 9. They say that believing
in the Father and the Holy Ghost, and hoping for Heaven, and praying for Mercy;
and Repenting of Sin, and Loving God and our Savior, and his Word and Saints,
and Thankfulness for Grace, and Obedience to Christ, and Patience and forsaking
all for him, are the works which Paul means to exclude from Justification,
and so is Faith in Christ's Righteousness as an Act, but not as an Instrument.
10. They are utterly disagreed whether Faith justify by appropriating only
Christ's active Righteousness, or also his Passive, or also his Divine
Righteousness and Perfection. 11. They say that by [ Imputing Faith for
Righteousness] is meant that not our Faith, but Christ's Righteousness, is
Imputed in it self (and not its merited effects only) to be our own, because we
performed it by him. 12. They say that it is the very Law of Innocence and
Works that justifies us, as having perfectly fulfilled it in and by Christ.
13. they (most) hold that in Christ we have both perfectly kept the Law, from
birth till death, by imputed obedience, and yet satisfied for not keeping it by
his sufferings, as if perfect obedience imputed could consist ith sin. 14. They
say that Gods corrections are no punishments because else Christ's Suffering was
insufficient, and God should punish one sin twice. 15. And that our pardon and
justification is perfect as soon as we believe. 16. And that no more is needful
to our continued Justification, than to its beginning. 17. And that yet more is
needful to our Salvation than to our final Justification. Many such humane
Inventions man's brain has spun out, and made a Doctrine of their own, and
called it Paul's.

And James, having to do with carnal Gospellers, that thought to be saved for
being of a right Opinion, and calling this, Faith, does 1. Tell them that this
is not that true Christian Faith which has the promise of Justification and
Salvation, but that that is a powerful, practical belief and trust. 2.
Therefore their Doing that which Faith consents and engages them to do, must
justify that Faith to be sound, which must justify them as the condition of
life. 3. And that therefore this Efficiency or Doing of this practical Faith,
is part of the condition of their Justifications, and it justifies the man
himself, 1. As it justifies his Faith, and so justifies him to be a sound
Believer, and not an Infidel or Hypocrite. 2. In that the effectual, operative
nature, and consent to obey, is essential to that Faith it self. 3. In that as
a Faith accepting Christ, and consenting to obey him as the Author of Eternal
Salvation, is the condition of our first entering into a state of Life and
Justification, so our performance of that consent by sincere obedience and
perseverance, is the condition of our Justification, as continued and
consummate at Judgment, and so of our final Salvation. 4. In that sincere
Holiness and Obedience is the very matter that must justify men, against the
virtual or actual accusation of Satan, that they were not holy and obedient,
but ungodly or hypocrites: As Faith it self is the matter of our Justification
against the accusation, that we were not Believers. Now James speaks of no
other Faith than Paul does: But 1. He speaks of another thing under the name
of [ Works.] 2. And he speaks of a working Nature in Faith for our
Justification begun, and of the Deeds themselves, as needful to its
continuance. And, in a word, he speaks of such Justification by no sort or
works, 1. In opposition to Christ or free Grace; or 2. In coordination with
him; 3. But in mere instituted subordination to him. And no Christian must
ascribe to any Faith, Works, or act of Man, the least part of the Office of
Christ.

CHAP. III.
1. MY brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater
condemnation.

1. And as I thus admonish you against the Error of Hypocrites, who take their
dead Opinions and Professions for a Justifying Faith; so must I do against
another Vice, which that sort of Hypocrites are guilty of: Their Pride and
Self-conceit makes them think that their knowledge is much higher than other
Christians; and that they are the fittest men to be Teaching Masters, and
Reprovers; and so they are all forwarder to Teach, and Magisterially Censure
others, and use their Tongue to contemn others as short of them in knowledge,
and to boast of themselves; and all their Talk runs in a Teaching, and not a
Learning way. But I warn you to avoid this proud and masterly spirit; for it
will make your sin the greater, and without excuse, and increase your
condemnation.

2. For in many things we offend all. If any man offend not in word, the same
is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body.

2. Your zeal goes out by censuring others, as great sinners in comparison of
you (perhaps for not observing your Ceremonies and Traditions, or not taking
you for their Teaching Masters;) But fear sin in your selves; yea, lest your
censorious, reproachful, unbridled Tongues, should prove worse than that which
you censure others for. He that has most power to rule his Tongue, and sins
not in words, is like to be the most perfect Christian, and can rule his
actions by the same Obedience and Wisdom which does rule his Tongue.

3. Behold, we put bitts in the horses mouths, that they may obey us, and we
turn about their whole body.

3. As we rule the whole bodies of Horses by a Bridle in the mouth; so, could
you bridle your mouths it would both signify a power to rule your lives, and
much promote, this.

4. Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of
fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small helm, whithersoever
the governor lists.

4. So the Pilot by so small a thing as the Helm, rules great Ships, that are
under the force of Winds.

5. Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasts great things:

5. And man's Tongue is but a small part of the body, though it boast great
things; and the Government of that little member, is a great part of the
Government of the man.

5, 6. Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles: And the tongue is a
fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue amongst our members, that it
defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and it is
set on fire of hell.

5 6. The Tongue in the body, and the World, is like fire among much
combustible matter. As a little fire kindles much; so this little member does
both kindle defiling passions and guilt in our own bodies, and also kindle
hatred, rage and strife in the World, and set on fire the Societies and Affairs
of Mankind in the World, being it self set on fire by the Devil, and used by
hellish temptations, to hellish designs in diabolical employment.

7. For every kind of beasts and of birds, and of serpents, and things in the
sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of mankind: 8. But the tongue can no man
tame,

7, 8. For all sorts of Animals have been mastered by Man: But the Tongue of
another who can master? [when we have so much ado to subdue our own.]

8, 9. It is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. Therewith bless we God,
even the Father; and therewith curse we men, which are made after the
similitude of God. 10. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing:

8, 9. It is to us, and in the World, an unruly evil, (till Grace shall tame
it) and infecteth our selves and the societies where we live, with the mortal
Poison of many great sins. The same Hypocrites, who praise God and worship him
with it, do reproach their Brethren with it; not only Men that have some of
Gods Image in their natural faculties, but those that are Gods true Servants,
better than themselves, who are renewed to Gods Image in Holiness by Grace.

10. 11. My brethren, these things ought not so to be. Does a fountain send
forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? 12. Can a fig tree, my
brethren, bear olive-berries? either a vine figs? so can no fountain both yield
salt water and fresh.

10, 11, 12. Do you not perceive that your ill reproachful Tongues, which
vilify, speak evil of and condemn, good Christians for not being of your
minds, do confute themselves, when the same Tongues profess to honor God, and
boast of Wisdom and Religion in your selves: If you were as Wise and Godly, as
you profess, your Tongues would not, by speaking ill of your Brethren, show the
contrary. No Fountain sends forth sweet water and bitter, fresh and salt, no
Fig tree brings sorth Olives; The tree is known by its fruits.

13. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge amongst you? let him show out
of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.

13. Are any among you, indeed, as much wiser and knowing and excelling others,
as you would be thought when you censure or despise them: Show it if you would
have any wise man believe you, not by proud boasting or talking against others,
but by the true fruits of the Spirit, even a better conversation than theirs in
all your dealings, and by more good works, with that humble meekness which
signifies true Wisdom.

14. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and
lie not against the truth, 15. This wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, devilish,

14, 15. But if you have a bitter Zeal, and envy and uncharitable heart-rising
and strife against your Brethren; pretending truth, Orthodoxness, or Religion
for your swelling envy and emulation, and talking and preaching down Love and
Peace, to make those that differ from your side, to seem hateful, or
contemptuous, in comparison of you, your profession of greater knowledge and
religiousness, is but proud boasting, and lying against the truth: This Wisdom,
and this Preaching and Course, is not of God, not such as he will own. It is
from an earthly, and sensual Principle, your own praise, or profit, or
Magisterial will, or some carnal interest is at the root; if you could know
your selves you might see this: Yea it is so far from excelling others, that it
is a devilish Wisdom, a Devilish Zeal, and Devilish Preaching and disputing,
which you glory in.

16. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work.

16. For where envious Zeal and Strife prevail, there is still Faction and
unquietness, (or Sedition, Tumults and unsetledness still for change;) and this
cherishes all sorts of evil works, which men will think to be all good or
lawful, to serve their contentious Zeal and to further their changes and carnal
ends.

17. But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality,
and without hyprocrisie. 18. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of
them that make peace.

17, 18. But if you would know among the several pretenders, whose knowledge,
and religiousness, and zeal is from above, the fruit of the Spirit, which God
will own? These are the sure marks of it. 1. It is first for true purity of
heart and life: It will not choose sin, on any pretense, so far as men can know
it. If any be for wilful, deliberate conformity to sin, or for a loose and
sensual life, or against serious godliness, and a holy, heavenly, sober and
just life, this is not from the Spirit of God. 2. It is next to this, addicted
to peace, and will seek it by all lawful means. 3. It is addicted to put the
best sense of another man's case, and to a gentle, and not a rigid, censorious
Judgment. 4. Easily yielding to good persuasions, and not stiff in ill Opinions
or ways. 5. Full of mercy to others, and of all good works or fruits to his
power, as being devoted to do good. 6. Without censorious partiality, as
Sectaries, that can see nothing but what seems to make for their own Party
and Opinions, (or, without a wavering unresolvedness in the Christian
Religion.) 7. Without Hypocrisy, or false pretendings. And though the
erroneous and contentious in both extremes, do use to vilify or abhor
Peacemakers, who serve God according to this supernal Wisdom, yet these men,
who labor to make peace, are sowing, in this work of peace, the fruit of true
Righteousness, as guiltless of the crimes of the extreme contenders, and of the
tumults caused by them: And when the Harvest of God's Judgment comes, they
shall reap this fruit to themselves: And if the Countries, where they live, are
worthy of such fruit, they must reap it from this seed of peacemaking labors.

CHAP. IV.
1. FRom whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of
your lusts, that war in your members?

1. The Jews are in frequent Seditions and fightings among themselves, in which
many erroneous Christians join with the unbelievers, in a blind Zeal for their
Law and Nation. And do you think it is from true Zeal that their Wars arise?
No, it is from their own sensual, worldly lusts, that first war in themselves,
and then disturb the common peace.

2. Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye
fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.

2. You Covet, and fight, and kill, in your mistaken desires of your Law and
Liberties; and you do but lose your blood and labor, by going your own sinful
way, and not seeking to God for Counsel, conduct and success, who must give all
good, and that in his own way.

3. Ye ask, and receive not; because ye ask amiss, that you may consume it upon
your lusts.

3. Yea you will be Religious in your sin, and make your Prayers to God for
deliverance from the Roman Power, and for your Countries Liberty. But they are
carnal Prayers; and God rejects them; for it is but that you may live in
great Plenty, Power and Pleasure, enjoying sensual prosperity, that you pray to
God for your deliverance.

4. Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the
world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is
the enemy of God.

4 You that by your perfidiousness to God, are like perfidious adulterers,
loving the World best, whilst God is in your mouths, know ye not that this love
of the World, as his Competitor, is enmity to God, and that he is God's Enemy
that so loves it predominantly?

5. Do ye think that the scripture says in vain, The spirit that dwells in
us lusts to envy?

5. Is it not true, which the Scripture says, of the evil inclination of Man's
Heart, as lusting after worldly Pomp and Pleasure, and to envy and strife, that
they may obtain it?

6. But he gives more grace, wherefore he says, God resists the proud, but
gives grace unto the humble.

6. But Gods Grace is of a contrary tendency, and would teach you better
things; but he gives it to the humble, and not to the proud, for he is against
such, as its said, etc.

7. Submit your selves therefore to God: resist the devil, and he will flee
from you.

7. If ye would be delivered and live in safety, submit your selves to Gods
Government and Will, and go the way which he prescribes: Conquer Satan, and
you need not fear his forces, and do but resolutely resist him, and you conquer
him.

8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: cleanse your hands, ye
sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded. 9. Be afflicted, and mourn,
and weep: let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness,
10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.

8, 9, 10. Draw nigh to that God against whom you have rebelled, and he will
draw nigh to you for your deliverance, and will not forsake you. Cleanse your
hands by Reformation from your sins, and your hearts from your halting between
God and the World: Bewail your former sin, by self-afflicting mourning and
weeping. Turn your sensual pleasures into godly sorrow, and your carnal mirth
into penitent tears: Humble your selves before that God whom you have offended,
and then he will lift you up, and save you better than your Seditions.

11. Speak not evil one of another (brethren) he that speaks evil of his
brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the law, and judges the
law: but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge.

11. And give over your reproach and censoriousness against the Gentile
Christians, that do not observe your Ceremonial Law, by which you encourage
their Persecutors; for both the Law of Christ, and the Law of Moses, which you
profess to own, do bid you love your Neighbor as your self, and forbid such
uncharitable censures; so that by condemning your Brethren, you condemn the
Law: And this is not to keep either Moses's Law or Christ's, but to set your
selves above both, by making your selves Reproving Judges of them.

12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy: who art thou
that judge another?

12. Christ, and none else (says Dr. H.) has Authority to give Laws to us:
There is but one Lawgiver, who has the absolute and final power of life and
death eternal, Salvation and Damnation. Who art thou that dare arrogate this
Judgment? Or what power have thou to judge or anathematize another, any further
than truly to tell men whom Christ will judge and cast away?

13. Go to now, ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a city,
and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain: 14. Whereas ye know
not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? it is even a vapor
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

13, 14. You are too much set on wordly prosperity; and you plot for gain, as
if you were secured of long abode on Earth; and you lay your designs with
presumptuous confidence, where and how long you will dwell, trade and gain,
when as your Life on Earth is a mere uncertain fugitive vapor, quickly gone,

15. For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will we shall live, and do this, or
that. 16. But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil.

15, 16. Whereas ye should remember the uncertainty and shortness of your
lives, and design and do all in submissive dependence on the will of God: But
you fetch your comfort from wordly things by your own vain presumption of long
Life, and hope of worldly prosperity: all such presumptuous carnal comforts are
evil.

17. Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is
sin.

17. And the brevity of Man's Life, and the vanity of worldly gain, are things
so notorious and undeniable to all men, especially to Christians, that to let
these vanities loosen you from Christ and your obedience, is utterly
unexcuseable.

CHAP. V.
1. GO to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon
you.

1. But as to those that will yet cleave to the World, and take no warning, let
me tell you to your sorrow, that dreadful miseries are coming upon you, the
fore sigh^ of which shouhld make you weep and howl instead of your deceitful
joy.

2. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten. 3. Your gold and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped treasure together for the
last days.

2, 3. What are these vanities which you have so inordinately affected. Your
beloved riches are not only corruptible, but corrupted by you, to your own sin
and hurt: your rich clothing is a moth-eaten vanity. The gold and silver,
which you have treasured up, is cankered and rusty, and the guilt signified by
that rust, shall condemn you, and corrode your Consciences as fire. At great
cost and labor you have treasured up riches, but it is in effect, to be a prey
to your Enemies in the day of your Destruction, and a witness in God's day of
Judgment against your selves to your own confusion.

4. Behold the hire of the laborers, which have reaped down your fields, which
is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and the cries of them which have reaped,
are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabbath (or hosts.)

4. You Jews are addicted to Covetousness, and by that to Injury and
Oppression, and you deny poor laborers their wages, and defraud them; and God
hears their cries, and will revenge them on you.

5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: ye have nourished
your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

5. Your Riches have been provision for your sensuality: You have by them made
provision for the lusts of the flesh, and lived in pleasure, revelling, and
luxury, and lasciviousness, and have fed and cherished the flesh, and its
delights, as in a continual feast.

6. Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he does not resist you.

6. Your Riches have lift you up into power, which you have abused to condemn
and kill innocent men, who have not resisted you, but endured all.

Note 1. Some think that the Jewish Christians are here meant, to whom James
wrote; but sure they were not so degenerate. 2. Some think it was the Gnostick
Heretics. 3. I think it much more probable, that by an Apostrophe he speaks to
the Rich Infidels, to introduce his Exhortation to the Christians to Patience.

7. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: behold the
husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience
for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. 8. Be ye also patient,
stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

7, 8. But as for you, persecuted Christians, bear all this patiently, without
discouragement, tiredness, or wavering in your Faith: For the time is short,
and the coming of Christ for your deliverance is not far off: If in your
Husbandry or Tillage you look not to reap as soon as you have sowed, but wait
for the Harvest and Fruit, and for the Showers that must ripen it; should you
not more patiently wait for greater things? when the time will quickly come?

9. Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold, the
Judge stands before the door.

9. Make not too great a matter of your wrongs, nor quarrel among your selves,
(as the Jewish Zealots, mentioned by Josiphus, did) lest while you condemn one
another, all condemn themselves, and biting and devouring one another, you be
devoured one of another: Stay but a little, and the Judge, who is at hand, will
avenge you of your Enemies, and end all your quarrels, which ignorance and
pride have made, and kept up, among your selves.

10. Take, my brethren the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord,
for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience.

10. You justly honor the Prophets, who have spoken, as sent from God:
Remember how they were used, and how they suffered, and let them be your
Example, and imitate them in Patience.

11. Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very pitiful, and of
tender mercy.

11. It is part of our Faith, to believe that they are happy who patiently
suffer for Righteousness sake: You have heard of Job's patience, and of the end
which God intended and accomplished, which tells us that God is full of pity
and mercy to us, when he afflicts us.

12. But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither
by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea, be yea: and your
nay, nay: lest ye fall into condemnation.

12. And I must specially exhort you to avoid customary, needless swearing, by
Heaven or Earth, or any oath; but let Yea and Nay serve you, and be true of
your word, that you be not drawn into a just suspicion of falsehood, (or
condemned for profaning the name of God.)

Note 1. That this is so far from forbidding necessary oaths, for ending
strife, that it is but to confirm them, by preserving the due reverence of them.

2. The true nature of an oath is by our speech [ to pawn the reputation of
some certain or great thing, for the averring of a doubted lesser thing;] and
not only (as is commonly held) an appeal to God, or other Judge. As to swear [
by the Fire, by the Temple, by my Faith or Truth, by the Life of Pharaoh, by
the Heavens, etc.] is as much as to say [ If this be not true, then the Fire
burns not, the Temple is not holy, I am a Liar, Pharaoh is no King, as sure
as Heaven is Heaven, etc.] so [ the Lord liveth] is [ This is as true as that
God lives.]

13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing
psalms.

13. In your affliction, have present recourse to God by prayer (in Faith and
Hope) and when you are cheerful and merry, turn it to God's praise and
thanksgiving for his mercies, in singing holy Songs to God.

Note; That it is not only David's Psalms that they are tied to, but such as
are by men fitted to their proper cases; which confuteth them that condemn all
humane Forms of composed words in God's Service.

14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church, and let
them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: 15. And the
prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he
have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

14, 15. When any of you is sick, let him send for the Bishops of Pastors of
the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the name of
the Lord, as a sign and means which he has appointed for miraculous Cures: And
if it be the Prayer of Faith, and he be a person capable and fit for that
deliverance, it shall recover him from his Sickness, and God shall raise him;
and if his Sickness be a corrective punishment for any sin that he has
committed, God will forgive him, and take off that penalty, if he repent.

Note 1. That this implies, that each Church had diverse Elders: And whereas
Dr. H. thinks it means one single Bishop, who, the Ancients say, visited all
the sick, you may see then how great their Diocesses were. Should all the sick
men in London, or in many Counties, send for the Bishop, he would come but to a
few of them, at least forty or eighty Miles off: But it will be said, He may do
it by others: And why not give Orders and Sacraments by others (as Laymen now
use the Keys?) And if the work be proper to Bishops, those others then are made
Bishops; if not, others may do it.

2. Anointing (being healthful to dry bodies in those hot Countries) was used
by Christ's appointment for miraculous Cures, and never made a Duty or
Sacrament to continue when Miracles cease.

3. Sicknesses are usually corrective punishments for sin; and to forgive the
sin as to that penalty, is to remit the punishment, and heal the sick.

4. The promise of pardon and recovery presupposes the person penitent, and
fit for that deliverance.

16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may
be healed: the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.

16. Therefore Penitently confess your faults to one another (especially to the
Elders that visit you) and pray one for another; for this is the likely way of
your recovery: The effectual, fervent, instant Prayer of a Righteous Man is of
great force or prevalence.

Note. 1. An impenitent man is unfit for Pardon, and therefore, for deliverance
from punishment: and he that does not penitently confess and bewail his sin,
cannot be judged a true Penitent; and therefore cannot be prayed for with that
Faith and Hope as we may do for the Penitent. 2. This is not to be a customary
thing, or only to a Priest, but it is a duty both in Sickness and Health,
wherever the expression of Repentance to others is a duty. By which alas, we
know how rare true Repentance is, when even professors of Zeal in Religion are
sharp in censuring and blaming others; and except a very few humble Souls, if
they be never so justly blamed or reproved, do swell against the reprover with
pride and indignation as if he were their Enemy: And they that separate from
the Churches for want of Discipline, are earnest for it for others, but cannot
bear it on themselves; nor so much as endure a confutation of their errors, but
take him to speak against Godliness, who speaks against their mistakes and
faults; and two many (like the Profane) will turn again and all to rend him.

17. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by the space
of three years and six months. 18. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave
rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

17, 18. Think not that Prayer is a vain or uneffectual thing, though we be
frail and faulty men: Elias was but a man, liable both to sufferings, and to a
troubled mind in them; as we are; yet on his earnest Prayer, it rained not on
an Idolatrous Persecuting Country for three years and a half; and at his
Prayer, it rained again, and the Land was fruitful.

19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him;
Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

19, 20. I beseech you, Brethren, be neither negligent or dispairing to the
cure of men in error, nor yet impatient with those that would detect your
Errors, and convince you and bring you to Repentance (as proud impenitent
Persons are:) But know that (as all men, alas are too prone to error) if any
man err from the truth (through ignorance or a corrupted will,) and one convert
him, he that converteth a sinner from his error in mind or life, does not only
do that which tends to save his life from Gods punishing stroke, but also
shall save his Soul from everlasting death, and procure the Pardon of his
manifold sin, not only so far that the Church, but God himself, shall receive
him into a reconciled state.

Note 1. That error and sin are the way to death and misery. 2. Converting the
erroneous sinner, is the way to save him. 3. One man may be said to save
another, (much more a man himself) by converting him, without derogating from
Christ's Salvation, but in subordination to it. 4. Therefore all Christians, but
specially Ministers, should be diligent and skilful to convert erroneous
sinners, and the erroneous patient and thankful for their help.

Note; If it be the Gnostics, as Dr. H. says, that James here and Paul in his
Epistles so greatly warn the Christians against, alas, too great a part of the
Church Governors, Bishops and their Clergys abroad on Earth, seem turned very
like these by him described Gnostics. 1. In being for Worldly interest, Wealth
and Pleasure. 2. In being for Ceremonies. 3. In joining with the Ungodly
Enemies of Piety. 4. In being Latitudinarians, or Licentious against strictness
and tenderness of Conscience, and Adiaphorists in things not Adiaphorous. 5. In
being Persecutors. And if base underling Gnostics or Nicolaitans, could so
trouble the Churches then, what a case must those Countries be in, where they
are got into the Episcopal Chair, and claim the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
to execute their Pride and Lusts over Princes and People of all sorts, sure
Borborites or Gnostics are not the less such, nor the less dangerous, for
being called Bishops, and having Power, Wealth, and Interest.

The First Epistle General of (the Apostle) PETER.
CHAP. I.
1. PEter an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 2. Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: grace unto you and
peace be multiplied.

1. Peter an Apostle (not called the Universal Bishop or Head or Governor of
the Church,) to the dispersed Jews through Pontus, etc. chosen by grace, out of
that unbelieving forlorn Nation, according to Gods foreknowledge and
unsearchable Counsel, to Sanctification by the Holy Ghost, and to Obedience,
and to a State of Reconciliation and Justification, by the Merit of the Blood
of Christ applied; Grace and Peace multiplied to you, is my Prayer and
Benediction.

3. Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,

3. B^essed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who out of his abundant
mercy, for the manifestation and Glory of it, has regenerated us to a living
hope, even a hope of Glorious Life, procured, notified and secured to us, by
the Resurrection of Christ from the dead.

4. To an inheritance inccorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for you: 5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time.

4, 5. Not to such a corruptible, defiled, fading Inheritance, as Earth is to
its lovers, but to an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled and holy, never
fading reserved by the Divine Love and Decree, and by the Possession,
Intercession and Promise of Christ, for you who are true Believers, and are
kept by the power o^ God through that Faith, which he has given you, and you
keep and exercise to Salvation, which ere long will be gloriously revealed to
your sight and possession, the last time being not far off.

Note; It is revealed already in the Gospel, and will be fully revealed to
separated Souls: But the full glorious revelation is when the whole Church is
consummated.

6. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need be) ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations:

6. In the belief and hope of this glorious Inheritance, you now live in great
joy, though for a little time, when God sees it needful for your good, he let
out upon you those trying sufferings which are heavy and grievous to the flesh.

7. That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honor
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

7. For as your Faith is a preciouser thing than gold, and refined gold is the
most precious gold; so tried Faith, is the most precious Faith, and the trial
of it a greater work than the trying and refining of gold by fire; that so it
may be found at the coming of Christ, a qualification meet for your own praise,
honor and glory, and in you also unto Christ's.

8. Whom having not seen, ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory:

8. Whom though you never saw in the flesh, as we did that followed him, yet
you truly love and honor: And though now you see him not in his glory, nor his
coming, yet your effectual Faith does so far serve instead of seeing him, that
you rejoice by it with unspeakable triumphant joy, in hope of that which you
shall see.

9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls:

9. And shall shortly receive that great Salvation, for which you have believed.

10. Of which salvation the prophets have enquired, and searched diligently,
who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you. 11. Searching what, or
what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when
it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should
follow.

10, 11. Of this great Salvation and Kingdom of Christ Incarnate, which is
dated from his Resurrection, and perfected at his next coming, many Prophets
foretold in their manner and degree; and they enquired, and diligently
searched, more explicitly to have known it, and the time when it should be,
when the Spirit in them foretold that the Messiah must suffer, and in general,
that glorious things should follow.

12. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did
minister the things which are now reported unto you by them that have preached
the gospel unto you, with the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, which things
the angels desire to look into.

12. And it was revealed to them, that it was not to come to pass in their
days, and that it was not they, but we that should see the Messiah, and his
special Kingdom, and the things, which since his Resurrection, are now preached
to you by us his Ministers, with the Seal of the Holy Spirit sent down in a
special abundance from Heaven, to be the Witness of Christ, and the Sanctifier
of Souls; a mystery so great, and of so excellent importance, that the Angels
think it worthy their search.

13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end,
for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

13. Wherefore, as runners gird their clothes to them, that they trouble them
not; do you fortify your minds with holy Resolution, and soberly watch, and
keep up your Hope until the end; for that glorious effect of Redemption and
Grace, which you shall see and enjoy at the day of Christ's glorious appearing,
which will answer all your Hopes.

14. As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the former
lusts, in your ignorance:

14. And as obedient Children of God, to whom you are reconciled, no more
living as you did in the time of your ignorance, in fleshly lusts, and worldly
vice.

15. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation; 16. Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

15, 16. And, as Children must be like their Father, and they must please God,
who will be saved by him; therefore, as he that has called you is a holy God
and Savior, be ye a holy People; for so God requires; Be holy, for I am holy.

17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges
according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear:

17. And if you call God your Father, and call on him, who, without respect of
persons, for any worldly difference, judges all men according to their works,
let the thoughts of his Holiness and future Judgment, cause you to pass the
time that you as Sojourners, wait for Christ's coming, in holy, cautelous,
obedient fear.

18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your
fathers; 19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish and without spot.

18, 19. For the preciousness of the price which redeemed us, tells us the
great worth of our Salvation from sin and misery, which was not with silver and
gold, or any corruptible price, but it was with the precious blood of Christ,
the spotless Lamb of God, that ye were redeemed from the vain Ceremonies and
Traditions which you were bred up in, and from your sinful conversation.

20. Who verily was fore ordained before the foundation of the world, but was
manifest in these last times for you; 21. Who by him do believe in God that
raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might
be in God.

20, 21. Whom God had sore-ordained to this blessed Office before the
foundation of the World; but (though often prophesied of) was not incarnate and
manifest in the flesh, till these last times, even for you that live since his
coming, who are not by him drawn, as we are falsely accused, from the true and
only God, but by him are taught the true knowledge of God, and to believe that
God to be God indeed, wise, good and almighty, who raised Christ from the dead,
and gave him glory; and so that your Faith and Hope might be ultimately in God
alone, by Christ's Mediation.

22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the
Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren: see that ye love one another with
a pure heart fervently,

22. And as you have purified your Souls from former Error and Sin, by obeying
the Gospel, by the work of God's Spirit, unto unfeigned love of Christian
Brethren, be sure to keep up that Love, and with a pure heart, and deep
affection, to love each other.

23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the
word of God which lives and abides for ever.

23. Seeing you are not only Brethren by corruptible generation and relation,
but of incorruptible seed, by the Word of God, who lives and abides for ever,
and so must your incorruptible love to each other, which is part of your
incorruptible nature.

24. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man, as the flower of
grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away: 25. But the
word of the Lord endures for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is
preached unto you.

24, 25. For all flesh, and all its glory, is a fading, dying thing, like the
grass and flower: But God's Word is everlasting Truth, as Christ the Author is,
and is our Guide to an Everlasting Life: And this true Word is it which we
preach to you by the Gospel, and bespeaketh endless constancy in your holy love
and obedience.

CHAP. II.
1. WHerefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and
envies, and all evil-speakings, 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the word, that ye may grow thereby:

1, 2. Lay aside therefore, and renounce all naughtiness, and all deceit, and
hypocrisy, or counterfeiting, and all envy, and all speaking evil of others.
And as new born babes, desire, and seek, and drink in the rational Milk, (or
intellectual,) without fraud and mixture, that you may grow up to Salvation by
it; which the mixture of heresy, or hypocrisy would vitiate, and invectives
against others would but turn it against your selves.

3. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. 4. To whom coming, as
unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious,
5. Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, and holy
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

3, 4.5. And if you are Christians indeed, and have had a Spiritual relish of
the love of God in Christ, you must suppose his Church to be like an House, in
which every stone is a living man, and Christ is the chief Foundation stone, as
the Lord of Life, on whom all the building is erected; rejected indeed by the
Jewish and Heathen Rulers, but chosen of God to this blessed Office, and more
Precious than any Pearl; and so coming to him the Foundation as so many living
stones your selves, you being cemented to him, and to one another, are made one
Spiritual House of God; yea as a Temple, in which you are all Priests, to offer
Daily Sacrifice to God; which he will accept through the Intercession of the
great High Priest Jesus Christ: For your Prayer and Praise may be thus
accepted: (Think thus of Gods House, and you may be for sweeping and repairing
it, but you will never be for dividing, dismembring or separating from it.)

6. Wherefore it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief
cornerstone, elect, precious; and he that believes on him shall not be
confounded.

6. This the Scripture foretold, saying, I lay in Sion, etc. That is, I set
over the Church a Savior and a King, on whom the Church shall be sounded: And
none shall be put to shame, by the frustration of their Faith, Hope and
Obedience, who put their trust in him.

7. Unto you therefore which believe he is precious; but unto them which be
disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head
of the corner, 8. And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them
which stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed.

7, 8. To you who believe, as he is esteemed precious, so will he be in the
riches of his grace to you: But to them that obey not the Gospel, but are
unbelieving rejecters of him, he whom the builders, the Jewish Rulers, did
refuse, is made the foundation of the Church, and they shall feel his Kingly
Power; He is that Stone on which they stumble and fall, and that Rock on which
the Adversaries dash themselves in pieces, even they that unbelievingly reject,
and quarrel against the Gospel, and disobey it: To which destruction (not to
their sin) the righteous God appointed them.

9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called
you out of darkness into his mavelous light:

9. But as the Israelites were, by their proper Covenant of peculiarity,
separated to God from the rest of the World, and called a chosen Generation, a
royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, especially as typifying
the Christian Church; so are you more eminently a chosen Seed of Christ by his
Spirit, a dignified Kingdom of Priests, who are all designed to reign with
Christ; and all may have access to God, a Nation or sort of men sanctified by
dedication to God; though all the World be his, you are his peculiarly, and
have the Covenant and Privileges of Peculiarity, having greater mercies than
the rest of the World, that as Priests, you may stand daily before God, and
celebrate his praises, who has called you out of the darkness of ignorance,
and unbelief, and wickedness, into that mavelous Light, by which you know him
the Father of Lights.

10. Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which
had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.

10. Who were under the Roman Captivity, and scattered over the Earth, and
alienated from God by unbelief, but now are made Christ's Freemen, and
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and have obtained that mercy, which
unbelievers do reject.

11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.

11. But you are yet Strangers and Sojourners in the Countries where you are
scattered, and indeed on Earth; therefore I earnestly beseech you to abstain
from that fleshly pleasure and life, which are usually the fruit of wealth and
prosperity in the World, and are warring Enemies against the holy Inclinations,
Motions and Works of the Holy Spirit.

12. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they
speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.

12. And let your conversation, among the Heathens, be so just, and decent, and
exemplary, that they that now speak against you, as if you were a sort of bad,
deluded, contemptible men, through prejudice and malicious same, may by your
excelling all others in good works, rejoice, and give glory to God, when he
shall visit you with deliverance from your oppressors, and shall exalt you.

13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether
it be to the King, as supreme, 14. Or unto governors, as unto them that are
sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that
do well.

13, 14. Be subject to every Civil, Humane Ruler, tho Heathen, whether it be to
Caesar as supreme, or those subordinate Rulers, who are sent by him for that
which is truly the Office of Magistrates, to which God impowereth them, which
is, to be punishers of evil doers, and praisers or encouragers of them that do
well.

15. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men.

15. Your peace and safety is not to be looked for by resisting and conquering
the Powers that are over you, but by due subjection and patience while you obey
God, to silence those ignorant, foolish men, who falsely reproach you as a
turbulent and unruly sort of People, for differing from them in Religion, and
obeying God before men.

16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God.

16. You are indeed Christ's Freemen, delivered from true servitude to Sin and
Satan; but you are God's Servants, and must obey him, in using your Christian
Liberty to his glory, in your appointed way of duty; and not as a covering for
any evil.

17. Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.

17. In short; Give all men their due respect: Love all Christians, especially
Christian Societies or Churches, with a special love: Fear God above all, with
reverent obedience: and under him give that eminent honor to Kings and Rulers,
which is their due.

18. Servants be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward.

18. Christian Servants must be subject to their Masters, whether Christian or
Heathen, with due respect and reverence, even to those that are froward, and
wrathful, and abuse them, and not only to the good and gentle.

Note; That this binds not free Servants to continue with such Masters, when
they may have better; but only Slaves, that may not change, and also voluntary
Servants, till their time of Service be at an end.

19. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully. 20. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for
your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but, if when you do well and suffer
for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.

19. For this God accepts as a rewardable act of Obedience, when in
conscience of God's commanding patience, you endure wrongful suffering. 20. Can
you think it a rewardable thing, as of any special worth, to take it patiently
when you are beaten for your faults? etc.

Note; What then shall we think of those Servants, even the religious sort,
that can neither bear strokes nor words when they deserve them, but will
repine, and swell with passion, if they be but reproved for their faults, yea,
for their sins against God, and will not humbly confess them?

21. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.

21. For your very Calling of Christianity binds you to this obedient
Patience, in imitation of Christ, who in his suffering for us, became our
Example, whom we must follow.

22. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. 23. Who when he was
reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously.

22, 23. Who never did ill, in word or deed; and yet being scorned and reviled,
he returned not to them the like, nor gave them one ill word for another; nor
threatened revenge when he suffered by them, but prayed for the pardonable, and
committed all to God the righteous Judge.

24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being
dead to sin, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed.

24. And never think much to imitate the Patience of your Lord, considering
what he did therein for us: For it was the punishment of our sins, which, as a
Sacrifice, he bare in his suffering body on the Cross, that we being dead to
sin, as he died for sin, might live to righteousness, as he revived and rose:
And he that healed you by his own stripes, will not let you be finally losers
by any stripes which you endure in obedience to him.

25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd
and Bishop of your souls.

25. For in your state of ignorance and unbelief, you were like wandering, lost
Sheep, but now you are converted, and come home to the true Shepherd and Bishop
of your Souls, who keeps you, and will feed and save you.

CHAP. III.
1. LIkewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey
not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the
wives:

1. And though Wives be not Servants, yet a loving subjection and obedience to
their Husbands is their duty; so that if their Husbands be unbelievers, and are
not converted by Ministers preaching, yet the conversation of their Wives may
be such as may convince them of the goodness of Religion, and may win them to a
liking of the Word, till by it they are fully converted.

Note; This winning conversation of Wives, is, their excelling all other sorts
of Women in love, prudence, meekness, patience, humility, diligence in
educating Children, in holiness, etc.

2. While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear.

2. While they see your pure and chaste conversation, joined with the true fear
of God (or reverence to them.)

3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair,
and of wearing of gold, and of putting on of apparel:

3. And do not inordinately mind that sort of adorning, which consists in
following the fashions of proud, vain or lascivious persons, such as plaiting
or knotting the Hair, and wearing Ornaments of Gold, to make you seem rich, or
extraordinarily comely; and costliness, neatness or curiosity of Apparel.

Note; That the thing forbidden, is the signifying of a vain, proud,
procacious, tempting mind, and the imitation of such vain persons: And that the
Rule to be observed in Apparel by the rich, is to choose, 1. That which is best
for bodily health, as warm and suitable. 2. Least hindering, and most useful
for labor and business. 3. Decent, without curiosity, or too much costliness.
4. Not scandalous, either imitating those above our rank, or humorously and
sordidly singular, but imiting the gravest of our own age and rank. 5. But the
command of a Husband, though he should be mistaken, may oblige a Wife or Child
to somewhat differing from their own inclination or judgment. 6. And young
persons desiring Marriage, may go further adorning than graver Women, so they
deceive none thereby.

4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price.

4. But labor to excel in that which is the truest and preciousest ornament,
which is the New Creature of a right frame of heart, which is not like beauty,
or apparel, or gold, a corruptible thing; and specially a humble, meek and
quiet spirit, void of pride, and passion, and of an unquiet mind, that
troubles it self, and those that are about such; that is hardly pleased, nor
can live pleasingly to others, but keep themselves, and their Families, in
discontent, and uncomfortable trouble. God is the Judge of our amiableness*
whom you must specially please: And he highly valueth this meek and quiet
spirit.

5. For after this manner in the old time, the holy women also who trusted in
God adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands.

5. This was the chief adorning of those holy Women, whose praises you read of
in the Scripture, who trusted in God, being in reverent and loving subjection
to their Husbands.

6. Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose daughters ye are as
long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement.

6. And thus Sarah, the believing Wife of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful,
obeyed and reverenced her Husband, and spoke of him as her superior; and you
will be the Daughters and Successors of her Faith and Blessing, as long as you
do well, and are obedient to God and your Husbands, and give not way to those
vexatious, causeless fears, which your Sex is much liable to, and which
signify too little trust in God, especially when they would fright you from
your duty.

7. Likewise ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honor
unto the wife as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the
grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.

7. And you, Husbands, must dwell with them, as beseems those that should
teach and guide them, and therefore should excel them in knowledge, and help to
edify them; and because their parts are supposed to be lower than yours, do
not contemn them for it, but contribute your Authority and Wisdom to maintain
their honor, and keep them from being contemned by Children or Servants; as
being so nearly united, that you should live together as joint Heirs of all the
mercies of God, for this life, and a better; that so, in this concord, you may
daily pray together, as with one mind and mouth, and that discord and
discontent unfit you not for such united prayers.

8. Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as
brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: 9. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing
for railing: but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called,
that ye should inherit a blessing.

8. Yea, let all Christians be of one mind, and live in concord, not
exagitating, but compassionating, each others infirmities and sufferings,
loving as Christian Brethren ought; pitiful to those that need you, and humble
and courteous to all; not hurting those that hurt you, nor railing at those
that rail at you, as if you might lawfully revenge evil with evil; but
contrarily, bless those, and give them good words, who give you evil ones: For
Christ by his Word, Example and Mercys, has called and obliged you to this,
that you may be blessed of God.

10. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile. 11. Let him eschew evil and
do good, let him seek peace, and ensue it.

10, 11. For as it is said, Psalm. 34. He that will love life, etc. Seeing you
love life, and would live in peace and quietness, the likeliest means to attain
this, is 1. To keep your Tongues from speaking evil of any man, and from all
other evil; 2. And from falsehood, deceit and dissimulation, (for it is men's own
unbridled Tongues which bring most of their troubles on them, and false words
that hide faults, at last detected, expose men more.) 3. Avoid all real evil,
and then your Righteousness will appear through the V^il of malicious slanders,
and falsehood will be detected, and not long hide your Innocence. 4. And do all
the good you can to all men, as well as your immediate Duty to God: And Nature
having a love to such as do us good, and a reverence of God, such good works,
and well doing, will powerfully justify you in the Consciences of most men. 5.
And stand not contentiously on your right, but whatever men are or do, seek
peace with all; and be not soon weary, but follow after it still in hope.

12. For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open
unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord it against them that do evil.

12. And this is not mere policy to please men, but whatever they be, it is God
that your lives and peace depend on; and he that commands this, is pleased
with it; and his Eyes watch over you for good, to save you from unreasonable
men, and he hears their prayers in all distress; while evil speakers and
doers, God himself is more against, than men.

13. And who is he that will harm you if ye be followers of that which is good?

13. If your Zeal in Religion be a Zeal of good works, to set your selves
earnestly, as to obey God, so to do good to all men; he must be a very impious
and diabolical man, that will for this set against you: It is the likeliest
way to your quietness.

14. But and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not
afraid of their terror, neither be troubled:

14. But I confess such blinded, unreasonable, malignant Slaves and
Executioners Satan has, that will persecute you, even for Righteousness sake:
But this is the way to, and prognostic of your reward and happiness: And
therefore let not men's threats, rage, or cruelty, terrify or trouble you,
seeing you shall be unspeakably gainers by it.

15. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an
answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with
meekness and fear:

15. But let God always be in your hearts with the highest respect, obedience
and honor, and be still furnished with those Reasons of your Faith and Hope,
that you may be ready to profess them, and to give a good account of them to
any that demands it; and this with meekness and due reverence to Superiors,
and not with passionate upbraiding them, or with disdain.

16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

16. Keeping your Consciences clear from guilt, that they may justify you when
men accuse you; and whereas men slander you as bad men, and seditious and
unpeaceable, your good conversation, according to Christ's Law and Example, may
shame their false accusations, (a better defense than bare words, and disputing
with them.)

17. For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well-doing,
than for evil doing.

17. For if God will have you suffer, it is far better that it be for well
doing, than for ill doing: Better for you, though worse for your Persecutors:
For now the body only suffers, while the soul is free, which else would
suffer far worse than persecution

18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust:
(that he might bring us to God.)

18. For Christ himself had greater sufferings in the body than we; but he
suffered not in the conscience of any guilt of his own, but was just, and
suffered for the unjust, to reconcile and bring us to God.

18, 19, 20. Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: By
which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; Which sometime were
disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is eight souls, were saved by
water.

18, 19, 20. Being put to death indeed as to the flesh, but made alive as to
the Spirit, (or by the Spirit;) in which (or by which) he went and preached to
the Spirits in Prison, which heretofore, in the days of Noah, were refractory,
and hardened in sin and disobedience, while the long suffering of God endured
them, and waited for their Repentance, while the Ark was making and preparing,
and Noah preaching to them; yet so impenitent were they to the last, that only
eight were saved by the Ark.

Note; It Is no wonder that Expositors of this Text differ: Some think that by [
the Spirit] should rather be [ in the Spirit] or [ as to it] put in direct
distinction from the Body; and that it is an Argument for the immortality of the
Soul, by [ quickned] being meant only that his Soul was alive, while his Body
was dead; and that in that Soul he went then and preached to imprisoned
sinners, that were drowned in the Flood; say some, to show them his Triumph,
and what Salvation they lost; and say they, This is it that is called his
Descending to Hell; say others, to offer them mercy once again; say others, to
bring some penitents from their long imprisonment: But others think, that [ by
Spirit] is meant the Power of God, or the Divine Nature of Christ, or the Holy
Ghost, (not Christ's Soul again en^^ing into his Body;) and that the preaching
meant, was by Christ's Spirit in Noah before the Flood, and not after his
Death. To name other Expositions, or the Reasons given for each, would but
perplex the Reader, unless I were able so clearly to assert one of the
Expositions, as to confute all the rest. They that think Christ's Soul and
Godhead preached to Spirits while his Body lay in the Grave, suppose that those
Spirits knew it whom it concerned: But if it had been necessary for us to know
not only Christ's preaching to our selves, but to them, he would surely have
more clearly fold it us.

21. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now save us (not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ:

21. And that Salvation from the Deluge by the Ark, prefigureth our Salvation
in the Church from God's wrath by Baptism, and that through the power of
Christ's Resurrection, to which we begin our Conformity, when we are raised to
Holiness by his Spirit, as we rise out of the Water in Baptism: But by Baptism
I mean not that the outward act of washing the Body serves to this Salvation;
nor must you think that God lays it on any outward Ceremony, save as it is
the exercise of our Obedience and Faith: But it is the faithful answer to God
of a resolved Soul in the Covenant of Baptism, who when asked, does profess and
promise to believe in, and give up it self, to God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and to Renounce the World, the Flesh and the Devil. Baptism is but the
celebration of this saving Covenant; and it is covenanting sincerely that is
the Condition of Salvation, and Washing is but the sign.

22. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, angels, and
authorities, and powers being made subject unto him.

22. And well may I say, that Christ's Resurrection saves sincere baptized
Covenanters, as God by the Ark did Noah, etc. when Christ thus risen, is gone
into Heaven, advanced to the highest Authority and Honor, all Angels, and all
Authorities and Powers in Heaven or Earth, being made subject, as his Enemies
to their woe, and his Servants to their joy, shall shortly find; so that he is
fully able to give and do for us whatever he has promised, and we need.

CHAP. IV.
1. FOrasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin: 2. That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the
flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God,

1, 2. Let then the sufferings of Christ have their due effect on you, in
conforming you to his death, that you may, as crucified or dead men, give over
sinning, being as dead to fleshly lusts; that ye no longer live the rest of
your time in the flesh, according to the lusts of your selves, or any tempting
men, but wholly live to the will of God, as your Rule and End.

3. For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of
the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquettings, and abominable idolatries:

3. Alas, we did too long live according to Heathen Sensuality (and that time
cannot be called back) even in lasciviousness and lusts, (either fornication or
immodesties that tend thereto) and in excess of wine or strong drinks, in
revellings, and banquettings, or unnecessary feastings, to gratify fleshly
appetite and lusts, and in the bacchanals and jovialties of their Idolatry.

4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the same excess
of riot, speaking evil of you:

4. And though it is monstrous and against humanity, that reasonable men should
thus live like brutes, yet they stand and wonder at you, as if you were the
monsters, or strange people, because you will not be as bad and mad as they,
and run with them brutishly against God, and Faith, and Reason, into this
sensual excess of sports, lust and riot.

5. Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.

5. But the time is near when, for all this, they must come to Judgment, and a
sad account they must shortly give to the Righteous Judge of all the World.

6. For, for this cause, was the gospel preached also to them that are dead,
that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to
God in the spirit.

6. But wonder not at their obloquy, nor imitate them; but look to the Example
of the Martyrs, and those that are dead in Christ, who received and obeyed the
Gospel preached to them, that while they were judged and persecu^ed in the flesh
according to the rage of men, they might live in the Spirit unto God, and
obtain his glory through all such suffering.

7. But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto
prayer.

7. But the time of their foolish rage, and of your patient suffering, will be
but short: The end of all earthly things is near; therefore let soberness be to
you instead of lusts, and revelling, and fleshly pleasure; and by watching and
prayer, seek and wait for grace and glory.

8. And above all things have fervent charity among your selves: for charity
shall cover the multitude of sins.

8. And above all things, be sure that you have, and carefully preserve and
exercise (not only peace and mutual forbearance, but,) a special love, yea
fervent love to one another, even to all Christians, and specially in your
Societies and Relations: For as love covers, and not aggravateth faults
toward one another; so God who has said [ Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy; and if ye forgive, you shall be forgiven] will cover and
forgive the many sins of sincere, loving Christians.

Note 1. The two Extremes that in all Ages have torn the Church, should have
regarded these words of Peter.

1. The Papal Church-tearers, that persecute all that consent not to their
Canons, Forms and Shadows, should have remembered [ above all things] (even
above your pretended plea for Obedience to you, and Decency and Order,) have
fervent Love: 2. And the passive Separatists, that can find faults enough in
the Orders, and Forms, and Ceremonies of Churches, to separate from the
Communion of almost all on Earth, should have deeplier received such Texts as
this [ above all your superstitious pretenses to more purity of Churches, and
better Discipline, have fervent Charity.] 3. It is but partiality and jealousy
of the Cause of Justification against the Papists, which makes some excellent
Expositors distort this Text, so as to exclude from its sense, God's covering
of our sins; because they consider not aright, 1. That Pardon, as continued and
as renewed for daily renewed sins, has more for the condition of it required
in us, than the first Pardon and begun Justification has: The first act of
sound Faith serves for the beginning, but the continuance of it, with its
necessary fruits, is necessary to the continuance and renewing of Pardon. 2.
That the Faith which is required to Justification and Pardon, is giving up our
selves to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the Baptismal Covenant: That
is, our Christianity, which is not put in opposition to that Love or
Repentance, which is still implied as part of the same Covenant Consent, or its
necessary fruit, but to the Works of the Law of Moses, or of Works, or any that
are set in competition with Christ, and Free Grace.

If prejudice hindered not men, the reading of the Angel's words to Cornelius,
and of Christ's [ forgive, and ye shall be forgiven] and the Parable of the
pardoned Debtor cast into Prison for not pardoning his Fellow Servants, with
Jam. 2. and Matthew. 25. would end all this controversy.

9. Use hospitality one to another without grudging. 10. As every man has
received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards
of the manifold grace of God.

9, 10. As God has given more or less of Riches or any of his gifts to any
one, let him proportionably use them by free communication to them that need,
remembering that all you have is freely given you of God, and that you are but
his Stewards, and receive it not for provision for your pride, or fleshly
lusts, but for your Master's use, of which you must give an account.

11. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God: if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise and dominion
for ever and ever. Amen.

11. Let your discourse be holy, grave and true, specially when you speak of
Divine things: Let your contribution and bounty to all good uses, be
proportioned to the estate and ability which God gives you, that God may be
glorified in all you do, by the exercise of your Faith in Christ, etc.

12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the feiry trial, which is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened unto you.

12. Note 1. Persecutions are for the trial of our Sincerity and Strength; and
therefore our use of them is, to come out approved and refined. 2. No
Christians should count them strange, because Christ taught us to expect them,
and calls us to count our cost, and forsake all. And counting them strange,
shows that we came not to Christ on his terms of taking up the Cross, and
Self-denial, as we ought.

13. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that
when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.

13. But instead of dejection, let it be your joy, that ye are now partakers of
Christ's sufferings, that you are conformed therein to him, and suffer for him,
that so you may have assurance that you shall be glorified with him; and meet
him with exceeding joy at his great appearing.

14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit
of glory, and of God rests upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but
on your part he is glorified.

14. Your patient suffering reproach for Christ, is a part and prognostic of
your happiness: And should they that believe this, be impatient of their own
good? For the Spirit of God, which is your glory, and glorifieth him, and
proves his Love to you, is it that for^ifieth you: And as he is dishonored by
their reproaches, for which they will suffer; so he is glorified by your
fortitude and fidelity, for which you shall be fully rewarded.

15. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil
doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters.

15. But sin is worse, and more shameful than suffering: and therefore be sure
that you avoid guilt, and that none of you suffer, 1. As a murderer, or hurter
of others; 2. Or as a thief, or defrauder of any; 3. Or for any evil deed; 4.
Nor for playing the Bishop in other men's Charges, or meddling with other men's
matters busily without a just call.

16. Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God on this behalf.

16. But if any suffer patiently for Christ, or for well doing, take it not for
a shame, but for an honor, and so behave your selves in it, as to honor God
who honors you.

17. For the time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if
it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of
God?

17. As it is said, Ezekiel. 43.4, 5. So now God, being entering on a course of
Judgment, will begin with the correction and trying of his Children, in which
the Infidels will by execution increase their guilt: And our sufferings now are
a dreadful prognostic of theirs that follow in the end.

Note; How little cause wicked men have to be glad of the Churches sufferings,
when it prognosticateth a far more heavy Judgment of themselves!

18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear?

18. And if the righteous be saved (though certainly, yet) by so much labor,
cost and suffering in this life, O how will ungodly sinners stand in Judgment
before a just condemning Judge!

19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

19. Therefore let us see that, if we suffer, it be for matter and manner
according to God's will, and let our duty and well-doing be our care; and so
let us wholly commit our Souls to the keeping and Love of our faithful Creator,
and quietly trust him to preserve and save them.

CHAP. V.
1. THe elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be revealed. 2. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but
of a ready mind.

1, 2. The elder and wiser sort being usually made Pastors of the Churches, I,
who am an Elder in Age and Apostleship, and a Witness of Christ's Sufferings,
and, on the Mount, had a glimpse of the Glory which shall be fully revealed and
communicated, and have my right to it, and part in its fore-tast, do exhort and
beseech them faithfully to over-see, and feed, and take care of, all the Flock
which is among you; taking the Oversight, or Episcopacy, of it, not as a
burden unwillingly, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre, because the Pastors
have double Honor and Main^^nance, but out of love to Christ and the Church,
with a ready cheerfulness to undergo all the trouble and danger of it.

Note, 1. The Office of true Bishops is to [ feed and guide the Flock that is
among them.] What are they then, that have the name and title of being sole
Bishops over a thousand, or many hundred or score, of Flocks, which are so far
from being among them, or being fed by them, that the hundredth person never
heard them teach, or saw their faces?

2. Though most Expositors apply (...), not by constraint, but willingly, to
the Bishop's willingness of his work, yet Dr. Hammond applies it to the
Bishop's manner of guiding the Flock, as not constraining them by force, nor
using violence in an active sense. And whether these words prove it or not,
other Scriptures, and the nature of the Case, prove that Bishops have no power
of Corporal Force, but ruling by God's Word, and that none but Volunteers are
capable of Church-privileges and Communion, and Pastoral Conduct.

3. They that seek and take a Bishopric for filthy Lucre of the Benefice,
Wealth and Worldly Honor, are Intruders that come not in Christ's way: And
they that also cast out the use of the Keys from the particular Churches among
them, and instead of it, rule secularly, by destructive force, and profane the
power of the Keys, by committing them to incapable Laymen, to be used, suo
modo, contrary to their nature and end, yea, against men for obeying God; do
take God's Name and their sacred Titles in vain, for which God will not hold
them guiltless.

3. Neither as being lords over God's heritage: but being ensamples to the
flock.

3. Nor, as if they were Lords of the Church, to domineer over the people of
God, and rule them by the Sword or outward Force, or command them by Laws or
Impositions of their own, besides the Ordering of Christ's own Ordinances in
subservient Circumstances, for the Churches Edification, nor to extort from
them a large Maintenance: But as becoming Ensamples to the Flock, of all the
Humility, Self-denial, Love and Patience, and all other Virtues which they
preach.

Note; How can Men be such visible Examples to many hundred Flocks that never
knew them?

4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory
that fades not away.

4. And though you have no reward from men, when Christ, the Redeemer, and
Owner, and chief Ruler, Lover and Defender of his Church, shall come to
Judgment, you shall receive from him your full reward, even a never fading
Crown of Glory.

5. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves unto the Elder: yea, all of you be
subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble.

5. And as Juniors are usually fittest to be subject, you that are young, and
Inferiors, submit your selves to the Teaching and Guidance of the Elder,
especially the Pastors: Yea, let all Christians be as teachable, and willing to
learn, and to please the righteous Wills of one another, as if they were your
Rulers, and you their Subjects; not insisting too much on your Self-will, and
Self-interest, or Liberty. And let Humility, which will cause this
Condescension and Complaisance, be to you as your very Clothing and Ornaments,
instead of proud Ostentation in Garb and Carriage: for God sets himself against
proud men, to bring them down; but the humble he does countenance and exalt.

6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt you in due time: 7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares you.

6, 7. Seeing then that God's Judgments are abroad in the Earth, and it is the
Almighty God in whose hand we and all things are, humble your selves under his
hand, that he may exalt you in his appointed time: and wholly trust him with
all your Concerns, and cast away all distrustful Care, for his Love and
Providence will be your full Security.

8. Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

8. Be sober, and not entangled with Baits of fleshly Pleasure; and be not
careless, but as always watching: for the Devil, who pleads against you as
your Accuser, is unwearied in ravenous, murderous Rage, seeking night and day
to deceive you with his Temptations, and destroy you.

9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.

9. Be steadfast therefore in the Faith, from which, Satan, by Temptations,
would discourage you; and resist his ill Suggestions, occasioned by your
Sufferings remembering that it is not your case alone, but others also suffer
with you: Yea, all that will live Godly in Christ, shall suffer Persecution.

10. But the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by
Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. 11. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.

10, 11. But the God of all Grace, who has already effectually called us into
that state of Grace, in which we have right and comfortable hope of attaining
his eternal Glory by the Redemption and Intercession of Christ Jesus, after you
have suffered the short time of his Appointment, compaginate and perfect you,
and your several Churches, and stablish, strengthen and settle you more firmly
by the shaking of these Trials, blessed by his Grace. And the Glory and
Dominion which are his, be acknowledged in his praise for ever. Amen.

12. By Sylvanus, a faithful brother unto you, (as I suppose) I have written
briefly, exhorting, and testifying, that this is the true grace of God wherein
ye stand.

12. By Sylvanus, a trusty Brother to you, as I reckon, I have written with
sufficient Brevity; the scope of all being to exhort you to stand fast, and to
testify to you, that this Christian Faith which we have preached, and you
profess, is that true State or Kingdom of Grace, foretold by the Prophets, and
exp^cted by your Forefathers, and that there is no other Savior, or way of
Life; and therefore let no Deceivers or Persecutors shake you.

13. The church that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you,
and so does Marcus my son.

13. Note; Some by Babylon, understand Rome: But seeing forced Senses are not
to be received without cogent Reasons, I rather take it plainly for Babylon in
Assyria, or that in Egypt.

14. Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity: peace be with you all that
are in Christ Jesus. Amen.

14. Let the constancy of your mutual Christian Love be, on all meet occasions,
expressed, by friendly kissing of Men with Men, and Women with Women (being now
the ordinary expression of it.) Holy Peace (the Summary of Prosperity) be with
you all, that are the true Members of Christ, the great Peacemaker. Amen.

Note, 1. That the thing made a common Christian Duty, is not Kissing, which is
a mutable signification; but it is Indeared Love expressed. 2. But Kissing being
then the common signification of Love, was a duty, where that signifying use,
by custom, was continued as needful. 3. That it is doubtless, that all
significant actions, even in Worship, which are mentioned in Scripture, are not
of standing duty; nor such forbidden, that are not there mentioned or commanded
in particular. For when God commands in general, the expressions of Love,
Humility, Reverence, Consent, etc. he leaves it to the custom of the
Countries, or natural Aptitude of the Action, or the Consent of many, or the
Conduct of Rulers, by what fit Action these things shall be expressed: As Love,
by this Kiss, or by Embracing, or shaking Hands; and Humility, by putting off
the Hat, bowing, kneeling, etc. or Reverence, by the same actions (even in
Worship) kneeling, bowing, standing, prostration, being uncovered, etc.
Consent, by holding up the hand, standing up, writing, etc. But this is no
Warrant for them who will invent many practices, or things, which have no such
signifying Aptitude, and put on them a signification of their own devising, and
command this to be used, as a Badge and Symbol of Christianity, and sederall
sign with God and Man, like Christ's own Sacraments, at least in a great part,
and then to make the these Test and Condition of Christian Communion, ejecting
and silencing all Christ's Ministers, and cutting off all Christians from
Church Communion who dare not use them, lest thereby they break the Law of God.

The Second General Epistle of PETER the Apostle.
CHAP. I.
1. SImon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have
obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteousness of God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. 2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the
knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord.

1, 2. Simon Peter, etc. to all Christians who have obtained the same precious.
Faith with us, which is founded in the precious price of our Redemption, and
advances us to the dignity of being Sons of God, through the Righteousness of
God, which is manifested in his way of justifying us by the Merits of Christ's
perfect Righteousness. Grace and Peace, which are the greatest Blessings that
Man is capable of on Earth, be multiplied to you, which must be only through
the Knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord.

3. According as his divine power has given unto us all things that pertain
unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to
glory and virtue.

3. As his Divine Power has, in and by Christ, provided and given us all
things necessary to Life present and everlasting, and to Godliness, which is
the right use of this Life, and the way to a better: and this through the
Knowledge of Christ, who has called us to future Glory, and present Virtue.

Note; some read it [by Glory and Vertue] and expound it [by the Voice from
Heaven that called Christ, the Beloved Son, and the virtue or power of signal
Miracles.]

4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises; that by
these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.

4. By which Calling are given to us exceeding great and precious Promises,
even God's Covenant of Grace, sure and s^aled, that by these, as his Deed of
Gift, or Instrument, conveying to us our Right to Christ, and Grace, and Glory,
we may be made partakers of the Divine Nature, not only relatively, as it is in
Christ, but also inherently, as it is the Renovation of our own Souls, to a
holy Inclination Godward, by the Spirit of Adoption, like the love and likeness
of a Child to the Father; being advanced hereby above the sensual corrupt
Nature, and escaping the pollutions of fleshly Lusts, which the World is
defiled with, and would defile us by.

Note; Though a Nature strictly signify some essential part, or inseparable
Inclination, it here signifies a holy Inclining Habit, called, A Nature, by
resemblance; it being not the effect of a mere Art or Opinion, but a fixed
Complacency, Love and Bent of the Soul toward God, and Holiness, and Heaven.

5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue; and to
virtue, knowledge; 6. And to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience; and to patience, godliness; 7. And to godliness, brotherly kindness;
and to brotherly kindness, charity.

5, 6, 7. And having the Divine Nature, let diligent Exercise reduce it to
particular holy Habits. As you are Believers, let your Faith show it self in
holy Strength and Fortitude in all that is your duty; and to that add a daily
increase of Knowledge in the things of God; and to that add a careful
mortifying all fleshly Lusts, and abstaining from all forbidden Sensuality; and
to that add, Patience of Mind under all Wrongs, Crosses and Afflictions; and to
that add, a zealous, holy, heavenly Observance of all the duties of the first
Table, or of Religion, public and private; and to that add, a special Love to
all Christian Brethren and Friends: And let all grow up to that highest Love to
God, and to all men, as he is interessed in them, with an Addictedness to do
them all the good you can, which is the top of all our Graces.

8. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall
neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

8. If you have these blessed Graces of Sanctification, you will be clearly
differenced from formal Hypocrites, whose Faith and Religion is but a barren,
unfruitful Speculation; an Art, and not the Divine Nature.

9. But he that lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see far often, and
has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

9. But he that b^asteth of his says without these virtues, is like a
pur-blind man, that can see nothing, but what is just near to him. Could they,
with a lively faith, foresee the things to come, it would waken their sluggish
Souls to all this: And could they rightly look back to their Baptism, they
would remember that they there vertually vowed all this, and were sacramentally
washed from their old sins.

10. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and
election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall:

10. Therefore see that ye use your utmost diligence in the things aforesaid,
that your Calling and Election may thereby be made firm, stablished and sure:
For if you do these things, you shall not miscarry, nor come short of Salvation.

Note; It is a frivolous Contention that is raised about this Text; some
disputing that it is only meant of sure Notification to our Consciences; and
some, that it is to make us meet Objects of God's Decretive Election, and to
make an uneffectual Calling turn to a more effectual. By Election is often meant
God's actual taking us out of the World, into the Church; and is the same with
Calling. The Greek here signifies, to make firm, and not only to make known.
God's Promise is our Title to Salvation: This Promise makes Faith the
Condition of our first Right; but the Fruits of Faith, the Condition of our
continued and final Right to Salvation. Therefore, as there is somewhat on our
part necessary to our first Justification, besides God's part; so is there
something more on our part necessary to our Right to Salvation, if we survive
our Initiation (which Christ describes, Mat. 25.) And the doing of this,
making us capable Receivers of God's free Gift, may as properly be said to make
it sure, as our Faith to justify us: that is, It makes up our Title to Life,
which else would be defective; and so makes our Calling and actual Election to
be confirmed and sufficient on their part, and not frustrate as to their end:
And then, being made firm and valid in it self, it follows that our Title may
the easier be known to us.

11. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

11. And your Baptismal Faith and Covenant proving not ineffectual, these
Performances being the Condition of your actual Salvation, your Covenant Title
will be complete, and you shall have sure entrance, and full possession of the
Kingdom of Glory.

12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of
these things, though ye know them, and be established in the present truth.

12. And holy Diligence and Improvement being so necessary to you, I must not
be negligent to put you in remembrance, and stir you up to it, though you know
it already, and believe it.

Note; We have great need to be diligently stirred up to the remembrance and
practice of that which we know already, as well as to know more.

13. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up,
by putting you in remembrance. 14. Knowing that shortly, I must put off this my
tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.

13, 14. Note, 1. The Body is but the Soul's Tabernacle. 2. Ministers must
never give over pressing known Truths while they live. 3. The knowledge of
approaching death must quicken us to diligence.

15. Moreover, I will endeavor, that you may be able, after my decease, to
have these things always in remembrance.

15. Note; That we must not be careful only for our own life time, but for a
Succession and Continuance of Truth and Godliness when we are dead; lest it dye
with us. Therefore we write.

16. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto
you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of
his majesty.

16. For our Doctrine of the Glorious Coming and Kingdom of Christ, is not a
cunningly devised fable; For we were eye witnesses of a glimpse of that Glory
in his Transfiguration, which he foretold us of as a resemblance of his last
coming, and his Kingdom.

17. For he received from God the Father honor, and glory, when there came
such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased.

17. For he then received in his humane nature, a communicated splendor, and
celestial honor and glory, when God from the Heavenly magnificent glory, said,
This is my etc.

Note, 1. It is the highest honor and perfection of a Creature, to be Loved
and Pleasing to God. 2. Gods Testimony of his Son from heaven is our Great
obligation to faith and obedience to him.

18. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in
the holy mount.

18. This voice three of us heard, when we were with him in that mount which
was sanctified by this glorious appearance, and may well be called, The holy
mount.

19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn,
and the day star arise in your hearts:

19. And we have also in the Old Testament a firm prophetic word, many
prophets foretelling the Kingdom of Christ: And ye do well to search and take
notice of these, as to a Light that was set up by God, for the use of those
darker ages, to lead them to the Knowledge of Christ, and so is very useful
still, till the clearer Preaching of that Gospel come, and the Spirit of
Christ, as his agent and witness, possess your hearts.

Note, The word [ more sure] signifies not more sure than the Gospel, but [
very sure.] Or more sure to the Jews, than Peter's bare word of the
Transfiguration, and voice, on the mount.

20. Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private
interpretation. 21. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man:
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

20, 21. But this you must first know, that no prophecy of Scripture is to be
expounded as speaking only of those persons, whom the speaker first meant,
whether himself or others, nor according to the speakers proper private
thought: For the prophecy came not in old time, by the Speakers own Wisdom,
Knowledge, Invention or will, but holy men of God, were moved by Gods Spirit to
speak those words which signified more than they designed, or always meant and
understood themselves.

Note, It seems strange to me that (...) [ proper or private interpretation]
should be commonly by excellent Expositors misinterpreted, as if it spoke of [
pr^per or private expositors] and so set men on disputing who must be the
public Expositor; when the words plainly speak of [ proper or private sense,
or objective exposition.] As when David often speaks words which are
immediately true of himself, or of Solomom, you must not expound them as meant
properly of them who were private persons, and but types: For it was the
Holy Ghost speaking in them, whose sense must be known, who meant Christ the
public person as typified by the private, of whom they were first verified:
And whether David (as in Psalm. 2. and 22. and such other) meant more than
himself, and his Kingdom, or not, the Holy Ghost meant more. If Grotius were in
the right that Isa^ meant but Jeremy or Josiah in Isa. 53. its certain that
they were but typical, and the Holy Ghost meant Christ. So that the plain
sense is, that Scripture prophecy, receiving its full sense, from the Spirit
and not from the Speaker, must not in our exposition, be appropriated narrowly
to those private men, by whom or of whom they were proximately meant by the
Speaker.

CHAP. II.
1. BUT there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

1. But one of your great Trials will be, as theirs of old, by false Prophets,
so by false Teachers, who will rise up among your selves, who will by secret
seducing persons, wi^h whom by familiarity they have advantage, bring in Sects,
holding damnable Errors, even by plain consequence denying Christ that bought
them, while they deny what is essential to his Person and Offices (or teaching
that he many be denied with the Tongue in dangers for self-preservation,
because God will have mercy and not sacrifice, as long as the heart does not
deny him.

Note 1. That all Christians have need to be fortified against false Teachers,
as well as against persecuting enemies.

2. Christ is called The Lord that bought them, not because they falsely professed
that he bought them, as some say, but because he purchased and made to them a
Deed of gift of Christ, pardon and life, to be theirs on Condition of believing
acceptance. And because they should not perish for want of a sufficient
sacrifice for sin.

2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of.

2. And many that professed Christianity, shall be seduced by them and follow
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom, malignant enemies will take Occasion
to speak evil of Christianity, and make a reproach of truth and godliness, as
if we were all like this scandalous Sect.

3. And through coveteousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of
you; whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation
slumbereth not.

3. Note, 1. That its wordly covetous men, who are most to be suspected to be
Traitors to the Church, as Judas was against Christ for [ for what will ye give
me?] 2. All their seducing confident harangues, to this end, are but false and
feigned words. 3. Their business is to sell Souls to the Devil for their own
wordly Benefice, Gain or Honor, as Judas did his Master. 4. God is hasting to
judge such men with speed, as he did Judas when his gain was too hot to hold,
and he hanged himself for betraying the innocent.

4. For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell,
and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment: 5.
And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of
righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly:

4.5. Note; 1. These Angels were not in a fixed immutable state, but mutable by
free will. 2. Their own sin was the cause of their misery. 3. For it they were
cast down to hell, that is a state of misery, reserved for more; though they
are said to be the Powers of the air, and to rule in the Children of
disobedience. 4. There they have their Prince and Kingdom. 5. Pride and Malice
against God and man, and wickedness is their quality, warring against Christ
and his Kingdom. 6. Tempting men to sin is their employment. 7. Their way
against the Church is by LYING, MALICE and MURDER, in which wicked men are
their slaves and instruments. 8. So far as men yield to sin by their
temptations, they fall into the fuller power of them, both for further
temptations and execution, by Gods permission.

6. And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, a condemned them
with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live
ungodly:

6. And with fire from Heaven destroying Sodom and Gomorrah and the adjacent
villages, both men and houses, that the history of them, and the stinking lake
that now possesses the place, might be a warning to the ungodly.

7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked:
8. (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed
his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.)

7, 8. Note, 1. Lot is called Just, from the tenor of his life, though after he
fell into very great sin.

2. Just men are grieved at the over-spreading wickedness of the times and
places where they live, specially their filthiness and their rage against the
Just. 3. God will deliver the Just from the Wicked, and from his Judgments on
them.

9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished:

9. We may well trust, that God, who as he is just and a hater of sin, and a
lover of righteousness, so knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations,
so far as that they should not be conquered by them, though they be tried, and
to reserve the wicked and oppressing Enemies to a full vindictive punishment at
the day of Judgment, though they prosper and triumph now.

10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness,
and despise government: Presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid
to speak evil of dignities:

10. Note; Dr. Hammond, who supposes this spoken of the Gnostics, would sure
think it a heinous aggravation, if Governors themselves should prove
Borborites or Gnostics, and walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness
and suppress Piety by power. To use Dignities for sin, is worse than to despise
them, or speak evil of them, for being evil; though this also is bad, and must
be avoided. 2 The Dr. thinks that the Dignities here meant, are Apostles; I
rather think it is Civil Rulers.

11. Whereas angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not railing
accusation against them before the Lord.

11. Whereas the blessed Angels, which have more power than Men, when they
plead against Devils themselves, do it not by railing accusation (as the
instance in Zechary shows.)

12. But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak
evil of the things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their
own corruption.

12. But these are like wild brute Beasts, whom all men seek to destroy for
their hurtfulness, and do speak evil in proud ignorance of Doctrines, Practices
and Persons, which they understand not, do stir up men against themselves, and
shall be destroyed in their sin.

13. And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it
pleasure to riot in the daytime: spots they are and blemishes, sporting
themselves with their own deceivings, while they feast with you; 14. Having
eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable
souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children:

13, 14. They shall be doubly punished for living in unrighteousness, and
sensual riot in the Light of the Gospel and Profession of Christianity. You
admit such to feast with you, even as if they were of your Societies, at
Love Feasts and Sacraments; but they are disgraceful spots and blemishes in
your Assemblies, and a dishonor to the Christian name: Their unclean hearts
have ungoverned eyes, fed with enticing objects of lust, and let in the
impressions of filthy pleasure into their imaginations, deceiving themselves,
and sporting away their own Souls, while they allure and deceive others. Their
imaginations and minds are so habited to such filthy vice, that they cannot
cease from it, being unstable, and by the power of sensuality cannot obey their
own convictions: And where lust reigns, covetousness rules to maintain it:
They are such as God's Word does pronounce accursed, whatever they profess.

15. Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way
of Balaam, the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. 16. But
was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb ass speaking with man's voice, forbad the
madness of the prophet.

15, 16. Covetousness has drawn them from the right way of Truth and
Godliness, and they stray in the way of Balaam, the Son of Beor, whom the Hire
that bribed him to do evil, was prevalent with to attempt it: But he that by
reason of the love of Money and H^nour, could not see the evil of his own way,
was rebuked by a dumb Ass, whom God made speak, to evince and forbid the
madness of such a Prophet.

17. These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest, to
whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

17. These are like Wells that have no Water, having a barren Profession, that
will not save them: Clou^s, that seem to be for fruitful Rains, but are only
for tempestuous Whirlwinds or Hurricanes, dark in themselves, both now and for
ever, as well as troublesome and hurtful to others.

18. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through
the lust of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped
from them who live in error.

18. For when they boast of their extraordinary knowledge (of Angels, and other
unknown things, as the Heretics described by Ireneus, Epiphanius, etc. then
did) and withal make fleshly licentiosness to be Christian Liberty, their vain
boasting words are but to serve their fleshly lust, alluring by base
lasciviousness, some who were quite come off from Heathenish and Jewish Errors.

19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

19. They tell the simple, that flesh-pleasing and lust is part of their
Christian Liberty, and that we are ignorant that know not such things; when
under all these promises of Liberty, they are the slaves of lust themselves,
being conquered by them, and in bondage to them.

20. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

20. For if after they have been convinced of the Heathen abominations, and
filthy practices, and have renounced them in Baptism, and forsaken them, and
joined in the Communion of Saints, by the acknowledgment of Christ, and the
Christian Verity, they shall again return to the practicing of the same sins,
on pretense of Knowledge and Christian Liberty, and so be overcome, their end
will be more sinful and miserable, than was their Heathen state of ignorant
pollution.

21. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment
delivered unto them.

21. For their sin and misery had been less, if they had never known the way of
Righteousness revealed by the Gospel of Christ, than after they have known it,
to forsake the owning or practice of the Commands of holy and righteous living,
which they received.

Note; Sins against present or former knowledge in great instances, have
dangerous aggravations, as coming from contempt of God, or odious depravation
of Judgment after.

22. But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is
turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire.

22. But it is with them according to the Proverb, The Dog, etc. Their Natures
were not renewed by the Holy Ghost, and made Holy or Divine; they were Dogs,
though they had disgorg'd their vomit, and Swine, though they were washed: No
wonder then if temptation draw them to return to their vomit, and to the mire
of filthy sin again.

Note, What sort of men these here described were, is not agreed on by all
Expositors: But thus much seems clear, 1. That they were professed
Christians. 2. That they lived in sensuality and fornication. 3. That they
taught that these were lawful, and the use of them was Christian Liberty. 4.
That to make this good, they joined with some Sect-Masters, that boasted of
more knowledge than the Apostles and their followers had, (as most Heretics
do.) 5. That yet they did not wholly separate from the Christian Churches, nor
the Churches cast out them (as they ought) For they are said to feast with
them, to be spots and blemishes to them. And Rev. 2. and 3. shows that too many
Churches had such among them, and did tolerate them; and that whole Societies
were in danger of being corrupted by them, and the Churches threatened to be
punished for having such Members. 6. Whatever name some put on them, its plain
they were those that are called Nicolaitans in Rev. 2. and 3. Qu. What if
Bishops, Priests and People, should become such debauched, covetous
Sensualists, and also set against serious godliness, and seek the reproach of
it as Hypocrisy and Fanaticism, and the silencing and excommunicating of the
most godly Ministers and People, and so become a Gnostick or Nicolaitan Church?
Ans. Forsake their local Communion, if you can have better; and if you cannot,
do not approve or commit any of their sin, nor own any incapable of the
Ministry by Heresy, or open enmity to Godliness, but either worship God only
in private, or protest against their sin, when you join with them only in good.

CHAP. III.
1. THis second epistle (beloved) I now write unto you, in both which I stir up
your pure minds by way of remembrance: 2. That ye may be mindful of the words
which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us the
apostles of the Lord and Savior,

1, 2. This second Epistle, with the former, I write to you, as to those that
are pure from the evils which I describe, but have need to be remembered of what
you have learned from the Prophets, and been commanded by us the Apostles of
Christ.

3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts, 4. And saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the creation.

3, 4. And I here first remember you, that, as you have been foretold, in the
last days before Christ's coming there shall arise unbelievers, that shall make
a mock at the promise of his coming, and thereby harden themselves in a fleshly
wicked life, saying, How long shall we stay ere we see Christ come? What Is
become of the promise of it, which you so long awed men with? It Is long since
the Fathers, who you say, Believed in him, were dead; and none of them are
risen again, nor yet see Christ come; the World continues as it did from the
Creation.

5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the
heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and in the water.
6. Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished. 7.
But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are kept in
store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly
men.

5, 6, 7. For it must be long of themselves, if men professing Christian
Knowledge do not know what a change was once made since the Creation; that
God's Word made the Heavens and the Earth, and that this Earth being partly in
the Water, and partly out of it, separated from Seas and Clouds; by this Water,
the world of men that lived in the days of Noah, were drowned. But by the same
Will and Word of God, the Heavens and the Earth that are now, are kept from
being drowned, being reserved to another sort of ruin, even by Fire, when the
time is come, in which God will publicly judge and destroy ungodly men.

Note; It is strange how any Expositor can think that this Text speaks only
of the destruction of Jerusalem and the Gnostics, when 1. It is resembled to
the drowning of all the World; 2. And it speaks of the Heavens and the Earth
that are now, which are more than Jerusalem; 3. And it refers to the promise
to Noah to drown the World no more; 4. And says, it is reserved to Fire; 5.
And that at the day of Judgment and Perdition of the ungodly, and not of the
Jews only.

8. But (beloved) be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.

8. But you must not ignorantly measure God's time by the measures of us men:
For one day is with the Eternal God, as a thousand years, and a thousand years
as one day: Time is soon gone with us, but to Eternity it is as nothing.

9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men count slackness)
but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to repentance.

9. The delay is not because God is slack as to the performing of his Promises,
(as slackness signifies some culpable omission among men:) But it is because
he is long-suffering to us men, not delighting in, or willing any men's
destruction as such, but that all should come to Repentance.

Note 1. God's will, as totally distinct from all effects, is only his Essence,
and is immutable, and is not denominated his, Willing This or That; 2. But his
Will, which is but the Effects of his Essential Will, is manifold, and does
begin, and end, and change. And 3. His Will, as it is but the Relation of his
Essential Will to these Effects, and an extrinsick denomination from them, is
also manifold and mutable: And it is in these two last senses that Peter says,
that God is not willing that any should perish, but all come to Repentance;
that is, God has provided a sufficient Sacrifice for their sin in Christ; he
reprieveth them from deserved damnation, and patiently endures them; he
offers Pardon and Salvation to all that will accept it, who hear his offer;
he gives all the World undeserved mercy, and obliges them to repent in hope
of more, and binds all the World to certain duties as means of their Recovery
and Salvation, and uses none according to the mere terms of the Law of
Innocence [ obey perfectly or die.] His daily mercies lead to Repentance and
Hope: He commands his Ministers to beseech them to be reconciled and saved;
He brings Life to their own wills, and gives them abundant reasons and
motives to accept it, etc. 1. That he does this de facto, no Christian can
deny. 2. Therefore he is said to will their Repentance and Salvation, 1. As
these Effects of his Will are called his Will; 2. Or as his Will is named only
as related to these Effects. Thus much well considered may end this
Controversy.

10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which
the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt
up.

10. But as men sleep, not knowing when a Thief will come in the night; so
shall Christ's coming surprise men unexpected; in which the Heavens, so far as
they belong to man, and partake of any of the Curse for our sins, shall pass
away with a great and dreadful noise like a storm; and the Elements shall be
dissolved with fervent heat; and all this Earth, and all men's works thereon,
shall be consumed by this fire.

Note; It is mavelous prepossession that could make any Learned man think,
that all these words signify nothing but the destruction of Jerusa^em.

11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, What manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness.

11. Note; The true belief of the day of Christ's coming to Judgment, and the
dissolution of all this lower World by fire, should convince all Christians,
that a holy conversation and godliness should be endeavored with all possible
care and diligence. And those men that think they can be truly godly and holy
over much, do not believe seriously such a change and day.

12. Looking for, and hasting unto, the coming of the day of God, wherein the
heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat.

12. Looking for, and earnestly desiring the coming of this day of God, when
the lower Heavens and Earth shall thus be dissolved, and the Elements melt with
the fervent fiery heat. (The joyful day of our perfect Deliverance and
Salvation.)

13. Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

13. But we, according to his Promise, look that God should by these dissolving
flames, refine Heaven and Earth, and having consumed with them all sin, and the
wicked hence, should make (as he formed this out of the Chaos) a new Heaven,
and a new Earth, an Habitation for righteous persons, where sin shall prevail
no more.

Note 1. He that makes this new Heaven and Earth to succeed the destruction of
Jerusalem, surely forgot, 1. That the Heathens for near three hundred years
after persecuted the Christians far more bloodily than the few poor Jews did,
or could; and that Church History says very little of the Jews Persecution in
comparison of the Heathens, or of any Martyrs that died by them. And sure, if
it was the time of the Ten Heathen Persecutions that was the new Heaven and
Earth, it is strange. 2. And if it were at three hundred years after Christ,
that the new Heavens and Earth come, it seems, far short of this here promised.
What was in the days of Constantine, Martian and Theodosius, they in Peter's
days must never see. But the day of Christ they were all to see.

14. Wherefore (beloved) seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that
ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

14. Note 1. It is not before death that Peter would have them look for this
change, whatever it was: He lived not himself to see Jerusalem destroyed, and
he and Paul died by the Heathen Power, though the Jews accused them; and the
Jews were more hated than they.

2. Whether the new Heaven and Earth be, as many of the old Fathers thought, a
restitu^ion of all things to the state they were in before the fall, for which
the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain to be delivered; and that
either for a thousand years, or for perpetuity; and who shall dwell in the new
Earth, and whether Heaven and it shall be made so like, as that the same men
shall inhabit both? etc. These are doubts, which I think, it must be the day of
performance that must resolve. As also whether accordingly there were other
Heavens and Earth destroyed for sin before the Creation of this. But Christians
care should be to be diligent to be found in a state of safety and peace, and
without spot and blameless, and leave unknown things to God; and then whatever
this blessed change be, we shall have our part in it.

15. And account that the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation, even as our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, has written
unto you.

15. And think not that God neglects you by delays, but that he suffers the
wicked World so long, that he may gather all his Chosen to Salvation that are
yet to be born and called, as Paul has showed, Romans 9.

16. As also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things, in which
are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own
destruction.

16. Note 1. They that refer [ in which] to [ these things] and not to [ his
Epistles] pervert the Text; for it puts [ in which] as contradistinct to [
other Scriptures] and not to [ other things.] And it is many other things much
more than these, that were wrested to destruction. And Peter himself even here
speaks as hard things of this as ever Paul did. 2. It pleases God to put
hard things in the Scripture for our exercise. 3. Yet it is men's ignorant
instability that wresteth such to their destruction; For there is as much very
plain, as may bring men to Salvation. And if, as to the difficult parts, they
will 1. But search as humble Learners. 2. And not take on them to know before
they do, but confess their ignorance, it may stand both with Salvation, and the
Churches Peace. 3. And if they must by men be inclined to either side, let them
say plainly, I hold not this by Divine Faith, as part of my Religion, but as an
Opinion on the trust of Man.

17. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye
also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness.

17. The scope of what I have said is to warn you, that having timely notice of
all these things, ye most diligently take heed, lest any of these sensual
Professors, or Heretical Backsliders, or Scoffers, deceive you, in wavering, or
unbelief, or heresy, or sensuality, to fall from your spiritual stedfastness
in Faith, and Hope, and Holy living.

18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen.

18. But contrariwise, labor diligently to grow in all grace (in Faith, Love,
Holiness, Patience, Hope, etc.) and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ (his Person, Office, Undertaking, Performance, Humiliation,
Resurrection, Doctrine, Example, Spirit, Intercession, Glory, Kingdom and
Judgment:) That as Glory belongs to him, you may glorify him now, and in the
sight of his Glory, for ever. Amen.

The First Epistle of JOHN the Apostle.
CHAP. I.
1. THat which was from the beginning, which we have heard which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
word of life.

1. Whereas there are of late many Heresies sprung up about the Person,
Doctrine and Works of Christ, I shall declare to you, that which was from the
beginning (his Godhead, or say others, that of him which was decreed from
Eternity, or as others, that which is true of him from his beginning or
Incarnation) and [that same Christ whom we have heard and seen with our Eyes,
and looked on, and our Hands have handled, even the Humane Body of Christ the
Word of Life.] Or as others, [that Gospel which we have heard, that Person, and
those Works which we have seen, and him whom we have handled, as these concern
the Gospel of life.]

2. (For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and
show unto you that eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested
unto us.)

2. For Christ, who is Life in himself, and the Fountain of Life to us, was
manifested in flesh, and we have seen him, and bear witness, and preach to you
the Eternal Divine Life and Nature of Christ, which was eternally one with the
Father, and was manifest to us.

3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may
have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ.

3. I say, we declare to you that of Christ, which we our selves have seen and
heard, that so what we had by seeing and hearing, you may have from our
Testimony, who have seen and heard Christ himself; and so you may by our
communication partake of the same Faith and Grace, as we our selves do, and may
continue in our Communion; and that is no other then to have the same Father
and Savior, from, and with whom it is that we have communication and
communion, and not to turn from them.

4. And these things write we unto you that your joy may be full.

4. And the end of my writing this to you, is the completing of your own Joy
and Salvation.

5. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you,
that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

5. The first and great part of Christ's Doctrine, and our Message, is to teach
us to know God himself; and first, that he is Light, and in him is no darkness
at all.

Note 1. The Apostle telling us what God is, speaks in the Abstract, to let
us know that it is his Essence; and not a mere Accident that he means. And as
God's Image in Man's Soul has three essentiating faculties, Vitality,
Understanding and Will, which are eminently self-motions, Light and Heat, or
resembled by these; so God is here called LIFE, v. 1. LIGHT, v. 5. and LOVE, c.
4, v. 8.

2. When God is called LIGHT, it is spoken but metaphorically, and signifies
his KNOWLEDGE or WISDOM, as it is his Essence, and as Communicative, giving the
Light of Knowledge to all that have it, and wisely Ruling them by his Laws: And
also the GLORY of this, and all his perfections, as refulgent to the Creature:
For Glory and Light are often the same in sense. 3. When it is said, There is no
darkness in him, it means, No Ignorance, nor Privation, nor
Vncomfortableness, as Darkness is.

6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie,
and do not the truth: 7. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we
have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin.

6, 7. If we say that we live in communion with God, and yet are in the
Darkness of Unbelief, Ignorance, Error and Wickedness, we do but lie: But if
we walk in the Light of holy Knowledge, Faith and Purity, we have mutual
communion with God, and with his Son Jesus Christ, whose Blood does cleanse us
from all sin.

Note; Qu. Is it not Fanaticism to talk of Fellowship with God, or Communion
either? Ans. Fellowship is too harsh an ^nglish word: But Communion is the
thing meant, consisting in receptive participation from God, and accepted
returns to God: And this is no fancy, but the only rectitude and felicity of
our Souls: If you conceive not how, think how the Eye has Communion with the
Sun: Really, 1. By receiving its luminous Beams, or emitted Light, by the
receptive aptitude of the visive faculty and organs; 2. By such an emission, or
active congress, by which the Light and Sun are seen.

8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us.

8. If we say that we need not Christ thus to cleanse us from Guilt and
Corruption, as having no sin; this is but self-dece^ving fa^shood.

9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

9. But if we with true Repentance, confess our sins (always to God, and humbly
to Man, when either reparation of any ones wrong, or satisfaction to the Church
offended, or the curing of scandal, and honor of Religion, or the ease or
information of our own Consciences require it) God that has promised it, is
faithful and just to forgive us our sin, and to cleanse us from its guilt and
power.

10. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not
in us.

10. But if we will either pretend to sinless perfection, or else break God's
Command, and say, that it is no sin, but a duty, or an indifferent thing, and
so justify our selves or our sins; this is to give the lie to God's Word,
which therefore does not rule such men.

CHAP. II.
1. MY little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
2. And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world.

1, 2. I write to you as to Babes, who need help and confirmation, in your
temptatious by Seducers, that you may not be drawn by them to take sensuality,
or such like evils, to be lawful, nor to live wilfully or impenitently in any
sin: But if any man, contrary to the bent and tenor of his heart and life, be
guilty of any sin of infirmity, let him not despair, but fly to our Advocate
with the Father Jesus Christ, whose perfect Righteousness merited our Pardon:
For he is the Propitiation for our sins by virtue of his Sacrifice, now
interceding for us in Heaven: And he is a Propitiation sufficient for the sins
of the whole World (so far as that none of them shall be damned for want of a
sufficient Sacrifice, but only for want of accepting his Grace) and actually
effecting the Pardon of all in the World, who believingly trust and accept him
and his Grace.

3. And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.

3. And because uneffectual Faith is but self-deceit, and he pardons sin to
none but to the sincerely penitent and obedient* it is by this that we must be
known to be sound Believers, if we sincerely keep his Commandments.

4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments is a liar, and
the truth is not in him.

4. He that professes the Knowledge and Faith of Christ, and ca^ls himself a
Christian, and yet does not sincerely keep his Commandments, is an Hypocrite
and Liar, and is not what he professes to be.

5. But whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected:
hereby know we that we are in him. 6. He that says, he abides in him, ought
himself also so to walk, even as he walked.

5, 6. But as true Faith works by Love, so does Love by Obedience; and it is
they that keep his Word, in whom the Love of God does show its soundness and
perfection. We cannot bear fruit, unless we are in him as the branches in the
Vine. And it is by this fruit that we must know that we are in him. He that
professes to be a Christian, and in Christ must walk as Christ did (in
Holiness, Love, Obedience and Patience.)

7. Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment,
which ye had from the beginning: the old commandment is the word which ye have
heard from the beginning.

7. It is not novelty that I bring you, as Seducers do; but that same old
Commandment which Christ and his Apostles preached when they first brought the
Gospel to the World: I call it Old, because it is the Word which you heard from
the beginning of Christianity.

8. Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him, and
in you, because the darkness is past, and the true light now shines.

8. Yet it may be called a New Commandment which I write, as it is the Doctrine
of Divine Love newly and more resplendently shining forth in the work of our
Redemption by Christ; and there is true and just reason to call it new, both in
Christ and in you: In Christ, because he is the newly incarnate, crucified,
glorified demonstration of God's Love to Man, and the eminent Messenger of it,
accordingly obliging to a new and extraordinary Love to God, and one another:
And in you, because, as you are renewed by, and to this special Love; so as new
men you live therein: For the darkness of a life of malice and ungodliness is
past, and the true Light now shining is ever accompanied, when it is effectual,
with the Heats of Love and Obedience.

9. He that says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness,
even until now.

9. The true Light of Knowledge and Faith is so inseparable from the Heats of
Love, that whoever pretends to that true Christian Light, is deceived, and
has it not indeed, if he hate, or do not truly love his Brother.

Note; We must love all in the various kinds and measures, as God appears in
them; that is, 1. All men as men above brutes; 2. All professed Christians (not
nullifying that Profession) as such. 3. All Christians of eminent wisdom, and
goodness, and usefulness, as such. 4. All Rulers and Teachers, as such. 5. All
kindred, friends and neighbors, as such. But 1. We must hate all the evil that
is in any of them. 2. Not equally, but as it is in various degrees in them. 3.
And no hatred to the sin, and to the man as a sinner, must cast out our Love to
him, so far as he is lovely. 4. But Rulers may be obliged to put to death some
sinners; but that must be more for love to Justice and the Commonwealth, than
hatred to the man, though yet, as he is bad, some hatred is due to him.

10. He that loves his brother, abides in the light, and there is none
occasion of stumbling in him. 11. But he that hates his brother, is in
darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because
that darkness has blinded his eyes.

10, 11. He that truly loves his Brother as himself, does show that he is
indeed a knowing, and true Christian: And he will be free from the scand^lous
mischiefs of Persecution, Oppression, and other Injuriousness, which want of
true Love does cause in others. But he that hates, abuses, persecuteth,
hurts, or destroys his Brother, is but a dark, self-deceiving Pretender to
Christian Faith and Wisdom, and knows not what he does himself, when he
exercises his Wit or Power against his Brother, for he is blind in sin.

12. I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for
his Name's sake. 13. I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that
is from the beginning. I write unto you, young men, because you have overcome
the wicked one.

12, 13. And this Command of Love and Obedience is such, as all sorts of you
must receive. I urge it on you that are Children in Christ, because, being
washed lately in Baptism, and the Blood of Christ, from your sins, you should
love much because much is forgiven you. I urge it on you, ancient Christians,
because you have long been taught to know this Commandment, and to know the
Love of God in Christ, which does enforce it. I urge it on you that are strong
Christians, because you have conquered the Devil, who is the Wicked One, and
the grand Enemy of Love.

13, 14. I write unto you, little children, because ye have known the Father. I
have written unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the
beginning. I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the
word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.

13, 14. Again I say, that you may not neglect it; I urge this Commandment of
Love and Obedience on all sorts among you: On young Christians, because, to
know God, as he is Love and a Father to us, is your chief Principle of Faith.
On you, ancient Christians, because it is your old Religion. On you, strong
Christians, because you that have most Strength and Victory over Satan, must
have most of this Grace of Love and Obedience.

15. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

15. And I must accordingly warn you against the Love that is contrary to this
Divine, Christian Love; which is the carnal, inordinate Love of this World, and
Worldly Interest and Things. Avoid this with all possible care; for in that
measure that you thus love the World, you are so far destitute of the Love of
God; else it would prevail against it.

16. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.

16. For, All that is the Bait of Sensuality in the World, whether it be the
pleasures of Appetite, Lust, and other Senses, or the pleasing of a covetous,
lustful, or vain Imagination by the Eyes; or Preferment, Dominion, pompous
Living, and Pride of Life, are none of them, the way to Communion with God, and
Salvation; but are the Worldly Interest, and Temptation of the Flesh, which
turn men's hearts to the World, from God.

17. And the world passes away, and the lust thereof: but he that does the
will of God, abides for ever.

17. And the World, and all its Pomp, Plenty and Pleasure, and the Fleshly
Lusts that are pleased by it, are hastily passing away, while they seem
enjoyed: But the reward and the pleasure of those that do the will of God, will
have no end.

18. Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the
last time.

18. I yet speak to you, as Children liable to Deceit. It is now the latter
part of the Age of the World; And, as you have heard that Antichrist shall
come, so, even now there are many false Teachers risen up, who, in several
sorts and measures, are Adversaries to Christ: which shows us that, indeed, it
is already the beginning of the last Age.

Note; Of the Controversy about Antichrist, see the Notes on 2 These. 2. there
are four Opinions very commonly pleaded for; and others, by some few.

I. Most of the old Doctors and Christians, that have left us their Thoughts,
took Antichrist to be a false, pretending Christ, that should rise up toward
the end of the World; little dreaming that the Pope was he; much less, that all
the visible Christian Church was then, in its most flourishing state,
Idolatrous and Antichristian, as some hold. By which it appears, that it is a
Point that Godly Men may be ignorant of: for few now, but the Papists are of
this Opinion.

II. Others think that Mahomet is the great Antichrist, as being that open
Enemy of Christianity; who by pretending hatred to Idolatry, has set up
himself, and won more of the World, than all the Christian part of the Earth,
by far.

III. Most Protestants hold, that the Pope is the Antichrist; but they greatly
disagree of the time when he began to be so: Some say, at the Churches
Deliverance by Constantine, which was three hundred and four years after the
Birth of Christ: Some say, About Anno 604. when Phocas named Pope Boniface the
Third, Universal Bishop in the Empire. And thence rises a Doubt, whether the
same Claim made not John of Constantinople Antichrist before, and so there ^e
not two Antichrists: And whether the like Ambition made not Cyril, Theophil^s,
and other Patriarchs of Alexandria, and diverse other Bishops, to be so many
Antichrists. Some say, He began about Hildebrand's time, when the Claim of
Universal Head, and Vice-Christ over all the World began, with Power over
Princes; which was above a thousand Years after Christ. And some few say, He
began about Innocent the Third; when the General Council of the Lateran owned
that Power, with Transubstantiation, and the Murder of Reformers, as Heretics.
The Reasons for the Opinion that the Pope is the Antichrist, you may find in
many Volumes; and particularly, Bishop G. Downame's.

IV. Others think that Antichrist was a false Christ, who was to appear in the
days of some of the Apostles, or that Generation, to seduce the Jews into
Rebellion against the Romans, to their destruction. And they are very confident
that John here meant no other than Christ himself meant in Mat. 24. and
received his Notice from none but Christ, and that Christ's own words are the
surest Notification, who is the Antichrist: For, it is mentioned here, not as a
thing known only by special Inspiration to them, or the Apostles, but as a
received former Prophecy; [ As you have heard that Antichrist shall come.] And
which way did they hear it, but by the Apostles, as from Christ; whose words
the Evangelists have not omitted? Now Christ's words were, [ Many shall come in
my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.] Here he does not fix the
name on any one, more than on others. And it is certain that Christ was not
mistaken; but what he foretold did come to pass: though we read not of any
that was expressly called Christ and commonly so believed, that was not, because
none attempted so to deceive men, but because their success was small, and soon
stifled, and not like Mahomet's. Biza, on the Text, Mat. 24. says, [ In my
Name, is, They shall usurp the Name of the Messiah, or Christ. Such was that
Dositheus, whom Theophilact speaks of, and Simon, and Theudas; and after
these, Manes, who also chose his twelve Apostles. And in our Memory, the
Munster- Anabaptists attempted the same; and after them, David George, the
Prince of the Libertines.] (So James Nailor lately, the Quaker whose Tongue the
Parliament bored through, whipped him, and imprisoned him till he dyed, for
solemnly personating Christ, riding into B^istol.) But there were others that
promised to deliver the Jews, till they drew them into Rebellion, to their
destruction; and so took on them to redeem Israel, though they called not
themselves the Christ. Almost all Expositors agree, that these were the
Antichrists meant by Christ, Mat. 24. But, though these were then shortly to
arise, it follows not, but that more such might arise after them: and such
was Mahomet. above all others, notorious by his Alcoron, Kingdom, and Success.
And, as Ebion, Cerint^us, and some other Heretics, were against Christ in some
degree, so more notably is the Pope in that degree, as he arrogateth Christ's
Prerogative, and makes himself a Vicarious Head of the whole Church on Earth.
So that these grant, that such Popes are one sort of those Antichrists that
should after arise; but that the Pope is not he that is meant by Christ, in
Matthew. 24. nor here by John.

And whereas 2 These. 2. is objected for One Man of Sin, etc. they say, that it
is not Antichrist properly, that is there mentioned; but the Anti-God, the
Roman Idolatrous Emperor, that should cause Jerusalem's Desolation, and set up
there the Idol of Abomination.

There is the like mention of Antichrist again, Chapter 4.3. [ Every spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: And this
is the spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come, and
even now a ready is in the world.]

So, Chapter 2.20. [ He is Antichrist, that denies the Father and the Son]

And, 2. Joh. [ For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver, and one Antichrist.]

And (say they) when no other Text in Scripture has the name Antichrist, and
these four all thus expound it of such as deny Christ's Incarnation, and
directly oppose him; and such as were then in being, and of many such Heresies,
and not of one Man, or Order, alone; and when all this concurreth with Christ's
own words, of many false Christ's, that should deceive the Jews to their
destruction, whence can we expect a surer Exposition of Antichristianity,
whether we take the name for an Adversary to Christ, or for a false Christ.

When Grotius singleth out Barchochebas, as the chief Antichrist, who called
himself the Messiah, and seduced thousands, and even the Sanedrim of Rulers,
in^o his Error, to their destruction, it is answered by some, That this was all
done before this Epistle was written. To which some reply; 1. That this is
utterly uncertain, because that Epiphanius says, John was first banished under
Claudius: and because the contrary Tradition has no good Evidence, and because
the Apocalypse is the best Expositor, whose very Style implies that, at least,
much of it was written before the Destruction of Jerusalem; and so may this
Epistle. 2. Were it certain, John makes no one to be the only, or grand
Antichrist, and therefore Christ's words might be first fulfilled in
Barchochebas, and such others; and yet more after may succeed them.

The two other Opinions, (1. That it is only Simon Magus. 2. Or Vespasian) I
think not worthy the confuting.

In these difficulties, I only advise the Reader, that he never forsake great
and certain Truths, or Duties, for any thing uncertain: And that Humane Faith
overthrow not Divine Faith: And no man's Opinion draw him to depose Christ, by
denying all his Visible Church, and making it all, in any Age, (much less in
its best state) to be Idolatrous and Antichristian: Or to b^ frightened from
Christian Love, Unity and Peace, or from any lawful thing, by the mere name of
Antichrist. But to judge of Doctrines by Scripture, and of Persons by their
Doctrines, Practices, and Personal Qualification; and to hate sin impartially,
wherever he finds it; and to accuse rashly and unjustly, neither Persons,
Parties, or Societies.

19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of
us, they would, no doubt, have continued with us: but they went out, that they
might be made manifest, that they were not all of us.

19. These Deceivers (the Nicolaitans, Ebion, Cerinthus, etc.) were indeed in
our Communion, and went out from us; but they were never sincerely of the same
Faith and Spirit with us; else they would have stayed with us: But they went
out, and separated, and set up their Heresies, that they might show that they
were never sound in the Faith.

20. But ye have an unction from the holy One, and ye know all things.

20. But the most holy God and Savior has anointed you with his holy Spirit,
which will lead you from pernicious Error, into all necessary Truth, if you
obey him.

21. I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth: but because ye
know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

21. It is not as supposing you ignorant of the Truth, that I write to you; but
because you know the necessary Truth, and therefore may the easier reject all
inconsistent Falsehoods.

22. Who is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? he is
antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. 23. Whosoever denies the Son,
the same has not the Father: but he that acknowledges the Son, has the
Father also.

22, 23. And who is the dangerous Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the
Christ; and consequently, denies the Father?

Note; The scantness of History leaves it uncertain, what sort of Seducers
John means; whether some that fell to flat Infidelity, directly renouncing
Christianity; or only such as Ebion, Cerinthus, and others, that denied
somewhat of Christ's Being, his Manhood, or his Godhead, or his real Suffering:
Or those that were for Moses's Law, and held, that Christ may be denied with
the Tongue, in case of danger, so that the heart deny him not; pretending that
God will have Mercy to our selves, and not Sacrifice.

24. Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning:
if that which ye have heard from the beginning, shall remain in you, ye also
shall continue in the Son, and in the Father.

24. Hold fast the Doctrine which at the first ye received from us, and turn
not after Novelties: and this will preserve you against Seduction, and continue
you in the Faith, Relation and Love, of the Son and Father.

25. And this is the promise that he has promised us, even eternal life.

25. And if you live by ^aith upon his Promises, he will give you Eternal Life,
which he has promised, whatever you suffer or forsake here in the way.

26. These things have I written unto you, concerning them that seduce you.

26. It is the seducing Heretics, who occasion my writing these Warnings to
you.

27. But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: and ye
need not that any man teach you: but, as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and is truth, and is no lie: and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him.

27. But I hope I need no other Argument, to confirm you in the Christian
Faith, against Seducers, than that the Spirit of Christ, which is his Witness,
Agent, and Advocate, has through his Apostles Preaching and Imposition of
Hands, been given to you, and among you. His Miracles have sealed his Truth
before your eyes; and his illuminating and sanctifying Grace has been given
you, if you be true Believers. And I hope you will not deny the Holy Ghost: As
he is thus the Infallible Objective Evidence of Christ's Truth, so is he in
you, an Efficient, Illuminating Teacher, and ready, within you, to plead
Christ's Cause, and teach you all necessary Truth. Therefore you need not any
man's Testimony and Teaching, as those do that have no other, but must take the
Word of Man alone. Use Christ's Ministers but in due Subordination to the
Spirit, and quench it not and he will keep you.

28. And now, little children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may
have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.

28. Therefore, Children, waver not, but fixedly abide in Christ, and true
Christianity; that when he shall appear in Judgment, we may see and meet him
with joyful confidence, and not with shame unto Condemnation, as Apostates will.

Note; It Is wonder that he that expounds all this, of Christ's coming to
destroy Jerusalem by the Romans (his Enemies) should think that all the
Christians, to whom the Apostles wrote, should then meet Christ, or be so much
comforted therein, when most were like to die first, and few living to be much
the better for it: And Christian Compassion would fill them with Grief, as Paul
had, Romans 9. and 11. and not make them like men of utter malice, to take it for
so great joy, to have the Jews so murdered, when Christ wept over them, that
foretold it; and when the Romans were far more to persecute the Church, near
three hundred Years. And this Exposition leaves all the Christian World since,
to this day, little more use of the abundance of Motives and Comforts of the
New Testament, than of the fulfilled Prophecies of the Old. Do not Christ's and
the Apostles words nearly concern us? Or should the Church be moved to
Constancy, Patience and Comfort, chiefly, sixteen hundred Years after, because
a Million of Jews were killed then?

29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that does
righteousness, is born of him.

29. And as ye believe that Christ's is just, and a Lover of Righteousness, so
all that sincerely live a righteous Life toward God and Man, are new born, by
his Sanctifying Spirit, to his Image, and shall surely be received and owned by
him.

CHAP. III.
1. BEhold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the sons of God; therefore the world knows us not, because
it knew him not.

1. Let us therefore, instead of forsaking Christ, admire the wondrous Love of
God to us, that has, in Christ, adopted us to be his Sons. Indeed our Dignity
is unknown to the unbelieving World; for they knew not Christ to be the Son of
God, and how then should they know us?

2. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we
shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is.

2. And it is no wonder if our Condition be unknown to the unbelieving World;
for though we are already the Sons of God, and have Right, by Promise, to
future Glory, our future Glory is yet unseen, and what we shall be, does not
appear to the World, or to our own sight: But we know by faith, that when
Christ appears, we that are his Members, shall, in our several measures, be
made like our glorified Head, in the Perfection both of Soul and Body, and
place and state of Blessedness. For he has promised that we shall be with him,
and therefore shall see him as he is, and therefore be made capable of such a
sight, and glorious Communion.

3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is
pure.

3. And knowing that, without Holiness, none can see God; and that, it is the
Pure in heart that have the Promise of seeing him, therefore all that have a
true effectual Hope of seeing him, will make it their chief care to purify
themselves, that such Likeness to Christ may render them capable of such a
blessed sight.

4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the law: for sin is the
transgression of the law. 5. And ye know that he was manifested to take away
our sins, and in him is no sin.

4, 5. For, to sin, is to transgress, and break God's Law: for that is the
definition of Sin. And ye know that Christ came in the Flesh, to be a Sacrifice
for Sin, and to take it away, and destroy it, and never sinned himself; and all
this, that he might vindicate God's Law and Holiness.

6. Whosoever abides in him, sins not: whosoever sins, has not seen
him, neither known him.

6. So far as any man is in him, and is taught and ruled by him; so far is he
freed from all sin: and all his true Members are delivered from the predominant
love and practice of all known sin; and are willing to know all, that they may
avoid it. And he that would not know it, and when he does know it, does not
hate it more than love it; and so far forsake it, as to conquer the Dominion of
it, and live in sincere and willing holy Obedience in the course of his Life,
may boast falsely that he is a Christian; but indeed, has no true saving
knowledge of Christ.

7. Little children, let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness, is
righteous, even as he is righteous.

7. Be not so childish, as to be deceived by the vain words of any that pretend
to be righteous before God, on any account whatsoever, while they live in
Unrighteousness and predominant sin; as if God would justify the Wicked for
their Opinions or Presumptions. It is he that, being called, justified and
sanctified by the Merits and Spirit of Christ, does live in a sincere Obedience
to him, and labors to be like him, in Holiness and Love to God and Man, whom
God will call a righteous man, and save him as such, when he is Judge.

8. He that commits sin, is of the devil; for the devil sins from the
beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the devil.

8. So far as any man sins, so far he is of the Devil, and like him: and he
is the Servant of the Devil, in whom sin is predominant: or that lives in the
love and practice of any sin, not consistent with true hatred of it, and
Repentance, and the predominant love and practice of holy Obedience. And Christ
will be no justifying Advocate, or Judge, of the Servants of the Devil (though
he may, by making them just and holy, turn them from the power of Satan, to
God; and judge them just, when he has made them just, both by Conversion and
Pardon, but not before.) For the Son of God came purposely into the World, to
destroy the Works of the Devil, in all that he will save; and not to call the
Wicked, Righteous.

9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin: for his seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.

9. He that is truly regenerate by the Spirit, is made a hater and forsaker of
sin, and therefore does not live in the ruling love or practice of it; nor
indeed, commit any sin, in that degree that he is sanctified; much less, live
in wilful, gross sin: for God's Word and Spirit, by which he was regenerate,
still abide in him. And it is a Contradiction to say that, at once, he is a
holy person, born of God, and yet lives in reigning sin.

Note; [Cannot] Here signifies a Hypothetical Impossibility, because it is a
Contradiction, and not a natural Impossibility; much less, Impotency: for it is
sinning, and not forbearing sin, that signifies Impotency. And the
Contradiction is only on Supposition that he continue sanctified.

10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil:
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his
brother.

10. It is not by proud Boasting, nor barren Opinions, that God's Children are
known from the Children of the Devil; but by the Image of God, which Faith in
Christ does cause in his true Disciples. He that does not live in the true love
and practice of Righteousness toward God and Man; abhorring and avoiding
Ungodliness, Injustice, and fleshly Lusts, is no Child of God, but of the
Devil: nor he that does not unfeignedly love all Christians, as Christians; and
men, as men; and live in Charity to them accordingly.

Note; That wicked men are called, The Children of the Devil, because they are
like him, and do his Will. And the World swarmeth with men so like to Devils,
in Lying, Malignity and Mischiefs, as makes it easy to believe, that there
are Devils, and a Hell.

11. For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should
love one another.

11. For this is the Message which Christ, the Lord of Love, did commit to us,
and, from the first, we have preached to you, that Love is the very ^^m and End
of Law and Gospel.

12. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother: and
wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his brother's
righteous.

12. That we be not like wicked Cain, who was of the Diabolical Disposition and
Practice, and killed his own Brother. And, Why did he kill him? Not for any ill
desert, nor for any harm that he had done him: but because he was bad himself,
and his Works bad; and his Brother's Righteous, and, by difference, condemned
him.

Note; Doubtless, God permitted Adam's first Son to be wicked, and murder his
righteous Brother, to show the World, what a state we are first in, since the
Fall, by natural Pravity; and that we are, as such, the Children of the Devil,
till Grace recover us: and to expound the Enmity put between the Seed of the
Woman, and of the Serpent; and to tell us, what a War will be continued upon
Earth, from the days Cain and Ab^l, till the End; and that Superiority and
Cruelty will usually be against the Righteous, whose Victory is mostly by
patient Suffering and Death.

13. Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.

13. If the ungodly Successors of Cain, whose own Works are evil, do hate
Godliness and Conscience, and hate you for them, take it for no strange or
unexpected thing: It has been so since Cain's days, and will be so, as Christ
foretold.

14. We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren: he that loves not his brother, abides in death.

14. Love being the great Work of God's Renewing Spirit on the Soul, it is by
Love, especially to all true Christians, that we know that we are changed from
the Cainish, corrupt state of Death, into the state of holy Life. Whatever else
men have, if they have not true love to others, especially to godly Christians,
they are yet dead in sin.

Note, 1. By [ The Brethren,] here is meant, [ Christians, as such:] Not only
those of some Party in Opinion which we like, nor only those that are friendly
to us, nor yet all men, or all called Christians alike; though all men must be
loved as men. It is, to love God in man, and man for his sake, so far as God's
Amiableness shines in them; specially, to love God's Holiness in holy persons.

2. It is not all Love to godly Christians, as such, that will prove us
translated from Death to Life; but to love them, and God in them, better than
the Pleasures and Wealth of the World. The cheap Love of such as wish men well,
but will be at no great cost or danger for any, because they love their Money
better, is the Hypocrites Love.

15. Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer
has eternal life abiding in him.

15. Note, 1. How dreadful a Sentence this is against malignant, or factious
Haters of Brethren.

2. But the Self-deceit of murderous Hypocrites is, by taking Brethren for no
Brethren; but, as the Papists, first call them Heretics, Schismatics,
Fanatics, Puritans, Rebels against the Pope or Church; that they may justify
their hating, murdering, imprisoning, silencing, and ruining them. As the
Scribes were loath to know who was their Neighbor, so are these loath to know
who is a Brother: But God will know his Children, though men call them by
reproachful names. Alas for the murderous Generation, that preach, write, and
strive to destroy the Upright, and say, they killed them, or ruined them in
Love; (that is, they hated them in Love.) Woe to them, when God shall judge
them.

3. Every degree of unjust Hurt or Hatred is a Breach of the Sixth Commandment:
But the meaning is not every degree, or mistaking wrong, is as bad as actual
Murder, or as sure a sign of Death. Alas! how few else would live.

16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us,
and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

16. As God has manifested his Love to us, by laying down for us the Life of
our Redeemer; so if we be God's Children, we must learn of him (as to love our
Enemies, so) if God should call us to it, as needful to better ends than our
lives, to lay down our lives for Christian Brethren.

17. But whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him?

17. And if Love must make us die for others, surely those have no true Love to
God, and to the Brethren, as God requires, who cannot lay down part of their
abundance (perhaps superfluity) for them; but while they are well able, yet
cannot find in their hearts to relieve them, but shut up the bowels of their
compassion from them.

Note; O the dreadful account that many of the Rich must give, that feast all
the year, while their poor Neighbors hunger! and spend forty times more in
(needless) housekeeping, as they call their Luxury, than on the Poor.

18. My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in
deed, and in truth.

18. Let not your Love be hypocritical, which will bring forth no better fruit
than good wishes, and fair words, but show the truth of it by your cost and
real helps.

19. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts
before him.

19. It is by such efficacy and real fruit that we must know that we are true
Christians, and not Hypocrites, and must have assurance that our hearts are
true to God.

20. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows
all things. 21. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God.

20, 21. For if our Consciences tell us that our Love is barren and fruitless,
and so condemn us of Hypocrisy, God is greater, and more acquainted with our
Hypocrisy than our Consciences: But if our Conscience truly witness the
sincerity of our Love by the fruits of it, then this assurance of our Sincerity
gives us boldness toward God.

22. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him because we keep his commandments,
and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.

22. And if we do God's Will sincerely, in obeying his Commands, and the things
that please him, he will hear our Prayers, and grant our just desires, and give
us that which is good for us; whereas, if we love iniquity, and live therein,
God will not hear our Prayers.

Note; They that deny that holy, sincere Obedience, is any condition of God's
hearing our Prayers (because Faith has the promise) contradict the scope of
Scripture.

23. And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son
Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment.

23. And the sum of all this acceptable duty is but this, To believe truly in
Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, our Teacher, King and Intercessor, and to obey his
great Command of Loving one another; with all such God is pleased, and hears
them.

24. And he that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in him: and
hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.

24. And if we keep Christ's Commands (of fruitful Love in Faith) there is a
near Communion between Christ and us; we dwell in Christ as his Members, and he
dwells in us; and his dwelling in us is by the Spirit of Love and Holiness
(the Seal of his Promise) which he has given us: (He that keeps Christ's
Commandments (specially of Love) has his Spirit:) And Christ dwells where his
Spirit dwells.

CHAP. IV.
1. BEloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world.

1. There be many false Teachers, who pretend to Revelation as Prophets, who
teach you the Doctrines of Sensuality, Worldliness and Malice, contrary to the
Doctrine of Holiness and Love, which I have taught you: Therefore believe not
that every man speaks by God's Spirit who pretends to it; nor that every
strong suggestion in your selves is from God's Spirit, which seems such
before you try it: But try all pretenses of the Spirit, whether they come
indeed from the Spirit of God, or rather from Satan, or men's own imagination
corrupted by pride.

Qu. How shall we justly try Spirits, or spiritual pretenses? Ans. By somewhat
that is more easily known, and no otherwise: And that is two things; 1. The
common certain notices of the Light and Law of Nature. 2. By the Infallible
words of the Spirit in Christ and his Apostles, and Prophets: For both these
are the sure Word of God, who does not contradict himself: Our gifts of the
Spirit are lower than the Apostles, and must be tried by theirs, which were
given them to record a Rule for us.

2. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. 3. And every spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is that spirit
of Antichrist, whereof you have heard, that it should come, and even now
already is it in the world.

2, 3. By this you shall know whether these Pretenders speak from the Spirit of
God: For the Spirit of God is the Spirit of Christ, sent by him to be his
Advocate, and plead his Cause, and do his Work in the World, and therefore
bears witness of him: If therefore these Teachers, truly and openly in the
face of danger, do own, profess and preach Christ Jesus, as the Incarnate Word
and Son of God, sent from Heaven to redeem, teach, rule and save us; this
Doctrine is of the Spirit of God. But if they deny the Godhead, or Manhood of
Christ, or that he is indeed the true Incarnate Savior, Prophet, Priest and
King, or will not own him in hazards or sufferings, but deny him to save the
flesh, and teach men so to do; this Doctrine and Spirit is not of God: But this
is the Spirit of Antichrist, which you have been foretold should come, and is
already in the World.

Note; By the Spirit of Antichrist is not here meant, the Spirit sent by
Antichrist, but the same Doctrine that Antichrist will vend, and therefore from
the some Spirit that acts Antichrist, which is a Spirit of opposition to
Christ. And in those times Ebion, Cerinthus, and many other Heretics did, some
deny Christ's Manhood, some his Godhead, some his Death, and some his
Resurrection, and each part of his Office was denied: That among all there
Simon Magus only should be the Antichrist, I see no reason to believe, of which
more before and after.

4. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is
he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

4. But your Faith in Christ is of the Spirit of God, who dwells and works
in you, and you have overcome the worldly seducing Spirit, its Doctrines, Baits
and Temptations; for God's Spirit which is in you, is more powerful than the
Spirit which deludeth the World.

5. They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them.

5. These Seducers are men of a worldly interest and mind, and therefore they
preach a wordly Doctrine, fitted to a worldly Interest and Ear; and therefore
worldly men believe them.

6. We are of God: he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God,
hears not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.

6. We are of God, and can prove our Mission by his attestation to our
Doctrine, as being from God: And therefore all that truly know God, will
receive and own our Doctrine as God's, and us as his Apostles: but he that is
not of God, having not the same Spirit, receives not the same holy Doctrine,
nor us. Thus differ the Spirit of God, and of Error.

7. Beloved, let us love one another* for love is of God; and every one that
loves, is born of God, and knows God. 8. He that loves not, knows not
God; for God is love.

7, 8. And as true Faith in Christ, and open confessing him, is one sign; so
true Christian LOVE is another, to know that our Doctrine and Spirit is of God:
Therefore be sure that you unfeignedly love one another: Most certainly LOVE is
of God; (common Love is his common gift, and holy Love is his special grace;)
and every one that Loves Saints as Saints, as well as Men as Men, sincerely
for the Love of God, and goodness in them, is so far like God (who as the God
of Nature, loves Nature, and as the God of Grace, loves Holiness,) and
therefore is a regenerate Child of God, and has true Faith and Knowledge of
God, or else he could not love him in his Saints. And whatever they pretend,
they have no true effectual Love of the most Holy God, or of his Will, who love
not his Holiness in his Children, and are not dear to one another. For LOVE is
not a mere quality in God, but his very Essence: GOD IS LOVE.

Note; I know no sentence more worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, or
rather written on all our hearts: But the other two prime Attributes written in
this Epistle must be conjoined, GOD is LIFE, LIGHT and LOVE: And LOVE is
complacency, and includes Infinite JOY or PLEASURE.

9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God lent
his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.

9. And God's Essential LOVE does tend to communication; he is good, and does
good: He loves us, not with a barren Love, as Hypocrites do; but he chose this
most woderful glorifying way of public manifesting his Love to us, even by
sending his Son into the World, that we might live through him.

10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
Son to be the Propitiation for our sins.

10. And the Glory of God's Love to us, is not only that he consequently loved
us for loving him; but that he antecedently loved us (that we might love him)
and (while we were in sin and enmity) freely s^n^ his Son to be the
Propitiation for our sins.

11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

11. And Gods great works, and glorious manifestations of himself to us are
purposely to be (as the Seal to the Wax) to make us like him in our degree: And
he therefore chose this astonishing way of revealing his LOVE to us, that by it
we might be brought to love him, and one another for him.

12. No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwells in
us, and his love is perfected in us.

12. It is God himself that his Love ^blig^th us to LOVE. But as we see him but
in the Glass or Image of his Nature and Holiness in Man; so we must Love him
(...) we see him here, even in the Nature and Holiness of Man: And if ^e thus
holily love one another as God^^ Image, God by his Spirit dwells in us, for
it is his Spirit of Love that makes us thus Love: And his Love to us attaineth
its end, which was to make us like him in Love. (O that Christians would study
this well!)

13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given
us of his Spirit.

13. By this sure evidence we know that God and we do, as it were, dwell in
each other, and have blessed communion, because he has given us this Spirit of
holy Love.

14. And we have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the
Savior of the world.

14. And we are the Preachers of Faith and Love; as we have seen, so we
testify, that God the Father glorified his Love, by sending his Son to be the
Savior of the sinful World.

15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him,
and he in God.

15. It cannot be that any man can soundly believe such astonishing Love, that
God was manifested in flesh, or that the Father sent his Son into flesh, by his
Doctrine, Example, Suffering, Merits, Resurrection and Intercession to save us,
and shall confess this, whatever suffering it cost him, but that man must needs
be possessed by God's Spirit of holy Love, and so God dwells in that man by
his Spirit, and that man in God as the great Object of his Faith and Love. (
For with the heart man believes to righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made to salvation, Romans 10.

16. And we have known, and believed the love that God has to us. God is love,
and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

16. And knowing, and by Faith believing the Love that God has to us, and has
declared in Christ, we again conclude, that GOD IS LOVE, and he that dwells
in Love (as his ruling habit of Soul, and practice of Life) dwells by
communion in God (as the Eye in the Light; and a Friend by Love dwells in his
Friend,) and God by his Spirit of Love in him.

Note; I pref^r this Verse before all the Humane Learning in the World.

17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world.

17. And our Love is for this blessed effect, that we may joyfully now foresee,
and stand at last before him in Judgment, as the Lord, to whom by Love we are
endeared and united: For as his Interest is dearest to us in this World, and we
obey and follow him in suffering; so it is that we may come to him in Glory,
with whom our Life is now hid.

18. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear: because fear
has torment: he that fears, is not made perfect in love.

18. For though our darkness and guilt would keep us under terror, lest God
should destroy us, or our weakness make us fear the power of man, and bodily
calamities and death, yet the Love that I speak of, has none of this terror
in it; but were it perfect, it would fully quiet the Soul, and cast out all
distrustful, painful fear: For though cautelous preventing fear of all danger
is necessary in this life to our safe avoiding evil, and the awe and reverence
of God is the duty of every creature; yet tormenting, or painful troubling fear
comes from distrust, and shows that our Love is yet imperfect.

Note; This is spoken both of tormenting fear of God and Man, of Hell and of
Death, Sicknesses and Crosses here. For he that by Faith is fully persuaded of
God's great and special Love to him, such as he has manifested by Christ, and
thereupon does love God entirely above all, in that measure, cannot fear that
such a God will damn him, or leave him to the malice of Men or Devils, and by
death it self do him any hurt inconsistent with dearest Love. If Wives and
Children fear not being murdered by loving Husbands or Fathers: perfect Love
would make us fully quiet in our trust in God. Painful fear of Hell, Death,
Sickness, Poverty or Persecutors, does show a distrust and doubting of God's
Love (who could sure quickly save us by such a word as made the World) and an
imperfection of our Love to him as caused by this distrust. Fear may stand with
true Faith and Love, but not with perfect. Only I confess sensitive passion,
through bodily disease or disposition, quite differing from rational Fear, is a
Tyrant, which Faith and Reason will not overcome. As a man bound with Chains to
the top of a Spire Steeple is rationally sure that he cannot fall, and yet is
terrified with looking down. O how should fearful Christians study Trust and
Love, as their only cure and quieting help.

19. We love him, because he first loved us.

19. And it is the knowledge of God's antecedent Love to us, giving us a Christ
and Grace, and making us love him, which thus delivers the Soul from fear,
and turns us to him with love and boldness: If his Love had been a mere
dependent consequent of ours, how uncertain should we be of its continuance!

20. If a man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar: For he
that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen?

20. But still, I say, our Love to God must be showed in our hearty Love to our
Brethren: To hate and persecute them, yea not effectually to love them, proves
him a Liar, who says, he loves God: It is God in his Image that you must love
and help: He needs you not, but he will make you need one another, to try
your Love and Obedience to him. If you love not his visible Image, how can you
love the invisible God? This does but detect your self-deceiving Hypocrisy.

21. And this commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his
brother also.

21. And he that will be the Judge who love him truly, has made this his
summary great Commandment, that you must love God first, and above all, and
your Brother or Neighbor for his sake as your selves: And you love him not if
you keep not his great Commandment.

CHAP. V.
1. WHosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God: and every one
that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him.

1. Note; That it is believing God and not Man only, a Divine Faith, and not a
Humane, a sincere Faith, and not a doubting Opinion, that is here called [
Believing,] Believing this on the word of our Rulers or Teachers is good, but
it is but preparatory to Religion, and the Belief of God: And it is a matter of
such great importance to believe it sincerely as God's Word, that God was
manifest in flesh, and appointed Christ to the Office and Work of Man's
Sanctification and Salvation, that it is not possible but such a sound Belief
must fill the Soul with love to God, and carry it up to a holy and heavenly
state, as the Regenerate are: Nor is it possible but such should love that
Savior, who is the Image of God's Love.

2. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and
keep his commandments. 3. For this is the love of God that we keep his
commandments, and his commandments are not grievous.

2, 3. And you must know, that it is not all Love to one another, or to good
People that will prove us regenerate (for men may love them as their Friends,
for loving them, or for being of their Opinion, Sect or party, or for their
Interest, etc.) But your love to men as God's Children is sincere and saving,
when it is God himself that you love most, and them for his sake: And when his
Love makes you keep his Commandments. And his Commandments are not heavy, nor
have any thing in them which men should be unwilling to keep, but should be
both our work and pleasure.

4. For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the world: and this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

4. God's Spirit is stronger than the evil Spirit that rules the ungodly
World; and therefore all that are truly regenerate, do overcome the Love and
Temptations of the World, though not perfectly, yet in prevalency. And how do
we overcome the World, but by firm believing in Jesus Christ, and the Love of
God, that will bring us to a far better World: The things believed prevail
against the things seen, in all that are true Believers indeed.

5. Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is
the Son of God?

5. Where do you see any truly overcome the Love of this World, but they that
believe that Jesus Christ has purchased, and promised, and will give them a
better? And how else should we overcame the World, but by believing in him that
overcome it, and is preparing a place for us in Heaven, and has made us the
Heirs of Glory.

6. This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by water
only, but by water and blood: and it is the Spirit that bears witness,
because the Spirit is truth.

6. This is he that, as he was baptized, so he instituted Baptism, for the
cleansing of Souls: And as he was crucified, to be a Sacrifice for sin, so does
he, by his Sacrament and Grace, communicate this Sacrifice in its Benefits to
us; which his Crucifixion signified, when both Water and Blood run out of his
pierced Side. He cleanses us, nor by Water and Baptism alone, but as a
Sacrifice, by Water and Blood, and at a dearer rate. And the Witness, by which
God attesteth all this to be his Truth, is, the Gift of his Spirit.

7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the holy Ghost: and these three are one. 8. And there are three that bear
witness in earth, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three
agree in one.

7, 8. For there are three in Heaven, who have given us their Witness to the
Gospel on Earth; even, the Father, who has from Heaven declared Christ to be
his Son: and the Word* or Godhead of Christ, which he showed in his Miracles,
Resurrection, etc. And the Holy Ghost, sent down for Infallibility, Miracles
and Renovation of the Faithful. And these are so Three, as yet to be One. And
on Earth, we have seen these three Witnesses attesting one thing by Agreement,
even the Spirit in the Souls of Believers, in their Miracles and Holiness
sealing the Truth; the Water of Baptism, and the washing of their Souls from
Sin; and Christ's B^ood and Sacrifice, which is our Expiation, signified in the
Lord's Supper; even as Christ, on the Cross, first recommended his Spirit into
his Father's Hands, and then out of his pierced Side came Water and Blood.

Note; Though much of these words, Verse. 7, 8. be not in many ancient Copies of
the Bible, we have more reason to think that the Arrians left them out, than
that the Orthodox put them in; (other Texts that assert Christ's Godhead being
so used.) But however, it need not offend the Faithful, there being so many
other Texts which assert the Trinity.

9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this
is the witness of God, which he has testified of his Son.

9. If the Witness of credible Men and Controversies among us, much more must
the Witness of God be believed: And this mentioned, is God's own Testimony of
Christ.

10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself: he that
believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the record
that God gave of his Son.

10. He that is a true Believer in Christ, has the Spirit of Christ, which
has regenerated him: (for, if any man have not his Spirit, he is none of his.)
And this Spirit of Power, Wisdom and Holiness, is most certainly from God, and
an infallible Evidence, that God owneth the Gospel: therefore all these have
the witnessing Evidence of Christ in themselves. And he that believes not so
sure a Testimony of God, does make him a Liar; as if he gave the Holy Spirit as
a false Witness of Christ, to deceive the World.

11. And this is the record, that God has given to us eternal life: and this
life is in his Son. 12. He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not
the Son of God, has not life.

11, 12. And the sum of the Gospel, attested by God and his Spirit, is this;
that God has made a free Deed of Gift, of Pardon and Salvation to the World,
even the Life of Grace and Glory; but so as that this Life is given us in and
with Christ, who, with all these Benefits, is offered to Men, on condition of
believing Acceptance: (As a Woman in Marriage, has the Man with his Estate;
and as we choose our Physician for Physic, our Teacher for Learning, our Ruler
for Government, etc.) He that has Christ upon believing Acceptance, as his
Savior, has Life initially, and Title to Salvation: And he that has not
Christ, through his Unbelief and Refusal, has not Life.

13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son
of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on
the name of the Son of God.

13. These things I have written to you that are true Christians, that you may
know what a Treasure you have in and with Christ; even, Right to Eternal Life,
and its Beginning here: and that you may go on confirmed, and constant in the
Faith.

14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his wiil, he hears us.

14. And through our Interest in Christ, his Merits and Intercession, we have
sufficient ground of Confidence that, by and through him, our Prayers are
heard, and that he will give us whatever we ask, which he has promised to
give, and we are fit to receive.

15. And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have
the petitions that we desired of him.

15. And if he thus hear your Prayers, we may reckon that, in his time and way,
he will give us whatever Particular we ask, if we and our Prayers be qualified
for his Promise.

16. If any man see his brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he shall
ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a
sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for it. 17. All unrighteousness
is sin, and there is a sin not unto death.

16, 17. And this comfort you have, in your Prayers for others, as well as for
your selves: God will hear you for those, who are qualified for the Mercy which
you beg for them, according to his Promise. Death, temporal and eternal, is the
Wages of sin; but with great difference. There are many sins of Infirmity,
which we hate and strive against; (as vain Thoughts, Words, Passions, Coldness
in Duty, Imperfection in all Good;) and all sins that stand with true
Repentance, and the predominant Love of God and Holiness. These the Law of
Grace does pardon, through Christ, and not damn any for: But Pardon must be
asked, and shall be obtained, for the faithful, penitent, qualified person. But
God has told us, that he does not pardon the Impenitent and Unsanctified, that
had rather keep their sin, than leave it; and are unqualified for Pardon. Your
Prayer to God, to pardon such, shall not prevail, while they are impenitent;
much less for them that are Infidels, and blaspheme the Holy Ghost. And God's
own Children may fall into some sins that are to be punished with Bodily Death,
or ^hame: Magistrates must put to death Murderers, and other capital Offenders;
and when Magistrates do it not, God will often times do it without them, himself;
(as he did on Ananias and Sapphira, and others.) In this case, if one be to be
executed by Justice, or be under God's Justice, that will put him to death, you
may pray for his Soul, but you must not pray for his Life, though he repent;
because it is against God's Law, and the common Good: And if you should pray
for the Recovery of such a man in Sickness, God has not promised you to
recover him: No, nor any of his own Children, when their dying time is come.

18. We know that whosoever is born of God, sins not; but he that is
begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.

18. We know that all that are born of God, hate sin, and overcome it in the
course of their lives; and live in no reigning sin which is predominant, but
only hated infirmities, which consist with sincere, predominant Faith,
Obedience and Repentance, (nor have any sin at all, so far as they have the
Divine Nature;) but they watchfully keep themselves from the prevalence of
Satan's snares.

19. And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness.

19. And, though Christ's Flocks here be less than the World, we see by
experience, that we are of God; guided by his Spirit, obeying his Laws,
pleasing his Will, living to him, and hoping for his Glory, and that the
unconverted World is wholly set on wickedness and mischief; so notorious is the
difference between the faithful, and the ungodly World (which foretells the
future difference.)

20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.

20. In a word, by all aforesaid, we are certain of the truth of our Religion:
We are sure that the Son of God is come, and Christ is he; and by his Doctrine
and Spirit, has enlightened us to know the true and only God, and his Will: and
we are, by faith and the Spirit, planted into him who is the Truth; even into
Jesus Christ. So that we are sure, it is the true God that we believe and
serve, and the Gift and Title to Eternal Life, that by Christ we do receive.

21. Little children, keep your selves from idols. Amen.

21. I speak to you in love, as if you were my own Children; but with care of
you, as to your weakness, and what temptations the Idolatrous World assaults
you with: As Christ has called you out of the World, from Idolatry, which you
have renounced; as you love God, and your Savior, and your Souls, hold close
to Christ and return not to Idols, nor partake of their Sacrifices, nor seem to
own them by Idolatrous Communion. Amen.

The Second Epistle of JOHN (the Apostle, it is most commonly thought, but not
certain.)
1. THe elder unto the elect lady, and her children whom I love in the truth:
and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth: 2. For the truth's
sake which dwells in us, and shall be with us for ever.

1, 2. Note; It seems this was some choice Woman, that was a great support and
helper to the Christians, and eminent in Piety, and stedfastness in the Faith;
Though some few groundlesly think, that it was some Church that he calls Lady.

3. Grace be with you, mercy and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.

3. Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and Christ the Son, are the
true, unvaluable Blessings I wish you, to confirm you in the two great parts of
Religion, Truth and Love.

4. I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy children walking in truth, as we
have received a commandment from the Father.

4. I greatly rejoiced, that I found thy Children both holding fast the
Christian Truth, and living in the practice of it, as the Father commanded us
to preach and do.

5. And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment unto
thee: but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one another.

5. The sum of my writing to thee is, not any Novelty, but the old, great Law
of Christ: Be sure that we keep up true Christian Love (which Satan is an Enemy
to.)

6. And this is love, that we walk after his commandments. This is the
commandment, that, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk in it.

6. And the Love, in which we all must live, is our Union and Concord in
keeping his Commandments; even the same Gospel which, from the beginning, was
committed to us: (For both new and false Doctrines, and a sinful life, do break
the Union and Peace of Christians.)

7. For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh. This is deceiver and an antichrist.

7 For there are many Heretics now come to that deceiving pass, that they deny
Christ himself; either his Godhead, or Manhood, or Office, or Work; yea, his
Incarnation; as if his Body were but a Fantasm. These are Deceivers and
Antichrists.

8. Look to your selves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought,
but that we receive a full reward.

8. Look to your selves with watchful care, that no temptation draw you to
back-sl^de, and you lose all your former belief and labor, nor we our
ministerial labor on you: but hold on, that you and we may attain that full
Reward that we seek.

9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has
not God: He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and
the Son.

9. As it was by the Doctrine of Christ, that you were brought into your
blessed Knowledge and Relation to the Father and the Son, so, if you fall from
that Doctrine, you will fall from God himself, to whom, by Christ, you are
reconciled. But if you abide in Christ's Doctrine, you will continue your
Relation to the Father and the Son.

10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed. 11. For he that bids him God
speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

10, 11. As for those Heretics and Apostates that deny the Gospel, or any
Essential Part of Christianity, show them no encouraging Countenance,
Familiarity or Communion: otherwise you will be guilty, as Partners in their
sin.

12. Having many things to write unto you, I would not write with paper and
ink, but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy may be
full. 13. The children of thy elect sister greet thee. Amen.

12, 13. Note, 1. Presence makes friendly Converse the more comfortable. 2. By
Elect Sister, here again, some think he means another Church; but it cannot
be proved.

The Third Epistle of JOHN ('it is most likely the Apostle.)
1 THe elder unto the well beloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth. 2. Beloved,
I wish above all things that thou may prosper, and be in health, even as thy
soul prospers.

1, 2. My love to thee for the Truths sake, which thou adherest to, makes me
wish earnestly that, as thy Soul prospers, so may thy Bodily Health, for the
service of God and thy Soul.

3. For I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and testified of the truth
that is in thee, even as thou walk in the truth.

3. Note 1. Soul-Mercies are the greatest Mercies, and matters of greatest joy
for one another. 2. Good Reports of our Brethren is a duty tending to the
comfort of Ministers and Friends.

4. I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.

4. Note; True Ministers rejoice more for the welfare of men's Souls, than in
Preserments, Wealth or Worldly Honor.

5. Beloved, thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do to the brethren, and
to strangers: 6. Which have born witness of thy charity before the church:

5. It is well done of thee, as a sincere Christian, that thou show so much
love and help, both to the Brethren of the Church with thee, and to Strangers
in their Banishment and Travels: Which diverse have here testified before the
Church, to thy praise.

6. Whom if thou bring forward on their journey after a godly sort, thou shall
do well: 7. Because that for his name's sake they went forth, taking nothing of
the Gentiles,

6, 7. And if thou further furnish and help them in their Travel, it will be a
laudable, Christian Duty, doing as to God's Servants, who, for Christ's Name
sake, went out of their Country, to preach abroad (or were persecuted out) and
took nothing of the Gentile Christians, toward their Maintenance in their
Travels.

8. We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellow-helpers to the
truth.

8. To entertain and further such, is part of our duty for the propagating of
the Gospel. (He that receives a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, shall have
a Prophet's reward.)

9. I wrote unto the church, but Diotrephes, who loves to have the
pre-eminence among them, receives us not.

9. I wrote for them, to the Church, my Testimonial, and desire of their
Reception: but their Bishop, Diotrephes, who loves to rule as pre-eminent
among them, receives nor us Jews (or my Letters and Request to the Church for
them.)

10. Wherefore if I come, I will remember his deeds which he does, prating
against us with malicious words: and not content therewith, neither does he
himself receive the brethren, and forbids them that would, and casts them
out of the Church.

10. Note 1. By remembering his deeds and words, is meant sharp rebuking him
before all, at least, 2. It Is like that this Diotrephes was Pastor, (or
Bishop.) else he could not have cast such out of the Church: At least he was
some great man that usurpt that Power: But sure no Layman did so early usurp
the Keys. 3. By this we see that the Pride of domineering Bishops began early
to be Schismatical, and divide the Church by Tyranny: Yea it grew arrogant to
oppose and reject the Beloved Apostle, and maliciously to prate against him.
There is no Man or Cause so good, but a malicious Bishop, or other man, may
prate against it. As there are few Mutinies dangerous in Armies, unless headed
by some Commanders; so there are few Schisms much dangerous in the Church, but
those that are headed by Bishops or Clergymen. 4. It is uncertain whether it
was to receive them to Communion, or only to Hospitality, that Diotrephes
opposed: But it is like it was both, because he cast out their receivers from
Communion. 5. It is not certain whether he did it on any difference of Opinion,
or occasional quarrel; but it is most like it was that he was a Gentile
Christian, and too much despised the Jews, as they censured and separated too
much from the Gentiles, Romans 14. Gal. 2. Thus Separation on both sides soon
began, and even Peacemaking Apostles could not be heard by the dividers.

11. Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good, He that
does good, is of God: but he that does evil, has not seen God.

11. Imitate not such proud, hurtful, uncharitable, dividing Examples; whatever
it pretend to, a hurtful, uncharitable course is not of God; such are not true
Believers, and know not God aright. But it is doing good that must show that we
are of God. By their fruit ye shall know them.

Note; Clergy Roman Cruelty by Inquisitions, Prisons, Ejecting true Ministers,
etc. shows that they are not of God, though they pretend Power, Order, Unity,
Faith, as if it were for God and Truth.

12. Demetrius has good report of all men, and of the truth it self: yea, and
we- also bear record, and ye know that our record is true.

12. Both common report, and his own good works, and our true Witness commend
Demetrius.

13, 14. I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and pen write unto
thee. But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we shall speak face to face,
Peace be to thee. Our friends salute thee. Greet the friends by name.

13, 14. Note; Kind Remembrances and Greetings are suitable to Christian
Friendship.

The General Epistle of JUDE (most probably the Apostle.)
1. JUDE the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are
sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: 2.
Mercy unto you, and peace, and love be multiplied.

1, 2. Note; Men being judged of according to their professio^^ all Christians
are called sanctified persons.

3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation: it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye
should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints.

3. Note 1. The common Salvation signifies but t^a^ way to Salvation which all
must go in that will be sav^d God's highway to Heaven; Christ and his Gospel.

2. The Apostles writing more against Heretics and Jews than Heathens, tells
us, that the Church has more cause usually to defend the Truth against
pretended Religious Zealots, and Sects that are erroneous, than against open
Pagans, who are not animated by so much blind Zeal against them; therefore they
know not the Churches case, who fear none but p^ophane Enemies.

3. Though Love and Meekness may be predominant in Christians, earnest
contending for the Faith against corr^pting Heretics is often a duty. But if
this be pretended for odious Censures, Excommunications, Persecutions or
dividing Contentions against Christians of the same Faith, for their
differences about lesser things, and for tolerable imperfections, or for
doubting of unnecessary Opinions, Ceremonies, Forms, or Humane Canons, it will
be no cover for the sin.

4. It is the Faith first delivered to the Churches by the Apostles, that
corrupters deprave, and we must contend for, and must be the Test of our
several differences.

5. Keep Faith and Religion sound among its Professors, and it will overcome
the World.

4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. For there are crept in by little and little, as in the dark, some men that
Christ had before told us should ^rise, (or God decreed to condemn for their
sin,) ungodly men, that though they did seem Christians, have turned the
Doctrine of God's Grace in Christ, into a Doctrine and Practice of
Lasciviousness and Licentiousness, and denying Je^us Christ, who is the only
Lord God, and our Lord (or the only God and our Savior, etc.)

Note 1. One of Satan's chief ways against the Church and Religion, is to
corrupt it by Heresies. 2. Corrupters creep secretly into the Church, at
unawares, and do not openly bring in all at once. 3. Though God ordain or
decree no man's sin, he both decrees and foretells their condemnation for
sin. 4. It is ungodly m^n that are usually the great corrupters of the Church
and Doctrine. 5. Libertinism, looseness and sensuality, are the usual dangerous
ways of such corruptions as being the way most suitable to man's corrupt
Nature, and which will have most followers.

5. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that
the Lord having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed
them that believed not.

5. As the Israelites perished in the Wilderness for Unbelief, after all their
miraculous deliverances from Egypt; so shall revolters perish notwithstanding
their Baptism and fair beginnings.

6. And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day.

6. And the Angels that stood not in their integrity, but fell by sin, God has
shut up as it were Prisoners in Chains (though they go about all the Earth with
temptations,) in certain expectations of fuller condemnation at the great day
of Judgment.

7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, in like manner
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

7. As Sodom, etc. were by fire from Heaven utterly destroyed, by God's
revenging Judgment.

8. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and
speak evil of dignities.

8. So these Heretics, dreaming of high Wisdom, are turned to fleshly lusts,
and to despise Government, and speak contemptuously or reproachfully of
Superiors, as if Christ has freed men from Humane Rule, and made all equal,
and all things lawful (when yet they deny even Christ himself, in some
Essentials of his Person or Office.)

9. Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil, he disputed
about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but
said, the Lord rebuke thee.

9. Yet Michael the chief Angel contending with a Principal Devil about the
rebuilding of the Jewish Temple, Zech. 3. durst not bring railing accusation,
but appealed to God.

Note 1. There are differences and superiorities among the Angels, and Devils.
It seems by Dan. 10.13, 21. that Angels have their several earthly Provinces in
charge, and that Michael was Prince of the Jews. 2. The badness and vanity of
Malignants will not justify railing accusation against them, when it may not
be used against Devils; yet their evil must be detected, that it may be
frustrated. 3. By the Body of Moses, some understand his buried Body, which
Satan would have idolized, and others his Body in the Basket, which Satan would
have had drowned: But by Zech. 3. it is more like to be the Temple, Law, and
Jewish Policy, called the Body of Moses, as the Church is called the Body of
Christ.

10. But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they
know naturally, as brute beasts; in those things they corrupt themselves.

10. But these, pretending to know what they do not, speak evil of the things
which they know not, being proud, and ignorant of their ignorance; but what
natural sense or reasonableness constrains them to know, their lust
prevails against it, and they live in debauchery, as if they knew it not to
be evil.

Note; It Is the common mark of erroneous men to be confident where they
mistake, and to censure and speak evil fiercely of that which they never
understood, and to sin against that knowledge which they have, or easily might
have.

11. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily
after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.

11. Woe to them, for they have imitated Cain in offering God a faithless
Sacrifice, and envying and persecuting them that do better: And they are
covetous worldlings, that, like Balaam, would do evil for reward or gain; And
they have imitated Core in opposing Moses and Aaron, Magistrates, and Apostles,
and shall perish as they did.

12. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you,
feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, carried about
of winds; trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by
the roots;

12. These are the disgrace of your Love Feasts and Communion, which they turn
into a Sensual Feast, not fearing profanation of excess: Hypocrites, like
empty Clouds, that water not the Earth, but carried about with the winds of
worldly Interest or Seduction; like fruitless Trees, twice dead and rooted up,
by Apostasy from their first profession.

Note; It is a wonder that the Apostle no more reproves them for admitting
such to their Communion, as it seems by these words they did.

13. Raging waves of the sea, foming out their own shame; wandering stars, to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

13. Unquiet, fierce and raging persons, who while they pour out ill words of
others, do but foam out their own shame: Teachers they will needs be, as Stars
to the Churches, but they are but Erratick Stars or Comets, that shall end in
endless darkness to themselves, while they boast of Light to others.

14. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold,
the Lord comes with ten thousands of his saints, 15. To execute judgment upon
all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

14, 15. Note 1. It Is like this Prophecy of Henoch was received by Tradition.
2. This description sure is not of the destruction of Jerusalem, but of the
great day of the Lord, terrible to all the wicked, and the malignant
Adversaries of Godliness.

16. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, and their
mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because
of advantage.

16. These are men that swell, and murmr, and complain against Government,
and all that cross their Opinions or Lusts after which they walk; and they use
big and boasting words, as men that were more knowing than all others (in
Philosophical Fancies, and the Orders of Angels, and Ages, and Things above,
and of Christian Liberty, etc.) and they extol the men for advantage of
themselves, and of their Sect, who are their Leaders and chief Favorers.

17. But beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the
apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ: 18. How that they told you there should be
mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts.

17, 18. But remember the words which Peter and other Apostles have spoken
heretofore, that told you such men should come; and keep to the first Doctrine
of the Apostles.

19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit.

19. These separate themselves into a distinct Sect, as if they were above the
Apostolical Churches; but their actions show that they are sensual, carnal men,
not at all sanctified and guided by God's Spirit, as the faithful be.

20. But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying
in the holy Ghost. 21. Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

20, 21. But ye, Beloved, must be quite other men from these; they build
sensuality, temporizing and separation upon Error, and proud self-conceit; But
you must build up your selves, and one another, in Holiness, upon your Divine
and most holy Faith. They are sensual, having not the Spirit. You must, as men
in whom God's Spirit dwells and rules, pray in the Holy Ghost, even with those
holy and fervent desires, which the Spirit of God exciteth in you; They are
revolted from true Faith and Love: You must by God's Spirit keep your selves in
unfeigned Love to God, and to his Truth, and one another, waiting in Faith and
Hope for Eternal Life by God's Mercy in Christ.

22. And of some have compassion, making a difference. 23. And others save with
fear, pulling them out of the fire: hating even the garment spotted by the
flesh.

22, 23. And as to your dealing with such erroneous men, it must be differently
as they differ, even tenderly and compassionately with some; and with others
you must deal more fervently and sharply, as with Lot in Sodom, or men in a
house that is on fire, whose death, if not quickly prevented, you must fear,
and therefore be importunate with them: But seek to save them all (and not to
use any violent or hurtful course) And your selves must hate and avoid all
degrees of filthiness and sensuality.

24. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, 25. To the only
wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, now and ever.
Amen.

24, 25. Now to him who is able in all temptations, notwithstanding your own
weakness, to keep you steadfast in Faith and Holiness, from falling into the
snares of Heresy or Ungodliness, and to present you faultless (as being
faithful and upright, and your sins forgiven) before the presence of his Glory
at his coming, that you may see him, and stand before him with exceeding joy,
(when the wicked are condemned) I say, to him the only God of Infinite Wisdom,
to our Savior, be Glory, and Majesty, and Dominion, and Power, now and ever;
so it will certainly be; and such is the prayer of all the faithful.

The REVELATION of John the Divine.
CHAP. I.
1. THe revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it
by his angel unto his servant John:

1. Note 1. It is eminently called the Revelation, as being by Vision and
Prophetic notice an extraordinary Revelation of future things.

2. Beza well observes hence the Order of God's Revelation to his Church.
First, God himself is the Fountain; he reveals it to our Mediator, as Man,
(who knows all things as God) that according to his Office he may be the
Light and Teacher to his Church. Christ reveals it to Angels; the Holy Ghost
and Angels reveal it to Apostles and Prophets; they reveal and record it to the
Church, where all must learn it, but specially Teachers, to tell it to the
People.

3. It is things to come that are here revealed; therefore I cannot receive
those two Learned men's Exposition, who make it a History in a Prophetic style,
and say, that most, or very much of it, was done before it was written.

4. The word [ shortly] made them expound almost the whole Book of things all
fulfilled about Constantine's time, or presently after Alaricus's sacking of
Rome. But [ shortly] may signify no more than, 1. That these things will
shortly be begun, though not so quickly finished; And 2. That a thousand years
is with the Lord but as one day. But I confess that so much, as can be proved
already done, we must not feign to be yet to come.

5. It is most like that this John was the Apostle, but it is not certain.

2. Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw.

2* Who by this Writing truly tells the Churches, what Christ by his Angel
told him, as a faithful Witness of Christ, and of all that he saw and heard in
this Vision and Revelation; some things that then were, may be mentioned, to
introduce the Prophecy of things to come.

3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein for the time is at hand.

3. Note; It is a desirable thing, and an addition to that man's wisdom and
happiness, who understands this, and all other Scripture Prophecies; but this
concludes not that no other are blessed, or that many attain that degree o^
happiness (For I think I never knew one such:) But the necessary parts of
Christianity, which are in this Prophecy mixed with darker passages, all must
keep that will be blessed.

2. The Time of their beginning was at hand, and the End not far off.

4. John to the seven churches in Asia, Grace be unto you, and peace, from him
which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven spirits which
are before his throne:

4. I John send you this holy Greeting and Benediction Grace and Peace (the
greatest blessings) be to you from the Eternal God, and those Angels whom he
has made your special Guardians.

Note 1. That it is Angels (and not the Holy Ghost's seven Graces) that is here
meant, is after manifested.

2. Why they are called Seven, some say is, because seven goes for a number of
perfection, whence the Seven Planets, the seven days of the week, etc. But this
is but men's conceit, and no part of God's Word. Nor can we prove hence, that
God has set seven Angels above all the rest. But all that we can know of it
is, that John, being commanded to write to seven Churches, numbereth the
Guardian Angels accordingly from their Charges.

3. This is no Prayer to these Angels, but a notice that God's Mercies are
communicated to those Churches by their Ministry, and this message sent by them
from Christ.

The naming of the seven Spirits before Christ, is no preferring them as above
him: But Christ is after named, becausse much more is to be said there of him
together.

5. Why seven Churches only are named, men variously conjecture; some say,
because they are spoken of prophetically, as in their names seven states of the
Universal Church, or its notable parts, to the end, are signified. But this
(being impossible to be proved) is rather to pretend another Revelation, than
to expound this. Others say, that it being only the Pro-Consular Asia that John
wrote to, these seven being the Metropolitan City-Churches, did comprehend all
the rest, as parts under them. But 1. T^is also is but a Humane Imagination,
without any proof. 2. If they mean that these were then made Ecclesiastical
Metropolis's, it is a fiction without, and against, Historical evidence, which
tells us of a far later date of Metropolitical Churches. 3. If they mean that
they were Metropolis's only in a Civil sense, and that the Apostles, in
planting Churches there, purposed or ordained that afterward Church Power
should follow the Order of the Seats of Civil Power, I answer 1. That this is a
crude unproved Assertion, and therefore of no authority or credit. 2. And it is
known, that it was four hundred years after that this was decreed by a Council
as a new thing. 3. And this was so far from being Apostolical, that it
confounded the Church, setting in superiority the worst men that could but get
into a Metropolis, and putting all Bishops and Churches at present under the
Power of the People and Pr^sbyters o^ one City, which was a Metropolis, and
chose their own Bishop: Yea, Dr. Hammond thought that then no B^s^op had any
Presbyters under him, and so there were n^ne but his People to choose him; (for
the Neigh^^ur ^ishops did not, though they ordained him;) Yea it turns
Churches upside down at the will of every Emperor, Heathen, Infidel or
Christian, who can enfranchise or disfranchise Cities at his pleasure. 4. And
there is no proof that these seven were all and only the Civil Metropolitical
Cities of Asia.

3. Both these then being men's unproved Imaginations, yea and unlikely, it
remains that these seven Churches were most eminent in Asia, both for
greatness and those trials, virtues and faults which Christ was pleased to note
as the occasion of this message; And if he see cause to send a message to
seven, it belongs not to us to ask him, why he sends to no more.

5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten
of the dead, and the prince of the Kings of the earth:

5. Note, 1. By [ faithful witness] is meant, the faithful and certain
Messenger and revealer of Gods will to man: 2. By [ first begotten] is meant,
both the Greatest and most Excellent, and the first in order and causality, who
Rising from the dead, is the cause that we shall Rise 3. He is Prince of the
Kings of the Earth, not only as Greater than all Kings, but as over them all in
power* by whom they reign, and who does dispose of all, Ephesians. 2.23. Matthew.
28.19. Joh. 17.2. Joh. 13 3. Joh. 5.22. Ephesians. 1.21. Col. 1.15, 16, 17. Phil.
2.9, 10, 11.

5. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, 6.
And has made us Kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

5.6. To this Glorious Lord and Savior, who showed his wonderful Love to us,
by his giving up himself a sacrifice for our sins, that the Merit of his Blood
might cleanse us from guilt and sin, and justify us from it before God, and who
has chosen and sanctified us and made us by his Grace, a peculiar holy People
to God, dignified in our Relation to Christ as Kings in honor, and brought us
near to God like cons^crated Priests, to offer him our daily service acceptable
through Christ; To him I say, shall be Glory and Dominion for ever, in the
acknowledgement whereof let all his Saints rejoice.

7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him:
even so, Amen.

7. I have often before enquired whether this Coming of Christ be 1. his Coming
by the Roman Armies to destroy Jerusalem, 2. Or his setting up Christianity in
the World, and destroying Heathenism, 3. Or his Coming at last in Glory. The
matter is true as to all the three: But the text seems most strained by the
first exposition, and least by the last: Every way he is dreadful to his
enemies. But every eye sees him not the first way; nor did the destroyed Jews
acknowledge it to be by him.

8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which
is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

8. I am everlasting, before all Worlds and without end, and he who has Power
over all.

Note, These words seem to be the words of Christ, and not of God the Father;
And with the sixth verse, which ascribes to him everlasting Glory and
dominion, do seem plainly to speak the Godhead of Christ.

9. I John, who also am your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the
Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos,
for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.

9. I John, who was your brother and companion, undergo the like sufferings as
you do, in the same belief and subjection to Christ in his Kingdom, and in
Patient enduring for his sake, was in the Isle of Patmos, whi^her I was
banished for my Testimony, and preaching the faith of Christ.

10. I was in the spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great voice,
as of a trumpet,

10. I was there in a transporting rapture by the Spirit of God, on the first
day of the week, called by the Church, The Lords day, (observed in
commemoration of his Resurrection:) And I heard a voice call to me as loud as a
trumpet.

Note 1. The vain cav^l of those that deny the [ Lords day] here to mean the
Christians day of holy worship, even the first of the week, I have fully*
confuted in a book called the Divine appointment of the Lords Day. And it needs
no confutation to those that are acquainted with Church History, who know that
this day has been kept holy as of Apostolical ordination and practice by the
universal Church ever since the Apostles days, the heretics themselves
consenting.

2. Christ owned his own day, and the suffering of his banished Solitary
Servant, by the Communication of these extraordinary Revelations, and by the
ecstasy of Spiritual influence.

11. Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and what thou see,
write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia, unto
Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto
Sardis, and Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.

11. N. 1. The first sentence is out of diverse Greek Copies; but is before
spoken, and is the description of Christ's Eternity. 2. This was written by
Christ's Command.

12. And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. And being turned, I saw
seven golden Candlesticks.

12. To see who that voice came from which I heard.

13. And in the midst of the seven candlesticks, one like unto the Son of man,
clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden
girdle.

13. One in the shape of a man who was a representation of Christ in splendid
clothing like Aarons.

Note, Whether it was the Angel that thus represented Christ, or Christ himself
who assumed this appearing shape immediately, is uncertain.

14. His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and his
eyes were as a flame of fire. 15. And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they
burned in a furnace: and his voice as the sound of many waters.

14, 15 Christ's apparition signifies his Innocence and Glory by whiteness; his
terrible majesty, by his fiery eyes and feet, and his dreadful voice; to affect
all with Reverence, and his foes with terror.

16. And he had in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth went a
sharp two-edged sword, and his countenance was as the sun shines in his
strength.

16. And in his right hand were held seven Stars, which signify the Pastors of
the seven Churches, commissioned and upheld by him: And a two-edged Sword, from
his mouth, signified his Word sent forth with power, to convert and save the
Elect, and to convince and condemn the obstinate rejecters: And his countenance
was glorious as the Sun in its clearest appearance.

17. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead: and he laid his right hand
upon me, saying unto me, Fear not, I am the first and the last.

17. He laid on me his supporting hand of Love, when his terrible Glory had
cast me at his feet and bid me Not fear, (for his Glory is joyful to his
Servants, though terrible to his Enemies:) He is my Almighty, Eternal God, and
my Hope.

18. I am he that lives, and was dead: and behold, I am alive for evermore,
Amen, and have the keys of hell and of death.

18. I am Christ who was lately Incarnate on Earth, and crucified for your
sins, and now live your King and Intercessor in glory, and shall die no more:
And death and all separated Souls are in my power, to be taken into Happiness,
or cast out.

19. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall be hereafter,

19. Write these Revelations for posterity, which contain what thou see, and
the Exposition of some things that already exist, and the Prophecy of many
things to come.

20. The mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the
seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven
churches: and the seven candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven churches.

20. Note; It is a great Controversy what is meant by Angels here; 1. Some say
that the Prophetical phrase being primarily of proper Angels, as the Guardians
of the Churches, yet as in their names intending the message to the Churches
themselves, so it is here spoken of, and to the Churches, but as denominated
from their several Angels: And this seems to me the most likely sense, viz.
To the whole Churches, Pastors and People under the name of their Guardian
Angels, though blaming the Churches, and not the Angels; which should not seem
strange to them who feign such good men as Timothy to be the Angels, who were
not guilty of the crimes here reproved. Thus Augustine d^ Doctr. Christ. lib.
3. c. 30. cites and seems to like Tyconius's Exposition, who supposes the
whole Church meant under the Angels name.

2, Others suppose the Presbytery of each Church collectively governing them
are called the Angels.

3. Others think that only the Metropolitans are meant as Heads of Presbyters,
and other Bishops.

4. Dr. Hammond thinks there were Sub-Presbyters in Scripture times, and so
that it is Metropolitans that are here meant; but such as were but single
Pastors of Congregations, like a Parish-Pastor now that has not so much as a
Curate un^er him save Deacons, but was Metropolitan over many Diocesses of such
single Bishops.

I am far from believing. 1. That any such Metropolitans were then settled; 2.
Or that such Churches had but one Pastor; 3. Or that the single Bishop of a
Metropolis was blamed for the faults of many Diocesses of Churches; 4. Or that
the Bishops of the excellent Primitive Churches, were so quickly degenerate,
and guilty of the crimes here mentioned, specially if Timothy was one. And this
Exposition too grossly slurs Episcopacy. But if they were but single Pastors of
single Churches, the difference is no great moment: What he speaks of the
Apostles intending so great a change afterward as Diocesans have made,
requires proof.

CHAP. II.
1. UNto the angel of the church of Ephesus, write, These things says he that
holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the
seven golden candlesticks:

1. To the Pastors and Flock of the Church of Ephesus, meant by the name of
their Angels, These things says Christ before described, and commands me to
write them.

Note 1. I believe not that Timothy was their Bishop in the ordinary sense as a
fixed Pastor of that Church alone; but that he in his Itinerant course
(described in Scripture, doing the work of an Evangelist) was there sometime,
and is therefore by the Ancients called their Bishop, as Apostles were called
Bishops, for planting and taking care for many Churches; when as there is not
the least proof that they appropriated any Diocesses or Churches to each, as
their proper charge, which other Apostles might not use the same Authority
with, or were fixed to any.

2. I believe it yet less probable that Timothy was the Angel here accused, of
leaving and falling from his first Love.

2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
bear them which are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are apostles,
and are not, and have found them liars:

2. Thy good works, and great labor in the Gospel, and thy patience in
suffering for it, are not unknown or disregarded by me: And it is thy praise
that thou do not countenance nor tolerate among you, the seducing Heretics
and wicked men; and that those that have pretended Inspiration, as sent of God,
thou have tried, and rejected them as proved liars and false Apostles.

3. And have born, and have patience, and for my names sake have labored, and
have not fainted.

3. Note; Christ loves and praises that which is good in the Churches, while
he reproves them for that which is evil.

4. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love.

4. But for this I reprove thee, that you have not that hearty, servent Love to
me, and to one another, which you had at the first; and that you grow colder
when you should grow better.

Note; Even good people may fall into a more cold, declining state, by
negligence.

5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

5. Look back on thy first Love and Works, and think whether it was not then
better with thee, and whether thou had any cause to decline; Return to thy
first works, or el;se I will shortly visit thee with the heavy punishment, of
taking the Ministry and Gospel from thee.

Note 1. Declinings from former Love and Duty are displeasing to God, and tend
to worse. 2. It is a grievous punishment to have the Gospel and Ministry taken
away, either by Wars, Devastations, Persecutions, Silencing, and worst by
wilful Expulsion.

6. But this thou have, that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I
also hate.

6. It is commendable in thee, that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans,
for I hate them.

Note; It is lawful to distinguish such Heretics as are not to be tolerated in
Church Communion by the names of their Leaders: But this should not be done
against tolerable differences, as tending to divide those that should all unite
in the Christian name.

2. God hates licentious Doctrines and Deeds, and so must we.

3. Whence these Nicolaitans had their name is not known certainly, but
doubtful Tradition in History tells us, that Nicholas the Deacon, Act. 6. had a
beautiful Wife, and he was blamed as jealous of her; and that thereupon he
brought her forth, and bid who would take her, to show that he was above all
fleshly lust; and that some people, misunderstanding him, thence took occasion
to plead for the lawfulness of Fornication. The Heresy of these hateful
Nicolaitans lay, 1. In making light of Fornication, 2. And in despising the
Heathens Government, as if Christian Liberty lay in being from under its power;
3. And in teaching that to avoid suffering, men might deny Christ with the
mouth, while the heart denied him not; 4. And that they might eat things
offered to Idols, so they despised the Idol in their hearts. Paul, Act. 20. had
before told these Ephesians, that grievous Wolves should enter and devour; and
that of their own selves men should arise speaking perverse things, to draw
Disciples after them: And it seems thus warned, they hated the Heresies. And
St. John himself lived in Asia, and is said to die at Eph^sus, who no doubt
would warn them (and was as above Timothy)

7. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the churches,
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the paradise of God.

7. Let all that hear or read these words of the Spirit to the Churches, set
their hearts to them with regard, as of great and common importance: To him
that in the day of Trial and Temptation does overcome, by being true to Christ,
and keeping his Innocence, I will give a part in everlasting Happiness,
signified by the Tree of Life in Paradise.

Note 1. Striving without overcoming in Temptation, so far as to keep our
uprightness and faithfulness, will not save men (much less lazy wishes.)

2. Though Faith put us at first in a state of Righteousness and Life, to those
that survive, Perseverance and Victory are conditions of Salvation.

3. It seems that the sense of the Tree of Life in Paradise, Genesis 3. Is here
expounded to be, Everlasting Life of Blessedness with God; and so in the New
Jerusalem after, chapter 21.22.

8. And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna, write, These things says the
First and the Last, which was dead, and is alive,

8. Note; Christ is not barely named, but described by Divine Properties, to
awe the Church with reverence to him, and to resolve them to Trust him, who can
deliver and reward them.

9. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I
know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews and are not, but are the
synagogue of Satan.

9. I know with approbation and praise, thy labor, and sufferings, and worldly
poverty; but thou art rich in grace: And I know that blasphemous Sect, that
tempt and reproach thee, who by obtruding Moses's Law on the Churches, (or at
least seem Jews to avoid their malice) do trouble the Churches against Purity,
Unity and Peace, and are Satan's Synagogue, as thus doing his work.

10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: behold, the devil shall
cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life.

10. Fear not though thou must suffer; and I foretell thee what thy sufferings
will be: But I will fully reward thee.

Note 1. Certainty of suffering may consist with the Conquest of cowardly fear.

2. It is the Devil that imprisoneth and persecuteth Christ's Servants, when
his wicked Servants do it by his Temptation.

3. Prisons and Persecutions are for the Trial of the Faithful. Our care
therefore must be, that we fall not in the Trial.

4. Ten days is a short time, yet seems long to the flesh.

5. The Crown of Life Everlasting is the sure reward of true Martyrdom and
Perseverance in Trial.

11. He that has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches.
He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death.

11. These Warnings of the Spirit to the Chruches are recorded, as of great
Concernment for all. It is they that overcome the Love of this Life and World,
even unto death, if God call them to Martyrdom, that shall escape that sorer
second Death that, after this Life, will befall the Ungodly.

12. And to the angel of the church in Pergamos, write, These things says he
which has the sharp sword with two edges.

12. To the Pastors and People of the Church of Pergamos, noted by the word
Angel, Christ, that has his dreadful Justice, as well as saving Mercy, sends
this Message.

Note; Once for all here note, that Churches were then named from Cities,
because Proximity was needful to Communion: And among Christians, there should
be so great Unity, that they that live in one Proximity (like our Parishes or
Towns) should always be of one Church, unless the incapable multitude force
them to divide in one City, into many Churches; in which still Proximity should
be observed; or unless the great Corruption, or Violence, of any Church do
necessitate any to congregate by themselves, for their safety and duty. For if
the faults of a Church, and any of its Members, be but tolerable Weaknesses, it
should not break their Communion, but they should bear with, and receive each
other: But if they are intolerable, for which God disowneth and forsakes them,
or their Worship, they are no true Churches, and must be forsaken of all, as no
true particular Christians, and must be cast out.

13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and
thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days
wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan
dwells.

13. I know, with Approbation, all thy good Works, and that thou dwell where
Satan rules in the Heathen multitude; having there an Idol-Temple, and Roman,
persecuting Powers; and that yet thou have held fast the Profession of
Christianity, and not denied me in Persecution; even in the days when Satan's
Instruments murdered my faithful Martyr Antipas.

Note; We have no other certain History of Antipas, and his Case, but only the
uncertain stories of Metaphrasles, and the Menology. No doubt but there were
many Martyrs, whose History is not come down to us: But Christ has honored
Antipas by this sacred Record: The time of his suffering is unknown.

14. But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that
hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before
the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit
fornication.

14. Though all this Good be found in thee, I am offended that thou so
connivest at the Heresy of the false Teachers, as to permit some of them in
your Communion, who, as Balaam for Gain taught Balac how to ensnare the
Israelites into sin by Women, so they lay Snares and Temptations before men, by
teaching them, that it is lawful to eat things offered to Idols, and to commit
Fornication.

Note; Had not this Church tolerated these filthy Heretics in their Communion,
Christ would not have blamed them for their mere Neighborhood.

15. So have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which
thing I hate.

15. And thou have yet in thy Communion some that hold the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which makes light of Adulteries, which is hateful to me.

Note; Christ hates all such false Doctrine as corrupts Faith or Manners.

16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them
with the sword of my mouth.

16. Repent of thy connivance at this wicked Sect and Doctrine, and cast out
them that will not be cured; or else with the two-edged Sword, which goes out
of my mouth, I will shortly cut off these Heretics, and punish thee for
bearing with them.

17. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the churches,
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give
him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows,
saving he that receives it.

17. Let no man disregard what the Spirit says to the Churches: To him that
overcomes the manifold Temptations, of Persecutors, false Teachers, and
fleshly lusts, I will give the bread of life, that hidden Manna which is laid
up in the heavenly Sanctuary, even Christ and his Spirit; and in the grace of
that Spirit I will give him a Pledge and Title to Eternal Life, and that new
Name and Nature, Holiness and the Divine Image, the evidence of right to the
heavenly Inheritance, whose Nature and Worth none rightly know, but those who
receive it. Thus shall it be done to them whom I will honor.

18. And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira, write, These things says
the Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are
like fine brass.

18. To the Church of Thyatira, Pastors and People represented by their Angel,
hear and regard this message from the Son of God, whose glory and dreadfulness
was signified by his appearing ^o me, with Eyes like a flame, and Feet shining
as burnish't Brass.

19. I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience,
and thy works, and the last to be more than the first.

19. I know and commend thy good Works and Charity, and Ministration to the
Saints, and thy Fidelity and constant Patience in Trials, and that thy last
Works excel thy first.

20. Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer
that woman Jezebel, which calls her self a prophetess, to teach, and to
seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto
idols. 21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented
not.

20. Note 1. Even a few faults in a laudable Church may be a provocation to the
Justice of Christ. 2. Suffering corrupt Doctrines and Seducers in a Church, is
a sin which Christ will not pass by. Suffering was not opposite to Banishing,
Imprisoning, Killing: For the Church had no such power or command. But it was
forbearing that sharp Reproof, Confutation and Excommunication which was the
Churches duty. 3. Whether there were really a Woman among them that promoted
this wickedness, by pretense of Prophetic Inspiration, or whether, by the
Woman Jezabel, be meant the whole Sect of Nicolaitans or Gnostics, is
uncertain. But it is certain that the Heresy tolerated was the same as was
before reproved, and that Paul was put so often to write against, viz.
Fornication and Idol-Sacrifices, pleaded for as lawful for Christians to
partake of, so they kept their faith and hearts to God. 4. Impenitence after
God's Patience and Warnings, ripeneth men for Judgment.

22. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with
her, into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. 23. And I will
kill her children with death, and all the churches shall know that I am he
which searches the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you
according to your works.

22, 23. Instead of a Bed of Lust, I will cast her, and all her seduced Sect,
into a Bed of great Tribulation, except true Repentance and Reformation prevent
it; so that all the Churches shall see my heavy Plagues on them, and shall know
that I discern, and hate, and judge the most secret lusts and sins; and will
judge you, and all men, according to your works.

Note; Judging is either Justifying or Condemning, and Executing accordingly.
Our first Justification, which makes us Just, and so Accounts us, is not
according to any works strictly so called, unless you will call it a work,
believingly to Accept a free gift: Nor is our Justification in Judgment
according to the works of the Law of Innocence, or of Moses, or any that can be
thought to make the Reward not of Grace, but of Debt: But it is according to
our performing the Covenant of Christianity, made by Christ the condition of
Salvation.

24. But unto you I say, and to the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this
doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, I will
put upon you none other burden. 25. But that which ye have already, hold fast
till I come.

24, 25. Note; Some Copies have [And] and some leave it out. If it be [ you and
the rest] it must mean [ you Pastors, and the faithful People.] And this would
show that it is not One, but Many Pastors that is meant by [ the Angel]. But if
[ And] be left out, then the sense is [All you of the Church that are not
polluted with this filthy Doctrine, which the pretenders to Wisdom call
Profound Knowledge, but is indeed the Depths of Satan; I will put on you no new
Doctrine nor Burden, but charge you to hold fast that Apostolic Doctrine which
you have received; and wait in fidelity for my coming, who will reward you.

26. And he that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I
give power over the nations: 27. (And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as
the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers) even as I have
received of my Father.

26, 27. This Promise is dive^sly expounded; 1. Some think that it is not the
same persons then living to whom it is made, but those, that in Constantine's
time are found persevering, shall then be advanced by him to honor and power.
Others think that it is to the same persons, and means bu^, that they shall
be made Bishops, and convert many Heathens. But all the Church could not be
made Bishops; and Bishops then were the greatest Sufferers: and converting is
not ruling, and dashing them in pieces with an Iron Rod. The Phrase is fetched
from Psalm. 2. Others think that it is meant of the Heavenly power of faithful,
separated Souls; and that after death, the Saints join with Angels, ^s
invisible Rulers of this World. And others think that it is meant of a thousand
years Reign on Ear^h, before the last Judgment. And others think it is meant,
of the state after Judgment; and that the Damned shall be as Slaves to the
glorified Saints. It is certain, that it signifies a triumphant, glorious
state in Heaven: but the ^est is dark to us.

I think it means, that they shall partake of Christ's Royal Power
subserviently, in their degree; by which they shall now triumph over the World
in faith, and in time, be delivered from men's Tyrannny; and at Death,
initially, and at Judgment, fully, shall, with Christ, judge the World of
wicked Men and Angels; which is here called, Ruling them. And it is not
improbable that the miserable damned ones will be, in some sort, trod down by
Christ and his Saints; but how, we yet know not. By the Morning Star, seems
meant, Christ and his Spirit to shine on them in Glory.

29. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the churches.

29. Let none take themselves to be unconcerned in Christ's Message to his
Churches; for it is recorded for our common use, and nearly concerns us all.

CHAP. III.
1. ANd unto the angel of the church in Sardis write, These things says he
that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars, I know thy works, that
thou have a name, that thou live, and art dead.

1. To the Angel, that is, the Pastors and People, of the Church in Sardis;
Thus says he who is the Lord of Angels and Ministers.

Note; Though the Spirits before were named before Christ, it was not as
preferring them before him; for he is here said to have them, as he has the
Pastors.

I know what thou art and do: and that thou art reputed by men, to be an
excellent Church: but thou art declined to a cold and decayed state, even like
to death.

Note; Profession, and outward Splendour, make Churches and persons applauded
that, wanting the life and power of the Religion they profess, are next to dead.

2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die:
for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

2. Be awakned from thy Self-flattery and Coldness, and revive and exercise
that Good which yet thou have, that it may be strengthened; for I find much
Hypocrisy and Formality in thee, and not that Soundness, Serious^ess and Zeal
which God will require.

3. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast, and
repent. If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

3. Remember what Doctrine my Apostles taught thee, and hold fast that, and
receive no other. Repent of thy Backsliding: for if thou do not awake and
watch in holy Preparation, I will come upon thee with my Judgments, as a Thief
comes on men asleep, when thou art most fearless, and do least expect me.

4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments, and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.

4. Though the greater part of that Church be as dead in their declining, some
few there are yet in it, who have kept their Innocence from Heresy, Vice and
Cowardly Shrinking: and these shall have the honorable Reward of their
Uprightness; for they are worthy of it, according to the Law of Grace, which
promises it to such alone.

Note; Yet these few Names are not commanded to separate from the rest.

5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will
not blot out his name out of the book of life; but I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his angels.

5. He that overcomes in this Life of Trial, shall be clothed with the Glory
which signifies the Reward of Innocence, and is the mark of Dignity and
Honor; (for such then was White Raiment:) and I will own him openly, before my
Father and his Angels, as one who is enrolled as a Denison of Heaven, among the
Elect of God.

Note; If White Garments now be seemly for conquering Saints, they are unmeet
for them that are overcome by the World, and the love of its Honor, Wealth and
Power, and by fleshly Lusts.

6. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
7. And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia, write, These things says he
that is holy, he that is true, he that has the key of David, he that opens,
and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens:

6, 7. Note; Christ is described by his Holiness, and Truth, and absolute Power
of Governing and Judging, to awe and to comfort the Faithful.

8. I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man
can shut it: for thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have
not denied my name.

8. I know and approve thy Fidelity: And I opened thee a Door of Advantage, to
do good in converting Infidels, and to enjoy the comfort of it; and none shall
shut this Door against thee: for thou have kept some strength of Faith and
Courage, and have not denied me by Heresy nor Cowardice.

9. Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan (which say they are
Jews, and are not, but do lie) behold, I will make them to come and worship
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

9. And as for those Heretics that, pretending Judaism, corrupt Christianity,
and are but the Synagogue of Satan; I will make them acknowledge the vanity of
their Error, and the honor of thy Fidelity; and to confess that I have loved
and justified thee therein, against their Accusations.

10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that
dwell upon the earth.

10. I will give thee a special Exemption from the Persecutions which the
Heathens will shortly use, to try those on Earth, that profess my Name. (Which,
no doubt, was performed)

Note; Though the best are often singled out for Persecution, usually the most
obedient Churches escape above others, and most have a hand in bringing it on
themselves.

11. Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou have, that no man take
thy crown.

11. My performance of all this, is not far off; for the Trial of the Churches,
and thy Preservation. But see that thou hold fast still thy Innocence, Fidelity
and Patience, that thou lose not the Crown, for want of Perseverance.

Note; The best Churches and Christians have need to be warned to take heed,
lest they back-slide, and lose all their labor and reward. Even where God
decrees to cause men to persevere, he decrees to cause it, by holy fear of
^alling, and by the use of Watchfulness, and diligent Obedience.

12. Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the
name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out of
heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name.

12. Him that overcomes in all the Trials of this life, I will make an
honorable Member of the glorified Church, (called a Pillar, as Timothy is
called a Pillar and Bas^s of Truth, in the House of God;) and he shall there
dwell for ever: And I will signalize him, as with a written Name, both of My
God, and of the City of my God, the New Jerusalem, which is now gathering in
Heaven; and when it is complete, shall thence come, and appear with me in
Glory: and I will write on him my new Name, The Glorified Redeemer.

Note; The whole Name, thus set together, will be, [ An Adopted Son of God, and
an Heir of the New Jerusalem from Heaven, and a living Member of Christ, the
Glorified Redeemer.]

13. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the churches.

13. All that have ears, and hear what Christ, by his Spirit, says to all
these Churches, should lay it deeply to heart, for their own Instruction and
Admonition.

14. And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans, write, These things
says the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the creation of
God.

14. Thus says he who is the Truth, and by whom, all God's Predictions are,
and will be fulfilled; the faithful Witness of God, to Man, by his Word and
Sufferings; the Head and Chief of all God's Creatures.

Note; This Text is diversely expounded, as men's Judgments differ. 1. The
Arrians hence gather, that Christ is but the first of Creatures, by whom God
made the rest. 2. Peter Sterry, and that Party, who hold three Natures in
Christ; the Divine, the Prime-cre^ted (Super-angelical,) and the Humane, say,
It is his middle Nature that is here called, The Beginning of the Creation of
God. 3. But the commonest Judgment of the Church is, that it is Christ, as in
both Natures, thus called; because he is the Head, or Chief, of all Creatures:
or, say some, as he is the Cause and Father of the new Creature, by Grace.

15. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou were
cold or hot. 16. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot,
I will spew thee out of my mouth.

15, 16. I know thy case and course, that thou art not for open Heresy or
Infidelity, but professest Christianity; but it is with Tepidity, without such
Zeal as the Faith and Hope of Christians requires. If thou were cold, and for
downright Infidelity or Heresy, I would judge thee accordingly: And if you
were sound and zealous Christians, I would own you. But being of a lukewarm
Indifferency, like Hypocrites, that profess Christianity, with Reserves for
Worldly Safety, I will disown thee with disdain.

Note, 1. Not that God had rather men were stark naught, than half Christians;
but, as if he had said, I should sooner have judged thee accordingly, and thou
would not have aggravated thy sin with Profession of Christianity, nor have
dishonored me so much by it. 2. God will disown lukewarm, worldly Hypocrites;
not all, whose Zeal is defective, and are too lukewarm, but all that have not
so much Zeal, as to prefer Christ before the World.

17. Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

17. Note; It Is like, The Ostentation of this Church came from some worldly
Prosperity; and outward, lifeless Formality in Religion, with the decay of the
Power of it. When true Religion decays in any, it is usually accompanied with
Self-Esteem, and boasting, when they should learn, not to be high-minded, but
fear. When they have turned Religion into a lifeless Image, they dance about
that Image, and honor it.

18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be
rich; and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may
see.

18. I counsel thee to seek earnestly to me for sound Understanding in the
Faith, against all Heresy; and for the Grace of Confirmation, against all
deceitful Wavering and Reserves; and for the Grace of sincere Righteousness and
Holiness, that thou bear not the shame of Hypocrisy, and halting between
Heresy, or Infidelity, and saving Truth; and for the Illumination of my
Spirit, to know the danger of Heresy and Hypocrisy.

19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and repent.

19. If I forsake you not, but show my love to you, it will be by chastening
you, to revive your Care and Zeal: If therefore you love not Chastening,
prevent it by Zeal and Reformation.

20. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

20. I have my time of offering Mercy, and desiring you to entertain it: And if
any man hear and obey this Call, I will come in by my Spirit, and take habitual
Possession of him, and have spiritual Communion with him, and he with me.

Note; Though it be not without the Grace of Christ that we open to him when he
knocks, and receive his offered special Grace; yet, in this, he lays so much
on Man, as to make our Opening, that is, our Accepting-Faith, the Condition of
his Entering for a fixed Habitation by habitual Love and Holiness. On which
account* Divines use to say, that Faith and Repentance, wrought first in
Conversion, are the Conditions or Qualifications for consequent Justification
and Sanctification.

21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
also overcame, and am set down with my Father, in his Throne.

21. To him that overcomes all the Temptations of this Life, so far as to keep
his sincere Faith, Love and Obedience to the End, I will give a Participation
in my Kingdom, Power and Glory; even as I obtained my Glory, by overcoming
Satan and the World.

Note; This expounds what is meant before, by Ruling the Nations with a Rod
of Iron, etc.

22. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the churches.

22. Note; Let every man that has an Ear and Heart, lay close to heart these
Reproofs, Warnings and Promises of Christ to these seven Churches; for it
concerns them all.

Again note that, notwithstanding all Christ's Reproofs and Threatenings, to
many of these Churches, he bids no one separate from them.

CHAP. IV.
1. AFter this I looked, and behold, a door was opened in heaven: and the first
voice which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet talking with me, which said,
Come up hither, and I will show thee things which must be hereafter.

1. After this the Vision, that I further saw, was as if a Door had been opened
into Heaven, etc.

Note, 1. Not that Heaven has a Door, but the Vision was to be suited to the
Capacity of a Soul in Flesh. 2. The Notices which advance Man's Understanding
on Earth, come all from Heaven. 2. And thither must we look and seek, if we
will know the things of God.

2. And immediately I was in the spirit: and behold, a throne was set in
heaven, and one sat on the throne.

2. And immediately I was in an Ecstasy, the Spirit acting me as above the
Body: And God revealing things according to my Capacity, I thought I saw a
Throne, the Seat of Royal, Glorious Majesty, and a Royal Person sat on the
Throne.

3. And he that sat, was, to look upon, like a jasper, and a sardine stone: and
there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald.

3. And the Power and Glory of him that sat on the Throne was represented to
me, as by the similitude of precious Stones, a Jasper, and a Sardine: And his
Glory, and faithful keeping of his Covenant, was represented to me, by the
Appearance of a Rain bow, like an Emerald in color, round about the Throne.

4. And round about the throne were four and twenty seats, and upon the seats I
saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and they had on
their heads crowns of gold.

4. Note; The Apparition, being made to him that was a Jew, was a
Representation of the Jewish Camp in ^he Wilderness, with the Tabernacle in the
midst; ^^cording to which also the Temple-Worship was ^^^med to bear some
similitude: And the Christian-Assemblies had some resemblance to that: Some
think it relates to the Church at Jerusalem, which had (say they) twenty four
Elders; say some, twelve Apostles, and twelve Elders; others that it is to the
Bishop of Jerusalem, and four and twenty City-Bishops of Judea, who use to sit
in Council with him; who yet (says Dr. H.) were then but the sole Pastors of
single Assemblies, without any other Elders under them, but were after to have
such: Others think it intimates, that all Churches should unite in such Synods
as consist of twelve Teaching Elders, and twelve Ruling Elders that are not
Teachers. Rather all Churches and Pastors are signified by twenty four. But all
these are but men's unproved thoughts, save only that in general, the Vision
appeared in resemblance of such an Assembly as is here described: And it
clearly intimates, 1. That the Elders have a proper Dignity, and Honor, and
Power, signified by their Seals, and White Raiment, and Crowns of Gold. I would
not have ignorant, proud Lads, that can but get a Lay-Patron to present them to
a Benefice, where they may live in the guilt of betraying Souls, to call
themselves these Elders, nor to feign in White Raiment that they have Crowns of
Gold.

5. And out of the throne proceeded lightnings, and thunderings, and voices:
and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the
seven spirits of God.

5. Note 1. The Glory and Terror of the heavenly Apparition is thus expressed:
From the similitude of the Temple-Worship, and more fully of the Church-Worship
and Sacred Assemblies, whence must proceed the Light of Doctrine, the Thunder
of Reproof, and just Censures, and the Voices of common Consent and Praises to
God. Whether it signify the scorching Lightnings, and Thundering^*
Excommunications of Lay-Chancellors, Officials, Surrogates, Commissaries, etc.
that use an absent Bishop's name over (not one Parish only, but) many score or
hundred Parish-Churches, I leave to the Arguments of the Affirmers.

2. The seven Lamps are expounded of the seven Spirits of God, relating, as
some suppose, to the Lamps which were continually to burn before the
Tabernacle, Exodus 17.20. and after before the Temple: And as others think, to
the seven Deacons at Jerusalem. Others think it is the seven Guardian Angels of
the Asian Churches, to whom John specially directs all this Book, though for
the use of all others.

But of this, and other such passages, the great doubt is, whether really there
be not, in the Spiritual World which John saw, such things as he describes,
and the Institutions about Tabernacle, Temple, and Church-Assembles, be not
formed to some resemblance of these? Or whether all be spoken only of the
things below, of which the superior World has no real similitude, but by
fiction?

6. And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in
the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts, full of
eyes before and behind.

6. Note; Before the Tabernacle and the Temple there was a great broad Vessel
of Water, called a Sea, for the Priests to wash in, Exodus 20.18. 1 Kings 7.23.
signifying the Purity required in the Worshippers of God; being as Crystal,
tells us, that no spots or Hypocrisy is unseen to God. (Though some make this
to signify the multitude of Worshippers.)

The four Beasts, some say, resemble the four Sta^dards and Camps of Israel in
the Wilderness, or as others, the four Evangelists: But it is like to mean the
Executioners by Providence and Miracles of Christ's Will and Power, full of
Eyes, as knowing all the Affairs of the Sons of Men about which they are
employed, called Living creatures for their executive power.

7. And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and
the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying
eagle.

7. Note; As these four agree with the Apparition in Ezekiel 1.10. in the main
(notwithstanding some small difference) so it is observable which D. Hammond
notes from Aben Ezra, that these were the Escutcheons on the four Ensigns or
Standards of the Camp of Israel, a Lion for the Camp of Judah, a Man for the
Camp of Reuben, an Ox for the Camp of Ephraim, and an Eagle for the Camp of
Dan: And an Ox and Calf are often used for the same. And these four are noted to
be the chief in their several kinds; the Lion among wild Beasts; the Ox among
the tame and serviceable; a Man among all Animals; and an Eagle among Birds. To
conjecture what God would signify by them to Israel, must needs be uncertain:
I know nothing liker than an intimation of Duty and Prophecy, that Israel
should be victorious over their Enemies, and valiant as a Lion, wise, and in
Dominion as Man, and should have a fertile and plenteous Land, signified by the
Ox, and be Seraphick and Divine in the holy Worship of God, signified by the
Eagle that mounteth Heavenward in her strength. And it is like such blessings
are hereby signified to be conferred on the Church; some fix the signification
on Angels, some on Ministers: And less probable are theirs that think Pete^,
John, Paul and Barnabas are meant, or they that apply it to the four
Evangelists, or four Patriarchs.

8. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were
full of eyes within, and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

8. Note; The Beasts resembling the Standard Bearer in the Camp, are likest to
signify both the Angels in Heaven, who glorify God's Attributes, and serve
him in the performance of his Promises to the Church; and also the Apostles,
and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors, who do their part herein on Earth.
See Isa. 6.2. of their wings.

2. Holy, holy, holy, may relate to the Trinity, but certainly signifies that
the Holiness of God is that for which he is loved and praised by Angels and
Saints. His Holiness is his Perfection, and Transcendency above all creatures,
being the end of all, to whom they are to be devoted; and consequently his
perfect contrariety to all evil.

3. The celebrating of the Praises of the most Holy God, is the uncessant work
of heavenly Spirits, and most of the work of Ministers and Church Assemblies on
Earth.

9. And when those beasts give glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sat on
the throne, who lives for ever and ever, 10. The four and twenty elders fall
down before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that lives for ever
and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, 11. Thou art worthy,
O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

9, 10, 11. Note, With the chief Angels concur all the heavenly H^st, in
magnifying the Holy, Eternal God, as shining forth in the glory of all his
works, by him, and for him, by his efficient Will, and for his complacential
Will fulfilled, they being all created, preserved and ordered. And this
heavenly work is to be imitated by the Churches on Earth, whose Pastors leading
the People must concur in the Praises of the most Holy, Everliving God, And
those Churches that are dry and scant in these Praises of God (how well soever
the Word be there preached) are defective and unlike their Pattern. These
passages are best expounded in the three first Petitions of the Lord's Prayer;
Let thy Name be hallowed, Thy Kingdom come, and Thy Will be done on Earth, as
it is in Heaven. Neither Heaven nor Earth must be left out in the Exposition.

CHAP. V.
1. ANd I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne, a book written
within, and on the backside sealed with seven seals.

1. I saw a Roll called a Book, in his hand who sat on the Throne, written on
both sides, but the Roll was sealed up with seven Seals.

Note; The Roll contained God's Decrees, as they were to be fulfilled according
to this Prophecy: And it is like they were seven Rolls together making one Book.

2. And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to
open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?

2. Note; Every Angel or Man is not worthy or meet to be the Expositor and
Messenger of God's Mysteries to Man.

3. And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to
open the book, neither to look thereon.

3. It was a work and trust too high for any mere creature in all the World:
None of them was worthy.

4. And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the
book, neither to look thereon.

4. I lamented that the creatures should, be found so unworthy, and God's
Mysteries be kept unknown.

5. And one of the elders says unto me, Weep not: behold, the lion of the
tribe of Judah, the root of David, has prevailed to open the book, and to
loose the seven seals thereof.

5. One of the Elders, that were at the Throne, comforted me, and told me that
Christ, who is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and the Son of David, and
Root of Jesse, was found worthy by the Dignity of his Person, and his Merits by
Man's Redemption, to open to the Church all the Mysteries of God, which it was
meet for Man to know, and to loose the Seals.

6. And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the throne, and of the four beasts,
and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb, as it had been slain, having
seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent forth
into all the earth.

6. Upon this glad tidings, I looked and saw Christ in the likeness of a Lamb,
wounded and bloody, as he was sacrificed, which signified that it was by the
Merit of Redemption that he had his power over all: And he seemed to have seven
Horns and Eyes for the exercise of Government, by Judgment and Victory over his
Enemies, and Illumination of his Church, and the full notice of all that
concerns his Government; which is done by the Spiritual Powers, or Angels and
Ministers, whom he sends forth from God into all the Earth: Or, as others by
the manifold Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which is his Agent or Advocate on Earth.

7. And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon
the throne.

7. He that alone was worthy, received Power from God, both to open the
Mysteries, and execute them.

8. And when he had taken the book, the four beasts, and four and twenty
elders, fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden
vials full of odours, which are the prayers of saints:

8. Note, Who were the four Living Wights (here ill translated Beasts, when one
was a Man) was before enquired, but its hard to know, only they seem to
signify some Greater than the Elders. Some Papists think they were the four
first Patriarcks; and the Elders the Councils. Its more probable than so, that
they were all the sorts of Ministers that were entrusted with the first
gathering of Churches and sealing the Gospel by Miracles, as distinct from the
fixed Church-Bishops called Elders. That is, that they were Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists and Miracle-workers as such. But all is doubtful.

2. That both the Living Wights and the Elders were men on earth, is plain by
their work here described; They are Priests that, in the sacred Assembly, do by
office Speak for and Lead the Church in offering up the Common Praises to God,
and also the Prayers of the Congregation. That there be any Angels that
resemble this office in Heaven, we cannot conclude from so obscure a Text.

Hence we see, 1. That Church Guides are the Worshippers of Jesus: 2. Though we
cannot hence prove that Gods praises must be used with harps and Musical
Instruments, they that use such have a fairer pretense hence to prove them
lawful (as doing Gods will, on earth, as John saw it resembled in Heaven) than
any can show to prove it unlawful. 3. Ministers in offering up the Churches
praise and prayers, are submediators under Christ.

9. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to
open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy
blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; 10. And have
made us unto our God, Kings and Priests: and we shall reign on the earth.

9.10. Note, 1. Christ is to be praised in the Church with a new song, or
Praises suited to his works of Redemption and his Glory, and not only with the
Jewish Psalms and Worship* (though those Psalms also may be used) 2. Though the
Collective phrase of gathering out of every nation, etc. makes some think that
it is an assembly of Glorified Saints in the heavenly Jerusalem, called the
General Assembly of the first born, and the Spirits of the perfected just that
is here primarily meant, it seems more probable that it is the Church on earth
alone: And that it is the first ages by Faith, and the following also, by some
experience of the Churches deliverance by Constantine, that mention reigning on
the earth: The Saints departed indeed shall judge the World. To be Kings and
Priests to God, is to be endowed with Power, and Honor, and Holiness, and
employed accordingly in Gods administrations and Holy Worship.

11. And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne,
and the beasts, and the elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands;

11. As I looked I seemed to hear innumerable Angels, joining with the Living
Wights, and Elders, in the Praises of Christ for man's Redemption.

Note, That this signifies the multitude of believers, or of Ministers through
all the World, is not to be proved. But that it is meant properly of Angels is
most probable. And it is to be noted that when the Living Wights are but four,
and the Elders but twenty four, the Angels that praise Christ are millions and
numberless. So Heb. 12.24. Whence note, that its ignorance that calls God more
severe then merciful, because its but a few of this World that are sanctified
and glorified; when as the vast and glorious Regions above seem, to Reason and
by scripture, to have so many millions of Angels, that its like the damned are
very few to them.

The greatest Kingdom is not near so great and glorious, in comparison of one
Jail and one Gallows, as the Heavenly Regions are in comparison of this spot
called Earth, or the place of execution called Hell.

12. Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing.

12. These Angels joined with the Churches in the Praises of Christ, ascribing
to him, in their Praise; all Power and Glory, etc. as deserved by his
Redemption of the World by his death.

Note, Those Angels that join with us in Christ's praises, and are present in
our assemblies, and Guardians of us and them, and pitch their tents about us,
and bear us up in their hands, and rejoice in our Conversion, and are
ministering Spirits for our good, are not so ignorant of us and our concerns and
our prayers, as some imagine. We have many ignorant men that think they know
more of our case here below than the Angels do; when they scarce know so much
as may keep them from being seducers, and deviders, of the Church. They are
sure but ill Guardians who know as little of our affairs as these men think.
Christ says that the least Christians have their Angels who behold the face of
God; And why are they called their Angels, and what do they for them with God,
if they know not our condition and concerns? And though this will not warrant
Praying to them, which themselves in this book seem to disown; yet we ought not
to think that mistake of those ancient fathers and Churches to be greater than
it was, who thought that, as Pastors on earth offer up the Congregations
prayers and praises to God, so there is an answerable office of Angels to offer
them, as from them to Christ, who offers them to God the Father: And who
thought, as a man might pray a Minister to pray for him, so he might do an
Angel, though it be an error, one is no more Idolatry than the other.

13. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth and under the
earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying,
blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

13. And as all the World, which was cursed for man's sin, was according to each
Creatures capacity redeemed from that curse by Christ (to be performed in due
time) so I seemed to hear all that part of the World, that belonged to man, to
magnify Christ and God by him, for the Worlds Redemption: Ascribing to him all
perfection, Blessing, Honor, Glory, Power, etc.

Note, Whether there be any reasonable Creatures in the sea is unknown to us:
The reasonable Creatures praise God and Christ understandingly; the rest
demonstratively and objectively. Those under the earth are the Antipodes on the
other ^ide of the earth.

14. And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders fell down,
and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever.

14 And the four Living Wights, who are as the four Cherubi^s mentioned in
Ezekiel, joined with the four and twenty Elders, (who answer the Jews
Sanhedrims,) that is, with the Churches in the praises of God and of the
Redeemer.

Note, If these four Cherubims signified only Angels, it is no wonder that they
join with the Church in the Praises of Christ when they are of the same society
with us, though the higher parts,

CHAP. VI.
1. ANd I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard as it were the
noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and see.

1. When Christ opened the divine decrees, in a noise like thunder, I heard one
of the four Living Wights, or Cherubims, calling me to come and see.

2. And I saw, and behold, a white horse; and he that sat on him had a bow, and
a crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.

2. Note, Some take this to be Christ going forth to convert men by the Gospel:
Others to be Christ, beginning his Judgments on the Jews: Others to be the
Roman power by their conquests preparing for further execution on the Jews.

3. And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come
and see.

3. The second Cherub called me to see, when the second seal was opend.

4. And there went out another horse, that was red: and power was given to him
that sat thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one
another: and there was given unto him a great sword.

4. God proceeded further toward his dreadful executions, and gave up the
World, and specially the Jews, to divisions, and unpeaceable tumults, and to
kill and ruin one another.

5. And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come
and see. And I beheld, and lo, a black horse; and he that sat on him, had a
pair of balances in his hand.

5. God yet proc^eded to the next judgment, which was famine; signified by one
on a black horse with balance to weigh food, to show its scarcity.

6. And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat
for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not
the oil, and the wine.

6. A man's day wages for labor shall buy but bread enough for one man: There
shall be a scarcity of the necessary part of food; specially in Judea.

7. And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
beast say, Come and see. 8. And I looked, and behold, a pale horse; and his
name that sat on him was Death, and hell followed with him: and power was given
unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with
hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.

7.8. Judgment shall proceed from scarcity to death and ruins by famine, wars
and plagues, which shall destroy a great part of the Jews (at least.)

9. And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar, the souls of
them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held.

9. Note; The heavenly Apparition relating to the Church on Earth, uses the
name of an Altar, and I think justifies the use of it now.

2. The Souls of Martyrs live in Heaven, and therefore so do other Saints;
which proves the Immortality of Souls. To be under the Altar, is to be in the
heavenly Communion with them that offer praise to God: And to be commemorated
at the Altar by the Church on Earth, that prays for deliverance from
Persecutors.

3. There be not only Praises, but Prayers in Heaven, and that for Justice on
Persecutors on Earth; therefore they know that their Blood is not revenged.

4. How then are miserable Persecutors like to escape, when Heaven and Earth
pray against them?

10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them, that dwell on the earth?

10. Note; This was not from uncharitableness, but conformity to God's
Holiness, Justice and Truth: The Revenge desired being the Vindication of God's
Holiness and Truth, which he had promised.

11. And white robes were given unto every one of them, and it was said unto
them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellow servants also, and their brethren, that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled.

11. They were clothed in White, which then signified Righteousness and
Dignity, in acknowledgment of their Fidelity; but the Revenge must be delayed
till the rest were killed; especially, say some, by the Jews, that must kill
more, that on that Generation might come ^ll the righteous Blood shed, from
Abel, till the last.

Note; God often delayeth his Judgments but while more, and greater, sins prepare
for heavier Plagues.

One Reason why we are not presently avenged, and delivered from Persecutors,
is because more must yet suffer, before they are ripe for signal Vengeance. Our
Souls may be under the Altar in Heaven, clothed in White, before that day of
Revenge.

12. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was a great
earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon
became as blood; 13. And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a
fig tree casts her untimely figs when she is shaken of a mighty wind.

12, 13. The great Calamities that were to follow (on the Jews, say some, and
on the World, say others) were so dismal, that they were represented to me, as
the darkning of the Sun, and the Moon looking like Blood, and the Stars falling
from Heaven; as if Heaven and Earth were dissolving.

14. And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together; and every
mountain and Island were moved out of their place.

14. And it was represented to me, as the Dissolution of Heaven, and Subversion
of the Earth.

Note; Some think, this is only of the Subversion of Judea. Others (because
that was done already) that it was the Overthrow of the Heathen Powers by
Constantine. Others, that it was the shaking of the Empire by the Goths. And
others, that it is the last Dissolution of the World.

15. And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman hid
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains; 16. And said to the
mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: 17. For the great day of his
wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?

15, 16, 17. Note, 1. If this was meant of the Ruin of the Jews, it was indeed
exceeding dreadful: and dreadful have God's Executions since been on Heathens,
and other Enemies of Christ.

Note 2. Greatness, nor Numbers, will save none from Misery and Terror, when
the day of God's revenging Justice is come, which they would not before
believe. Any sort of hope of Deliverance would be then welcome: but all help
will fail, and all hopes will be in vain, to them that know not the day of
Grace.

Proud men are able now to oppress the Innocent, to scorn the Faithful, and to
domineer in the Ruins and Blood of Saints; calumniating them, as the vilest
Malefactors: But wicked Princes, Lords and Judges, and bloody Soldiers, will
then all cry out, [ The great day of his Wrath is come, and who is able to
stand?]

CHAP. VII.
1. ANd after these things, I saw four angels standing on the four corners of
the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow
on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.

1. God's Decree for the suspending of his dreadful Executions (specially on
Judea) was declared to me, by the Apparition of four Angels, standing on the
four corners of the Earth, who were to hold the four Winds from blowing to the
hurt of any Creature.

Note, 1. The Winds are called four, according to popular Opinion.

Note, 2. By this, it is not unlikely that the four Beasts are so numbered, with
respect to the four Quarters of the Earth, signifying the Executioners of
Providence.

2. And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the
living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was
given to hurt the earth and the sea, 3. Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the
sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their
foreheads.

2. Note, 1. The East, where the Sun rises, is noted in Prophesies, as the
way, whence we are to expect our Blessings, from Christ, the Rising Sun: whence
came the old Ceremony of worshipping, in the Chruch, only toward the East.

2. The Seal of God is, his gracious, sealed Commission.

3. The loud Voice and Cry signifies, God's great care to preserve the
Faithful.

4. The Seal in the Forehead is, God's Notification of those whom he will
preserve. In Ezekiel. 9.4. it is as by the Letter, Tau. But the Text seems to
mean no more than that God made known, to the destroying Angels, every one that
was to be preserved.

4. And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed, an
hundred and forty and four thousand, of all the tribes of the children of
Israel. 5. Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve
thousand. 6. Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Nephthali were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed
twelve thousand. 7. Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were sealed
twelve thousand. 8. Of the tribe of Zebulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were
sealed twelve thousand.

4, 5, 6, 7, 8. All these were to be preserved from the Destruction coming.

Note, 1. Not that there were just twelve thousand of each Tribe; but that the
number was great in it self, though small, as to the number of them that
perished. 2. Joseph is put for Ephraim, and Dan is left out; some think, the
Tribe being almost worn out; or for what other reason, is unknown.

9. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number,
of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands:

9. And it was not only the believing Jews that were to be preserved, but the
Gentile Christians, in a multitude innumerable, who worship God joyfully in
holy Assemblies, celebrating honorably the Praises of Christ, represented by
their Spirits magnifying God and the Lamb joyfully in Heaven.

10. And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits on
the throne, and unto the Lamb.

10. They praised God, and their Redeemer, as the Author of Salvation.

Note; The Heretics of those times (as such do now) accused these great
Multitudes, and separated from them, as unworthy of their Communion, while they
were unworthy of Church Communion themselves.

11. And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders, and
the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God.
12. Saying, Amen: blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and
honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

11, 12. And I saw the multitude of Believers (or Ministers) represented by all
the Angels, joining with the four living Wights, and with the twenty four
Elders, who represented the Church of the Christian Jews, celebrating the
Praises of God and the Lamb; ascribing to him everlasting Blessing, Glory, etc.

13. And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are
arrayed in white robes? and whence came they? 14. And I said unto him, Sir, thou
know. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

13, 14. And one of the Elders, in order to inform me, asked me whether I knew
what those were that stood arrayed in White: And I told him, that I knew not;
but desired him, who knew, to tell me. And he told me, that they were such as
had suffered great Tribulation for Christ, and were now accepted as righteous
before him, through the Merits of his Blood; and were dignified by him.

15. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night
in his temple: and he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them. 16.
They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun light
on them, nor any heat.

15, 16. Note; It is not the least difficulty in this Book, to know when it
speaks really of what is done in Heaven, and when of what is done on Earth,
and when of both. This Text seems to speak chiefly of what is really done in
Heaven. To expound it only of the Liberty, that came to the Christians after
the Destruction of Jerusalem, is improbable, when the ten Persecutions
succeeded. To expound it of the Advancement of the Church by Constantine, must
make it to speak only of the Species of Christians that formerly suffered, and
of no individual persons, but those that were then alive; and is hardly
believed by them that believe the reported Voice from Heaven, Hodie venenum
funditur in Ecclesiam; and that know how quickly Papacy and Church-Corruption
sprang out of it. And yet, to exclude all inferior Church-mercies from this
Vision, seems also unsafe.

17. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and
shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: And God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes.

17. The Churches on Earth shall have some Times of quiet Assembling, and
learning of Christ and his Ministers, the pure Word of Life, and Religion shall
flourish, and God shall give them some Respite and Intermission, or Ease from
Persecution (under Vespasian and Titus.) But this is but a small Fore-tast of
the heavenly Glory, wherein these words shall be fulfilled; where indeed, they
shall go out of God's Temple no more, and shall have all Tears wiped away.

CHAP. VIII.
1. ANd when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about
the space of half an hour.

1. There was a little space, after the opening of the seventh Seal, before I
saw or heard the Revelation of it.

2. And I saw the seven angels which stood before God, and to them were given
seven trumpets.

2. Seven Angels were appointed to publish, as by Trumpet, the Judgments
following. Some think that the Temple-Worship is here described, where the
people without prayed in silence, while the Priest within officiated, and the
Trumpets sounded: Which the following words favor.

3. And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and
there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers
of all saints upon the golden altar, which was before the throne.

3. Another Angel represented the High Priest, whose Office was, to offer
Incense at the Altar, and to offer up Prayers for the People: To which use, he
had a Golden Censer, and a Golden Altar, to show the honor of the Christian
Ministry and Worship; which is all accepted, through Christ's Intercession.

4. And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the saints,
ascended up before God, out of the angel's hand.

4. And God received, as grateful, the Prayers of his People, as offered by the
Ministers, and by Christ.

5. And the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and
cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and thundrings, and lightnings,
and an earthquake.

5. And upon the Acceptance of the Saints Prayers, followed the kindling of
God's avenging Judgments on the Earth.

6. And the seven angels, which had the seven trumpets, prepared themselves to
sound.

6. Then did the Messengers of God's Judgments prepare to publish, or sound,
them forth.

7. The first angel sounded, and there followed hail, and fire mingled with
blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of trees was burnt
up, and all green grass was burnt up.

7. And the Judgment published by the first Angel, began with Destruction on
the Countries, such as usually accompany Wars, which lay wast Land and Houses.

8. And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with
fire was cast into the sea; and the third part of the sea became blood: 9. And
the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and
the third part of the ships were destroyed.

8, 9. That no place should escape, the next degree of Judgment was represented
by a Mountain of Fire, cast into the Sea, which turned the third part of the
Sea into Blood, etc. signifying increased Wars and Bloodshed; by Sea and Land.

The particular Signification Expositors are utterly disagreed in Dr. H. takes
it for the Bloodshed by Insurrections in Galilee: Others, for the Barbarians
ruining the Roman Empire: Others, for Heresies in the Church: Others, for the
Bishops Strife for Superiority.

10. And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven,
burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and
upon the fountains of waters: 11. And the name of the star is called wormwood;
and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the
waters, because they were made bitter.

10, 11. And next, the Jugdment was, the infecting of the Rivers, and Waters,
with mortal Bitterness, by a Star from Heaven, that was mortally bitter,
falling into them. This signifies the further extensive progress of the
Punishment.

Some take this for the Fall of a great Captain of the Jews: And some, for one
of their false, seducing Prophets: And some, for the Fall of the Western
Empire: And some, for Arrius: Some, for Pelagius: Some, for Mahomet: and some,
for Heretics in general.

12. And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smitten,
and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars; so as the
third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it,
and the night likewise.

12. On the Sounding of the fourth Angel, the progress of the Judgment was
represented to me, as the darkning of the third part of th Sun, Moon and Stars;
signifying the fall of some great Powers, Ecclesiastical or Civil.

Some expound it of Vespasians's destroying a third part of the Cities of
Judea: Some of the beginning of the Siege of Jerusalem: Some of Totila's
sacking of Rome: Some, of the Corruption of Prelacy, before Popery: Some, of
Arrianism: Some, of the general Corruption of the Church by Popery.

Lira takes the four Angels to be the four Heretics (as he does the four
Beasts to be the four Patriarchs.)

13. And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying
with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe to the inhabiters of the earth, by reason of the
other voices of the trumpet of the three angels which are yet to sound.

13. This punishment extended but to a third part. But I heard an Angel flying
in the midst of Heaven, lowdly crying, woe, woe, woe for the greater plagues that
were yet to some.

Some expound this out of Josephus of one Jesus Son of Ananias that, for many
years before the siege, went about pronouncing this woe: Others diverse other
ways.

CHAP. IX.
1 ANd the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the
earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit. 2. And he opened the
bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great
furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened, by reason of the smoke of the
pit.

1, 2. Note; By this, some say, is meant that Jewish Seducer that headed the
turbulent Zealots in the Siege of Jerusalem: Others apply it to Arrius; most
Protestants take it for the Pope: Some take it for Christ that had the Keys of
Death and Hell, descending to let loose these destroyers. And the Smo^k is by
Protestants mostly taken for the obscuring of holy Doctrine and Manners; but by
the first for the Confusions in Jerusalem by the Zealots (as the murderers were
called.)

3. And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth; and unto them was
given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power. 4. And it was commanded
them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any gr^^^ thing,
neither any tree; but only tho^ ^en which have not the seal of God in the^^
foreheads.

3, 4. Note; That this was an increase of God's Plagues, is clear; and that it
was to be by Soldiers, that were not to make an utter desolation, but to
captivate and punish the Enemies of Christianity. But the particular sense is
controverted. Some take it for the foresaid rage of the Zealots in Jerusalem;
some for the beginning of the Roman Assaults; some for Constantine's Dejection
of the Heathens, who yet did not kill them, but give them a disgraced Liberty
of Idolatry; some take it for the first rising of the Saracens and Mahometans;
and some-take them for Devils that are called Locusts; some for Heretics; and
most Protestants for the Papal Clergy and Friars; and these by [ hurting] mean
[deceiving.]

5. And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they
should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the torment of a
scorpion when he strikes a man. 6. And in those days shall men seek death, and
shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

5, 6. The Torment of Christ's Enemies shall be worse than Death, so that they
shall wish for Death, and not obtain it. Some by this understand the Famine in
Jerusalem, and the Zealots tormenting the Inhabitants, to make them confess
where their Bread or Food was. Others otherwise.

7. And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses, prepared unto battle;
and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as
the faces of men, 8. And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth
were as the teeth of lions. 9. And they had brest-plates as it were
breast-plates of iron, and the sound of their wings was as the sound of
charrets of many horses running to battle. 10. And they had tails like unto
scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt
men five months. 11. And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the greek
tongue has his name Apollyon.

7, 8, 9, 10, 11. That this is the description of a terrible Army of cruel men,
seems plain, but who they were, and when, is not so plain: Whether the
foresaid Jewish Zealots, (who got out of the Country into the City, and used
the Inhabitants cruelly:) Or whether it was the Roman Army, or the Arabian
Mahometans (which many had rather think, than that all this obscure Vision
spoke but of things already done, and known to John, and those of his time, if
it was in Domitians Days.) And the Abadddo^ their King, both sorts think was
the Devil; though some say, it is Christ, and some an Angel that had power to
let out such destroyers. Five months being the just time of the Zealots Rage,
before Titus came against the City, confirms the first sort of Expositors in
their Opinion: But, as I said, most Protestant Writers take this King to be the
Pope, or the Devil as acting him, and the Locusts to be the Friars and Clergy
and all their tormentings and destroyings to be spiritual: But it is hard to
think that Deceiving should be meant by such tormenting, as made men wish for
death: For their Excommunications and Persecutions cannot be meant, because
those are more against good men, than the bad; and though some of their
Doctrines be uncomfortable, they have more that flatter men in sin.

12. One woe is past, and behold, there come two woes more hereafter.

12. Thus one of the three Woes reserved to the three last Trumpets, is past,
and two follow.

13. And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of
the golden altar which is before God, 14. Saying to the sixth angel, which had
the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates.

13. Those that expound all this of the destruction of Jerusalem, think that by
Euphrates is meant Rome, and that the four Angels there bound, was the Roman
Legions which Vispasian had stopped, till he saw what would become of the Empire,
when Galba, Otho, and Vitellius were killed, and he was chosen Emperor; and
then he went on to the Siege; Or else that the Syrian Legions, having marched
as far as Euphrates, were there stopped. But this exposition has much said
against it: Especially that these were then things past, and that v. 20. the
men are described as gross Idolaters, which the Jews then were not.

Many others expound it of the Arabians and Turks, who dwelt beyond Euphrates,
out of the Roman territories, till they invaded and spoiled them.

15. And the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour and a
day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.

15. Some gather from [an hour, a day, a month and a year) that from the first
great invasion and taking of Babylon to the fall of the Turks, it will be
exactly in 1696, that is, twelve years hence: which time will expound. The four
Angels some take for four Mohammedan Generals, and parts, before they united in
one. And by slaying the third part of men, their cruel devastations and
successes.

16. And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand
thousand: and I heard the number of them.

16. The number of the Roman Army say some: But most say the number of the
Mahometans was exceeding great, like locusts over spreading all the Countries.

17. And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them, having
brest-plates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and the heads of the
horses were as the heads of lions, and out of their mouths issued fire and
smoke, and brimstone.

17. They appeared terribly as fitted to destroy: But some expound it of their
false doctrine.

18. By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the
smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.

18. Multitudes say some killed by the Romans; and, say most others, the
exceeding great numbers killed by the Mahometans, Saracens and Tarks.

19. For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails
were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt.

19. They are both fierce and venomous, and every way destructive. Some expound
mouth and tail, of the front and the rear of their Armies.

20. And the rest of the men, which were not killed by these plagues, yet
repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils,
and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood, which neither
can see, nor hear, nor walk: 21. Neither repented they of their murders, nor of
their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.

20. 21. To take this for the Gnostics, and the Spiritual Idolatry of the
Jews, seems very unlikely. The Mahometans, say others, made the destroying of
Idols their chief profession, and have not only rooted out image worship from
the Eastern Christians, but turned since many great Kingdoms and Empires from
Heathenism to Mahometanism: But they repented not under those destructions.

CHAP. X.
1. ANd I saw another mighty Angel, come down from Heaven, clothed with a
cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun,
and his feet as pillars of fire.

1. The circumstances describe the Glory of this Angel, which some take for
Christ, and some for a proper Angel.

2. And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon
the sea, and his left foot on the earth.

2. The plain sense is, that he showed the universality of his commissioned
power (sea and land comprehending the world below;) and that-the Book was the
Decree of God committed to him to execute. But the conjectured sense is
manifold: Some say it was Gods Decree to destroy Jerusalem, and that Sea and
Land was Galilee and Judea: And others that it was Gods Decree to destroy the
Roman heathen power, and deliver his Servants: And others that it was his
Decree to destroy the Papacy, and reform and deliver the Church: And others
that it was his Decree to destroy all oppressing powers, and set up Christ's
thousand years reign in Righteousness: And others that it was his Decree to end
the World, and come in judgment.

3. And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had cried,
seven thunders uttered their voices.

3. His terrible Aspect and Cry, was to prepare for a progressive Increase of
the Plagues, signified by seven Thunders, which are louder than Trumpets.

4. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write:
and I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, seal up those things which the
seven thunders uttered, and write them not.

4. Say some, Because the Plagues are so grievous, that (on Jerusalem, say
some; on the Empire, say others; on the Papacy, say others) they shall be known
by experience, and not by words. Therefore write them not (at all, say some; or
not yet, say others.)

5. And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lifted up
his hand to heaven, 6. And swear by him that lives for ever and ever, who
created heaven and the things that therein are, and the earth and the things
that therein are, and the sea and the things that are therein, that there
should be time no longer. 7. But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel,
when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he has
declared to his servants the prophets.

5, 6, 7. He swear by God, that there should be no longer delay; that is, say
some, of the Destruction of the Jews, but till Adrian's time; or, as others, of
the Ruin of the Roman Empire; or, as others, of the Churches Deliverance from
Popery and Persecution; or, as others, that there shall be no longer Duration
of this World: But that, at the seventh Trumpet, God's decreed Judgments shall
be accomplished. Or, as Lira, that the Arrian Heresy should no longer prosper.

8. And the voice which I heard from heaven spoke unto me again, and said, Go
and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which stands
upon the sea, and upon the earth. 9. And I went unto the angel, and said unto
him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up, and
it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.

8, 9. The Voice bid me take the Book, etc. And I asked the Angel for it; who
bid me eat it, etc. It shall be pleasant to thee, to know what will be as News;
but bitter to know such heavy things: or, it will be sweet to thee, to
sore-know the Churches Deliverance; but bitter, to know the dreadful Judgments
that effect it, (against the Jews, say some; the Roman Empire, say others; the
Papal Church, say others, etc.)

10. And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up, and it
was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was
bitter.

10. The Mercy revealed in it, was sweet; but the dreadful Judgments of
Bloodshed, bitter.

11. And he said unto me, Thou must prophecy again before many peoples, and
nations, and tongues, and kings.

11. Say some, When Titus has destroyed Jerusalem, there is more for thee to
prophecy of, which many following Emperors, and their Armies, will do against
them, especially Adrian, to finish their Destruction. Or, as others, There are
yet greater, and more dreadful things to be told thee, against many Nations and
Kingdoms. Or, as others. The Work of Prophecy, or preaching the Gospel,
suppressed by the Pope, and his Prelates, shall be revived again, and prosper,
before the end.

CHAP. XI.
1. ANd there was given me a r^ed like unto a rod, and the angel stood, saying,
Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship
therein.

1. Say some, to measure the Temple and the Altar-places, as reserved from
Adrian's building an Idol-Temple, which, say they, he did only in the Outer
Court. Say others, Measure the Church, which shall be reduced to a Conformity
to the Word of God, after all its Pollutions by Popery. Or, Measure it,
signifies, that the Church will be a small and measurable thing under the
Papacy, and even obscured, but not forsaken of God.

2. But the court which is without the temple, leave out, and measure it not;
for it is given unto the Gentiles; and the holy city shall they tread under
foot forty and two months.

2. Say some, the outer Court, and the City was rebuilt by Adrian, called
Aelia, so the Gentiles to live in, and a Temple built for Jupiter, and so
continued three years and a half, as Antiocbus profaned it, Dan. 7.25. Say
others, The outer Court and the City left to the Gentiles, is that great part
of the visible Church left under the Papacy to such gross Idolatry, as that it
has but the name of Christian, as ^loathing restored Gentil^sme, and is
rejected of God. Some take the 42 months literally, for a certain time of three
years and a half; and some for uncertain time, Christ was three years and a
half, in his ministerial labor. And this number is five times here recited:
Therefore like to be strictly meant. Some old Fathers and some Papists
understand it strictly of the reign of an Antichrist, which they think is yet
to come: some of the time of the Papal reign, which they say will be 1260 years
beginning between 365. and 455. and ending between 1625, and 1715: in which
space Babylon will fall. Others state the time differently.

3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.

3. Note, There is great diversity of opinions who these witnesses are: And yet
most Protestants think that their time is past, or the most of it, and this
prophecy fullfilled: And Prophecies use to be plain when they are fulfilled.
Some new men say that they were the two Churches in Jerusalem, of the Jewish
and the Greek Language, and their two Bishops, who preached all that time
against the sins of Jews and Gentiles: For they think that the Jews and Greeks,
not understanding the same Language, had in Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome,
Alexandria, and other great Cities, two Churches and Bishops* Others, that the
two witnesses are Enoch and Elias, that shall come when Antichrist comes.
Others, that they are the Old and New Testament, which the Papacy shall oppose;
or, as others, the Preachers of the Old and New Testament, named two, because
but sew, but yet enough to promote the Reformation. Brightman says, It is the
Scriptures, and the Assemblies of the Faithful. Others, that it is the Godly
Magistracy and Ministry, which the Papacy will cast down. Others, that God will
hereafter send two, with the Spirit of Enoch and Elias, in whom all this shall
be literally fulfilled: Others, that it is the Martyrs that have in several
times opposed Popery to the death; Called two in allusion to many old couples
of Witnesses, Moses and Aaron, Caltb and Joshua, Ezra and Nehemiah, Haggai and
Zachary, Zerubbabel and Joshua, (to which Zech. 4.11. this Text specially
relates) Moses and Elias on the Mount, etc.

Clothed in Sackcloth, is doing their Office in a time of great affliction: And
all this, some think, may be applied to diverse couples, that God has used in
diverse times and parts of his Church: As to the Waldenses and Albigenses; to
John Hus and Jerome of Prague, to John Frederick Duke of Saxony and Philip
Landgrave of Hassia, long imprisoned by Charles the fifth, and after delivered;
to the Lutherans and the reformed; to King Edward 6. and his Uncle Protector
Duke of Somerset, etc. Even as Christ sent out his Disciples by two and two;
Paul and Barnabas, etc. Lira's conceit that Silverius and Mennas were the two
witnesses against the Eutychians is vain.

4. These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the
God of the earth.

4. These are resembled to the two mentioned, Zech. 4. These are as Olive
Branches that empty themselves into the Lamps, even the Servants of the Lord of
the World for his Church.

5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner
be killed.

5. If any will persecute or silence them, God will revenge their cause; it
refers to Elias that brought down fire from Heaven to destroy the Captains and
their fifties, 2. Kings 1.10. and to Moses, Number. 16. Or say others, The word in
their mouths shall be as fire against all false Doctrines and Corruptions.

6. These have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their
prophecy: and have power over waters, to turn, them to blood, and to smite the
earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

6. And the Power that God gave their Ministry and reforming endeavors, and
the revenge that God will use against their persecutors, were expressed to me,
as resembling Elias, whose prayer stopped the rain for three years and a half,
and the plagues which God by Moses inflicted on Egypt: Christ intimating this,
Matthew. 17. When Moses the chief Lawgiver, and Elias the chief Prophet, were
the two great witnesses of his Glory. And it is notable that Godly Magistrates,
and Godly Ministers, have usually prospered together, and fallen together, and
Magistracy and Ministry been together corrupted.

7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast, that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them, and kill them. 8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street
of the great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our
Lord was crucified.

7, 8. Note, Christ's witnesses, (Holy Magistrates and Ministers,) shall be
marvellously preserved, till they have finished their Testimony, and they have
done their work. And then they may be destroyed by the Servants of the Devil,
and exposed to common scorn, and perhaps be denied buryall, in the places where
they preached and were wonderfully blessed, and their enemies punished. And this
will seem* to carnal men, to be Gods disowning them, and all that they did: But
the same sort of Men shall be raised again, and revive their work with more
success, and again silence the deluded insulting enemies.

These words [ where our Lord was crucified] seem to favor their Exposition,
who apply all this to Jerusalem. But most Protestants take it for the Roman
state of Papal corruption. And some by their carcasses say, is meant the dead
carcass of the Scripture, or Religion, or Assemblies, which only is left among
them. But it seems to me to mean persons: And whether the same thing, as this
killing and reviving the witnesses, may not be done at Jerusalem, and
elsewhere, again and again in several ages, (the Church, having had its days
and night,) I yet know not.

9. And they of the people, and kindreds and tongues, and nations, shall see
their dead bodies, three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in graves.

9. Say some, They shall literally be cast out inhumanely unburyed; say others,
They shall be politically slain, deposed, silenced, imprisoned, and cast by as
dead and useless. And not only their persecuting enemies, but the deluded
rabble and people, shall see their oppression and insult over them, and not
suffer them to be restored, or honored.

10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

10. The enemies of the Church, and the ungodly rabble, shall triumph and
rejoice together in their revenge and conquest of these Prophets, and that in
the revengeful sense of their own suffering by them, whose preaching was a
torment to them, who by Godly Magistrates also had been punished or restrained
from their sin.

Note, 1. Oh how madly do the wicked rejoice, for their victory against the men
that would have saved them. 2. One of the great causes of the violence of
Silencers and Persecutors is, the remembrance of their own sufferings by godly
Magistrates and Ministers, by Punishments and Reformation.

11. And after three days and an half, the spirit of life from God entered into
them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them which saw
them.

11. Either the same men, or men of the same Spirit and Office, were restored
to the same Power and Works to the great wonder of good men, and the great
consternation of the bad.

12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld
them.

12. The Voice of Christ, say some; of the chief Rulers, say others: Come up
hither, that is, say some, to Heaven as the reward of their former Service, as
Christ ascended in a cloud, and as Moses was called away and buried by God, and
Elias carried up, Moses not seeing what Joshua must see, and Elias being only
translated from a wicked Generation before Jehu executed God's Judgments on
them; so Magistrates and Ministers, that do great things for the Church, are
usually taken up to Heaven before they see the desired issue, which is left to
their Successors: Not David, but Solomon, must build the Temple. Or, as others,
come up into a state of greater prosperity and peace, which is as a Heaven in
comparison of their Persecution: Or, as most Protestants, come now into the
desired state of the visible Church reformed from Popery and Impiety. Their
advancement conv^nced some, and terrified others of their Adversaries.

13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the
City fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; and the
remnant* were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven:

13. Say some, Adrian rooted out those Jews that did not turn Christians, and
set up the Image of a Swine at the Gate, to put them in despair; upon which the
rest turned Christians, and glorified God.

Say others, nine parts of Rome were destroyed before, and under the Papacy
only the tenth part of old Rome was left, and that fell by this Earthquake: Say
others, the first stirs by Preaching, Disputing and War about Religion, quickly
cast down the tenth part of the Roman Church, and then many others turned
Protestants: Some think, it was the fall of old Heathen Rome; and some think
that the killing of the Witnesses (by Papal Cruelty) is yet to come, and that
Popery shall be restored a few years, and then fall for ever. It seems to
relate to the case of Elijah and Eli^ha, after whose time the House of Ahab
dreadfully fell by Jehu.

14. The second woe is past, and behold, the third woe comes quickly.

14. Note; Thus far some think that the Revelation showed John nothing but what
was done many years before, and visible to all men there, that is, that all was
but the destruction of the Jews; and that of these three last Woes, the first
was by the Zealots, the second by Titus, (in which, says Josephus, eleven
hundred thousand persons were killed by Sword and Famine, besides the Captives
carried away;) The third by Adrian, when the Faction of Barchochiba was cast
out of Jerusalem, and were pursued, in which, some say, five hundred thousand
were killed, some say eight hundred thousand, and some twelve hundred thousand.

Others say that all the Woes respected later times.

15 And the seventh angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven,
saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

15. The foresaid new Expositors take this for the Triumph of the Church for
the Jews destruction, and the ceasing of their Persecution, and the uniting of
the Jew and Gentile Christians in one Church at Jerusalem, where Adrian gave
them that freedom by which they prospered.

Others think that this Verse speaks of the Christian Emperors owning
Christianity, and putting down Heathenism: Others think it speaks of the great
Success of the Reformation against Popery: Others think it speaks of Christ's
thousand years Reign: And others think it speaks of the last Judgment. I see
not why we may not take it for the flourishing of the Gospel in the Catholic
Church, begun when Persecution abated, but most notably promoted by Constantine.

16. And the four and twenty elders, which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces, and worshipped God, 17. Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord
God almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to
thee thy great power, and have reigned. 18. And the nations were angry, and thy
wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that
thou should give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints,
and them that fear thy name, small and great, and should destroy them which
destroy the earth.

16, 17, 18. The twenty four Bishops of Judea, say some: Rather, the Ministers
of the Catholic Church, represented by four and twenty Elders in the Vision;
or the whole Church, say others: And those in Heaven, say others. The Reign
mentioned is variously expounded, as aforesaid; 1. As against the Jews. 2. As
against the Heathen Emperors. 3. As against the Pope, by the Reformation. 4. As
of the Fall of Mahometanism, and the Turkish Empire. 5. As of the Millenium,
and the Resurrection and Judgment that shall be then. 6. As of the last
Judgment.

19. And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his
temple the ark of his testament, and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thundrings, and an earthquake, and great hail.

19. The Vision of the opened Temple in Heaven signifies, the Freedom given to
the Gospel against Persecutors and Corrupters; and the pure Preaching and
Profession of it, and God's owning his Covenant and Church, by his eminent
Blessing: and the Lightnings, etc. signify the great Manifestation of Christ's
Power, for his Church, in the Commotions and Changes in the World, and his
Judgments on their Enemies, as follows. (But in what Instances and Periods of
Time, Expositors differ, as aforesaid.

CHAP. XII.
1. ANd there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun,
and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars.

1. Some Popes, and their Flatterers, have said that, by the Woman in Heaven,
is meant, the Pope, and Church of Rome in its Power; and by the Sun is meant,
their spiritual Power, as Key-bearers of Heaven; and by the Moon is meant, all
Princes Secular Power as under the feet of the Papal Church, at least, in order
to the ends of the spiritual Power; by which he may, if they deserve it,
excommunicate and depose them.

By others is understood the Christian Church, now raised to Honor, and
flourishing in Grace and Wisdom, and having worldly Prosperity as a lower part
of her Blessing; or, say others, trampling on Wealth, and worldly things, with
a holy Contempt: And known by this Ensign of Honor, that the twelve Apostles
were its Founders, under Christ; and that still they hold fast the Apostolical
Doctrine, and depart not from it by humane deprivations, or by heretical
Seduction and Corruption. This is a Crown of Glory to the pure Church, being
not yet seduced from Christian, Apostolic Simplicity.

2. And she being with child, cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be
delivered.

2. She labored with earnest desire to propagate Christianity through the
World. Some refer this to the Jewish Church desiring Christ's Nativity; but
most, to the labor of Ministers to spread the Gospel; and some, specially, to
the Conversion of the Roman Empire.

3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold, a great red
dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads.

3. The Devil appeared in the shape of a great red Dragon (specially Mars, whom
the Heathen Romans took for their special God.) His seven Heads and Crowns
signify his great Power, especially at Rome, the City that had seven Hills,
and ruled in the Earth: and the ten Horns are the Kingdoms or Provinces of the
Roman Empire.

4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them
to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born.

4. By his Tail, say many, is meant, his Subtilty; by Heretics he corrupted a
third part of Christians; which, says Dr. H. was by Simon Magus, and the
Gnostics: Say others, by all the Swarm of Heresies. ( Lira says, All this is
spoken of the War of Cosroe, King of Persia, against the Christians.) Most
Protestants say, it is meant of the Roman, persecuting, Emperors Successes,
acted by Satan, who sought to extirpate Christianity.

5. And she brought forth a man-child, who was to rule all nations with a rod
of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne.

5. This Child, say some, was Christ; others say, Constantine; most say, the
Church, as prosperous, which, in Constantine's time, was to be advanced to
Power, and prevail against Heathenism, both by the Word, and by the Sword: Or
that Christ, by the Church, was thus to rule: Or, as others, the Martyrs, taken
up to God, triumphed by suffering, and furthered the Glory of the Church.
Others think it means that, in the days of the honest Heathen Emperors,
Alexander Severus, Philip Arabs, Constantius Chlorus, etc. the Church
travailed, as in the pains of Childbirth; but was to suffer with patience, as
in the Wilderness, till Decius, Dioclesian, Max. Hercul. Maxentius and Licinius
had done persecuting: and then it was delivered by Constantine, to an advanced,
free Church State.

6. And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of
God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days.

6. Say some, the Church throughout the Empire, persecuted by Nero for three
Years and a half, was put to worship God in Obscurity, and as in Flight: (But
Nero's Persecution was before John wrote this, if under Domitian.) Others, more
probably, refer it to the later Roman Persecutions, under which God kept his
Church till its Deliverance. And some understand it of Antichrist's driving the
pure Church, as into a Wilderness.

7. And there was war in heaven, Michael and his angels fought against the
dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels: 8. And prevailed not, neither was
their place found any more in heaven.

7, 8. Some expound this of the Conflict at Rome, between Simon Magus and Simon
Peter (long before John wrote this, if the story be true.) Others more probably
say, it represents the Churches Persecution by the Heathen Emperors (especially
Dioclesian, Maxentius, Licinius, etc.) and their final Overthrow by
Constantine, by a War in Heaven, of which this was the Effect. By Michael some
mean Christ; Others rather that Archangel, mentioned Dan. 10. who was Guardian
Prince over Israel, and is now such to the Church. And whether such have real
War in the Air with Devils, is doubtful. But the casting out Devil-worship, in
the Empire, is here meant, as the Effect.

9. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the devil and
Satan, which deceives the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his
angels were cast out with him.

9. By the Similitude of casting down from Heaven to Earth, is signified, that
Satan and Idolaters were cast out of Power and Honor in the World, as Earth is
opposed to the Church and Empire.

10. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and
night.

10. The Church Triumphant and Militant glorifies God for this wonderful
Change; which showed his strength for the setting up his Kingdom, and the
Exercise of Christ's Power, and the Salvation of Men, by conquering the Devil,
and the Heathens.

Note 1. If Christian Kingdoms be so honorable, and called the Kingdoms of
God, and the Power of Christ, and the Fall of Devils, let them better consider
it, that cry them down under the name of National Churches, and would have
Churches to be only some gathered out of the multitude.

2. Quest. Why does Satan accuse Saints, day and night, to God, who never
receives his false Accusations? Ans. 1. He has too many true Accusations
against them. 2. He shows his Malice, though without Success. 3. He accuses
them, by Slanderers and false Witnesses, to the Rulers of the World, and to the
People, to keep them in hatred of Faith and Godliness.

11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.

11. Not only Christ, but the Faithful under him, conquer Satan, and Heathens,
and all the Churches Enemies. 1. By the Blood of Christ, whose Sufferings,
trusted to, are the Merit of their Successes. 2. By the Word of God, preached,
pleaded and witnessed by them. 3. By their Sufferings and Martyrdoms.

12. Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them: woe to the
inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea; for the devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time.

12. Lira thought that this was Cosrot, King of Persia, who, being conquered by
Heraclius gave the Church great cause of Joy, but woefully oppressed his own
Subjects; though, being old, he had not long to do it. Dr. H. says, It was the
Churches joy, and the Devils rage, for the Overthrow of Simon Magus; and that
now he foresaw the Fall of his Kingdom, he set on foot Nero's Persecution.
Others That, the Empire turning Christians, the Devil raged, by Julian, Valens,
and such others, for a little while, both against Laity and Clergy. Some think
that it is properly those in Heaven that rejoice: Others, that it is the Church
on Earth: Others, that it is both. And some say, It is upon the Approach of the
Millenium, after the Fall of Antichrist.

Note, 1. To be delivered from Satan, and see his Kingdom fall, is matter of
great joy. 2. If Satan rage, because he knows that his time is short, how
much should we be quickened to Diligence and Hope, when we all know that our
time on Earth is short.

13. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman which brought forth the man-child.

13. Says Lira, when Cosroe saw that he was conquered by Heraclius, he
persecuted the Christians in his own Dominions, whom Heraclius relieved by two
Armies. Says Dr. H. When Satan saw that he was conquered in Simon Magus, he
stirred up Rome against the Christians. Say others, more probably, when Satan
saw that vigilant Pastors had defeated his Religious Frauds by Heretics, he
turned to the way of Violence by Persecutors; first Heathens, then Arrians.
Some say, This contains all the time from Anno 310. to 606. And others, That
it is his Rage against the Reformation since, etc.

14. And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly
into the wilderness, into her place; where she is nourished for a time, and
times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.

14. Christians driven from Rome by Heathenish Persecution, say some, or after,
by Papal, say others, fled up and down, into Villages, and remote Countries,
called a Wilderness, where God provided for them, till that Storm was past: (As
the Waldenses, and such others.)

15. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water, as a flood, after the woman:
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

15. The Flood* says Lira, was by Cosroe: says Dr. H. by Nero; and after by
Domitian, and others: say others, it was by all the Heathen Persecutions: say
others, by the Goths, and the invading Barbarians: say others, by Heresies: and
say others, by Popery.

16. And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth.

16. Say some, The Persecution was diverted from the Christians, by the
Insurrections of the Infidel- Jews, and their Suppression: Say others, The
Roman wicked Emperors were diverted, by the Goths, from mischief: Say others,
The Arrian Goths were conquered, even by bad Emperors: Say others, the
Prevalency of Truth made* even carnal Bishops, in Councils, help the Church:
Say others, The visible Church consists of many bad, worldly Men, who, for
conjunct-Interest, help the Faithful.

17. And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ.

17. Some say, this is Domitian and Trajan's Persecution: Others, that it was
the Arrians, when Satan saw he was dispossessed of Heathen Rome: Others, that it
is his setting up the Papacy, as it persecuted particular Christians, for not
corrupting Religion.

Note; There is no hope of a desirable Peace with Satan, or Diabolists, while
such; through Christians must study, as much as in them lies, to live
peaceably with all Men; and specially, study Love and Peace among themselves.
The Devil will not lay down his War against Christ, till he be cast down and
bound; but the Members of Christ's Body should not war against each other.

The poor Albigens^s, etc. were first, by Dioclesian, driven into a barren,
mountainous Country, and after murdered by Popes and Papists.

CHAP. XIII.
1. ANd I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the
sea, having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon
his heads the name of blasphemy.

1. Most of the ol^ Fathers expounded this of an Antichrist, that should come
toward the end of the World. Some Papists take it to be the second Cosroe, that
succeeded his Father in Persia. Others take the Beast to be the state of the
Heathen Religion at Rome; the seven Heads signifying either seven Emperors, or
the seven Hills; and the ten Horns, and the Crowns, the Consederate Kingdoms;
and the name of Blasphemy, the Titles of Rome, called, A Goddess, and the
eternal City, with its Idolatrous Profession. Others take the two Beasts here,
to be but one, under two Relations; that is, the Pope, or Papacy: Or, say some,
the Roman Kingdom under the Pope, and the Papacy it self, as Ecclesiastic.
Some take the Devil to be this Beast; some, the Turkish Empire; some, the Greek
Empire: and some take this first Beast to be the Roman Empire, as Christian.
The hardest part of the Controversy is between them that say, It is Heathen
Rome, and those that say, It is Papal Rome: And the Reasons which they give
against each other, seem stronger than the assertive Reasons of either side; of
which, many Volumes are written. Some say, that the seven Heads are seven
Kings, which went immediately before Antichrist; and that the name of Blasphemy
is, say some, the Titles given the Pope (as God, and Universal Head, or Bishop,
and Christ's Vniversa^ Vicar, that can forgive sin, and bring Souls from
Purgatory, etc.) Or, as others, his Idolatry.

2. And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the
feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him
his power, and his seat, and great Authority.

2. The Leopard was the Type of the Greeks, the Bear of the Persians, and the
Lion of the Babylonians: And all are set together, to signify the Cruelty of
the first Beast, and variety of its Exercise. This was the Heathen Idolatry, as
exercised by Domitian, etc. say some, to which Satan made the Imperial Power to
contribute its utmost help. Or, as others, it was the Papal Idolatry and
Cruelty, which Satan now propagated by Christian names and pretenses, as before
he had promoted the like, in the name of Heathens Gods.

3. And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded to death, and his deadly
wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.

3. To pass by those, that expound this of the Son of Cosroe, King of Persia,
some take it for the burning of the Capitol at Rome, the Head-Temple of Idols;
either in Vitellius's Stirs, when after Vespasian rebuilt it; or in Titus's
Reign, when, being burnt by Lightning, Domitian rebuilt it. But it seems
unlikely that all this should be spoken of so small a matter as a Temple.
Others expound it of the sacking and taking of Rome five times in forty two
Years, by the Goths and Vandals; and the Recovery, by Justinian, and
Belisarius, and Na^ses. The most learned Protestants say, the deadly Wound of
the Beast was, the Overthrow of the Heathen, Roman, Religion and Power; but
what the Healing was, is the doubt: Julian's Cure was too short to be meant:
Most think, that the very erecting of the Papacy is meant, as restoring
Devilism, or Idolatry, under the Christian name. Other Protestants think, that
the many Schisms in the Papacy, was the deadly Wound: and that it was healed by
the Councils of Constance and Basil. And others think, that the Reformation
gave the Pope the Wound; and that the Revolt to Popery, in France, by Hen. IV.
in England, by Queen Mary; in Germany, by the Overthrow of the Palsgrave, etc.
was the healing of it. To wander after him, is, to follow him in blind Devotion.

4. And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast, and they
worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make
war with him?

4. That is, say some, They worship the Devil, under the name of Heathen Gods,
for making their Empire so great, and repairing the Wound of their Religion.
Say others, They honored and served the Papacy, and him that erected it,
thinking it had been God, when it was the Devil: admiring the Sanctity and
Power of the Papacy.

5. And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things, and
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.

5. This the Ancients expound, of an Antichrist not yet come: And others, of
Domitian: And others, of the Pope.

6. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name,
and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

6. Say some, He blasphemed the true God and Christ directly; (that is,
Domitian, persecuting Christians.) Say others, It Is the Papal Blasphemy, by
Transubstantiation, Image Worship, arrogating God's Prerogatives, persecuting
them that obey his Word, etc.

7. And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome
them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.

7. Those that take the first Beast to be Mahomet himself, with his Arabian,
Saracen Powers; and the second, to be the Turkish Mahometans; do easily tell
when, and how the Saints were overcome, and Nations subjected to him. But
several Objections lie against this, and so there do against those that apply
it to Domitian: And why it may not more plausibly be applied to some following
Persecutors, especially Dioclesian, I see not yet. But that it is meant of the
Papal Tyranny, is the more easily believed by many that know the truth of the
History, that all the ten Heathen Persecutions, set together, were a little
thing, compared to the Papal Bloodshed. Mede truly tells us, that Perion
reports (and diverse second him) t^a^, in France alone, a Million of the
Albigenses and Waldenses were killed: And that Sanders de Vis Mon. l. 8. them.
34. confesses, that infinite Lollards were burnt in Europe: And that Vergerius
says that, within thirty Years, an hundred and fifty thousand were consumed by
the Inquisition, and such Means. And the numbers murdered in Bohemia, and other
Countries; and since then, in the Low Countries, France, England, Ireland, etc.
render the ten Persecutions by Heathens, as described by our most aggravating
old Church-Historians, to appear but as Morsel to the Papal Sacrifices.

8. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not
written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.

8. And his great Power and Victories shall cause the generality of worldly
men, to own, admire and obey him (whether it be the Heathen Rome, or
Mahometans, or the Pope;) except those chosen Children of Wisdom, whose names,
from the foundation of the world, were by God's Decree written in the Book of
the slain Lamb, or in the Catalogue of those who were to be saved by Christ
crucified.

9. If any man have an ear, let him hear 10. He that leads into captivity,
shall go into captivity: he that kills with the sword, must be killed with
the sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.

9, 10. Let all Christians regardfully mark what I say, that they be not by the
success of Persecutors or Tyrants, tempted from their Patience, Constancy or
Duty: Though these great Conquerours and Persecutors are a while adored for
their Success and Power, in the end they shall be used as they used others,
commonly when they have conquered and triumphed, others conquer them, and
triumph over them; and when they have killed many, they are usually killed
themselves: Few famous Conquerors die the common death of all men. Therefore
the holy Wisdom of God teaches his Saints, as much as is possible, to avoid
War, even defensive, and to overcome by Faith and Patience, especially in the
case of Persecution, and of private and particular persons toward injurious
Rulers; though Kingdoms may exercise self-defence, lest they tempt all their
Neighbors to make them their prey.

11. And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, and he had two
horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon.

11. Many say, that by Another Beast, is meant the former in another respect,
and that they are but one. But when the Text says, it is Another, with so many
notes and acts of difference, such presumption does not expound the sense, but
make it, and may say any other improbable thing. Others that say, the first
Beast was Heathen Rome, and the second Papal Rome, will as hardly as the former
make it probable, that Heathen Rome was one of the Popes Heads, if he be the
Beast: Was the first Beast but one of the many Heads of the second Beast? Or,
was the Heathen Religion but one of Heathen Rome's own Heads? Or, was the
Pope's wounded Head in being before him? If the Heathen Rome or its Heathenism,
was the wounded Head of the first Beast, then the Pope was not the first Beast,
for that was not one of his Heads, especially at its overthrow by Constantine.
Grot. and Dr. H. that say the second beast is Apollonius, or Magicians, or
Magic, if they soconfine it, speak as improbably. Whoever was the second, his
Lamb-like Horns show him to be an Hypocrite pretending to Truth, and his
Dragon-like Speech show him to be the Devil's Agent. But the Reasons to prove
both one, being against the plain Text, some think rather that the first Beast
was the Idolatrous Emperors that so cruelly set up Image Worship, in the East
and West, and the Pope the second Beast that flattered them, and rebelliously
excommunicated those that were against them; and his first notable Power was
obtained by engaging himself in the cause of the Image-worshippers, and
extolling and flattering them; and withal flattering Pipin, and Chapter Martell,
and others, to maintain him in ^his Rebellion, by invading the Western Empire,
and then engaging most succeeding Princes in the same cause.

And some think that the Pope is the first Beast, and the second are his
Councils, and Cardinals, and Clergy, and Jesuits, and Friars, that cry him up,
and persuade the World to obey and follow him, according to his universal claim.

And if the difficult Objections against all these last, should incline us
rather to think that it is the Heathen Empire that is the first Beast, I should
(by reviewing the History of Fact) think that the second Beast was (not
Apollonius fabled of by Philostratus and Hierocles, but) the whole Gowned and
Literate Tribe; Learning, and the pompous ostentation of it, being then almost
as much of the Glory, Pride, and Strength of Rome, as the Military Power: And I
shall show anon how ordinary it was for the first Beast, the Imperial Military
Power, to arrogate the name of God's, and to have Temples, Altars, and
Sacrifices: And the second Beast, Poets, Orators, Comedians, Philosophers,
Historians, as well as Augurs, and Southsayers, and Magicians, and Priests, all
flattered and applauded these blasphemous Emperors; and the great Learning of
these men was set up against Christianity, as despised foolishness: As they did
with Paul at Athens, so did the Learned Romans count Christians Bablers, and
ignorant Barbarians: Learning (vain and carnal) was as great a glory to Rome as
Arms, and it is doubtful whether the Imperial Power, or the Literate Opposition
and Scorn, did more hinder the reception of Christianity. But Christ and the
Cross at last conquered both, and used both to promote the Gospel. Yet this
might be said to arise out of the Earth; for when it was used for enmity and
strife against Christ, it was foolishness with God, and as James says, chapter 3.
was earthly, sensual and devilish, causing confusions, and every evil work.

12. And he exercises all the power of the first beast before him, and causes
the earth, and them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose
deadly wound was healed.

12. If it be the Heathen Empire that is spoken of, 1. Then it seems likest
that the deadly wound was the shame and shaking of the Empire by the deaths of
Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius; every Emperor,
between Augustus and Vespasian, murdered by others or themselves; and the
Suspension of Vespasian at first, (or afterward the shake that Heathenism had
there by the Wisdom and Honesty of the Antonines, and after of Alexander
Severus, and Philip) yet the first soon repaired by Vespasian, Titus and
Domitian, and all the rest at last by Dioclesian (after Decius, Aurelian, etc.)
And the Learned Tribe did live in Power, and in their Senate, and all their
City-Officers, exercise such splendid Pomp and Rule, as the Emperor did in his
place: And caused the Roman City and Empire to worship their victorious
blasphemous Emperors, and with them to continue the common Idolatry.

13. And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from heaven on
the earth in the sight of men,

13. This Roman Learning is used to overcome truth and Christianity, and to
make men believe that the Sun and Moon and Stars are Gods, and have Oracle;
where they speak, and that it is they that conquer the enemies of Rome; so that
their power was in the vis^on represented to me, as if they brought down fire
from Heaven.

14. And deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the means of those
miracles, which he had power to do in the sight or the beast, saying to them
that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had
the wound by a sword, and did live.

14. Their powerful Oratory and Learning deceives the ignorant multitude, to
erect Images to their victorious Blasphemous Heathen Emperors, who recovered
from the foresaid wound by the military murders: Images, and Atlars and
Sacrifices, are to be made the means of worshipping them.

15. And he had Power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image
of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many, as would not worship
the image of the beast, should be killed.

15. They so deceived the people as that the Oracles seemed to them to speak,
and to tell them as from the Gods, that they must kill all those that would not
worship the Image of the Emperor, and the Gods that he worshipped, and would
not be of his Religion.

16. And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: 17. And that no man
might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the
number of his name.

16.17. It was the custom of the Romans, in those times, to mark both Servants,
and many Soldiers, as notes of relation and appropriation, mostly on their arms
or hands, by which the person marked, as by a Badge, Livery, or Colors, owned
his Master or Captain: And also to mark their slaves, and punished persons,
with a brand of disgrace, in the face or hand: The mark of Servants, or
Soldiers, was sometime his Masters Escotcheon, or chosen Badge and sometime his
name, and sometime the Chief Letters of his name, which leaving out the rest,
flood for the name (as M. for Marcus, L. for Lucius, S. P. Q. R. for Senatus
Populusque Romanus, etc.) And it sometime fell out that these Letters were
numerall ( M. D. C. L. I. V. are with us) Now this Text serves to some to mean
that the flattering Literate Tribe in Rome (Orators, Senators, Poets, Priests,
Aruspices etc.) who were the Second beast did, by their Laws, Orations, Poems,
Comedies, Oracles, and Deceits, cause the people commonly to come under
obligations, thus to enslave themselves to the Idolatrous Emperors, to own them
as petty Gods, and offer at their Altars and Sacrifices, and to Worship the
Idols also which they worshipped, and so to be the owners of, and actors, in
their Idolatry: And in order hereto to honor them by receiving their Badges,
or their names, or the Chief Letters of their names: And it fell out that the
Chief Letters here meant were Numerall and Nominative both, and made up 666.

And if it be, (as most Protestants think) Rome-Papall, that is the Second here
meant, then as the First Beast is the Papacy, as Idolatrous and Potent, so the
Second is likest to be the flattering Clergy, who are to the Popes much like
what the Literate Romans aforesaid were to the Heathen Emperors: I mean his
Prelates, Councils, Jesuits, and Friars of all sorts; These have pretended to
abundance of Miracles, to advance the Papacy and its corruptions of Religion,
in so much that they make such Miracles one of the Chief Marks of their Church.
Gregory's Dialogues, and such other, led the way; and their monstrous Legends
feign so many, and so shamefully (of St. Francis, St. Dominick, and multitudes
more) as makes men suspect that this tribe are the miracle-working beast; not
but that many miracles are true, that are written of Gregory Naeocesar. Martin,
and others, by Eusebius. Socrat. Sulp. Severus, Augustine, etc. Which were all for
the confirmation of the Christian Faith, and not for Popery: And many of the
Monks, and others, of whom these fictions are written, were holy men, and God
did some wonders at their prayers; And it is this which the Legenders take
occasion from to add their multitudes of falsehoods, and then to persuade men,
that all these were Miracles wrought for Gods attestation to Popery: It being
usual for that Clergy to persecute the living Saints that are not for their
wills and ways, and to canonize those, as wonders of sanctity, whose
strictness and austerity is joined with subjection to the Papal dominion. Such
men's writings as Baronius, Bellarmine, Genebrard, etc. With their many false
Councils, and Jesuits that compass Sea and Land to promote the Papal Kingdom,
do seem much more fully to do the part of the second beast for the Papacy, than
the Poets, Priests, etc, did for the Heathen Idolatrous Empire. And the Mark in
their Right Hand or Forehead, seems to be some professing Badge, by which
they tie themselves to worship the beast and his Image, that is, subject
themselves, by consent, to the Papal Sovereignty and Canons, and Idolatry, or
corrupt Imagery and scenicall worship: And herein the Papacy so far exceeds
the severity of the said Heathens, that they do, by the Laws of their Church,
put strict oaths upon all the Clergy to believe many new Articles of Faith, and
to obey the Pope; yea and on Princes to exterminate a^l that the Pope will but
call Heretics; and that those temporal Lords shall be excommunicated, deposed
and damned, that will not do it. No man, called by them a Heretic, may so much
as make a will, or have the benefit of the Law, no not of his liberty, or life,
but be tormented in the inquisitions, or burnt. No Minister may preach Christ's
Gospel, that is not a subject of the Popes; nor any Christian else meet to
Worship God, no nor read the Bible in a known tongue, but by this License, and
theirs that he empowereth. These things are far more than to forbid buying and
selling without the Mark of the beast, or his name.

18. Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding count the number of the
beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred threescore
and six.

18. Here is work for the Sagacity of a sharp witted man: Let such try to find
out the beast by the number of his name; for it pleases not God more plainly
to reveal it. It is numeral Letters, which denominate a man: And the Letters
are (...), which in numbering signify DCLVVVI or 666.

About this name and number the Fathers, Papists, and Protestants, are of many
minds among themselves. The first general difference is, whether it signify
the name of a Man properly, or only some other mark that belongs to him,
called his name? And the next whether the name belong to a single person, or to
a state, or policy, or party? Of the Protestants many think its a man's name,
but belonging to the Papacy in Common: Junius takes it for the Canon Law and
Decretalls; Broughton for Adonikam, Ezra 2.13 Bright man recites these, and
diverse names, found out by diverse fancies, Titan, Lampetis, Ninetes, Cacos,
Odegos, Alethes, Blaberos, Palas, Bascanos, Amnos, Adicos in Arethas, Ecclesia
Italica and Romaghnus. All which he rejects, and fasteneth on that which
Irenaeus chose of old, which is Lateinos. And he thinks that this number of the
name, to be received, was meant of the Greeks, who were brought to submit to
the Latin Church; And so all the Greeks that so submit, receiving the number,
are joined in the guilt and damnation with them that had the Mark, or the Name
it self.

This is clear that all they, that only find out a name, or number, which are
not imposed, and by the subjects received, speak not at all to the Text. It is
only the receiving of the mark, name or number that is here mentioned: It is
the subjects Badge. If the racked word Lateinos be used as added to Catholic,
and put instead of Roman, it may reach the Papists, whose name and Badge now is
to be [ Roman Catholics, as distinct from all others, that are but mere
Christian Catholics.]

But lately most Protestants take the number of the name to be but some
characteristical acts or marks: Some say, It is the Systeme of Papal
corruptions in doctrine and worship; some (as Mr. Potter) make it the number of
25, as the square root of six hundred sixty six, and he largely tells us how
many ways it suiteth Rome. But how is this number of 25 received as a Badge by
reprobates? Some say, that Patriarchall and Metropolitan (and such like)
Idolaters and Persecutors are the Image of Papacy, and that PERJURY is the mark
of the beast, who by false Oaths binds all to him, and to his Prelates; so
that who ever will not be Perjured, by false and wicked oaths, are not received
into his Church, nor tolerated by them: And I read not in history that ever any
party on earth did so long, and so violently, bind men by wicked oaths, and
involve all sorts in heinous Perjury, as the Pope and his Prelates have long
done and do: Abbot Vispergensis lamenteth it in his days that Priests and
people were commonly involved in Perjury. Swear, or Suffer, is their Law; and,
when interest requires it, unswearing and forswearing is as violently imposed,
and whole Countries absolved from their oaths to their Sovereigns. PERJURY,
PERFIDIOUSNESS and PERSECUTION seem to be the mark of the Papal Dominion: And
(as my old fellow Minister in the same Congregation) Mr. Nath. Stephens says,
The name of the beast seems likest to be his assumed Power, or pretended
authority; to which it is that he makes all to swear: And the Oath or
subjection is not to the Number, but to the Power or Persons marked by that
Number; the Number being but the Name abbreviated, and the Name the
notification of the Party, or Policy, to which men consent.

But Mr. N. Stephens thinks that 666 is the time between the beginning of the
Roman Monarchy, according to Daniel's computation, as it respected the Church,
which was in Pomper's time, and the rise of Antichrist, which he thinks was in
606. (Anno Dom.) and so is just 666 years: For he takes (as many others do)
the title of Universal Bishop given Bonif. 3. by Ph^cas, to set ^p Antichrist
first; and the antecedent Fall of the Roman Empire to be that by the Goths,
etc. But I am past doubt, that neither wicked Phocas, nor Bonif. themselves,
did mean that the Universality should extend over all the World, but only over
the Empire; for what pretense could Phocas have to give power or titles to his
Subjects, to rule in all Princes Dominions on Earth? They only meant that he
should be, before the Bishop of Constantinople, the Prime Bishop in the
Universal Empire; and that Leo challenged before Phocas. But the claim, of
Governing all the World, came up by degrees long after both; and it was about
700 years before the Popes cast off their Subjection to Emperors and Kings.

On the other side, those that appropriate all this to Heathen Rome, are not of
one mind. Some take the Beast to be the Heathen Worship as it stood as Rome,
and the Roman Empire, supporting it, to be represented by seven Heads, that is,
particular Emperors or Hills* and the ten Horns to be ten confederate Kings,
and Tributary: And that Domitian is specially meant, as a self-idolizing
Blasphemer and Persecutor, for three years and a half; and that the Magic,
Auguries and Oracles, are the second Beast; and specially Apollonius: That the
Image is the Idol-worship set up in the rest of the Empire in imitation of
Rome: And all were compelled to bear some Mark of their God, or his Name, or
some numeral Letters signifying his Name, branded on them; but that it being
not revealed, then what these Letters signify, (...), it cannot be known now,
save that it was a discriminating note received by some, and not by others.

But others think, that Vespasian was the Beast, and Antichrist, 1. Because
some foolish Jews took him (as they had done Herod) at first to be the Messiah.
2. Because he answered to Antiochus Epiph. who before him violated and profaned
the Temple and Worship. 3. Because Christ seemed to lead them to that
interpretation, Matthew. c. 24. by assimilating the case to that in Daniel. 4.
Because he was said to work Miracles, to cure a blind man, etc. 5. Because he
so destroyed the S^cred Nation, and enslaved the remainder; which the
Christians were far from rejoicing in, being still much inclined to the honor
of Jerusalem, and thinking that a glorious Throne of Christ was there to be
erected, and grieving for them, as Paul did, Romans 10. and 11. 6. And these
gather the name from the Letters of Teitan, as if Titus had been so called by
allusion to Titan. And Hesychius says that Titan was to be written, as of old
(...), as containing the number of 666.

Others rather lay the name and mark on all the Heathen Emperors, as Idolaters
and Persecutors, or Enemies at least to Christians. And 1. They may well prove
that it was very ordinary with them to usurp some degree of Deity while they
lived, or to be Deified by the Senate, or their Successors, when they were
dead; and to have Altars erected to or for them, and Sacrifices offered
accordingly. Of Augustus himself there is full evidence, Virgil, and Horace,
Deifie him, and mention his devoted Sacrifices and Altars. So does Valerius
Maximus invocate Tiberius, and Propertius calls him God. Claudius is called
Divus in an old Monument. The Self-deifying of Caius Caligula, and Domitian, is
commonly known: It is no wonder that the great worth of the Antonines,
specially M. Aurel. Philosophus, made the Romans Deifie him when he was dead,
and would have done so, for his sake, by his Successors of the Antonine Race,
had not they, by the inhumane Villainies of Commedus and Heliogabalus, changed
their minds, (Though Antonine accepted not this while he lived.) Many Emperors
presumed to Deifie their Wives when dead: And indeed building Temples over
their dead Bodies, and erecting Altars there, was too soon imitated by the
zealous Christians over the Graves, Bones, or Suffering places, of the Martyrs.
Aurel. Victor says indeed, that Dioclesian was the first after Domitian (and
Caligula) that suffered himself publicly to be called LORD, and named and
adored as God: (But not the first that was Deified by the Senate, or
Flatterers, especially Poets.)

And that they used to mark or stigmatize their Servants, Soldiers and Slaves,
he that will read may see in Pignorius de Servis; out of Ambrose de obit.
Valentin. Plin. jun. Ep. Ausonius; Petronius Arbiter; Sutton. de Calig. Aetius
Amidenus Medic.

And it is not impossible to invent congruous numeral Letters that might be the
abbreviations of their names: And though John writing in Greek put [(...)] yet
seeing the Emperors and Roman Subjects were Latins, who can doubt but that
the Letters, being at once Nominative and Numeral, were Latin, and not Greek,
however Teitan, and O^lpius, and Lateinos, etc. be instanced by many.

For instance [T. FLAV. VESPAS. C. DIV.] is the abbreviation of [TITO FLAVIO
VESPASIANO CAESARI DIVO] (The Father and Son had the same name) the numeral
Letters are [D. C. L. V. V. V. I.]

[T. FLAV. DOM. C. DIV. VOT.] that is [TITO FLAVIO DOMITIANO CAESARI DIVO
VOTUM] the numeral Letters of the abbreviation are [D. C. L. V. V. V. I.]
Galba, Otho, and Vitellius are not worth the naming.

[D. ULP. TRAIANO C. VOTUM] that is, [DIVO ULPIO TRAIANO CAESARI VOTUM] D. C.
L. V. V. V. I.

[AEL. ADRIANO C. AUG. VOTUM] that is, [AELIO ADRIANO CAESARI AUGUSTO VOTUM.]
is [D. C. L. V. V. V. I.]

[DIV. AE. LU. VER. ANTON. C.] that is [DIVO AELIO LUCIO VERO ANTONINO CAESARI]
D.C.L.V.V.V.I.

So [DIV. AUREL. ANTON. C. VOT.] is [DIVO AURELIO ANTONINO CAESARI VOTUM.]
D.C.L.V.V.V.I.

So [DIVO VALOR. C. VOT.] is [DIVO VALERIANO CAESARI VOTUM.] D.C.L.V.V.V.I.

So [DIV. AUREL. C. VOT.] is DIVO AURELIANO CAESARI VOTUM.] D.C.L.V.V.V.I.

So [VA. DIOCLES. VOTUM.] that is, [VALERIO DIOCLESIANO VOTUM.] D.C.L.V.V.V.I.

So [DIV. HERCUL. VOT.] that is [DIVO HERCULIO VOTUM.] C.L.V. V.V.I.

I do but give Instances how easy is to conceive how such nominal marks might
be given and received: But that de facto it was just so, or why that number is
chosen, who can tell?

CHAP. XIV.
1. AND I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their
foreheads.

1. Next the Vision showed me Christ, as a Lamb, standing on Mount Sion, etc.
These hundred forty and four thousand, seem to be only the faithful Christian
Jews, that stuck to Christianity through suffering; the number being the same,
as chapter 7. and the number of twelve, which is the square root of this number,
noting a respect to the twelve Tribes, as the number of twelve Apostles did:
Therefore the place is called Mount Sion, (their holy place;) whether it be in
Heaven, or in the Catholic Church that they are supposed to be. Doubtless many
Christian Jews thought that the New Jerusalem should be in the place where the
Old was at Christ's coming. The Name of God (and of the Lamb, say some Copies)
in their foreheads signifies their open Profession of Fidelity to the Father
and the Son, and God's gracious noting them for his own. And it helps us to
expound what the mark of the Beast was, even some open signal obliging
Profession of Idol Worship.

2. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their
harps: 3. And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the
four beasts, and the elders, and no man could learn that song, but the hundred
and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.

2* 3. The voice of many Waters signified the multitu^^ of Converts that by the
Gospel were gathered to this Church on Mount Sion, who praised God with the
(...) of Harps, or joyful Psalmody: And it was new Psalms of Praise for Man's
Redemption, and the Grace of Christ which they sung, as before God and the
Cherubims, and the holy Church, which none of the Jews were fit to sing, save
the foresaid chosen saved number.

4. These are they which were not defiled with women, for they are virgins:
these are they which follow the Lamb whither soever he goes: these were
redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. 5.
And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the
throne of God.

4, 5. The Vision being of those in Heaven, as the Precedents of the Christian
Church at Jerusalem, that should afterward succeed them; they were the
first fruits of the Apostles Ministry, described Act. 1. and 2. and 3. and 4.
who were eminent in Purity and Love, free from Idolatry and Fornication, as a
People chosen out of the Jewish Nation unto Christ; and as they were holy on
Earth, they are faultless and perfect now in Heaven.

6. And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting
gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people.

6. Whether the midst of Heaven have the Mystical senses that diverse give, or
be only [ sent from Heaven to Earth] I know not: Some say, it is called the
Everlasting Gospel, because it was decreed from everlasting; some, because it
dureth to everlasting, or tends to life everlasting. By the Gospel some
understand only the glad tidings of the Fall of the Roman Empire; some, the
Doctrine of Reformation, and tidings of the Fall of Popery; and some, the
common Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, as it was now more freely and
universally to be published to the Gentile World.

7. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him for the hour of
his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea
and the fountains of waters.

7. Away with your Idols that are no Gods, and turn to and fear the true and
living God, who made Heaven and Earth: For the time is come that he will judge
and destroy Idolaters. Other expositions I omit.

8. And there followed another angel saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that
great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornification.

8. Another part of my vision was another Angel, etc. implying a further
revelation to me. Whether it signify also another sort of Preachers on Earth,
and who; as some say, the Albigenses and Waldenses, or Luther, Zuinglius, or
Illyricas and his century writers, let them tell that know.

Babylon is here described (and more fully after) to be that great City that
drew all nations unto Idolatry, whether this were Rome as Heathen, or Rome as
Papal, or Rome as containing both, see my Advertisement.

9. And the third angel followed them saying with a loud voice, If any man
worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out, without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb:

9, 10. Those that partake of the sins of Idolatrous Babylon (or Rome) shall
partake of her plagues; and the Judgment that overthrows her shall extend to
all her companions in Idolatry, and also the punishment in the life to come:
And Christ and his Angels will execute and behold it, as just and good.

Some, to save their charity, say that damnation is not denounced to all that
only have the Name of the beast, or the Number, but only to them that receive
his Mark as his slaves, and worship him and his Image. But I think receiving
his Name, and its Number, is included in receiving the Mark. But all my be
pardoned to the penitent believers.

Whether this Angel be Luther, Chemnitius, Whittaker, and such others, I leave
to the proof of the affirmers: Its enough to me, that this additional
revelation and punishment, is notified to John as by another Angel. Though many
think that only temporal punishment is here meant; doubtless the same sin
deserves more.

11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. And they
have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name.

11. Though temporal calamity be here included, this seems plainly to mean
Hell: And the Mark of his Name, is here made equal to [His Mark] verse 9. O the
restless misery that is prepared for the impenitent!

12. Here is the patience of the saints; here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

12. This misery of impenitent Idolaters and Enemies of Christ, will show the
World, how wise and happy the Saints were, that by patient suffering did
overcome, and kept to the end, the Commands of God, and the Faith of Jesus
Faith, Obedience and Patience, are all necessary to Salvation.

13. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

13. Though it be always happy to be at Rest with Christ, the sufferings of
those times will be so great, as will make it seem a sesonable blessedness, to
go to that Rest, where they shall no more labor or suffer, but receive the
fruit of their labors and work performed for Christ on Earth. Some make this
to be but a promise of after-freedom from Persecution here: The Text proves a
Blessedness for separated Souls before the Resurrection: For [(...)] [
henceforth] signifies from this time forward. The Socinians therefore abuse
the Text, that make the Blessedness to be but Resting in a state of death, till
the Resurrection. For life, with God's service and acceptance in a time of
Persecution, is a greater blessing than mere death.

14. And I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat, like
unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sha^p
sickle. 15. And another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud voice
to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is
come for thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe. 16. And he, that
sat on the cloud, thurst in his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.

14, 15, 16. Some understand this of an Angel in the likeness of a man; but
most of Christ, or an Angel like Christ. The other Angel seems to signify but
another part of the Vision, and execution Reaping the harvest, is punishing
sinners ripe for destruction.

17. And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also
having a sharp sickle. 18. And another angel came out from the altar, which had
power over fire, and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle,
saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the
earth, for her grapes are fully ripe. 19. And the angel thrust in his sickle
into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great
wine press of the wrath of God. 20. And the winepress was trodden without the
city, and blood came out of the winepress, even unto the horsre-bridles, by the
space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.

17, 18, 19, 20. Of the difference between the Harvest, and the Vintage and the
two Angels and their executions, opinions are various. Some make it to be two
degrees of o^^ plague, some to be two; some say conjunct, some say d^stant.
Some say one is the destruction of the Turkish Empire, and the other (the
Vintage) of the Roman Papacy before Christ's coming. Some say, the first is the
completing of the Elect as converted, and the latter the destroying of
Antichrist. Some say, it fosaketh of the last Judgment, some, of the Fall only
of Hearthen Rome, and some, of other E^ecutions. It is clear that it speaks
of diverse degrees of ^^ecution of God's Judgments on the Idolaters, signified
as by diverse Angel appearance, words and deeds: But whether it meant any beside
the Roman Heathen Idolatry, and their consenting Countries sufferings; and
whether the sixteen hundred Furlongs signify any more than diffused Plagues,
and whether it was meant of Trajan's Executions in Syria, etc. as Grotius
thought, or of the Country about Rome, or any determinate space, and where, and
which of the six or seven senses of [ power over Fire] is right, besides a mere
destroying power, are all things which I cannot determine. Mr. Brightman has
found England to be the thousand six hundred Furlongs, and Cranmer to be the
Angel that had power over Fire, because he held his right hand to be burnt, and
Thomas Cromwell to be the Executing Angel: And some that can make themselves
believe, that so small a spot of ground as England, is it that this Tragedy is
acted on, have thought that they found here the killing of the two Witnesses
(Magistracy and Ministry, and the two Beasts, and the number of their Names, in
the Letters here mentioned, (...) (ch) (...) (x) (...) (st) and the wounding
and the healing, and the mark of the Beast PER, as referring to Chapter ( Church)
and St. ( State;) and in a word, that almost half the Revelation spoke of
England. But unless they can prove that the two Beasts have their Offspring,
who bear their Fathers Image, and are dispersed as Cains offspring was, so
that the same thing is acted over by them, in several lands and ages, which was
acted by the first, I shall, rather than this, confine the exposition to that
empire and state, that the Church suffered under when John wrote.

CHAP. XV.
1. ANd I saw another sign in heaven, great and mavelous, seven angels having
the seven last plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God.

1. Seven plagues, which are all to be poured out on the Idolatrous persecuting
Empire, as it were by seven Angels.

2. And I saw as it were a sea of glass, mingled with fire, and them that had
gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and
over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God.

2. I saw a sea like that in the Temple, signifying purity and the multitude of
worshippers; mingled with fire, signifying the Altar Sacrifices, and their
zeal, and Gods acceptance, and them that by patient suffering had overcome, by
keeping themselves undefiled from owning the Roman Idolatry, by owning the
Idol, or his Image, or Mark, or the numeral Letters of his name; And they stood
on this sea, having the harps on which they sang the praises of God, as was
used in the Temple.

3. And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the
Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and
true are thy ways, thou king of saints.

3. And they, being many of them the first Christian Jews, sang Moses's song
after the drowning of Pharaoh, the case being like their deliverance from the
Roman Tyrants, and the song of Christ, suited to the joyful Praises of God, for
the work of man's Redemption and Salvation; saying Great, etc. Thou gloryfiest
thy Power in conquering the greatest proudest enemies, and delivering thy
Servants from the great dangers, even by miracles of providence; And thy
Justice and truth, O most Holy Lover, and King, of Saints, are magnified in thy
avenging them on their cruel enemies.

4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art
holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are
made manifest.

4. This demonstration of thy Greatness, Holiness and Justice, shall move the
nations to fear and Glorify thee, as the only most Holy God, and to fear and
worship thee, because of thy Judgments.

5. And after that I looked, and behold, the temple of the tabernacle of the
testimony in heaven was opened; 6. And the seven angels came out of the temple,
having the seven plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and having their
breasts girded with golden girdles.

5, 6. The Holy place and Gods Decree seemed to be opened; And seven pure and
Glorious Angels, honorably girded to execute Gods will, came forth with the
seven last plagues that are to finish the destruction of the Idolatrous,
potent, persecuting, Roman Empire.

7. And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven golden vials
full of the wrath of God, who lives for ever and ever.

7. Those that undertake to tell whom these Angels, and this Living Wight,
signified on Earth, go further than I can, who know no more but that the seven
plagues were thus represented.

8. And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his
power, and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of
the seven angels were fulfilled.

8. And the dreadfulness of Gods wrath, as a consuming fire, striking even his
worshippers with fear, and in the execution disturbing the Churches peace, was
represented to me by the filling of the Temple with smoke, from the Glory of
God, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
. ANd I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, Go
your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

1. I heard a great Voice out of the Temple, sending these angels to pour out
the Vials, and execute God's Wrath.

2. And the first went and poured out his vial upon the earth: and there fell a
noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon
them which worshipped his image.

2. Of the great Plague in wicked Commodus's Reign (that killed, in Rome alone,
two thousand a day;) and of the like, in the Reign of several Persecutors, even
till Constantine's Reign; and of the Bloodshed and Fire, and the resemblance
of this; to the Plagues of Egypt: See Dr. H. on the Text, and Grotius before
him. Others say, It is the Papists Torment of Conscience, when Popery is fallen.

3. And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea, and it became as the
blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the sea. 4. And the third
angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters, and they
became blood.

3, 4. That these signify a progress of the same Judgment on the Idolaters, is
clear: But whether, by the Sea, and the Rivers and Fountains, signify things
so distinct, as many think; and which, of their many conjectured
Significations, are right, I cannot say.

5. And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which
art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus:

5. The Angel that executed God's Judgments on the Idolatrous Nations,
performed it with Praise and Glory to God, for his Justice on persecuting
Idolaters.

Note; The Angels in Heaven were not ignorant of what God thus did on Earth:
And as God's Mercy hindered not his Execution of Justice so their pity kept them
not from triumphing over these destroyed Sinners, and giving God the Glory of
their Punishment.

6. For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink, for they are worthy. 7. And I heard another out of the
altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

6, 7. Na. God and Angels will rejoice in the terrible Revenge of the Blood of
Saints. 2. The Angel from the Altar signifies, the Consent of the Souls under
the Altar, and of the Church of holy Worshippers on Earth, who pray for
Deliverance. 3. Were it never so certain, that it is Idolatrous, Heathen Rome
that is here meant, it consequently infers that, if Papal Rome have
equalled, yea far exceeded them, in shedding the Blood of Saints* their
punishment shall be as great, or greater. It is no small Aggravation of Pap^l
Bloodshed (by Massacres, Inquisitions, Burnings, etc.) that they father all on
Christ himself, and do it as Christians; yea and, in so many Ages, make it the
necessary Defense of their Kingdom: And they shall find, that God knows a
Saint when Men call him a Heretic; and will not be so mocked, as to dis-own
Christ's Sheep, for such forged Marks.

8. And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun, and power was given
unto him to scorch men with fire. 9. And men were scorched with great heat, and
blasphemed the name of God, which has power over these plagues: and they
repented not, to give him glory.

8, 9. Some take this to signify a great Drought, and Dearth, that came in the
days of Commodus; and after, of Maximinus. Many take the Sun here, for
Antichrist, that calls himself so: Others, for Governors: Some, for the King
of Spain; some, for the German Emperor; or some such Papal Luminary: Some, for
the Scripture, as tormenting Papists: Some, for Christ, as sending forth his
Word and Judgments. I can go no further than the general sure sense; That a
greater Plague, that fell on the Idolatrous Empire, made them lay all the blame
on the Christians, and rage the more; but cured not their Idolatry, or
Persecution.

10. And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast, and
his kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain, 11.
And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and
repented not of their deeds.

10, 11. The plain, general sense of all this is, to liken Idolatrous,
persecuting Rome, and the suffering Christians, to Pharaoh, and the Israelites;
and liken God's Plagues on Rome, to the Egyptian Plagues: And to tell us that,
as Pharaoh's heart was hardened till Destruction fell on him and his, so will be
the Idolatrous Romans.

By the Seal of the Beast is meant, Rome, with the Imperial Power (or Papal,
say many:) and by Darkness, the Confusions there, and Diminutions of their
Glory* In Heathen Rome these were many and great; the Soldiers setting up, and
pulling down, and killing, Emperors, till they set the Empire to Sale; Emperors
set up, and warring against each other; few dying a natural death: Valerian
taken, captivated, and made his Footstool, by Sap^es, and flead. To be an
Emperor, was the next way to Murder, or some odious disgrace and death, by him
that could overcome and kill him.

And Papal Rome was subdued by the Barbarians. Other Expositions are many.

12. And the sixth angel* poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates,
and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might
be prepared.

12. That this signifies a further progress toward Idolatrous, persecuting
Rome's destruction, and the Churches deliverance, is clear; but what Euphrates
signifies, and what its drying up, and what, The Way of the Kings of the East,
Expositors greatly differ in. Some take Euphrates literally; some, mystically;
some, for the Turk; some, for the chief Champions of Antichrist; some, for the
chief Strength and Garrison of Babylon; some, for the Pope's Riches, and great
Tributes and Revenues; and some for the River Tibris, in Rome, and so, for Rome
it self. And these take the drying of it up to be, the ruin of Maxentius, by
Constantine, destroyed in Tiber: Others think, the drying up, to be the
destruction of the Turks: And so they vary in the rest. But some think, that
this is but a further Assimilation of the Case to the Israelites, when the Red
Sea was dried up for their escape, and to prepare the way for Pharaoh's ruin:
and signifies, that the danger and impediments of the Christians deliverance
were removed, by the Overthrow of all the Idolater's Forces, the Ruin of
Dioclesian, Maxim. Herculius, Galer. Maxim. Maxentius, Licinius; that so the
Christians, by and with Constantine, might triumph. And some think, it is a
weakening the Roman Power, toward Euphrates, to let in the Persians, and others,
to afflict them.

13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the
dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophet. 14. For they are the spirits of the devils, working miracles, which go
forth unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to
the battle of that great day of God Almighty.

13, 14. As, when Ahab was to be destroyed, the Devil was a lying Spirit in the
mouth of all his Prophets, and bid him, Go and prosper; and Zidkiah made Horns,
to signify his Victory; so I saw, as it were, three Devils, like the Frogs of
Egypt; or three lying Spirits, sent by Satan, and encouraged by the Idolatrous,
persecuting Emperors, and by his flattering Oracles, Augurs, Orators, etc. to
persuade all the foresaid Princes to fight against Constantine; especially,
Maxentius and Licinius; that they might fall, as Abab and Pharaoh did.

Or, say others, They were Popish Missionaries, and Priests, and Friars, sent
out by Antichristian, Civil Powers, and Antichristian Ecclesiastical Powers, to
draw men to Popery and Idolatry, that they may be destroyed when God shall
judge them. The day of God, some take, as before, for Constantine's Victories
against Idolaters; others, for the day of the Pope's Fall; and others, for the
last day of Judgment.

15. Behold, I come as a thief; Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

15. My coming will be, when men expect me not* Blessed is he that prepares
not for Shame and Confusion, when his Sin and Hypocrisy shall, by my Judgment,
be brought to light, by complying with the higher Powers in sin, as thinking
that I will be long in coming, to take down Sinners, and see up Saints.

16. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue,
Armageddon.

16. The Devil's Prophets provoked them to gather, and fight to their
destruction.

Note, Here the Dragon is expounded to be Devils: And this word, Devils, in
this Book, usually signifies, those Idols ( Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, etc.) which
the Romans worshipped instead of God: (For Paul tells us, It was Devils that
they worshipped.) And it being the spirits of these Devils, or Heathen Idols,
that are sent out, it seems most probable, that it is the War with the
Heathen Idolaters that is here meant. Dr. H. after Grotius, notes that, in the
Fight at Rome, Maxentius had a hundred and seventy thousand Foot, and eighteen
thousand Horse, of Romans, Italians, etc. and Constantine had ninety thousand
Foot, and eight thousand Horse, of Germans, Gauls and Britains: and that the
Victory was of such consequence that, from that day, the Account of Years, by
Indictions, began to commemorate the deliverance of City and Church; (which
since, is turned into accounting from the Birth of Christ)

But others say, It is the day of the Fall of Antichrist: And some say, Of the
destruction of the Turks: And some say, He that gathered them together, is
Christ, or God, by his permitting Providence, for their destruction.

17. And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air, and there came a
great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done.

17. The Angel, that poured his Vial into the Air, signifies, the coming down
of God's Plagues from Heaven, on the Generality of the Enemies. And the Voice
out of the Temple signifies, that it is done by God's Decree, for the
Vindication of his holy Worship, and his Ch^^^h.

[ It is done.] That is, The last Plague on the Roman Pharaoh is now pouring
out, and he is to be drowned in the Red Sea. God's Judgments are accomplished
for the Extirption of the Heathen Roman Empire, and the revenging the Blood of
the Saints, shed by them. As Pharaoh's Cruel^ies increased, before the
Isra^lites were delivered, so Dioclesian made the cru^^^st Slaughters* before
the Heathen Beast was to be destroyed: and then they were ripe, and the time
was come. Or, a^ others say, The time of the Fall of Pop^ry An^^christ. Or, as
others, The end of the World.

18. And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings: and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake, and so great.

18. The great commotions which went to these great changes, and subversion of
the Heathen Powers, was represented to me, as by Thundrings, Lightnings, and
the greatest Earthquake. Say some, it is the changes by the Ostrog^ths, and
such others: Say others, there were literally such dreadful Earthquakes before
Totilas took Rome: Say others, it is yet to come before Antichrists fall: And
say others, before the day of Judgment.

19. And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the
nations fell; and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto
her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

19. And Rome was then divided between Heathens, Christians, and worldly men,
that were indifferent for Religion: Or, say others, Heathens, Orthodox and
Heretics: It Is taken from Ezekiel. 5. Others say, that literally the third part
was destroyed by Totilas; and say others, by Alaricus; others say, it is three
in relation to the three Princes, the Dragon, the Beasts, and the false
Prophet; others, that Antichrist's Kingdom was falling by being divided in it
self.

20. And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

20. As Earthquakes shake Mountains and Islands; so all the Dependents of Rome
fell with it.

21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the
weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail;
for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

21. God's Executions bruised and broke them, as great Hail would do the tender
Plants, and yet they did but blaspheme God the more. A Talent is threscore
pound. God's Judgments pursued the scattered Roman Citizens, say some; the
Papists, say others; and all wicked Christians, say others.

CHAP. XVII.
1. ANd there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and
talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show unto thee the judgment
of the great whore, that sits upon many waters: 2. With whom the kings of
the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabiters of the earth have been
made drunk with the wine of her fornication.

1. Say some, 1. I will show thee what is coming from God on Imperial, Heathen,
Idolatrous Rome, who by Power and by Learning (by the first and second Beast)
has drawn Kings and Nations with her to Idolatry.

Others say, it is Papal Rome, and they prove it, because if they had not been
married to God before by the Profession of Christianity, they could not have
been Adulterers. To which the former say, 1. That Fornication may be the sin of
the unmarried. 2. That by Fornication is meant Idolatry, and God's right may
serve to infer this guilt, though men be not married to him by consent: And
that it is incredible that all the Heathen World are no Idolaters, because they
were not professed Christians. By the Whore is meant the same as the Woman, the
second two horned Beast; and the false Prophet, say many, that is, the Church
of Rome, with the whole body of the Roman Clergy; which others deny.

3. So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman
sit upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven
heads, and ten horns.

3. Into the Wilderness, say some, to represent the desolation; say others,
because it was a Revelation not to be yet openly known in the City, for if the
Rulers had known of all these terrible Predictions against them, they would
have raged by Persecution against Christians; and therefore all this Prophecy
was to be obscure, and not communicated long so commonly as other Scriptures.
Others say, it was to show that Antichrist's Kingdom is barren, without a drop
of grace: Others, that solitude is fittest for contemplation: Others, that the
Wilderness is Heathenism brought in by Popery; Others, that as the true Church
was driven into a Wilderness of solitude and suffering, so now shall Papists
be: Others, that the Papacy is a Wilderness, as an Apostatical Church
succeeding the Apostolic Church.

Who is the great Whore, whether Rome Pagan, Rome Papal, or Rome hereafter
fallen to a future Antichrist, I ouce for all refer the Reader to my Postscript.

4. And the woman was arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with
gold and precious stone and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication.

4. Idolatrous Rome was represented to me as a Woman richly and splendidly
arrayed, by her wealth, and pomp, and power, enticing the World to her Idolatry.

5. And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE
MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.

5. The name written was [Mystery, Babylon, etc.] that is, Mystical (not
literal) Babylon, the Great City Rome, the Mother of Idolatry and Wickedness,
propagating them, by her Power and Learning, to all the Nations of her
Dominions, and further in the World. As Babylon was the Idolatrous, cruel,
Captivator of the Ancient Jews, overthrowing their Kingdom; so was Idolatrous,
proud Rome, the Captivator and Persecutor of Jew and Gentile Christians, and
the great Enemy of the Church.

6. And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the
blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great
admiration.

6. Idolatry was not her only crime, but the guilt of being as drunken with
holy blood: Both her pomp and her bloodiness seemed wonderful.

7. And the angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee
the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her, which has the
seven heads and ten horns.

7. Note, Seeing God professes to open the mystery, who this Mother of Harlots
is, it is safest to add as little, on pretense of fuller exposition, as we can.

8. The beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall
wonder, (whose names were not written in the book of life from the foundation
of the world,) when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

8. Some take this as fitted to the time when the Empire should first be
Christian; as if it meant, Rome was the beast when it was Pagan, but now is not
when it is Christian, but will be again when it was Papal and Antichristian. Or
Rome is the Idolatrous beast under the Pagan; but is not now under that form;
but yet is under the Papal form: Many other expositions I pass by. They, that
expound all of Pagan Rome, say that the sense is [I shall notify the beast,
which is the Roman Emperor, by that one who now reigns which is Domitian:] He
was in the Government when his Father Vespasian was abroad: And he after ceased
while his Father and Brother Titus reigned, and then reasumed it, raised by
Satan to persecute the Church, and then is basely killed himself.

Rather q. d. [I am now showing thee the fall and destruction of the beast and
whore, and will now notify him to thee accordingly:] The beast or Emperor at
this fall will be the bloodyest of all persecutor, Dioclesian: Of whom then it
may be said, He was Emperor, But discouraged by the ill success of his
persecution he, with Maxim. He^cillius, laid down the Empire, and both betook
themselves to a private life: But after the Devil would sain have restored
them, and they attempted to rise out of their privacy; but did it to their own
destruction, being both killed when Constantine prevailed: as were Licinius and
Maxenti^s, who would have done their work. So that when Constantine was
destroying the Pagan Empire it was true, that Dioclesian (and Maxim. H^^cul)
was Emperor, and now is not, and yet is, that is, in being, though not in
power, but will rise to his perdition.

And the Idolaters shall be struck with wonder and con^^rna^ion, when they see
so cruel and great a Tyrant so brought to naught.

9. And here is the mind which has wisdom: The seven heads are seven
mountains, on which the woman sits. 10. And there are seven Kings, five are
fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he comes, he must
continue a short space. 11. And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the
eighth, and is of the seven, and goes into perdition.

9, 10, 11. That the seven mountains are those of Rome is very plain: But who
were the seven Kings I confess I know not: Here is work for a searching head
(the mind that has wisdom.) But it is matter of fact, which when the thing was
newly done the mind that has wisdom might know: But how can we know it, but by
history, without a new Revelation? And history herein is lame and much
uncertain, and the work of man, and all men are liars; and few Christians were
writers till three hundred years after Christ; and the first Christians had
many fabulous reporters among them (as their spurious writings show) When John
wrote this book, and whether all at once, or at many years distance of the
parts, is unknown (whatever confident men may talk.) Eusebius trusts diverse
fabulous authors, and reports, for want of better, though he be credible
himself. I take the style, and words of the Book, to be the best History of the
time, which intimates that part of it, at least, was written before the siege
of Jerusalem, which makes me the easilyer believe Epiphanius, that John was
first banished into Patmos in the reign of Claudius, and there wrote part of
the Book, at least. For though some of it might be written of things past, its
hardly credible that most of it should be such.

This Verse has many Expositions: Many say it speaks not of individual
Kings, but of seven sorts of Government, viz. Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs,
Dictators, Tribunes Military, and Emperors; and the Pope they make to be the
seventh and eighth. But so much is said against this, as I cannot answer: As 1.
That it is not mere Power, but Idolatrous and Persecuting Power, that the Text
describes, And none of these persecuted, save the Emperors; nor were they so
Idolatrous as Athens, and other places. 2. That the mere Imperial Power as the
Pillar of Idolatry, is plainly made the Beast; therefore not the five
antecedent. 3. That indeed these five were no Supreme Power; for that was only
in the Senate, which had the Legislative Power till violence ravished them of
it; which when it did, the Consuls, Decemvirs, and Tribunes, had but a part: No
nor the Emperors long, or often. These were not several Sovereigns, but parts of
the Supreme, as the Tribuni Plebis were; and some of them very short: And the
Pontisices Man. might as well be named as some of them. And who the seventh and
eight Head were, is said with so great difficulties, difference and confusion,
as would be tiresome to repeat.

The Papists Opinions about a future Antichrist, and theirs that apply all to
Mahomet I will not repeat.

They that expound it of particular C^sars also, are opposed by many hard
Objections. Some of them apply all to the seven Emperors, that the Christians
were first troubled by, viz. Cla^aius, N^^s, Gal^a, O^io, Vitellius, Vespasian,
Titus, and Domitian the eighth: But three or four of these persecuted not. Some
think that, seven, here signifies not a determinate number, but many. They
seem the same with the seven Heads, chap. 13. And if the ten Horns signify not
precisely just ten, why should the seven? I, that understand it not, may say,
it is as probable as some of these that this be the sense [it being the time of
the Fall of the Beast and Whore that I am speaking of] there shall be, at that
time, seven Caesar's alive at once, of whom Dioclesian, Constantius Chlorus,
Galerius Maximianus, Severus, and Galerius Maximinus, are fallen at the time when
Constantine is destroying Idolatry: Constantine is the sixth who is then in
being: Licinius is after to be used as one of them, seeming then a Friend. The
bloody Dioclesian who, with Max. Herculius, laid down the Rule, is one of the
seven, and together will, by the Devil's instigation, attempt again to be the
eighth, but to his own perdition. Whether Maxentius pass only for a partial
Usurper after, or pass for the eighth, rather than Dioclesian, I let pass. Both
Licinius and Maxentius continued but a short space.

12. And the ten horns, which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have received
no kingdom as yet: but receive power as kings one hour with the beasts.

12. Say some, they are twelve Heathen Kings, that are not full Kings, but
tributary to Rome: Say others, they are the Gothish and other extraneous Kings,
that are not in the Empire, but are consederates. Some say, it is the Tyrants
that have headed the Devil's Kingdom in seven several Ages: But this is a vain
Popish Evasion. That ten Kings were dependent on Pagan Rome, is clear; and that
ten or more of the Barbarians broke the Christian Empire: But which is meant is
the doubt.

13. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
beast. 14. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them: for he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they, that are with
him, are called, and chosen, and faithful.

13, 14. The ten Idolatrous dependent Kingdoms, shall assist and support the
Roman Pagan Empire with their Power and Strength: But Christ, who overcomes
Rome, will overcome them also; for he is over all Kings and Kingdoms, and will
help the Christian Army under Constantine. Or, say others, ten Kings shall give
their Power to the Pope, and make War against Christ, that is, his Doctrine and
Worship, and Christ and the Reformers shall overcome them. But these cannot be
the same barbarous Kingdoms of Goths, etc. forementioned, but mostly others.

15. And he says unto me, The waters which thou saw, where the whore
sits, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

15. This Idolatrous Roman Power rules over many great and populous Nations of
the Earth: Or, as others, the Papal Idolatrous Power is upheld by many Nations,
even all the Empire.

16. And the ten horns, which thou saw upon the beast, these shall hate the
whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire.

16. The ten Nations, that before upheld the Roman Idolatry, shall turn against
her, and be the Instruments of her destruction. The Britains, Gauls, Germans,
and diverse others, first fought with Constantine against the Pagans, and many
more of them after turned Christians. Or, say others, the foresaid Goths,
Vandals, etc. shall overthrow the remnant of Pagans in Rome. Or, say others,
The Reformation shall be wrought by Princes that have forsaken Popery. Whether
it speak only of destroying the Idolatrous Roman Power, or of destroying the
Houses, or City it self, is controverted: The latter is not yet performed, nor
the first as to the Papacy.

17. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and
give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.

17. God has so overruled them, and all their hearts, that eventually they
shall serve the Pagan Empire, say some, or the Papal Power, say others, till
the time that God will pull them down, as he foretold.

Note; God can so order things, that all his Judgments shall be executed by
sinners, without causing any one of their sins.

18. And the woman, which thou saw, is that great city, which reigns over
the kings of the earth.

18. It is certainly Rome that then reigned. It is certain then that Pagan,
Imperial Rome, was at that time the Beast, on which the Whore sat: And certain
that Pagan Idolatry was it that then made Rome the Whore: But whether (besides
this,) Christian Imperial Rome under Constantine, or under the Western
Emperors after, or Imperial Constantinople, or Rome as the Popes Seat (before
606, or after only, or when) be the Whore And whether their very differen sort
of sin make them two or three whores, or the concord, in general, or
similitude, make Pagan and Papal Rome to be the same whore, as meant in this
Text, these and other are the doubts: But the certain part must not be doubted
of.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. ANd after these things, I saw another angel come down from heaven, having
great power, and the earth was lightened with his glory.

1. The Fall of Rome is so great a work that it was foreshewed me, as by an
Angel of wondrous Glory. Those that tell us that this Angel was an eminent
preacher, and such other particularities of filling the earth with his Glory,
go further than my knowledge goes.

2. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of
every foul Spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

2. The Language of those times was to call deferred ruined places where no man
dwelt, the places haunted by Devils, and Goblins, and Satyrs and Owls and
Serpents. So that this signifies Desolation: And the Jews then thinking that,
as Babylon that before captivated them is destroyed, so the very City of Rome
would be; the Prophecy calls the Destruction of the Pagan Empire and
Idolatry, with all its retinue of Literate upholders, by the name and titles of
the Destruction of the City. For it was not Babylon, as a City, nor qua Roma,
as this City, nor as a Rich and Great City, But as the Great Idolatrous Power
which captivated and persecuted the Church; Therefore it is destroyed, not as a
Great or Rich City, but as Babylon: And so it is desolate. Some think that this
is spoken of it, as when Rome was burnt in part by Totilas, and the remnant of
Pagans destroyed by Alaricus: That Is more than I can prove. But it being the
Pagan Empire, that captivated the Church, that made it Babylon, I think Babylon
fell when that fell, though many Pagans did survive.

3. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants
of the earth are waxed rich, through the abundance of her delicacies.

3. For their Power and Learning have spread the poison, or drunkenness, of
their Idolatry to all nations, and the Kings of the earth have been encouraged
in the guilt; and her wealth and grandeur, have promoted all pride and
sensuality in the nations, that have traded with her, or depended on her.
Others say, It is the sale of pardons, indulgences, and Ceremonies and
Church-preferments, that are her Merchandise and delicacies.

4. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
5. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.

4, 5. That is, Away from Idolatrous Pagan Rome, as Lot fled from Sodom; if you
love your lives and Souls avoid all partaking in her sins: Eat not things
offered to idols, imitate them not, and comply not with them in any act of
Idolatry, or other sin: For the time of her destruction is at hand, and you may
suffer with her if you sin with her, and fly not from her.

Or, Come out from Popery, and partake not of the sin, lest you partake of the
plagues. Here, say some Protestants, we answer the question, Where was your
Church before Luther? And why do you separate from Popery? To the first, say
they, our Church was in Babylon, where God bore with it, till he called it out:
To the second, God commanded us to come out. No doubt, we must partake of no
men's sins.

6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double, according
to her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double.

6. God, who is her Judge, will have you lay doubly more on her than she laid
on you by persecution: And this is no injustice; it being for sin against him,
and not only as against you. This gives the reason of Gods execution by
Constantine; but allows no private men to take arms against Government, on
pretense of revenging the injuries of the Church.

7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give her: for she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and am
no widow, and shall see no sorrow.

7. The sins of Sodom were pride, fullness, idleness, and unmercifulness: And
Pagan Rome, grown proud and sensual by power and wealth, shall now suffer
debasement, and dejection. Or, Rome Papal that says, I am the successor of
Peter, and the mother of all Churches, shall be dejected, and destroyed for her
pride and cruelty.

8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and
famine; and she shall be utterly burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord God
who judges her.

8. The Fall of the Pagan Empire shall be sudden and terrible, like the burning
of a City. Or, say others, The remnant of Pagans shall be burnt out of
Christian Rome by Alaricus, etc. Say others, Papal Rome shall be cast down: Say
others, burnt. But it is not like if the City were burnt, but some would
rebuil'd it, as we did London.

9. And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication, and lived
deliciously, with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall
see the smoke of her burning: 10. Standing afar off for the fear of her torment
saying, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour
is thy judgment come.

9. The Nations, that were her companions in Idolary, shall bewail her great
and sudden fall. Obj. Papal Rome falls not suddenly. Ans. We know not what it
may do yet: But it is certain Pagan Rome did.

11. And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no man
buyeth her merchandise any more, 12. The merchandise of gold and silver, and
precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and
scarlet, and all thynewood and all manner vessels of Ivory, and all manner
vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble, 13. And
cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and
fine flower, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots,
slaves, and souls of men.

11, 12, 13. The Pride and Greatness of Rome, bought up all that many Countries
could bring in, of all sorts for necessity and delight; and they fed the Pagan
Idolatry and Tyranny: Others apply it to Papal Pardons, Offices and
Preferments. But these were rather bought at Rome, than sold thither. By Souls
of Men, some understand Pagan Romes Slaves, some their Soul-murdering Idolatry,
and some Papal Soul-murders.

14. And the fruits, that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and
all things, which were dainty and goodly, are departed from thee, and thou
shall and them no more at all. 15. The merchants of these things, which were
made rich by her, shall stand afar off for the tear of her torment, weeping and
wailing, 16. And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine
linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and
pearls! 17. For in one hour so great riches is come to naught.

14, 15, 16, 17. Rome's Pride and Sensuality found all the Countries money for
all sorts of commodities, whose Market cease by her destruction.

17. And every ship master, and all the company in ships, and sailers, and as
many as trade by sea, stood afar off, 18. And cried, when they saw the smoke of
her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city? 19. And they cast
dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that
great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea, by reason of
her costliness! for in one hour is she desolate.

17, 18, 19. The Fall of the Pagan Power and Religion, being the Political Life
of the City, is thus represented in Vision to John under the show of the
burning of the City-buildings (as our Eyes saw London burning three days 1666.
September. 2, 3, and 4th.) Or, say others, The Fall of Rome Papal was thus
represented: But others say, that Rome Papal shall be thus really burnt and
destroyed.

20. Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets, for God
has avenged you on her.

20. It was this same Roman Idolatrous Power which murdered the Holy Apostles
and many Prophets that are now in Heaven: And they shall rejoice in the
vindictive justice of God: And so shall the Church on earth; Not as it is
revenge on private enemies, but as it is Gods public deliverance of his
Church, and vindication of his truth and Cause and Glory.

21. And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into
the sea, saying, Thus, with violence, shall that great city Babylon be thrown
down, and shall be found no more at all.

21. The Pagan Empire was never again restored; for Julian did but begin to
attempt it, and was killed, before he could so much as lay any foundations for
it. Yea Rome was never more the seat of the Empire, much less of the Pagan
Empire: For Constantine did but, as it were, take up his quarters there for a
short time* and remove the seat to Constantinople: And his Successors in the
West, had but the lesser part of the Empire, and were, sometimes at Rome, and
sometime at Millan, and sometimes at Ravenna, and after in France and Germany.

22. And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters,
shall be heard no more at all in thee: and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he
be, shall be found any more in thee: and the sound of a millstone shall be heard
no more at all in thee. 23. And the light of a candle shall shine no more at
all in thee: and the voice of the bridegroom, and of the bride, shall be heard
no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth: for
by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.

22, 23. Thus, as by the Emblem of a City totally ruined and deserted, was the
Fall of Pagan Rome represented to John: And that you may know, that it was not
the burning and desertion of the material buildings that is meant, he now tells
you that, by the merchants, he meant the Nations that consented to, and upheld,
her Idolatry, and power.

24. And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that
were slain upon the earth.

24. God dealt thus severely with her, because she had not only been the
murderer of Apostles and Prophets, and the primitive Christians, at Rome and
abroad, in all her Dominions, in upholding her Idols, but (as Jerusalem) had by
imitating former persecutors, justified them, and so suffers for all. The
considering of Dan. 7.11. Jer. 51.63. and 25.10. Ezekiel. 17.13. Ezekiel. 27.12, 13.
Will help to expound all this.

Others say, It is Papal Rome, and how the blood of Apostles and Prophets was
found in her, they tell us from Matthew. 23.35. And how the blood of Saints will
be found in her, is easily proved.

CHAP. XIX.
1. ANd after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven,
saying, Halleluiah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord
our God:

1. The Saints in Heaven, and the Christians on earth, gave Praise to God, and
glorified him, for this great work.

2. For true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great
whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the
blood of his servants at her hand. 3. And again they said, Allelujah: and her
smoke rose up for ever and ever.

2, 3. They glorified God for holy and amiable justice^ and destroying the
Mother of Idolatry and nest of Luxury and cruelty. God will have great Glory by
destroying the persecutors and wicked, and in delivering his Saints, and in the
Freedom of the Gospel.

4. And the four and twenty elders, and the four beasts fell down, and
worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Allelujah.

4. And the consenting Praises of the Church, especially of Christian Jews, was
represented to me under the ost-mentioned similitude of the Temple-Worship,
where the Twelve Tribes were doubly represented (by twelve Oxen, and twelve
Lions) and four Cherubims were about the Mercy-Seat. Jews, and Gentile
Christians, praise God for the Fall of Babylon.

5. And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.

5. And God himself, and his Ministers, called to all his Church to join in
these his Praises.

6. And I heard, as it were, the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice
of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Allelujah: for
the Lord God omnipotent reigns: 7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give
honor to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her
self ready. 8. And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine
linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints.

6, 7, 8. And the raising of the Catholic Church in numbers, and extent, and
power, to the visible Glory of Christ, was represented to me by the Voice as of
a great multitude, etc. saying, Praise the Lord, for his Kingdom is coming in
Power, and his Church shall be promoted by the Rulers of the Earth, and the
Kingdoms of the World shall be visibly the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ: And Christ and his Church will appear to the World in Honor and Joy,
as Marriages use to be celebrated. And the Catholic Church shall be clothed
with the notes of Honor and Purity, or Righteousness (or shall publicly
worship him in his instituted Ordinances.)

9. And he says unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the
marriage-supper of the Lamb, And he says unto me, These are the true sayings
of God.

9. Happy are they that shall see the fall of Babylon, and the Deliverance and
Advancement of the Christian Church, and shall have their place and part in
that public Reign of Christ, by his Christian Magistrates and Pastors, and in
the public praises of the flourishing Christ, (much more they that shall see
his Reign in the Kingdom of Glory.)

10. And I fell at his feet to worship him: and he said unto me, See thou do it
not: I am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of
Jesus, worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

10. I thought that I owed so great honor to such a Messenger of so glad
Tidings, that I fell at his feet to worship, him (not with Divine Worship, as
God, but as his Angel;) but he forbad it me, and bid me worship God only, and
not Angels, by such prostration: (For though we we may, by prostration, do
worship to a Prince or Parent, yet to do it to Angels that are invisible, will
be too like the Heathen sort of Worship, and encourage those that offer Angels,
unwarrantable Worship.) I am a Servant of Christ, and a fellow servants to thee
and thy Brethren the Prophets; and your Office of publishing the Gospel, and
mine in this Prophecy, are much like: The Spirit of Prophecy, by which you are
Christ's Messengers and Witnesses, is that Testimony of Jesus, which you and I,
as fellow servants, are in our several capacities employed.

11. And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat upon
him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge and make
war.

11. Having spoken in general of the Fall of Babylon, he now shows how Christ
in its over throw will do execution on those his Enemies, till he have rooted
the out; and how the Beast will struggle before he be quite destroyed, and that
not in Rome only.

12. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns, and he
had a name written, that no man knew but he himself. 13. And he was clothed
with a vesture dipped in blood, and his Name is called, The word of God.

12, 13. His flaming Eyes signify his Glory and Omniscience; and his many
Crowns, the many Kingdom^ which he shall subdue and reign over. What his
unknown Name is, we must not enquire. His bloody Vesture signifies his Victory
over his Enemies, purchased with his Churches deliverance by his own blood: And
his known Name is, The Word of God

14. And the armies, which were in heaven followed him upon white horses
clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

14. And the Executioners of his justice on Babylon, etc. were represented to
me by an Army of heavenly ones following him on white Horses, and clothed in
white, etc.

15. And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he shall smite the
natitions; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treads the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of almighty God.

15. The word of his mouth is, as a sharp Sword, to overcome the Heathen World,
and all his Enemies, by converting his chosen, and denouncing his Judgments on
the uncurable, which he will execute, and that presently by the Sword of his
Warriors, by whom he will crush the Rebels, and on them he will execute God's
Vindictive Justice.

16. And he has, on his vesture, and on his thigh, a name written, KING OF
KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

16. For besides. [the Word of God] he has another name on his thigh (where
the Sword is worn) King of Kings, etc. For he will reign, and all Kings and
Lords are under him and he will subdue his Foes.

17. And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather your
selves together unto the supper of the great God: 18. That ye may eat the flesh
of Kings and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh
of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free
and bond, both small and great.

17, 18. It cannot be expected that the whole Idolatrous Empire of Babylon be
destroyed without War: And he will conquer that is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords: And Commanders and Soldiers shall be a prey to the Fowls; which was
fulfilled on Maxentius, Li^inius, etc. Others say, this is destruction of the
Popish Kings: And others, that it signifies not their death, but the Fall of
Popery

19. And I saw the beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their armies,
gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against
his army. 20. And the be^st was taken, and with him the false prophet, that
wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had receive^ the
mark of the beast; and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast
alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

19, 20. The Pagan emperors were conquered, and with them the Literate
Sedu^^rs (Senators, Orators, Poets, Philosophers, Augurs, Aruspices, Priests,
who by such Poetical Fable is, as Ovid's Metamorphesis, and by feigned
Predictions, Oracles, and such pretended Miracles as Eunapius boasts of by
many of their Philosophers, but especially by the power of their abused
Learning, called by Paul the Wisdom of the World, which is foolishness with
God, and Science falsely so called) who deceived the Princes and People into a
high Opinion of their Idols, and a contempt o^ Christianity, as foolishness:
The Imperial Power, and the Learned Seducers, were rooted out, and, as Sodom,
cast into utter destruction, and judged to damnation.

Others say, that the Beast here is the Pope, and the false Prophet, with him,
is himself also, he being the Beast as Civil Ruler, and the Prophet as
Ecclesiastical: But the Text plainly makes them two, Others say, it is the
Pope and his Clergy, Jesuits, Friars, etc.

21. And the remnant were slain with the sword of him, that sat upon the horse,
which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled with
their flesh.

21. The memory of their conquered Emperors and Philosophers, Senators, Poets,
etc. is continued in History (as Pilate's in the Creed) to their perpetual
shame, and so they are said to be cast alive into the Lake: But the multitudes
of Soldiers and People, that fought for them, were slain and cast into
Oblivion; or some converted by the Word, and some confounded. Or, as others,
the Papists are some converted, and others for obstinacy condemned.

CHAP. XX.
1. ANd I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless
pit, and a great chain in his hand. 2. And he laid hold on the dragon, that old
serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, 3. And
cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be
fulfilled: and after that, he must be loosed a little season.

1, 2, 3. And as for the notice of the state of the Church after the
extirpation of the Pagan Empire and Idolatry, it was showed me under the
appearance of an Angel coming from Heaven with power to restrain the Devil, and
he laid hold on him, and imprisoned, and surely shut him up* as in a bottomless
Pit, that he might deceive the Nations now turned to Christ, no more for a
thousand years (or a long time:) But then he will be permitted a little while,
to deceive many Churches.

Note; Satan ever since, to this day, has kept about four parts of six of the
World in Heathenism; so that it must be the World then under the Roman Empire
that he is bound from deceiving. Whether a thousand years be taken strictly, or
for a long time, is uncertain: Some take it to be a promise of his 1000 years
restraint after the Fall of the Pagan Empire; and many, for 1000 years after
the Fall of the Papacy. The former think it is all past; the last (mostly)
think it is all yet to come, but some, that it began 1560. It is not a promise
that Satan shall not, in that thousand years, corrupt the Christian Church with
any great sin, but that he shall not seduce them from Christianity, till after
a thousand years. Just at, or about, that space of time, Mahometanism, which
began farther off, about 606, did invade the Eastern Churches, and overcome the
Christian Powers, and set up a false Prophet, an Enemy to Christ, and bring
Christianity into captivity and scorn.

4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto
them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the Witness of Jesus,
and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his
image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands;
and they lived and reigned with Chirist a thousand years.

4. And the happy following state, of the Church, was further represented to me
by the appearance of Thrones, where men sat in Judgment, showing the dominion
of Christians over their Enemies. And I thought I saw the Souls of the Martyrs,
whom the Pagans murdered, and not only of them, but of all sound Christians,
who had abstained from all participation in the Pagan Idolatry, and they lived
and reigned, as superior to their Enemies, with Christ, the King of the Church,
a thousand years.

Note; Here is no talk of the Bodies Resurrection, but the Souls living and
reigning with Christ: And it seems to mean, that as the Souls of the Faithful
live and reign with Christ in Heaven, for duration; so the Successors of such
shall partake on Earth of such a Reign, as Christ will exercise in his Church:
And if yet many corruptions and troubles consist in this imperfect state, with
Christ's own Reign in the Soul, and in the Church, why may it not consist with
this promised Reign of Saints in the Empire over Pagans? As Christ's Reign here
is more or less prevalent against public sin, so shall their participation
with him be. Both heavenly and Earthly Reign seem here spoken of: the first, as
in reality, though, in the Vision, but to show the other.

5. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were
finished. This is the first resurrection. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has
part in the first resurrection: on such the second death has no power, but
they shall be priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand years.

5, 6. The rest of the dead, even the subdued Pagans, (or Papists, say others.)
were kept as in a state of death, out of power, till the Dragon revived their
power again a thousand years after. Happy are the holy Christians, who shall be
partakers in the privileges, blessings and comforts of this delivered and
advanced Church; they shall no more fall under the Pagan Power (or Papal, say
others,) not partake with them of that utter destruction, which is as a second
death: Even as holy Souls, with Christ in Heaven, have these the state of a
first Resurrection before the Body rise, and are secured from the condemnation
of the wicked.

7. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison, 8. And shall go out to deceive the nations, which are in the four
quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle: the
number of whom is as the sand of the sea.

7, 8. There are several Expositions of this; some say that, by the Thousand
years, is meant precisely that time, which fell out either from Constantine's
Edict 611. till the Turks subdued Greece; or from Alaricus's sacking Rome, till
the Turks took Constantinople: And that the Fall of the Eastern Churches, under
the Infidel Power, was the letting loose of Satan: Others say, that a thousand
years signifies only a long undeterminate time, and that it was the Churches
prosperity, till the Papacy corrupted all, and tyrannized. Others say, it was a
thousand years before Antichrist should come: Others, that it will be a
thousand years after the Fall of the Papacy, in which Religion shall flourish
under holy Princes and Pastors: Others, that after the Fall of the Papal
Antichrist, Christ will visibly return, and sent up a holy Kingdom, whose chief
Seat shall be at Jerusalem.

Some say, that it will be a Resurrection of Bodies; some only Political. Some
say, that the Thousand years began at Christ's Birth, or at the Apostles
Preaching: Others, at the destruction of Jerusalem, and ended about
Hildebrand's time. Some (as before said) at Constantine's Empire, and ended at
Boniface the 8, that killed the Albigenses, etc. Others, that it began at 1560.
He that knows which of these is the right, let him tell it, for I do not. By
Gog and Magog many understand the Turks; others, all sorts of Christ's Enemies:
Whoever they be, a War they will attempt against the Church, and will be
overthrown.

9. And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the
saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down from God out of heaven,
and devoured them.

9. This Text seems the hardest of all the rest: Those that say, the holy
City is Constantinople; some of them are put to say, that Gog and Magog's
destruction, as by fire, is yet to come: But the Text seems to speak of it,
as done before they could take the City. Others say, it was Tamerlane, (an
Infidel, and therefore sent, from God, against his own inclination:) that
raised Bajazet's Siege, and carried him about in a Cage of Iron in scorn, till
he wilfully dashed out his own brains; and so Andronicus was delivered. Others
refer it to Baldwin's, and other Christians taking Constantinople, against the
Turkish Power: But because the Turks after took it, these seem not to agree
with the Text. Others think it is a War yet to come, say some, at Jerusalem,
which shall by Christ be made the holy City, or his Chief Royal Seat; and there
will be his Thousand years Reign on E^rth. Others take the Holy City to mean
the Reformed Churches, which shall again be assaulted by all sorts of Enemies,
before the day of Judgment. And some take the Camp of the Saints, and the
Beloved City, to be the seven Asian Churches to whom John wrote. Whatever it
be, if it be past, I understand not what, or when it was; if it be to come,
time must expound it. In general it is sure, that Enemies will often assault the
Church, and God will defend it.

10. And the devil, that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented
day and night, for ever and ever.

10. When Christ has delivered his Church from Pagan Cruelty, the same Dragon,
or Devil, will seek new Instruments to assault it, from age to age, and most
notably at the last: But he shall be conquered after all, and be cast out into
torment, as the Pagan Powers and Deceivers were.

11 And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the
earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them.

11. Some think that this speaks not of the day of Judgment, but of the
calling of the Jews: And some think the meaning is, that when Christ sets up
the Thousand years refined Church, (by a Resurrection, and his visible
presence, say some; or by a holy Government and People, and Deliverance from
Enemies, say others,) both the Power of Infidels, ( Turks and Heathens,) which
are meant by the Earth; and the Corrupted Church, (both Papal and Greek, etc.
meant by Heaven) shall all vanish, that the holy City may take place. But most
say, it describes the day of Judgment.

12. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God: and the books were
opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead
were judged out of those things, which were written in the books, according to
their works.

12. When Christ has overcome his Churches Enemies, he will judge the World,
and the book of their own doings and Consciences shall be opened; and also Gods
book of Life, (the Scripture or Gospel Law,) say some, which is the Rule of
Judgment; or the book of Gods Decree, say others, in which all are enrolled
that shall be saved. And they shall be judged according to their works, the
matter of Fact being recorded in their book, and the matter of right in Gods
Law, and the conclusion in his Decree: To be judged according to their works,
is to be then justified, or condemned, as they have sincerely kept Christ's Law
of Grace, by which they shall be tried; or have not kept it, by Faith,
Repentance, and sincere Obedience, the condition of Salvation..

13. And the sea gave up her dead which were in it: and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man
according to their works.

13. All that were any way dead, were judged according to their works, by the
Law that they were under.

14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second
death. 15. And whosoever, was not found written in the book of life, was cast
into the lake of fire.

14, 15. And death and Hades, that is, Mortality, shall to his Saints be by
Christ for ever abolished, or, as some take it, those wicked men, that death
and hell shall deliver up to Judgment, shall be cast into hell fire. This utter
abolition, (or this damnation,) is called the second death. And whosoever has
not right to Salvation, by the Gospel Covenant, or Law of grace, and is not by
God enrolled among the Heirs of Life, was cast into the Lake of fire.

Mr. Potter, and many others, expound all this confidently, (and the two
following Chapters,) of Christ's judging, and rewarding, and punishing, men in
this Life: But others as confidently, of the Life to come. Though this make the
Text difficult, it makes no great doctrinal controversy; both being commonly
believed.

CHAP. XXI.
1. ANd I saw a new heaven, and a new earth: for the first heaven, and the
first earth, were passed away, and there was no more sea.

1. N. That the corrupt State of the World, and the degenerate Church, may be
called the old heaven and earth, is granted: And that the Church, before the
End, may be so reformed and blessed, as that heaven and earth may be said to be
new: And also that fire at last shall dissolve the earth, and that heaven, that
fell under the Curse for man's sin, and there shall be (no annihilation but) a
New Heaven, and earth, is plain in Peter, etc. But which of these is the sense
of this Text is doubtful. I incline most to the later, that it is the new
World, that shall follow the conflagration, and Judgment. If any ask what the
new earth shall be for? he must take up with what God has told us; Therein
shall dwell Righteousness, and the Creature be delivered from the bondage of
Corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Soas of God, and all things shall
be restored. Whether we shall then dwell on Earth, or only a new made
Generation, is not so clear. But the Jerusalem, now in Heaven, consists of
Spirits; And this must come down from Heaven, and these Spirits must be again,
at the Resurrection, embodyed: And do not new bodies suit with a new Earth, as
Spirits with Heaven? Obj. This will be to our loss: Ans. No, God will dwell
with man, and be no Stranger to us then in Heaven: Heaven and Earth will not be
separated as now. As our bodies will be (no Clog to the Souls but) Spiritual,
incorruptible bodies, so Earth will be made suitable to them. Its no diminution
to the Glory of the Sun to shine on bodies, no nor of God, to Vouchsafe them
his influence.

2. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

2. Not new created Souls, but immortal Souls, coming down with Christ, say
some; before the day of Judgment, say others, after. Many Texts seem to place
it here, and not in Heaven only, after the Resurrection. This is the Life of
Preparation on our part; but Souls in Heaven are further prepared by Christ.

3. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

3. Wherever the place be, Gods presence in glory, wlll make it a Heaven to us.
But if it did speak only of an advancement by holy Reformation and Peace on
Earth, it would be so far like to Heaven.

4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain:
for the former things are passed away.

4. If they be in the right, who expound this of a Thousand Years freedom from
Persecutions, and all Sorrows on Earth, in a New Jerusalem, I am sure it will
be a more joyful time, when it shall be performed in the propersense of the
words, after the general resurrection. And I see no probability that the
promise of [ no more death,] and the rest that follow should be meant of any
earthly state, before that time. The new Jerusalem, and the new Heaven and
Earth, must be at once expected: and that is, when all these things are
dissolved by fire, at the judgment of the great day. O desirable blessed day!

5. And he that sat upon the throne, said, Behold, I make all things new. And
he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful.

5. It is true that at Constantines delivering the Church, there was as it were
a New World. And I am in hope yet, that there may be such a Reformation and
advancement of Piety and Unity before the last day, as may be called a New
World, in a fuller sense: But not up to this description of the New Jerusalem.

6. And he said unto me, It is done: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end, I will give unto him, that is a athirst, of the fountain of the water
of life freely.

6. Say some [I am he that has thus delivered the Church from Idolaters and
persecutors; and now all, that will, shall have the blessed privileges of the
Church.] Rather (I have prepared the Church for the state of Blessedness and I,
that an* the principal efficient and ultimate end of all, will give life
everlasting, in the new Jerusalem, to every believing thirsty Soul.]

7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son.

7. He that overcomes Temptation to the end, shall, as my son, inherit full
felicity in me, who will be his God.

8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone: which is the second
death.

8. But those that, being cowardly, forsake me for fear of suffering, and trust
not me, and those that live in filthiness and cruelty, and unrighteousness and
Idolatry, and all false deceivers, shall be damned.

9. And there came unto me one of the seven angels, which had the seven vials
full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will
show thee the bride, the lambs wife.

9. By the Bride is meant the new Jerusalem, that is, say some, the delivered
Church in Constantines time and after, 2. Say others, the reformed Church at
the Fall of Popery. 3. Say others, a prosperous time before the thousand years.
4. Say others, the Jews conversion in great splendour at Jerusalem. 5. Say
others, Christ's visible reign with the martyrs, and others, raised from death a
thousand years before the rest. 6. Rather the new Heaven and Earth after the
last judgment, when the flaming sword, and partition wall, shall be taken down,
and God dwell with man.

10. And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and
showed me the great City the Holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from God.

10. Say some, the Church, as here advanced to purity and liberty by the
heavenly power: Rather the Souls, that were with Christ, coming with him to
meet those that shall be then alive and changed, advanced to that perfection,
in which they shall for ever be glorified with the Lord. Though some glympse of
this may be in happy reformation, concord and deliverance here before.

11. Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most
precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal:

11. Its Glory and strength was represented to me, as made of Jasper, clear as
Crystal, Gods own Glory shineing out.

12. And had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates
twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve
tribes of the children of Israel.

12. John being a Jew, and the Jews the first Christians, who had commonly an
expectation of Christ's more special relation to them than to others, and they
being the first specimen of the Catholic Church, the Revelation of the new
Jerusalem (and perhaps also of some antecedent happy state) is represented as
shaped to the Jews expectations; and as typified by the old Jerusalem. And its
wall is its strength and safety, and separation from others. Its gates are for
entrance, and the guardian Angels numbered according to the twelve tribes; as
were the Apostles, who yet founded all the Churches.,

13. On the east three gates, on the north three gates, on the south three
gates, and on the west three gates.

13. Note, Not that this must be thought the shape of it; but that its glory
was represented by such a shape.

14. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of
the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

14. As the Church on earth is founded by the doctrine and witness of the
twelve Apostles, so is the new Jerusalem described as related to them, it being
but the Church militant perfected and made triumphant.

15. And he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the city, and the
gates thereof, and the wall thereof. 16. And the city lies apiece, and
the length is as large as the breadth: and he measured the city with the reed,
twelve thousand furlongs: the length, and the breadth, and the height of it are
equal.

15, 16. By this representation, (like that in Ezekiel) the firmness, and
perfection and greatness of the new Jerusalem was signified.

17. And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four cubits,
according to the measure of a man, that is, of the angel.

17. The Angel appearing as a man, his measure is taken as a common humane
measure.

18. And the building of the wall of it was of jasper, and the city was pure
gold, like unto clear glass. 19. And the foundations of the wall of the city
were garnished with all manner of precious stones. The first foundation was
jasper, the second sapphire, the third a chalcedony, the fourth an emerald. 20.
The fifth sardonix, the sixth sardius, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth
beryl, the ninth a topaz, the tenth a chrysophrasus, the eleventh a jacinth,
the twelfth an amethyst.

18, 19, 20. That the new Jerusalem is represented by these precious stones, as
firm, precious, lucid and glorious, and by the number of twelve, as suited to
the twelve Apostles, and so in them to the twelve Tribes of Israel, as typical
of the new Jerusalem, is all that I understand of this: what each precious
stone distinctly signifies, you may read in them that know, (or take on them
to know,) more.

21. And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, every several gate was of one
pearl, and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.

21. If there shall be any state, on this side eternity, which answers this
glorious representation, how much more will the perfected glorious triumphant
Church answer it?

22. And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are
the temple of it.

22. Some expound this of liberty to serve to God in every place, as well as in
Temples (who yet would destroy them as conventiclers, that do so.) But the Text
seems to mean, that this new Jerusalem is the perfect state, which is above
our instituted lower means. God will be our All.

23. And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it:
for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

23. Prophetical Hyperbolies and Allegories, may put as high terms as these for
a state of mere reformation, and Church prosperity: But seeing that it must be
a force, and not an exposition, which so restrains it, without proof, we must
believe that it has a higher accomplishment.

24. And the nations of them, which are saved, shall walk in the light of it:
and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it.

24. And those, that shall be converted out of all nations, of the Gentiles,
shall, as well as Abraham and the Christian Jews, lay up and find a treasure
with Christ in the new Jerusalem.

Note; They that expound this of the Thousand years Reign of raised Martyrs at
Jerusalem, and they that expound it of a peculiar Jewish Church there, after
the Jews Conversion, say, that the Nations round about shall not have the same
Confirmation and Glory, as the New Jerusalem, but be liable to Trials still.
Dr. Ham. who expounds it of the Churches prosperity after Constantine's
Success, gives these Reasons, 1. Because the New Jerusalem descends from
Heaven. Ans. 1. So it may to Judgment, and yet return to Heaven. 2. Or rather,
the New Heaven and Earth shall be open as one. An immortal Glory, in the New
Earth after the Resurrection, may be the New Jerusalem. 2 He argues from Gal.
4.26. as if the Jerusalem above were only the Church Militant: But that we deny.

25. And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day; for there shall be no
night there. 26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into
it.

25, 26. There shall be no danger of the entrance of Enemies or Traitors; But
all worldly glory and blessings by Saints referred to this end, shall there be
found in the transcendent perfect state.

27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie; but they which are written in
the Lambs book of life.

27. Sure this proves that it is somewhat better than the thousand years after
Constantine, that is here meant: For alas, how much abomination and deceit
entered in that time! what hatred, false accusations, worldliness, pride,
cruelty and contention? 2. Note; None but Saints cleansed from gross sin, will
be found written in the Lambs Book of Life. It is a vile slander on the
Orthodox Doctrine of Election, that we say, the Elect may be saved how wickedly
soever they live; when we say, that it is one Decree of God that electeth men
to be holy, obedient, persevere, and be saved.

CHAP. XXII.
1. ANd he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb.

1. By this some understand Baptism* that binds all to Purity: Some the
Gospel (not muddied by Usurpers corrupt Canons:) And some, the Spirit in
greater measure: And some, the heavenly influence for illumination and life for
ever. All these in their seasons may be expected.

2. In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river, was
there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her
fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the
nations.

2. As in the prosperous Church militant, everlasting life is open, and given
to all accepters, by the Doctrine of the Apostles, and continually represented
and conferred in the Sacraments, and by the Word, the Spirit of Christ
accompanying his Ordinances, the Preaching of the Word is for the healing of
the unbelievers and unconverted: So, in the New Jerusalem, where the end of all
his is attained the Glory is represented by the means that are past, that
brought them thither, by which men were sanctified, and the Nations healed; the
means being eminently (though not formally) in the attained end. But the better
the Church is on Earth, the more it thus resembles the New Jerusalem.

3. And there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God, and of the Lamb,
shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him. 4. And they shall see his
face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.

3, 4. Thus it appears that the New Jerusalem is a state of Immortality (by
the Tree of Life,) and freedom from the Curse, or all punishment for sin, and
the very Throne of God, and Christ shall be visibly in it, and they see God's
face: And though somewhat tending to all this be in the Church militant, this
seems a description of the Church triumphant.

5. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light
of the sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever
and ever.

5. There shall be no want of knowledge, nor need of Ministers, Teaching,
Scripture, or such means. For God will be to them above, and instead of these;
and they shall reign for ever. And what more can be hoped for by man? Why
should forced Expositions darken this?

6. And he said unto me. These sayings are faithful and true. And the Lord God
of the holy prophets sent his angel to show, unto his servants, the things
which must shortly be done.

6. As Christ, Matthew. 24. told them of such devastations as that generation
should see, and yet adjoyneth the signs of the end of the World; just so does
he, by this Revelation, show John the Fall of Pagan Babylon and the Churches
deliverance, and yet shortly annex a thousand years after, and then the end of
the World: All was to be shortly, but not shortly equally with the first parts.
But it is not to be said, that he almost past by the things that were shortly
to be done, and said almost all of the Papal Rome. The certainty of the
Revelation is the hope and joy of firm Believers.

7. Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the
prophecy of this book.

7. Think not that I delay my coming, as slack of performing my Promise: Some
of this will be quickly done, and the last e're long. To understand and believe
this Prophecy will be comfortable: But to keep the Precepts of it, avoid the
Sins threatened, believe the Promise of my Victories and Coming, and wait in
Patience, is needful to all.

8. And I John* saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and
seen, I fell down to worshp before the feet of the angel, which showed me these
things.

8. Note; All faulty Worship of Angels is not Idolatry, nor makes a Church
Idolatrous: It was not Divine Worship which John gave the Angel: If really he
wrote most of this Book against Popish Idolatry, as many think, he would never
be twice guilty of worse than their praying to Angels and Saints themselves,
whom he condemned: For they worship them no^, as Gods, though amiss. John
thought Vener^tion was the Angels due.

9. Then says he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servants, and
of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book:
worship God.

9. See before cap. 19.10. God is jealous of any thing too like Idolatry. Note;
Are Angels our fellow servants? love them then, and be thankful to God for
their Love and Help; and rejoice in this privileage, and think it not unlikely
that you should live with them for ever. O what a people should we be then in
holiness!

10. And he says unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book:
for the time is at hand.

10. The most of it is to be performed ere long, in the ruin of the Pagan
persecuting Empire.

11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let
him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and
he that is holy, let him be holy still. 12. And behold, I come quickly, and my
reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be.

11, 12. I come quickly to fulfill and execute this Prophecy; and then I will
take and judge men, as I find them; there shall be no more place for
preparation; as it was with the wise and foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. when the
midnight cry was, The Bridegroom comes, as I find you, I will use you.

13. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last.

13. I am God e^^rnal, the first cause, and ultimate end of all things, able to
fulfill my Will and Word.

14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.

14. Blessed are they that do what Christ requires to Salvation in his Law of
Grace, (or purify their heart and life) that they may, by his free gift, have
right to enter into the New Jerusalem, and live with Christ for ever.

15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

15. For all filthy, cruel, persecuting, Idolatrous persons, and Liars, and
deceitful Te^chers, and Hypocrites, (though called Christians,) are shut out of
the holy City, as Dogs are turned out of the house.

16. I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the
churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning
Star.

16. I Jesus have sent my Angel to tell these things to John, that he may tell
them to the Churches of Asia, and by them to others (the matter much concerning
those Churches then alive.) Take these as my own Words, who am the Messiah
prophesied of, as the Root and Son of David, and am the Light of the World,
sent to teach men the way of life.

17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, come. And let him that is athirst, come.
And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.

17. And seeing Church-deliverance now, and the Glory of the New Jerusalem at
last, are the effects of my coming, as my Spirit teaches men to desire my
coming, and my Church and Chosen do desire it; so let all desire it that wou^d
partake of that felicity. For all shall have it by my free gift, who do but
b^lievingly desire it. For I will shut out none but final obstinate refusers.

18. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of
this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book: 19. And if any man shall take away from
the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written
in this book.

18, 19. If any wilfully corrupt this Prophecy, in words or sense, to draw men
from believing it, to the belief of their own corrupt Additions, God will add
to them his Plagues, and deprive them of any part of the blessings here
foretold, and shut them out of this holy City of God.

Note; It Is dangerous then to make bold, Cabalistical, Fanatic Expositions of
this Book, and to call our own conceits the sense of the Revelation: And it is
dangerous groundlesly to expect more Prophecies of God's usage of his Church;
or to add to any of his Word, or dim^nish from it, and father any of our
Errors on Christ, and on his Spirit, which has here finished that Book, which
must be the universal Churches Rule of Life.

20. He which testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even
so, Come Lord Jesus.

20. Jesus, who is the Author of this Revelation, surely promises that he will
come quickly, by degrees to perform all his word, and charge you not to
question it through unbelief, or to saint by doubting, as if he did fall by his
delay. And let us all with Faith, hope and desire, prepare and earnestly pray
for his coming: Even so; come Lord Jesus.

21. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

21. I conclude all with this best Request to God for you, and Benediction to
you, that the Grace of our Lord Jesus, which is our preparation for Glory, and
our earnest, pledge, and foretast of it, may be with you, to prepare you, and
Seal you up, as the certain Heirs of that Blessed S^ate, and save you from all
sin, and Temptation, and Enemies that would deprive you of it. Amen.

An Advertisement.
READERS,
I Here give you notice, (which I desire you not to forget in the reading of
this Paraphrase,) that it is but some General Notes, and not a proper
Exposition of the Revelations, which I offer you. And that I here confess to
you, that very much of it I understand not: And if this offend any, that say I
should have better studied it. I only say, 1. That you suffer fools gladly,
seeing your selves are wise. 2. That I am far below Dionysius Alexandrinus, and
most of the Ancient Fathers, even Augustine himself, who professed that they
understood it not: Yea incomparable Calvin professes that he understood not
the Thousandth Part of it; And his Partner Beza would give us little of it,
next to none: And both refused to write a Comment on it. 3. I honor them that
know more than I, and contradict them not: I had rather say too little (where
other men have said enough) than say more than I know. 4. It is not through
mere sloth, that I am ignorant: Women and Boys think they know herein what I do
not, who have studied it less than I, but I confess that Despair is much of the
cause. Forty four years ago, when I was but young, I studied it (I doubt too
soon) and read Brightman, Napier, Pareus, etc. and after that Mede, Potter, and
many more, besides such Treatises, as Downamus de Antichristo, Broughton, and
other such, besides the answerers of Bellarmin, etc. I met with many Divines
and Laymen, who had chosen it out for the chief study of their Lives, and I
found so great diversity of Opinions, five of the most confident going four
ways, and so little proof of what they most confidently asserted, that I
despaired of being so much wiser then they, as to come to satisfaction, if I
should lay by more necessary studies, and make this the business of the rest of
my Life, which yet I durst not do. Afterward I converst with my fellow
Labourer, Mr. Nath. Stephens, who has written of it, and was much upon it in
his discourse, but I durst not be drawn to a deep study of it: And when since I
read Mr. Durham, Dr. Moor, etc. and Grotius, and Dr. Hammond, and many
Annotators, I confess despair, and more needful business, made me do it but
superficially: And when I had for my own use written the rest of this
Paraphrase on the New Testament, I proposed to have said nothing of any more of
the Revelations, than of the three first Chapters, professing that I understood
it not. But after, being loath to omit wholly any part of the New Testament, and
thinking that the renewed study of that, which speaks so much of the New
Jerusalem, might be suitable to a pained dying man, I thought of it more
searchingly than I had done heretofore, but have not now either the strength of
Wit, or length of time, that are necessary to so hard a work, and therefore
presume not to oppose others, but refer the Readers to them that have more
thoroughly studied and expounded it, than I can do: But yet I thought that those
Generals, which I understood, might be useful to unlearned Readers, though they
made them no wiser than I am my self; while those, that are above me, have
enough higher to read.

If any be offended that I name so many men's Opinions; I answer them, 1. Had I
known which of them was right, I would have mentioned that only: But when I
know it not, (and their difference tells us that they know it not themselves,)
how can I honestly be so partial as to name one, and pass by all the rest? And
how should I know which that one must be? When Lira had given us the Exposition
of much of it, he plainly tells us, that these are other men's Expositions, but
he thinks them improbable, and if ever he come to understand it himself, he
will tell us the true meaning; which if he had not said, I should have thought
that Lira delirasset, though the saying be, Si Lira non Lirasset, totus mundus
delirasset. My Friend, Mr. Matthew. Pool, in his Synopsis, has recited greater
diversity of Opinions than I have done; where the arguments for them may be
partly seen, which my short notes must not take in.

The points which are too hard for me, are these especially.

I. Whether the Dragon, Beast, or false Prophet, or Whore, be the special
Antichrist? And whether the case of Antichrist be here much, or at all, meddled
with? II. Who is the first Beast? Chap. 13. III. Who is the second Beast? IV.
What is the Image of the Beast? V. What is his Mark received, and what his
name, and what is the number of it received? VI. What is the Whore? VII. Who
are the two Witnesses? and where, and when killed? VIII. What is the binding of
the Dragon, and the thousand years reign, and resurrection, and where? IX.
What, and when, and where, is the Army against the Holy City, and the Wars at
Armageddon? X. What, and when, and where, is the New Jerusalem?
I. As to the first, I long took it for granted, that Antichrist is here spoken
of, even the same mentioned by John in his Epistle, and by Paul, 2 These. 2.2.
But, to my admiration when I searched, I could find neither the name of
Antichrist, nor an ascertaining description of him; so that I began to think
better of the most Learned Judicious Hierom. Zanchy, who took Mahomet to be the
Antichrist, though the Popes Crimes might allow us to take him for one of those
other Antichrists, of whom John says there were many. And if any find him here
characterized, as called the Beast, the false Prophet, or the Whore, I will
crave his pardon, for my choosing to take up with the Scripture Names. I am not
wiser than the Revealer of these things, in naming such as he here speaks of;
why are not the Names here given us sufficient? I will explain the word [
Antichrist] where I find it; and the words, [ Beast, false Prophet, Whore,
etc.] where I find them. I dread fiction and addition. Of the Description I
shall speak after.

II. Who is the first Beast, is of great importance, of which I find many
opinions: Those of the Fathers, and the Papists, I pass by: These now among us
stand chiefly in competition. 1. Those that say, it is the Roman Empire as
containing both the Pagan, and the Papal State: 2. Those that say, it is the
Papal Civil Power only, as upheld by Popish Princes, the ten Kings: 3. Those
that say, it is only the Papacy, or Antichrist, who is the first Beast, as in
Civil power, and the second, in Ecclesiastical. 4. Those that say, it is only
the Pagan Empire. (Others I pass by that say, 5. It is the Greeks Eastern
Empire; 6. Or the Turkish Empire; 7. Or a future unknown Antichrist; 8. Or the
Devil.)

I. Mr. Mede says, the first is the common opinion, but not true, he is for
the second; and Mr. Durham, and many of late, for the third, and all of them
against the 4th. I shall not further mention their reasons against each other,
but only those that are brought for the Papacy, either alone, or with its
supports, and those that are brought against the 4th opinion; (which is for the
Pagan Empire.)

I. They say that the first Beast must needs be the Papacy (or its supports.)
1. Because John saw the rising of it, so that it was then to come: But Pagan
Rome was before. 2. Because he succe^seth the Dragon in his Seat. 3. It is the
Pope that owneth the names of Blasphemy. 4. He is adored. 5. He only heals
the wounded head. 6. He is contemporary with the ten Kings with crowned horns.
7. He is contemporary with Babylon, which is Papal Rome. 8. All the Texts agree
to Papal Rome. 9. He is Antichrist, who is to sit in the Temple of God. 10.
That which hindered, was to be removed before his Revelation, which was the
Empire as Pagan.

II. And they say, it cannot be the Pagan Empire. 1. Because that was risen
long before. 2. Because it was not that Power, which was the sixth head, but
the seventh and eight, and ascended out of the bottomless pit, with whom the
ten Kings were to receive Kingdoms. 3. Because the Pagan Empire was not
contemporary with Babylon. 4. This Beast was to continue 1260 years, whereas
the Pagan Empire continued but 360. 5. It had not the ten crowned horns. 6. The
Roman Pagan Empire was lawfully obeyed, being of God, but so is not the Beast.
7. The things said Chap. 19. agree not with it.

And here the sixth doubt is coincident, what is the Whore? For if it be only
Papal Rome, then, say they, the Pope is the Beast. And this they prove. 1.
Because it is a mystery, which Heathen Idolatry was not. 2. Antichrist sits in
the Temple of God. 3. Because it is that Rome, that must be for ever desolate,
and a place for Devils and Serpents etc. 4. The fall of Babylon was to be,
after the faithful were come out of it: 5. Pagan Rome sold not Souls, nor made
the Nations drunk with the Cup of her Fornication. 6. She was not married to
Christ, and therefore could be no adultress. 7. She had no false Prophet, as
here described, to seduce and work Miracles, but did all by force etc.

II. But because it is an advantage to the Reader, to know the Judgment of men
in the Connection of the parts, and Mr. Brightman seems to have done his Work,
with as Pious a Zeal and as great Learning and deep study as any man, I shall
sum up his opinion about this matter, Having on Daniel strongly proved (after
Calvin) that the passages, commonly expounded of Antiochus are mistaken, he
says that it is the Romans Power that they mean, who were above all called
Gods, that is, all Princes, and that the Abomination (not making, but) made
Desolate, was the utterly casting out the old Jewish Temple-Worship, which was
good till abrogate, and Abominable afterward: That this was done by the
destruction of the Temple, but perfected in Julians time, by Gods overthrowing
it, when he attempted to re-edifie it. And on Rev. 13. And forward he says, 1.
That Antichrist, the Pope, is both the first and second Beast, and Latinos his
name, etc. 2. That the first 1000 years began with Constantine, who was the
Man-child, and bound the Dragon. 3. The binding him is that he shall no more
set up Heathenism. 4. But Antichrist began at the same time, and reigned al^
the while that the Dragon was bound, even from Constantine; And the Church was
in the Wildernes^. 5. The first Resurrection began 1300 when Marsil. Patavinus,
Wickliff, and others, began Reformation (But I am persuaded that those, after
called Albigenses, and before Bagandoe, were before Constantine; Reynerius
confesses that they called themselves Apostolicks, and said they were from
Silvesters, that is, Constantines time: Why then is Wickliff (who has many
errors) set above them?) 6. The rest of the Dead in Popery rose not by
Reformation. 7. The second death is Hell fire. 8. A second 1000 years, of
Church Reformation and Prosperity, began then at 1300, when the Dragon was let
loose: Antichrist began at his binding, and the happy 1000 years Reformation at
his loosing. 9. His loosing set up the Turk, Gog and Magog, (Scythians,) to a
War against the Saints. 10. The Camp of the Saints was Europe. 11. The Holy
City was the Converted Jews, and the place of the War in Judea, where the Turks
shall wonderfully be utterly destroyed, (by Michael the Angel of the Jews.) 12.
The Beast that deceived the Turk, is the Turk himself. 13. The Beast, and false
Prophet in Hell with him, is Antichrist, who falls a little before him. 14. The
Judgment and second Resurrection, Chap. 20.11. are the full restoring of the
Jews. 15. The Dead, small and great, judged are the Jews, that till now
rejected Christ. 16. The Sea and Earth giving up their Dead, are all Countries
sending home the Jews converted. 17. Death and Hell, cast into the Lake, are
Turks and Papist that shall detain the Jews no longer. 18. The Thrones and
Reign of those dead, is the destruction of their Enemies on Earth. 19. Only
elect Jews shall be in that Church: 20. What the first Heaven and Earth is,
that shall be done away, he does not know, but thinks it is the old Jewish way
of Worship, which shall cease as their conversion. 21. No more Sea, is no more
false Doctrine 22. No more Death, is no more sharp punishment, and that the
sting of death shall be taken out: 23. And the new Glorious Jerusalem,
described in the 21. and 22. Chapters, in this City or Church of the Converted
Jews at Jerusalem, the rest being restored with them. Why I incline to Learned
Mr. Calverts opnion, that the conversion of the Jews is long ago past, the
obstinate Jews being mostly destroyed by Titus and Adrian, and the Christian
Jews being very numerous quickly, and all, that stayed in Judea, as much made
the Kingdom of Christ, by Profession, in the days of Cyril, Juvenal and after,
when their Country was replenished with Bishops, Churches and Monasteries, and
many abroad since then Converted, (as Lira, Tremellius and others were,) as
other Christian Kingdoms were, (where some still are Infidels, I have showed on
Romans 11.)

But the most wonderful part of the expected Miracle is, that all these
Thousands, if not Millions of Jews, that live scattered through the World, and
now are the most vile, and Barbarous, ignorant and worldly Persons, living
among Turks, and Papists, where they hear not the Gospel, should all without
Preaching or Teaching be not only Converted at once, but made, such Wise and
excellent Christians, as are fitter to constitute a Glorious Church, than we
that have bin taught so long. If God have promised that not only a Nation, but
a New Jerusalem, should be thus born, or come down from Heaven, in a day, it
must be believed: But doubtless it will be a Miracle incomparably excelling all
that Christ and his Apostles did; yea Millions of Miracles at once: And
therefore we may expect such proof as faith needs in so strange a case. And
as God is no respecter of Persons, so the Jews never proved, since Abraham's
days, under the Law, under Judges or Kings, or since, so wise or excellent a
People, as may prognosticate such Advancement. And God uses to work by means,
Christ and his Apostles converted none without the Word: And Paul says, how
shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear, without a preacher, and how shall they Preach, unless they be sent? And
these expositors tell us not that Preachers shall be sent to the scattered
Jews, into all Turkish and Papists Lands, to learn the Languages, and convert
them at once. It is worth the Readers perusal, c. 7. p. 217. how he justly
derideth Bellarmine, as supposing that Antichrist will put down Gods Worship in
all the Earth, telling him that he has an hundred forty eight Thousand
Thousand times five hundred fifty Thousand nine hundred and nine Miles to
travel, to do it, (and so much have Universal Popes and Councils, to take
charge of,) which will hardly be done in three years and a half: And yet
killing men's Souls is a less work than to make them alive.

Its doleful to think what Satan has gained by corrupting the Church, by
wicked Bishops, making that his Game, when Pagan Power fell; partly by tempting
in Worldly wicked men by Wealth and Honor, and partly by making Ungodly
Princes the choosers of Bishops, (and Ungodly Patrons the choosers of Priests,)
and when men ruled by Satan choose them, Satan himself often chooses them: Who,
by their wickedness, Malignity and Persecuting the best men, have tempted those
Christians, who most hate sin, to call almost all the Church Antichristian, and
fly from it as worse than Pagan Rome, and to lose much of their Love to all
that are called by such abhorred names. Had the Pastors of the Church bin all
Holy, Humble men of Love, and not men of Wickedness and Blood, their Power and
Interest would have bin the Joy of Pious men. But enough of that side.

II. On the other side, they that say the contrary, thus express their sense.

1. The first Beast is the Roman Imperial and Military Power, not as such, but
as the Grand Power of Idolatry, first, and next, as the Captivator and
Persecutor of the Christian Church, of Jews and Gentiles.

2. The Image of the Beast is both the Idol Statues, Images, and Altars of
their Idol Gods, and of themselves, both which by their Laws were to be
worshipped with Sacrifices, and other acts of Idolatry.

3. The second Beast is the Senate with all the Literate Idolaters and
Flatterers, Orators, Philosophers, Priests, Poets, Comedians, Augurs, etc. as
Learned defenders of Idolatry, and repro^chers, and Enemies of Christianity.

4. The name of the Beast, was the name of the Idol God, whom they were to
Worship, and of the Idolized Emperors, as called Divi and Dii, and honored by
Altars and Sacrifices.

5. The Mark was a Stigma, or Badge, then usually received by Servants, and
Soldiers, and Votaries, as an obliging mark of subjection.

6. The number of the name was some abbreviating Letters, part of the mark, and
here proved to be numeral; though, at this distance, we cannot say what they
were, nor whether still the same.

7. Receiving the mark is professed consent, and usually by such a Badge.

8. The Woman Whore was the City of Rome, not merely as a City, or as Rome, or
as Rich, or as Powerful, but as Idolatrous and captivating the Church.

9. The Witnesses were the Jew and Gentile, Christian Teachers, Prophets,
Miracle-workers and Martyrs, that had the spirit, as the first Christians had,
for signal Testimony to the Gospel, Miracles long continuing in some degree.
These are their expositions.

Their Reasons they begin first of the Whore; or the seat of the Beast, which
they say must needs be Pagan Rome. 1. Because it was expressly said by the
Angel, who purposely explained it to be, the great City which rules over the
Kings of the Earth. 1. Not a Church which is under Princes, but properly a
City. 2. Not only pretenders to a Power of Church Keys; but proper Rulers by
Power of Arms. 3. Not only over the Church, (often called Heaven,) but over the
Kings of the Earth, (noting those without.) 4. Not [ shall Rule] but does Rule,
as a visible note, by which John might know the Whore.

This being so plain, that only violence can obscure it, may be, say they, a
Key to all the rest.

2. Chapter 17.2. The Kings of the Earth had at that time committed Fornication
with her; and the Inhabitants of the Earth were then drunken with the Wine of
her Fornication, else it could not be to John a notifying mark. But the Papacy
was not of many hundred years after in being.

3. John was brought into the Wilderness to see it, which was the then
Persecuted State of the Church: And it was to comfort him and that Church, in
hope of a near Deliverance; for they were things that must shortly be done.

4. Her name notifyeth her [ Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots and
Abominations of the Earth;] [ Babylon,] captivating the Christians, as old
Babylon did the Jews; [the great] as then being; (to whom the Papal Power was
small:) The Mother or Nurse, and Upholder of the most Abominable Idolatry and
Wickedness, not in the Church, but [ of the Earth,] by Power and Learning,
upholding the Worship of Sun, Moon, Stars, and Men; of Jupiter, Saturn, Sol,
Mars, Mercury, Pallas, Venus, Neptune, and numberless Idols, by Paul called
Devils; and the wickedness of life, described by Paul Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.18, etc.

5. The names of Blasphemy were hers reproaching Jews and Christians with
scorn, and ascribing Gods names and works to these their Idols, and to Men.

6. The vast Riches and Luxury of her described, punctually agree with Pagan
Rome.

7. She was then drunk with the Blood of Prophets, and Martyrs, which the Pope
then was not. The Angels undertaking to open the Mystery, must not be thought
rather to obscure it.

8. She had been a Persecutor of both Jew and Gentile Christians, who both gave
God Thanks for her fall.

9. The Whore sat on seven Mountains, But so did not the Papal Civil Empire.

10. The assistant Kings had not received Regal Power, being but as Servants to
the Beast, and the Whore: But Popish Kings are Kings indeed.

11. They were unanimous in upholding the Whore: But Popish Kingdoms long
strove against the Papal Power.

12. They fought against Christianity till they were conquered, v. 14. But so
did not many Popish Kingdoms.

13. People, multitudes and Nations, more notify Pagan Rome than Papal.

14. C. 18. They were to reward her double, as she had used them. But so we
must not do by Papists.

15. The Kings of the Earth lament her fall. But the more the Pope fall the
more they rejoice, except the House of Austria, and a few more.

16. Her fall comes suddenly, as in an hour; but the Pope stands yet after
150 years, beginning to fall.

Moreover about the Beast, they say.

1. It is said, he was, and is not, and yet is: But the Papacy was not then,
nor is, after it was not.

2. The seven Heads of the Beast, had the name of Blasphemy. But if the heads
were the seven species of Government, the name of Papal Blasphemy, was not on
six of them at least, but only of Pagan Blasphemy: Therefore it was Pagan Rome,
or its Empire, that they headed.

3. The seven Pagan sorts of Government, were not seven Heads of the Papacy, or
Roman Church; therefore the Papacy, or Roman Church, was not the Beast: For
they were the Heads of the Beast. And the wounding of one of the Heads, shows
that all the seven were Heads of one, and the same Beast.

4. [ Who is able to make War with the Beast?] tells us, that it was by Arms
that he stood, and not by mere Hypocrisy and deceit. That was the part of the
second Beast, and not of the first.

5. It is all that dwell on the Earth, (without that Church,) that worship him:
But those that dwell in heaven, and the Tabernacle, and name of Christ, he
Blasphemeth, v. 5.6.7.

6. They worship the Dragon for giving Power to the Beast: But by the Dragon
the Text says is meant the Devil; and it is those Devils that Pagans thought
did prosper Rome, that is, Mars, Jupiter, Apollo, etc: But Papist: worship not
these for setting up the Pope.

7. The Dwellers on the Earth worshipped the first Beast, whose deadly wound
was healed, c. 13.12. But it was not the Pope, nor the Papal Rome, or Church,
whose deadly wound was healed, in the Judgment of all them, that says, the very
erecting of the Papacy was the healing of that Wound: For it was not wounded as
a head, before it was in being. And if it was Pagan Rome, or Idolatry, that the
Papacy healed, then the healed, and not the healing party, was the first Beast.

8. Its contrary to diverse express Texts, that the first and second Beast are
the same: Therefore they, that make the Pope the second, must acknowledge
another to be the first.

9. The number of a man, received, cannot be found of Papal Rome.

10. All that receive the mark and name of the Beast are (without conversion)
to be tormented for ever; But we cannot say so of all that own the Papacy:
Education and converse, and prejudice against Protestants for their divisions,
makes may think verily, that the Papal* Church is the best for its unity, and
antiquity, and extent, and duration, etc: When we read the Writings of such Men
as Bernard, Gerson, Kempis, Gerhard, Zutphani^nsis, Thaulerus, Sales, etc. And
the lives of such as Ph. Nerius, de Renti, Boromeus, etc. Yea the Writings of
such as Bonaventure, and diverse Schoolmen, we find so much of truth and
holiness in them, that forbids that Judgment.

Further that it is Pagan Rome that is the Whore, and its Empire, as Idolatrous
and captivating, that is the first Beast, and not the Papacy, they argue thus.

If it be Papal Rome, it is either the City as building and place, or it is the
Policy. 1. Not the place called the City; for it is good as such. 2. Not the
Place as related to the Policy, For 1. The material City of Pagan Rome, was as
much defiled as that of Papal Rome, and yet continued. 2. Else when the Pope
dwells elsewhere, the relation would follow him. For above 100 years, much of
Italy it self placed the Supremacy in the Patriarcks of Aquileia. Rome may
fall, and the Papacy stand: It has been often taken, and sacked, and long
possessed by Goths and others: Even Charles 5. By Charles of Burbon, sacked it.

2. If in the Policy, either 1. As related to Rome. 2. Or as elsewhere placed.
And what is that Policy, that is the formal constitution of the first Beast?

1. It i^ not Empire as such; for all Power is of God, and was to be obeyed in
Heathens: Else all Emperors would be such Beasts, (or, as they say,
Antichrists.)

2. It is not Empire merely as Roman: For then both the Heathen Emperors would
have been the Beast (or Antichrists,) without respect to their sin, And
Constantine, Valentinian, Jovian, Theodosii, Marcian, etc. the great blessings
of the Church, would have been Antichrists, or the beast: Or at least those
good Emperors that abode at Rome.

3. It is not Empire merely, as found in a person of bad Qualities and Life:
For then every wicked Emperor and King would be the Beast, (or their
Antichrist,) and a Pope, that were not personally vicious, would be none.

4. It is not every Emperor or King, that is an Usurper or invader: For then
many Emperors would be the Beast.

5. It is not every one that is Ambitious, and st^iveth to be highest and above
all others: For then there would be a great many Antichrists in the World.

6. It is not every one, that in Church Power would be highest, for then James
and John would have bin Antichrists; and so would many Bishops of
Constantinople and Alexandria; if not many in most other lands among the
several parties of Christians.

7. It is not every one that pretends to, and Usurpeth, a sort of Power that
God never gives: For so do many Imposers of most parties.

8. It is not every one that joineth Civil and Ecclesiastical Power in one
person: For so did Melchizedeck; and so did Cyril, and other Alexandrian
Bishops, and those of Constantinople, and what Episcopal Countries have not
such? If you say, that this is a Kin to Antichristianity, or preparatory, I
say, our question is not What is a Kin, or preparatory, but what is it, that
formally constituteth it?

9. It is not every one that is a Persecutor; for so alas have been too many in
most times and places, nor is it all that promote heresy or Blasphemy by
Persecution. For so did Valens, and many Arrian Kings (and Councils,)
Gensericus, Hunnericus, Theodoricus, Odoacer, etc.

10. It is not all that were Idolaters in any degree, for so is now four sixth
parts of the World: Much less all inward Heart-idolaters; as are all that are
Covetous, and love the World better than God, and obey man against him. Nor is
it all that give Saints or Angels undue or sinful Veneration: for so John twice
offered prostration to the Angel: At least, so did the Council of Nice, to the
Images of Saints, and especially the Virgin Mary: And so did many of the
Eastern Emperors, and Tharasius drew in almost all the Eastern Bishops; yea
many were faulty long before Popery came in.

11. It is not the being of any of these at Rome, that constituteth the Beast
or Antichrist, which would not do it elsewhere; For Theodorick, Odoacer, and
other Arrians, Blasphemers of Christ, and Persecutors in Rome, were not the
Beast or Antichrist. It must therefore (say these men) be somewhat differing
from all these; which we can find in Pagan Rome, but not in Papal. If the same
thing will make the Pope, (and all Papists,) to be the beast, that would not
make another such, there must be some special reason for it.

12. Lastly, say they, it must be remembered, that it is confessed to be Civil
Power, and not Ecclesiastical, that constituteth the first Beast, and Rome is
his Seat. Now, 1. The Empire was not settled at Rome, but at Constantinople,
when Christianity came in power, 2. The Popes were most Martyrs and Sufferers
till Constantines time; and long after professed subjection to Emperors, yea
even to Arrians, and to Usurpers: And Alexandria and Constantinople used as
much force as they. It was 606 years before Phocas called Boniface the 3. the
Universal Bishop; by which he never meant, the Universal Emperor or Civil
Governor: (No nor Universal Ecclesiastical any further than the Empire.) It
was long after this, that the claim of deposing Kings as Excommunicate, was set
on foot by Gregory the seventh; and long after that, before it was determined
in the Lateran Council. Most Christian Kingdoms opposed it all along: William
the Conqueror, and William Rufus, and others, in England: Philip, and others,
in France, where it is denied to this day, and much in Spain: The German
Emperors, Henry the fourth and fifth; and Frederick and Otho long fought
against it, and some of them took Rome, made and unmade Popes, and used them as
their Subjects. The Princes of Italy, themselves, were from age to age almost
always in War against the Popes: The Eastern Emperors before mastered them,
till Pipin, and the two Charles' used the Papacy to usurp; the Empire, and
after were Masters of the Pope themselves: The very Citizens and Laity of Rome,
from age to age, strove with them for the chief Power in Rome it self, and often
overtopt them, till they got Foreign Princes to help them. To this day they
claim not Imperial Power over other Princes, save indirectly, as nullifying the
Title of the Excommunicate, falsely pretending that they may excommunicate
them, and that Christians may then reject them as no Kings. Is all this an
Universal Empire, and was Rome the Whore for 700 years, or not? It is supposed
that Idolatry and Persecution make her the Whore, and her Civil Power, the
Beast. Transubstantiation is the grossest part of the first, and that is a
Novelty? A few odd men wrote for it a little sooner, but their Church owned it
not by Law, till the fourth Lateran Council under Inno. the 3. almost twelve
hundred years after Christ. And excess of Veneration to Saints and Angels, most
Churches on Earth owned and still own, (the Greek, Armenian, Abassine, etc.)
Our Divines have proved Purgatory, and almost all their abuses of that
tendency, to be Novelties; (see Moulin de novit. Papism, Blondel de Eccles.
Rivets defense of du Pleslis, etc.) Now here we are divided. 1. Some say Rome
was the Whore ever since 300: And so all, or near all, the Church of Christ in
the Empire was the Beast, or Whore, or both: (except the few poor men in
Piedmont and Languedock, for I am of the opinion, that they kept their
Simplicity and Integrity ever since Dioclesians Persecution,) and then all the
Glory of the b^st Ages of the Church is darkened into shame, and the triumph for
its deliverance from Pagan Capti^^^y, turned to our confusion. (I have fully in
my History of Councils described the mischiefs of Clergy-Ambition, but never
thought that such men's faults so overthrew all Christ's Church in the Empire, as
to make it Antichristian: A Holy Humble Ministry upheld it, while some
ambitious carnal Prelates troubled it,) As even a Heathen Am. Marcellinus
witnesses, speaking of Damasus's, case. If Christ had no Church visible so
many hundred years, then he was no Christ, or King, of a visible Church, which
is a sad conclusion for opposers of Antichrist. Does he say worse against
Christ himself?

2. Others say that Rome began to be Babylon. the 606, under Boniface. the 3.
and Phocas, (on the grounds before confuted) 3. Others begin it under Boniface
the Eighth. 4. Others begin it with Hildebrands Usurpation over Princes,
between 1000. and 1100 years after Christ. 5. Others begin it with Innocent the
third, who in the Lateran Council generally first owned that Usurpation and
Transubstantiation, and Bloody Persecution for it, which before were owned but
by little factious Parties. 6. Others labor to prove that that Council made no
Decrees, and so that it was not settled then.

Now, if Rome for 606 years, or for 1000, or for 1100 years was not Babylon,
then Pagan Rome was not then, nor Christian Rome; and no man knows when it
began to be so: And then almost all our most confident late Expositions are
quite overthrown. But doubtless John was told of a Babylon, a Whore, a Beast,
which was much ealier than this. The six or seven species of Pagan Government,
were not the Heads of a Christian Papal Beast, that was to rise 1000, or 600
years after Christ. See Bishop Barlows Pref. to his Brutum fulmen of their
Novelty.

With these Reasons, this sort of Expositors add the answer to the contrary
objections. And to the first they say, that the Rising of the Beast out of the
Sea, does but tell the order of the Vision to John, and not that the Beast was
not yet in being; and it may mean Domitian or Dioclesian, not yet come. To the
second they say, the Objecters beg the Question. 3. And so of the third. 4. To
the fourth they say, that (...) signifies not continuance, but operation, to
which some Copies join (...), he makes War: And they say, that neither here,
nor cap. 11. of the Witnesses Preaching, is meant a thousand two hundred and
sixty years, but Days, as expressed, even three years and a half. 5. To the
fifth they say, it had the ten Crowned Heads, which is the same States, which
were Crowned Horns, when they became militant and cruel. 6. They say, that the
Pagan Empire, as the Beast commanding Idolatry, was not to be obeyed. 7. They
say, Pagan Rome is called Mystical, not Literal Babylon; and their Mysteries of
Worship also were Idolatry. 8 They say, that it is not Antichrist sitting in
the Temple, but the Beast blaspheming it, that this Text mentions. 9. They
say, that Pagan Rome, as such, is totally desolate, and for ever, but the Papal
is not. 10. The faithful came away from Babylon's Idolatry and Sin before her
Fall, and were called on to avoid her most carefully, just when she was falling
lest just then the falling Babylon fall on them: But Papal Rome, being not yet
fallen, were no Christians these 1300 years under the reasons of that Call? 11.
They say, Pagan Rome sold Slave^, and bought them, and sold Souls to Idolatry
worse than Popery. 12. They say, that the unmarried Heathens may be guilty of
Fornication yea and of Adultery, by reason of God's right to them: And the
Fornication here is but Idolatry, and it is sad to conclude that Heathen Rome
was so Idolatrous. 13. Lastly, They say, that their Senate, and all the Learned
Patrons of Paganism, and Reproachers of Christianity, better answer the
Character of the second Beast, and false Prophet, than either the Pop^ as
pleading for himself, or his Agents pleading for his Civil Power.

I should next have told you the difficulties that pose me about the other
Questions; but I fear perplexing the Readers, and must not be so large. I
mention what I have done, to tell you why I understand not the Revelations, and
cannot help it that I am no wiser than excellent Calvin nor than a^ the Ancient
Fathers, (though I disown their conceit of a future Antichrist at the end of
the World.)

I doubt not but many, in blind zeal, will call this my confessed Ignorance a
warping toward Popery (though I have long in my Writings against Popery
confessed the very same;) This I must bear from them, that bear more from
themselves, and from whom the Church bears more. It Is a small thing for one
man to be censured by those persons, that censure hardlier almost all the
Church of Christ on Earth: But when I try whether they know any more than I, I
find little more than a believing that to be the sense of the Revelation, which
those good men say it is, whom they most value.

Some will desire yet to know more of my own Opinion: And I will freely tell it
them.

I. I am much persuaded, by impartial consideration of the Text, that the Roman
Imperial Power, as the upholder of Heathen Worship of Devils, Idols, and
themselves, and a Captivaters of the Church of Jews and Gentiles, was the first
Beast, and that Rome in that respect was Babylon, and the Whore, that made all
Nations drunk with her pompous Idolatry. And the whole current of the Book
seems plainly to drive at this. But many of the subordinate particulars I
understand not.

II. Whether the Papacy be another Beast, or Whore, there meant, and the Text
mean two first Beast^ and two Whores, or the similitude notwithstanding so many
diss^militudes, and six hundred, or seven hundred, or a thousand years
interruption, make these two one; or whether it be Antichrist that is the
Beast, I will neither affirm, nor deny, but see no evidence to prove the
Affirmative.

III. What my Judgment is of Popery, the Reader may fully see, 1. In one Sheet
enumerating its Errors, 2. In a Book called, The Safe Religion. 3 In another
called, A Key for Catholics. 4. In two of the true Catholic Church against
Johnson, altas Terrel. 5. In one called, The Christian Religion certain without
Popery. 6. In one called, Full and easy Satisfaction, which is the True
Religion. 7. One called, Naked Popery. I^ these satisfy not the Censurers Zeal
him, that is ignorant, be ignorant, and he that is wrathful, be so still.

IV. I do judge of Popery by the knowledge of its particular Errors and Sins,
and not by the Revelations, or any thing which I understand not. If the Pope be
the great Antichrist, which I neither deny, nor affirm, because I know not, (as
I have long ago confessed,) I think that it is formally, as he is by claim the
Vice-Christ, Vicarius Christi, and claims an Universal Sovereignty
Ecclesiastical over the whole Church on Earth, (and not over a Nation only;)
and that he began with that claim, to which his many corruptions are joined to
make up a body of iniquity: Were there no more to be said against that Church,
than, 1. This claim of Universal Government. 2. And the cherishing of
Ignorance, by forbidding the reading of the Scripture in a known Tongue,
without License, and Latin Prayers and Service, and an Ignorant Clergy. 3. And
the Inhumane Doctrine of Transubstantiation. 4. And the vile corruptions of
much of God's Worship. 5. And their horrid Blood-guiltiness, by which they do
uphold their Kingdom called a Church. I take those Popes and Papists, who own
all this, to be liable, before God, to greater punishment, than the Beast, and
false Prophet, mentioned in the Revelations; it being far worse to sin thus
under the name of Christians, and Christ's Vicar, and holy Bishops, than as
Infidels and Heathens, to whom (as to Sodom) it shall be easier in the day of
Judgment than for these.

V. Therefore I judge, that a Confederacy or Coalition with the Church of Rome,
in any of these sins, or in the very form of a Church headed by a pretended
Universal Head or Sovereign, is to be abhorred by all sound Christians: And I
am glad that this Kingdom is sworn against all Foreign Jurisdiction, Civil or
Ecclesiastical; though Union and Concord with all Foreign Churches must be as
far kept as we are able, not partaking of their sins. But I have long ag^ (in
my Key for Catholics) proposed the desirable terms (not for a Coalition, but)
for neighbourly Peace, that we may live in love and quietness, and not as those
that still take themselves bound to destroy each other.

VI. On these grounds I judge of Persons according to their Personal Guilt, and
not by the general name of Papists. I abhor those that are wicked, and that own
the foresaid wickedness, but not all that are called Roman Catholics, that
live in the fear of God, and in Charity. I will try uncertainties by
certainties, and not deny Fundamentals in opposition to men's By-Opinions. I am
certain that I must love a Christian, as such, and that as much as in me lies
I must live peaceably with all men, and avoid all unnecessary Division, Wrath
and Hatred; and I am sure that, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for (whatever
Error calls them) they shall be called the Children of God: I am sure, that
I must (unnecessarily) speak evil of no man; and that slandering and
false-accusing are diabolical works; and that ^he Wisdom is from beneath, which
causes Envy and Strife; and, in a word, that LOVE is Christ's Work and
Character, and Hatred the Devils: But I am not sure that the Church of Rome
has these 1000 or 1300 years been the Whore, and Babylon, meant in these
Texts; nor that yet all Papists shall be tormented, as worshipping the Beast, or
his Image, etc.

I am sure, that the Visible Church will have scandals, and ambitious men; and
yet that its deliverance in Constantine's time, and the following Ages, was a
wondrous mercy, which Heaven and Earth did rejoice in, and praise God ^or: And
it was a great part of Christ's coming to Reign by Christian Princes, and that
the Kingdoms of the World were made the Kingdoms of Christ: Therefore I dread
the denying Christ these Kingdoms, and reproaching even the best Ages of his
Church on Earth as Antichristian, lest I deny him to have any Church Visible at
all, or tempt men to Infidelity, by saying that Christ is so little a King, and
came to so little a work in the World, as to have no Church, save the
persecuted part, till An. 300, and the Reformers since 1560, save a few latent
persons. Men will judge of the Workman by his work, and of Physicians by their
Cures: And though it be honorable to save one Soul, they will tempt men to
dishonor Christ, that call almost all his Church Antichristian. I would not
slander one man, but should I mistake, and slander millions for thirteen
hundred years together, how great were my guilt!

VII. I dread the turning Religion into a humane, hurtful, love-killing
Faction. If I abhor millions and millions merely on my uncertain exposition of
the Revelations, I cannot do it in Faith. If one ask me why I do it, and I say,
because they are of Babylon, or worship the Beast, and you ask me, how I know
it, I must say that I know it not; But most here believe it because Mr. A. Mr.
B. Mr. C. etc. say so: And so as Papists found their Faith, and their hatred of
us as heretics, on the credit of their Teachers, that say so, so shall we ours
on the word of our Teachers. And here I dread the effects, viz, abhorring men
causelessly, corrupting our Prayers and Sermons and Books, and fathering all on
God, condemning all as favoring Popery, who have not contracted this hating
disease; crying down many good and many harmless things, merely because they
come from the beast and Babylon. Temples themselves, good Prayers, excellent
Ministers and Churches, yea Baptism it self, have been cried down and
renounced, as Babylonish and Antichristian, and a ground of endless Divisions,
and starting at every shadow that Rome has had to do with, is thus laid; yea
the Seekers greatly countenanced that say, Scripture, Church and Ministry, are
lost in the wilderness, and the Church feigned to be brought into the
wilderness, just when it was brought out of it, (which was the Pagan
persecution;) even the Protestant Churches are condemned as being yet
Antichristian; And the Martyrs, that suffered by Papists, yea and those that
suffered in the 3d 4th and 5th Centuries by Arrians and others, are all made by
many to be the Children of Babylon; And a war proclaimed between professed
Christians, by which all the Romanists are tempted to hate and destroy us, as
those that would do so by them. And all this by the expounding the Revelations
of that, which no man, that has not more knowledge than I, can find that it
says, or medleth with: And that needlessly, while we have plain texts enough
that condemn Popery, and all sin, by which we may abhor bad men, without the
danger of hating the Children of God. Christ is in our Creed, but Antichrist is
not. All the old Fathers were not Papists that took not the Pope for
Antichrist: But more probability of it may be gathered from other Texts than
from the Revelations.

VIII. To say, I know not what I would know and cannot, is easier to me, than
the dread of being guilty of the sin threatened in the conclusion of this Book,
that God will add the plagues in it to them that add to it, and blot his name
out of the Book of Life, who takes from it. (I deny not other men's knowledge,
but my own: Ignorance of men's ignorance is the mortal disease of the world:) To
add to the sense is to add to the Book: To say, this is the sense, when I know
it not, and where five of the wisest are of four minds (and Common Christians
take all on trust) this exposes me to the dread of this heavy curse:

If this account excuse me not to the Reader, it excuses me to my Conscience,
whose censure I must more fear than man's, lest I prefer my interest in the good
opinion of partial misled censorious dividers, before the pleasing of God, and
my Salvation, and that when I am going from this World to him: And if all this
seem too much to any, the diseases and danger of the Churches, the extremes of
many and their sad effects, these fifty years, and the confuting of those who
falsely interpret my History of Bishops and Councils, do make it seem otherwise
to me.

I blame not modest conjectures, if men will but confess their uncertainty,
when they are uncertain, and not make an uncertain Opinion an Article of Faith,
and sacrifice to it certain Fundamental Truth or Duty, the Churches Peace or
Christian Love, nor use it to kindle a partial, hating, dividing Zeal. Good Mr.
Brightman did with a Pious Mind, determine many things very confidently, which
time has already confuted: He has concluded that the Blessed Resurrection,
and time of Christ's Thousand years Reign in the New Jerusalem, shall be 1695,
eleven years hence. Thomas Rogers, and many others, have been shamed by setting
times, which being past have confuted them. This has frightened some others
from that boldness, who yet in other uncertainties have been so confident, as
that they have drawn many good People thereby to measure their Faith and
Charity. I am far from thinking, that deeper Students are as ignorant herein as
I: But I would not have all that are as ignorant, looked upon as Aliens. And I
confess that I am less able to expound Prophecies than Daniel, who yet thus
concludes, Chapter 12.8, 9. And I heard, but I understood not: Then said I, O my
Lord, what shall be the end of these things? And he said, Go thy way, Daniel,
for the Words are closed up and sealed, till the time of the end.

Yet I say as Calvin, [ I make no doubt, but the Revelation is Gods Word,
though I understand it not;] and that it is not useless: Yea so much as I do
understand, is of exceeding comfortable use: Though I know not whether the New
Jerusalem will come down from Heaven before, or at, the Common Resurrection, it
rejoiceth me that it will come: And God having condescended to describe it, as
Glorious, by corporeal Similitudes, to us that have no full Idea's of things
Spiritual, it is a meet means of our comfort, by such Similitudes, to conceive
of that Glory; and even to imprint them on our minds, to further our desires of
that Blessed State, and make us Loves and long for Christ's appearing, and cry
daily, Come Lord Jesus.

While I was writing this, there came to my hands, Isaac Vossius his Var.
Observat. In which he shows the magnitude of Rome, when it was in its
Grandeur, (it being about 60 Miles about) and how it decreased, and that
Constantine destroyed Rome far more, and before the Goths, by building
Constantinople; so that within 80 years it was not the fifth part so big, as in
Aurelians time: And that when Rufus and Victor wrote, there remained not the
20th part of the old City; and that now, under the Pope, it is so far from
containing the seven Hills, that it is almost all contained in the Campus
Martius, and contains not now scarce the two hundredth part of the old City.
And that it was fitly called Babylon the great, we read that old Babylon was
near as great as Rome at the greatest, and by Herodotus, and some others made
greater.

It is answered to this, that it is the same City still, known by the same Name.

But it has not either the same Situation, Magnitude, Power, Dominion, and
Idolatrous Fornication, by which John was to know it, nor would that
description agree to it now. By many such reasons I suspect that the Questions,
( who is the Beast? which is Babylon? and who is the Antichrist?) are not the
same in the Scripture sense, nor must have the same Solution.

If any, that are Friends to Papal Usurpation, and Church-Corruption; shall
think that my confessed ignorance of these Prophecies, is any advantage to
their ill Cause, I will further tell them, that it is far more dreadful to the
Pope, and all his Flatterers, and Followers, to be plainly condemned by the
known Laws of Christ, which all Christians receive as past all doubt, than to
be under the Dread of a dark and controverted Prophecy. To them that say, the
Pope is the first and second Beast, the Whore of Babylon, the Man of sin, the
false Christ or Antichrist, you have the shift of a contempt of his words, as
of a controverted uncertain thing; but who knows not, that the plain Law of
God concludes, that the Proud, the Worldly, the Malignant, the Idolatrous,
Murderers, Persecutors, Liars, the Enemies of Christ's Gospel and serious
Godliness, are Satan's Slaves, and shall not enter into the Kingdom of God? Can
any man, that reads but what Baronius, Binnius, Genebrard, and the most
flattering of your Historians, say of the Popes from An. 700, till 1400, think
that God owned and guided so wicked a sort of Men? I again tell those, that are
angry at my History of Bishops and Councils, that I doubt not but God had, in
all ages, a visible Church of Pious Christians, kept up by the lower sort of
Bishops and Pastors, and some of the higher (Patriarcks and Metropolitans,) but
it was by these Majorites, and Ambitious Men, that corruption, cruelty and
dissension, chiefly entered; and they being uppermost, a few of them, by noise,
ostentation and domineering, past for the whole Church with undiscerning Men.

And here to show you how the Pope has succeeded the most bloody Pagan
Persecutors, and outdone them, I will instance in a History not sufficiently
understood by most.

Dioclesian murdered more Christians than all the former Pagan Persecutors set
together: Among others he dealt so cruelly and inhumanely with them in France,
and Savoy, and Retia, as forced many to stand upon their defense to save their
Lives; two Commanders, Amandus and Elianus headed them, and raised them, that
were but Country Club-men, into Arms: Much of France and Spain favored them.
Dioclesian made Herculius Maximianus Caesar, and sent him with an Army against
them. In this Army was the Theban Legion, whose Colonel was Mauritius; at the
Alps Herculius would try his Soldiers, by Idolatrous Tricks, whether they
would fight against these Christians called Rebels, or not: The Theban Legion
said they could fight against bad Men, but not against good Men, but would
rather submit their lives to his pleasure; (not being able to resist if they
would:) So he decimated them, and killed 70, and with the rest of his Army
quickly routed the Country-Clubmen, and besieged their very strong Castle, and
killed them all, and overthrew their Fortress. Many score thousand are said to
be killed, and the name Bagaudae put on them in scorn, (like Tories and Whigs,)
as signifying Thieves and Robbers.

And what is all this to the Roman Pope? Ans. These were the Christians
murdered by Dioclesians and Herculius, Pagans; the Relics of the Fugitives
continued in Languedock, Piedmont, Rhetia, etc. from age to age, till at last
reviving to a more free opposition to Popish Tyranny and Corruption, they were
murdered by the Popes,) (by Simon Montford, and his Crusado's, and others
after*) to a far greater number than by Herculius Max. So that some Historians,
reckon two Milions killed in all, in those and other parts. And is* it not more
wicked for a professed Vicar of Christ, to murder Millions of poor Christians,
for being against his Tyranny and Corruptions, than for a Pagan Emperor, that
had Civil Dominion, to kill not half so many?

I know it will be doubted by some, 1. Whether these Bagaudae were Christians,
seeing it is said that they never resisted their Persecuting Princes, but used
only Prayers and Tears? And 2. Whether the Albigenses and Waldenses were their
Successors? The History is of great Weight. I prove both parts.

I. For the first, set these following Testimonies together.

Hieronymus, in Chro. 2303. [ Dioclesian took Maximianus Herculius into
partener-ship of the Empire, who restored Peace to France, the multitude o^
Rusticks being oppressed, who called their Faction by the Name of Bacauds.]

Victor de Caesarib. [By the departure of Carinus, Elianus and Amandus,
assaulted most of the Cities, wasting the Countries, by raising a Band of
Countrymen and Robbers, whom the Inhabitants called Bagauds.]

Eutripious Li. 9. [When the Countrymen in France had raised tumults, and
taken the Name of Bagauds to their Faction, and had Amandus and Elianus for
their Captains, Caesar sent Maximianus Herculius to subdue them.]

Pompon Let us. [ Maximianus did with mavelous Speed suppres, and presently
root out, the tumults in France, which Amanilus and Elianus, on pretense of
Tyranny, had raised, with the whole Faction of the Bagauds, by which Name the
^out of the Rusticks called themselves.]

Paulus Orosius Li. 7. C. 25. [When in France, Amandus and Elianus, gathering a
Band of Rusticks, which they called Vagands, had raised pernicious tumults, he
(Dioclesian) made Maximianus, firnamed Herculius, Caesar, and sent him into
France, who by Military Power easily bridled the Power, and confused Band, of
the Countrymen.]

But Salvian speaks plainer, lib. 4. de Gubern. [The Bagauds being spoiled
afflicted, and killed, by bad and cruel Judges, when they had lost the Right of
Roman Liberty, lost also the Honor of the Roman Name: And their Infelicty is
imputed to them: We impute to them the name of their own Calamity: We impute
the name which we made our selves; and when we have compelled them to be
criminous, we call them Rebels, and call them, destroyed Wretches. For what
else was it that made them Bagauds, but our iniquities, and the dishonesty (or
naughtiness) of Judges? What but their Prescriptions and Rapines, who turned
the name of the Public Tax, into the gains of their own Treasure; and made the
Tributary Impositions to be their own prey? Who, like cruel wild Beasts, did
not rule those committed to their Charge, but devoured them; and were not
maintained (or fed) only with the men's spoils, (as most Robbers use,) but with
tearing the men's and, as I may say, with their blood. And the matter was so
managed, that the Men that were strangled, and killed by the Robbery of the
Judges, began to be, as it were, Barbarians, because they were not suffered to
be Romans: For they were fain to be, what they had not been, because they were
not suffered to be what they had been, and they were constrained to defend at
least their Lives, because they saw that they had utterly lost their Liberty.]

See. du Fresne's Glossary lately printed at Paris, Vol. 2. In the word [
Bagudae,] showing that they were Christians, See Florencius in Hottingers
Eccles. Histor.

In the Life of Abbot Bobolen, published by Chifletius in the end of Bedas
works [ Orosius the History-writer in his History which he composed --
affirms that the foresaid Castle was by Maximianus Herculius overthrown to
the very ground, and utterly destroyed; because Amandus and Elianus,
(Christianae Cultores Fidei,) who were of the Christian Religion, would not be
subject to the Sacrilegious Roman Princes: For the same Maximianus, having
gathered an Army of Romans, and joining to him the Legion of the Theban
Soldiers, drew toward them, that he might utterly destroy the Castle of the
Bagauds; And passing over the Alps with his Army, and resting weary about
Octodurum, commanded to invite all to the Fanatic Sacrifices, and to take an
oath upon the Sacreds of the Gods, that they would with one mind fight against
the troops (or companies) of the Bagauds: And the rest of the Christians
whereover found, he decreed should be killed by all men. But when this came to
the ears of Maurice, Captain of the Theban Legion, viz, that Caesar commanded
them to fight against Christians, he said to him (the Emperor,) we know how to
fight against Impious men, but to destroy godly men and Fellow Citizens, we are
utterly ignorant; We hold our Arms you see, but we resist not, for we are
readier to die than to kill: And so they joy fully yielded their necks to the
Executioners, and, by the Torment of their Bodies, past to the heavenly glory.
Then Caesar proceeding, and coming to the Castle of the Bagauds, so long
besieged it by Land and Water, till after a long time he took it, with the
possessors, whom he killed with Sword and Fire: And so brought to naught the
Castle that, besides the ruins of the ditches, no signs appeared of any
Fortifications. As among other Castles it was tumid with Munition, more
excellent than the Imperial, so by the Roman Emperor it was brought lower by
destruction. And the Inhabitants of the said Castle, who (as I before noted)
were Chirstians, despising the care of their Body for the Love of God, are to
be believed to have passed to the heavenly Kingdom by Martyrdom, so far this
Author.

See also the Life of St. Maurice in Histor. Lombard.

It is called (says Ferrarius) Bagadarum Castrum; and S. Maur des Folsez,
test Vignerio, to this day, and is page Gal. ad. Matronam fluv. apud Parisios;
And turned to a Monastery.

You may see more yet in Martinij Onomast, in the word Baquetes, for that he
makes, after Scaliger, to be their Country name, and their Enemies after used
it for the Title of Rebels, and Rogues, and Seditious People.

I conclude with Martinius his words hereon, [ Et talis est mos, etc.] Such is
the manner of some, who being titled (or called) Clement, delight to be
Inclement: The end of whose Reputation and Government, is as was their
predecessor Rehobaam. Ambition and Luxury do this, so great weight is in that
one Rule [MODERATE THINGS ARE DURABLE,] and the Prudence, in Public and Family
Government to proportion our Expenses to our Estates, etc. But it will not be
better with human affairs, as long as the Wisdom from above is excluded, and
the Wisdom that is earthly, sensual and devilish, takes place in the World.
But yet let not the suffering of any evil, draw us to do any evil: For it is
the greatest evil, not to be able to bear evil.

Out of all this, it is evident. 1. That the horrid oppression and cruelty
against Christians in Dioclesians time did drive these Christians, in France,
to a rustic self-defence, under the conduct of Amandus and Elianus. 2. That it
was for refusing to fight against them, that the Theban Legion was decimated,
(and 70 killed say some,) and with all for not swearing and sacrificing to the
Gods. 3. That it was the great numbers of Christians, (whose multiplication
Eusebius describes in Dioclesians days,) that caused him to destroy them,
lest they should grow too strong for him (as Pharaoh did by the Israelites.) 4.
That yet these self-defending Christians sped worse, and suffered more, than
they had done if they had fled. 5. That those that the Pagan Emperor called
Rebels, and Seditious Rogues, such writers as the Author of the Life of that
Babolen doubt not to number with glorified Martyrs: How well let them answer.

II. But what is all this to the Popes of Rome? Ans. It seems clearly to be
the Successors of these, that the Popes after murdered. For, 1. There is no
doubt but though many that took Arms were killed, and their Castle demolished,
the far greatest part were not in Arm^, and therefore saved themselves by
flight, and hiding, specially Old Men and Women, and Children. 2. No doubt but
they fled to the most Mountanous and deserted parts, as safest. 3. No History
tells us of their flying so far as the Aged, and Women, and Weak could not go,
but to Languedock, Piedmont, Rhetia, and about the Alps. 4. The People
murdered by the Popes, were found most in those same Countries, and are of the
very like description. That there were some Manichees among them, who disgraced
the rest, and made Bernard, Peter Cluniacensis, and Walafr. Strab. and others
accuse them hardly, it is no wonder: The Apostles Churches had Heresies,
Luthers Reformation was accompanied with many disgraceful Sects; nor is it
marvel that we read of no great noise against or about them, for some hundred
years after Dioclesian, and that they were not called Albigenses, Waldenses,
etc. till of late. For it was many hundred years after, before the Bishops
turned to persecute their Fellow Christians openly: And when they did, these
were poor people and harmless, fled (as the Britains into Wales,) where they
were niether a desirable prey, nor any great annoyance to any: And when some
Teachers after more openly cried down the Popes Tyranny and Corruptions, then
they began to be more defamed and persecuted. 5. Reynerius, that well knew
them, testifyeth that they were more dangerous than new risen Sects, because
they boasted of their Antiquity, that they were called Apostolicks, and had
continued what they then were from the days of Silvester: And Silvester lived
in Constantines time, and was Bishop of Rome about An. 314, and so lived in
Dioclesians time; so that either these Albigenses were the Successors of the
murdered Bagauds or another sort just* like them in the same Country, which no
reason can imagine. Of their Antiquity see more in Paul Perin, and Morlands
History of them, but especially at large in Bishop Usher de Successione
Ecclesiarum.

I think then it is manifest by this History that the bloody Popes and Papists,
did murder the same sort of Men, (yea three or four times more in number,) by
Sword and Inquisition (not only there but in Germany, Bohemia, Poland, etc.
whither they were dispersed,) which Dioclesian and Max. Herculius murdered;
(and yet honor St. Maurice, and the Theban Legion, that would not fight
against them, as they do St. Martin, that separated from the Bishops that were
but for killing a Gnostick Priscilianist:) And it is not the Name of a
Heretic, that will Cloak such hypocritical Cruelty, or deceive Christ, that he
shall not know his Flock, it men miscall them. To own Christ and the Gospel,
and to murder Thousands, or Millions in his Name, as if he took it for
acceptable Service, is incomparably a more aggravated crime, than the most
bloody Pagan Persecution was.

Obj. These were Heretics, and deserved death. Ans. 1. And were they worse
than Heathen Idolaters and Infidels, and must three or four parts of the World
be put to death?

Obj. But they were Baptized, and so are Revolters: Ans. 1. And do they revolt
to worse than Paganism? 2. Is Infant Baptism of so dismal consequence, as that
the Pap^sts may murder all that revolt from it. Is not this the way to make
Antip^^o baptists, or Antibaptists, and keep Men from Christianity? But oportet
Mendacem esse Memorem, Why then do your Historians charge them to have been
against Infant Baptism? Did you murder none till they were Baptized?

2. But what was their Heresy, how can we know better than by your bloody Laws
against them? The General Council. 4. at the Lat^rane under Innoc. 3. ^^^s us,
it was denying Transubstantiation, (and disobeying the Pope:) And all Temporal
Lords are to swear, to exterm^^at^ all such, and all others, that they w^ll
call Heretics, on pain of Excommunication, deposition, and damnation. So that
all that renounced not their senses were Heretics, and all such to be
destroyed or exterminated, and Subjects ^bs^lved from their All^g^^nce to
Temporal Lords (...) will not execute it; and many other grievous penalties are
ad^^^ And seeing General Councils are the Rules of the Religion of the through
Papist, be not ^^nv^y with them that call both your Pope and Council, and
Church, Antichristian, who thus exceeded Dioclesian, and Max. Herculius in
their work.

Obj. But how then can you hold that the whole Visible Church was never the
Seat, or Society of Antichrist, in any one age?

Ans. Very well: Christ was Christ, the head of his Church, as visible and
invisible, in every age, 1. Three or four parts of the Christian World were
then, and are now, from under the Pope: this very bloody Council says, c. 4.
That the Greeks rejected the Roman Pope, and so far abhorred the Latins, that
if Latin Priests did but celebrate at their Altars, their Greeks judged them
defiled, and would not use them again, till they had washed them, yea they
rebaptized those whom the Latin Priests baptized. And they once a year
Excommunicated the Popes long, and they owned not Transubstantiation: And they,
with the Abassines, Armenians, and all such others, were three or four times
more than the Papists.

2. And who may not easily know that a Pope, and such a Council called General,
are not the Western Visible Church, real or representative? Its not unlike that
forty to one might be against them. King John's Ambassador was one of the
consenters, who then was in contest against Stephen Langton, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and to conquer his own Lords and Kingdom, gave his Kingdom to the
Pope, and took it as from him. And if such a King had the choice of Bishops,
they would no more represent the Church there, than he and his Court
represented the Kingdom, when he gave it away, and fought against it; and those
Bishops that the Pope chose did as little represent it, being more the
Messengers of his will, than of the Churches: And how few Bishops were in such
Councils, besides those that the Pope made or consented to? When he, and the
Emperors Henry's were in War, the Emperors Bishops condemned the Popes, and
the Popes Bishops condemned the Emperors, and these Servants of two Men in
power, were not the representers of the Church. The multitude of lower quiet
Bishops, Pastors and People were the Visible Church, more than England was a
Visible Kingdom, distinct from King John's Court; for the Pope was but an
Usurping head, which that King then was not.

Obj. Then you make two Visible Churches in Europe. Ans. Yes; Christ had one
diffused over the World; and the Pope made another, by Usurpation and
Rebellion, which was Regnum in Regno, as any Rebel might do that could get
strength, to set up a party in power, to call him King, in some part of a
Kingdom.

Such an Antichristianity as this, I make no doubt but the Papacy did become
guilty of; and none that owneth it as such, and receives their mark, can be
Innocent; but are condemned by plainer Evidence than dark Prophecies; but I
will not therefore say the same, of all, from An. 304. (Or any other,) that
lived before this contracted guilt, though too many at Rome, and other
Countries, prepared the way; nor yet of all called Papists, who own not the
crimes, and Characters of such men; and much less of all the Visible Church in
any one age: And least of all of all the Visible Church, since 3^4, or
thereabouts. The World has already seen a great deal of public Sin and
Misery, in and by the Empires of P^gans, Moh^metans and Christians, conquering
and being conquered, turning and overturning. Thousands and hundred Thousands
murdered, etc. more than I can find mentioned in Daniel, or the Revelations.

In this Judgment I am (in Pain and Languishing) waiting for my Change, and
Hope of a World, where all is expounded, and all Wickedness, Malignity, and
Divisions shut out, and Holiness, Love and Concord perfected, and all perfectly
pleased in pleasing God.

And as I can easily bear the reproach of those that accuse me for no better
understanding the Revelations, and of all that accuse me, of being either too
little against Popery and Antichrist, or too much being shortly to be above the
ignorant obloquy of all extremes; so Readers, I earnestly advise you, that you
never take Faction for Religion* nor lying or betraying truth, for its defense:
Let them prove that Popes have not been Antichrists that can: It Is none of my
work. But if you are never so sure that it is he indeed, pull him not down by
calling Truth, Duty or things lawful, Antichristian, nor by telling men that
all Protestants are Idolaters or Antichristian, if they forsake not the
Communion of all our Parochial Protestant Churches, and of all other Reformed
Churches that are as bad as they, that the Papists may re-enter into them as
deserted Garrisons, and find no resistance: Nor by telling the World that all
our Laws against Popish Recusancy do punish them, for not doing an unlawful
thing, which all Protestants should refuse as well as they. This is no likelier
a way to pull down Antichrist, than Racking and Tearing the Reformed Churches,
by unlawful Snares, and silencing the Faithfulest Ministers of Christ. But
above all, begin not the Papal Antichristianity, with the beginning of the
Christians deliverance by Constantine, nor too soon; nor feign it to be
Universal: Read such Books, as Jewel, Rivet, Blondel, Pet. Moulin, Dalleus,
etc. If you are Scholars, which prove the Novelty of Popery, and the confident
offer of the present Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Barlow, (no stranger to Antiquity,
or Books,) that he will recant and turn to them.

Let them prove by any full and concluding reason, that any Christian Church in
the World acknowledged, or the Church of Rome, her self assumed, and publicly
pleaded for, such a Papal Supremacy as now they pretend to, for 1000 years,
after our Blessed Savior, and for my own part, I will confess, and retract my
error.

Let them prove by any such concluding reason, that any Church in the World
(Eastern or Western, Greek or Latin,) did acknowledge (what now the Pope and
his party so earnestly and vainly contend for,) the Popes Infallibility, and
his Supremacy over all general Councils, for 1500 years after our Blessed
Savior, and for my part, I will retract what I have here affirmed, and be
(what I hope I never shall be) their Proselyte.

London, 1684. Nov. 12. Natali Authoris. Aetat. Suae, 70. RICHARD BAXTER.

FINIS

