Pnemato Diakona: OR, Gospel-Churches, A Standing ORDINANCE OF Jesus Christ, TO
Continue to His next Personal Glorious Coming, plainly Proved; Objections
particularly Answered.

By an unworthy servant of Jesus Christ, a Mourner in Sion for the Divisions
thereof; who waits for the day of the Son of Man, R.B.

Mat. 16.18. Upon this Rock will I build my Church: And the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it.

1. Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show
the Lord's Death till HE COME.

Ephesians. 3.21. Unto him be glory in the CHVRCH -- throughout all Ages --

London, Printed by T.M. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1682.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IF thou intendest a serious perusal of the ensuing Treatise, 'twill not be
amiss to stay a while at the Portal. It Is now two full years, and upward, since
it was fitted for the Press, the Remora's of its publication are needless to
mention to thee. It has in that time been frequently given up to the Lord, and
the service of his Churches; with earnest cries to him, who Ministers Seed to
the Sower, and makes the Seed sown to prosper, that it may be blessed for some
Spiritual advantage to them that truly fear him, whether in, or out of the
Churches of Christ. What of the leadings, help, of the Lord an unworthy dust
has had in the managery of this Work from first to last, is not needful to be
mentioned. This I think meet to say to the praise of match-less Grace, that I
have not been altogether without them, and in some things, such clear openings,
as I never had before. All is submitted to the Judgment of the truly Judicious;
and if the least be contributed for the establishment of the Lords Children
(the weakest of them) in the Path, and way of the Gospel, let him have the
Glory, I obtain the end aimed at. The Reasons of the present undertake are too
many to give an account of. I know none that have ex professo handled this
Subject. It Is true, the Learned Dr. Owen, some while-since (and long after this
was finished for the Press) has writ much in a little, touching it: but he
tells us, he only debates it (...), in passage. There have been, and still are,
some that openly oppose this way of the Gospel, upon various accounts: Of which
(at least some of them) we give particular notice. That in every Generation,
Satan has set himself against the Churches of Christ, since they have had a
being in the World, none are ignorant of, who have thought it any part of their
concern to enquire into these matters. Many ways he has taken to eradicate,
root them out; and has by some of those ways, greatly disturbed, perplexed,
shaken them. As,

1. Sore, great Persecutions, has he often raised against them from the first
days of the Gospel, till now. And though he has often seen the Vanity of his
attempts that way to root them out, yet he is unwearied therein. Millions of
Saints have been tortured, butchered, destroyed by his Instruments upon the
account of their being found in the practice of those Gospel-Wayes, Ordinances,
we are pleading for. Nor can any oppugn, despise them, but they condemn those
Millions of innocent ones, and justify Satan; and his Instruments, in their
horrid butcheries of them. Touching which, more afterward. He early began this
cruel work. The Priests, Ecclesiastick-Governours amongst the Jews, together
with the Roman-Rulers, breath forth Threatenings against them; imprison,
slaughter, some eminent ones amongst them, to terrify the rest: see Act. 4.
and 7. and 9. They Excommunicate them, charge them with broaching
New-Doctrines, endeavoring to overturn the ancient State of Religion, as
Seditious, Factious, setting up Separate-meetings, or private Conventicles;
banish, cast them into Prison, compel them to Blaspheme; Whip, Behead, Stone
them. Under Claudius, about A.D. 45. Herod Agrippa furiously falls upon some of
the Disciples of our Lord, kills James (the Brother of John) with the Sword;
casts Peter also into Prison, Act. 12. (Him the Angel of the Lord quickly meets
with, Smites, he is eaten up of Worms, gives up the Ghost, v. 23.) At Antioch
the Jews are filled with envy against Paul, and Barnabas, contradicting,
Blaspheming; they raise persecution against them, expel them out of their
coast, Act. 13.45, 50. At Iconium also, the Unbelieving Jews stir up the
Gentiles against them; and the Gentiles, and Jews, with their Rulers, make an
assault to use them despitefully, and to Stone them, Act. 14.2.5. To Lystra,
from Antioch, and Iconium, come certain Jews; who stir up the People against
them, they stone Paul, and draw him out of the City for dead, Act. 14.19. At
Philippi, Act. 16. Paul and Silas are dragged into the Court unto the Rulers,
v. 19. They are Scourged, cast into Prison, v. 22, 23. At Thessalonica an
uprore is made against them; the house of Jason (where it is like they met)
assaulted; but not finding them, they draw Jason, and certain Brethren, unto
the Rulers of the City, crying, These that have turned the World upside down
are come hither also, Act. 17.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Preaching at Barea, the Jews from
Thessalonica come thither also, and stir up the People against them, v. 13. At
Corinth, the Jews, with one accord, make insurrection against Paul, bring him
to the Judgment Seat, Act. 18.12. At Ephesus, by Demetrius a great tumult is
raised also, v. 24. to 35. At Jerusalem, the Jews which are of Asia, stir up
the People against him, and lay hands on him, Chap. 21.27. who would have
killed him immediately, ver. 31. Of his afflictions in Asia, Paul himself
speaks, 2 Cor. 1.8. in Judea, Heb. 10.32, 33, 34. About the Seventeenth Year of
Nero (that Monster) A.D. 63. James the Brother of our Lord (with others) is
slain, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. Josephus, l. 20. Antiq. c. 8. At Alexandria, Mark
the Evangelist (it is said). was put to death. This Nero Fires the City of Rome,
lays it upon the Christians; and from hence takes occasion, by public Edict,
to raise persecution against them; He was the first of the Emperors that did
so, Tertull. in Apologet. which continued to the end of his Reign: Peter, and
Paul (it is said) were slain by him; with others innumerable. How the hand of
the Lord wrought him, is known; condemned he was by the Senate, to be punished
More majorum, i. e. to be whipped to death; to prevent which, he slew himself
with this exprobration of his own sordid villainy, Turpiter vixi, turpius
morior; I have lived filthily, I die more dishonourably, Sueton. in Nero.
Domitian about A.D. 97. by his Edicts, raises another dreadful persecution
against the Christians: Banishes John into the Isle of Patmos, Eusebius. l.3. c.
18.19. Eutropius, l.9. Timothy, Onesimus, and Dionysius the Areopagite were put
to death, Niceph. l.3. c. 11. with an innumerable company of the faithful
beside: The Wrath of God pursues him, and he is murdered in his own house by
his own Servants, Sueton. in Domit. Under Trajan, a great persecution was
raised against the Lamb's followers, about A.D. 100. Multitudes of them are
destroyed; some mentioned by name, viz. Simeon the Son of Cleophas; Clemens,
Alexander, Quirinus, and his Daughter Balbilia, Sulpitius, and Servilianus,
Nereus, and Achilleus, Phocas, a Bishop in Pontus, Ignatius. This Storm
continued fourteen Years. In fine, by a resolution of his joints, nummedness of
body, and a choking Water, Trajan miserably perished, Dion. Cassius de Traj.
Under Hadrian, about A.D. 120. a Storm falls upon the Christians; not a few are
cut off. About the Second Year of his Reign Aurelius Comes casts about 1250. of
them into Prison, whom he at last burns to death. Amongst whom was Alexander,
the Bishop of Rome; and Hermes, the Prefect of the City. Zenon a Roman
Senator, with ten thousand two hundred and three, it is said; were slain, in a
Witness for CHRIST, Cent. Mag. Cent. 2. c. 3. p. 12. At last he perishes with a
flux, and casting of blood, Aelius Spart. in Had. Some add, that he gave the
World, this Poetic desperate farewell; Animula Vagula, blandula,
Hospes, comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec ut Soles, dabis jocos.
Antoninus Pius comes next, about A.D. 139. Many of the Disciples of Christ are
cut off; at Rome, Felicitas with her seven Sons; Braxedis --. In Spain, and
France, not a few; amongst the rest, Photinus, Bishop of Lions, with forty
nine more: At Alexandria in Egypt, Ptolomaeus, and Licius; with many others,
are Martyred for Christ. Eusebius. Chron. Justin. Apol. After he had read the
Apologies of Justin and others, he became better affected to the Christians;
and send's Letters into Asia to stop the Persecution, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 26. For
which cause (perhaps) the Lord poured not forth his wrath on him as on others,
who abode in their enmity against his chosen Ones. Under Antoninus Verus, about
A.D. 162. the Church had their time of Tribulation; as the Epistle of the
Saints at Vienna, and Lions, to the Brethren throughout Asia, and Phrygia,
recorded by Eusebius, l. 5. c. 1. does abundantly declare; wherein they
acquaint them, that the fierceness of the Gentiles anger against them, the
great things they suffer, cannot be well written or spoken. Amongst others that
suffered, they mention, Vetius, Epagathus, Sanctus, Maturus, Attalus, Blandina,
Ponticus, Photinus, Alexander, etc. by name. At Rome they were persecuted;
amongst others, Justin there fell by wicked hands. In Asia there was great
distress, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 15 as the Church of God at Smyrna, unto the Church at
Philomilium, and to all the Churches throughout Pontus, intimates; where they
at large declare, the manner of the Martyrdom of Policarpus. Nor was there a
stop put to this Persecution, by the Apologies made for the Christians, by
Melito, Bishop of Sardis, and Apollinarius, Bishop of Hierapolis. At last his
Army being sorely distressed in Germany for want of Water, the Christian
Legion, by their Prayers, procures Rain, and Thunder, and Lightning, that scare
and routes the Enemy (upon the account whereof, they are termed -- (...), the
Thundering Legion); this comes with some conviction upon the Emperor, who now
writes Letters, that they should not suffer as Christians; that the Informers,
Prosecutors of them, as such, should be burnt Alive. Tertull. in Apologet.
Lying speechless for three days, he dies of an Apoplexy. Cent. Mag. Cent. 2.
c. 4. p. 28. The Church had a little rest under Commodus, the Emperor (who
succeeded Antoninus); yet was his Throne tinctured with some of the blood of
the Saints: Apollonius a Roman Senator (by virtue of an ancient Law made
against the Christians, and unrepealed) lost his head in a witness for Christ.
Eusebius. Hieron. But in the time of Severus about A.D. 205. the Devil is let
loose to purpose; a fresh Persecution is raised every where against them.
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 1. Spartian. The accusations against them were generally,
Sedition, Treason, Sacrilege, Incest, Adulteries, (the Candles being put out)
Leonides the Father of Origin, is beheaded. Eusebius. ibid. With many others.
Tertul. ad Scapul. Apologetick. contra Gentes. All manner of cruelties were
exercised against them, their houses were rifled, their goods taken away, they
themselves are murdered, burnt in a witness for Christ. But the Emperor at
last pays dear for these cruelties. After he had endured great pain in all his
members, especially in his feet, he poisons himself to put an end to his
torments. Cent. Mag. Cent. 3. c. 3. p. 22. For a little while the Church had
some tranquillity; but under Maximinus about A.D. 237. Persecution is raised
against the Pastors of the Church, upon this Principle, that they being
removed, the rest, the Flock, would deny their Profession. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 28.
The distress was short, but smart: He continued Emperor but three Years; and
then he with his Son (yet a Child) was torn in pieces of the Soldiers, all
crying out, Ex pessimo genere, ne catulum quidem habendum, That not a Whelp was
to be left of so cursed a Stock. Aurel. Victor, Capitol. Decius A.D. 247.
raises another fierce persecution. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 39. Cypr. l. 4. Epist. 4.
Nicephorus l. 5. c. 29. tells us, that it is, as easy to number the Sands of
the Sea, as the Martyrs that lost their lives by this persecution. Some are
mentioned by name; as at Jerusalem, the Bishop of the Church there, who was
cast into Prison, and died; as did Babylas, the Bishop of Antioch. Niceph. l.
5. c. 26. Another Babylas Bishop (or Pastor) of the Church at Nicomedia, was
Martyred. Spec. Vincent. l. 11. c. 52. Asclepiades, Pastor of the Church at
Antioch, with forty Virgins, Id. Ibid. At Lampsac, one Peter. In Troas,
Andrew, Paul, Nicomachus, and Dionysia, a Virgin, Id. l. 11. c. 46. At
Caesarea, Germanus, Theophilus, Caesarius, Vitalis, l. 11. c. 52. At Babylon,
Polychronius their Bishop, c. 49. At Perga in Pamphylia, Nestor, their Bishop.
c. 52. Olympias and Maximus, in Persia --. But the violence of this persecution
was in Africa, as is manifest from Tertullian, Cyprian; and particularly at
Alexandria, as Eusebius. l. 6. c. 40, 41, 42. Demonstrates from the Epistles of
Dionysius, Pastor of the Church there. At Rome, Fabian their Bishop, and
Cornelius, Sabel. l. 7. Ennead. 7. --. As they were an innumerable company,
that at this time suffered for the Name, Worship of CHRIST, so were their
Sufferings of diverse kinds; some were driven from house and harbor; spoiled of
their Goods, and Enjoyments, bound with Chains, shut up in Prisons, cast to
wild Beasts to be devoured; consumed in the Flames, Cypr. contr. Demet. Some
they beat with Clubs; prick Face and Eyes with sharp Quills; Stone to death;
drag along the Streets; sorely scourge; dash against Milstones: They break into
their Houses, take away their Jewels, and all of any value; throw the wooden
stuff into the streets, burn it to ashes -- Eusebius. l. 6. c. 40. When Decius had
scarce Reigned two Years, he was slain, together with his Sons, Eusebius. l. 7. c.
1. Vibius Gallus ascends the Throne, about A.D. 254* and continues the
Persecution by Imperial Edicts, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 1. Vincent. in Speculo. l. 11.
c. 53. But a dreadful pestilence invading the Empire, not much was done. Gallus
also himself was quickly slain by Aemilianus, Faseicul. Tempor. fol. 45. About
A.D. 257. Valerian mounts the Throne, who at first was so kind to the People of
God, that his whole Palace (says Dionysius) was replenished with the godly,
and became a Church of God, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 10. Afterterwards they were sorely
Persecuted. They are forbid to keep any Conventicles; are despoyled of Goods;
imprisoned, scourged, banished, killed with the sword, consumed in the flames,
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 11. At Caesarea, Priscus, Malchus, and Alexander, are cast to
the Wild Beasts, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 12. Concerning the persecution at Alexandria,
Dionysius writes to Domitius, and Didymus, thus, It Is superfluous to go about
to reckon the Names of such as suffered amongst us, since they are so many; but
thou may know that they are of all sorts, Men, Women, Youths, old Men,
Virgins, old Women, Soldiers, and Unlearned, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 11. He makes
particular mention of one Faustus, who was killed with the Sword. And
Bergomensis in his History of Valerian the Emperor, l. 8. mentions Philippus,
Bishop of Alexandria, who suffered after the same manner. And at Carthage,
Cyprian was put to death. Sabell. in Chron. Vincentius, l. 11. c. 83. tells us,
that three hundred Martyrs suffered at Carthage; many at Rome, and elsewhere.
At last, the cry of the blood of Innocents, brings vengeance upon the pate of
Valerian, and he falls into the hand of Sapores King of Persia, who carried him
about in a Cage, and used him as a footstool as often as he took Horse, Laetus.
Aurel. Vict. and being seventy years old, as a just and righteous Judgment of
God on him for his like cruelty to his Servants, says Eusebius, Sermon. ad
convent. Sanct. he was flayed, and saulted alive; and so dyed. Valerianus being
taken by Sapores King of Persia, Galienus governs alone: about A.D. 262. and by
Public Edicts, puts a stop to the Persecution, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 13. and 15. and
22. from whence, to the time of Dioclesian, and Maximilian, about A.D. 288. The
Church was in a more tranquil state; but then were they more harassed,
persecuted, than ever; Eusebius. l. 8. c. 1. The persecution began the nineteenth
year of his Empire, A.D. 306. In March, most terrible Edicts come forth, for
the pulling down their Meeting - Places, leveling them to the ground,
throughout the Roman Empire; which accordingly was speedily done, Eusebius. l. 8.
c. 2. Then comes forth another Edict for burning the Scriptures: as also for
ejecting with ignominy, out of all Offices, and places of Trust, whoever would
not abjure their Religion; Persons in private capacities to be brought under
servitude, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 3. Niceph. l. 7. c. 4. Zonaras, Tom. 2. not long
after, other Edicts are published, to seize, imprison their Preachers; and by
all manner of punishments, to compel them to Worship their Idols; Eusebius. l. 8.
c. 3.5. At Tirus above forty were beheaded: At Caesarea the eminent Pamphilus
was Martyred, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 13. In Syria all the noted Teachers were first
imprisoned, afterward slain, Id. Ibid. In Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Tarsus of
Cilicia, Nicomedia; in Bythinia many are hardly used, Butchered, Eusebius. l. 8.
c. 12. and 13. and chapter 4. and 6. Hermannus Gigas* tells us, that Serena the
Emperor Dioclesian's Wife, was also Martyred for Christ. Twenty-thousand were
together by Maximianus his cruelty, burnt in a Temple, being there assembled to
Worship God, Niceph. l. 7. c. 6. Many in Arabia were cut off, Eusebius. l. 8. c.
12. All the Inhabitants of a City in Phrygia, with their City were destroyed,
Eusebius. l. 8. c. 11. In Armenia, Arabrace, the Teachers of the Churches were
Murdered by them, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 6. Niceph. l. 7. c. 14. The persecution
severely raged in Egypt. At Thebes a whole Legion of Christians were put to
death, Vincent. in Speculo. l. 12. c. 2. It-reached Africa, and Mauritania,
Eusebius. l. 8. c. 6. and the Islands, as Lesbos (Sabel. Ennead. 7. l. 8) Samos,
and Sicilie, where seventy-nine Martyrs were slain, Heinrick. de Erford. At
Nicopolis, in Thracia, Niceph. l. 7. c. 14. at Chalcedonia, Vincent. l. 12. c.
77. At Rome, Bononia, several were murdered, Vinc. l. 12. c. 49. At Aquileia
the Emperor commanded to destroy all the Christians, Id. l. 12. c. 58. At
Florence, Pergamos, Neapolis in Campania, Beneventum, Venusa in Apulia, and in
Toscana several were cut off, says Regino. At Verona in France, at Mediolanum,
at Massilia (or Marseille) there were many Martyred, Heinric. de Erfor. Vinc.
l. 12. c. 2. In Spain the Blood of the Saints ran down like Rivers, and
tinctured the streams of Water, Vincent. l. 12. c. 136. It reached even to
Britain, Beda, l. 1. de ratio. temp. All the Christians here (almost) were
destroyed, Martin. Chron. Fascic. temp. Maximinus (who was Emperor with
Constantius) rages in the East against them, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 15. In the midst
of Cities, Edicts written in Tables of Brass against them, are hung up, Eusebius.
l. 9. c. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. upon which many are banished, put to death, Eusebius. l.
9. c. 7. Niceph. l. 7. c. 44. Having made havoc of the Church, and not
prevailing against it, Dioclesian with his partner Maximianus, lay aside the
Government, and live as private men. But the Vengeance of the Lord reaches them
for their bloody cruelty against the Saints. Dioclesian being smitten with
madness, slew himself, Eusebius. in orat. ad convent Sanct. Maximianus perished
with a disease so loathsome, that the Physicians, as they could not cure him;
so were not able to endure the stinck of it, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 16. At last
Constantine, with Licinius enter Rome as Victors, proclaim liberty to the
Christians: yet not long after, Licinius sets himself against them: turns them
all out of his Court, such as are Soldiers he cashiers: makes diverse wicked
Laws against them, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 8. and l. 1. de vit. Constant. Privately
murders their Pastors in several Cities of Pontus; pulls down some of their
Temples, shuts up others; takes away their goods, banishes, puts to death not a
few, Sozom. l. 1. c. 2. Eusebius. l. 10. c. 8. l. 1. de Vit. Constant. So that now
the Christans betake themselves again to Fields, Woods, Solitudes, Mountains,
Eusebius. l. 10. c. 14. Niceph. l. 7. c. 14. Sozom. l. 9. c. 2. He would have
proceeded further, but conquered by Constantine, a period is also put to this
Persecution. 'Twere endless to mention the sore distress the Churches underwent
by Sapores King of Persia in his Dominions: The cruelties they endured by the
Arrians, the Butcheries, Tyrannies, Oppressions of all sorts, they underwent
from the Antichristians, the Papists; are innumerable, ineffable; Europe is
made a shambles, wherein the Blood of millions of the Innocent Lambs of Christ
has been poured forth; (for which they shall be plagued, destroyed, in the
time appointed by the Lord). These things are known to all, who have thought it
their concern in the least to turn aside to consider of them. The boody
cruelties of the Antichristian Party, against the Bohemians; in Holland also;
the Massacre of Paris, Ireland, the Valleys of Piedmont, etc. wherein many
thousands of the Lord's Innocent Ones have been barbarously murdered, for no
other reason* in the World, but because they labored according to their Light,
to maintain, and be found in the Doctrine, and Worship of Christ, is yet recent
in the memory of most. What heart so rocky as to read the Histories of the deep
suffeings of those worthy witnesses of our Lord the Waldenses, without pouring
forth floods of tears? What treacheries, clandestine Plots, breach of
Covenants, Oaths, have the Antichristians been found guilty of (pursuant to
that bloody principle, Nulla fides -- No Faith is to be kept with Haereticks;
and all are such in their account, that embrace not their heresy, abomnable
Idolatries) that they might obtain their end, to waste, destroy, root out the
Heritage of God. Another way Satan has taken to accomplish this his design, is

2. Schism amongst the Churches of Christ. This was early set on foot, even in
the Apostles days, (1 Cor. 3.3. and 11.18. When ye come together in the
Church, I hear that there be divisions (Schisms) among you, and I partly
believe it:) and has been more, or less, with cunning, heat, violence, managed
ever since by Satan, to the disturbing, breaking, crumbling into nothing some
Churches of Christ. The frequent charging and recharging of Schism upon each
other, by those that truly fear the Lord, and agree in the fundamentals of
Christianity, has been no small machine of the wicked one to weaken, destroy
them. A work he is still managing, and we are too too little awakened to see his
design, and to study in the right Spirit to prevent it. 'T would make ones
heart to bleed, to see, hear, with what keenness, acrimony, bitterness some
Protestants are acted against others, who are not of the same mind in all
things, whilst the Devil in the Papacy stands laughing to think, what an easy
prey hereby he shall make of them all. Ah! alas! where is the Christian
simplicity, amity? How little respect have some to the great Commandment of
Christ, to Love one another, who yet would be accounted his Disciples? Were it
not for a hasty Spirit, bitter envying that is upon some, one would think they
had no concern for Religion at all; and yet even this discovers that they are
too little impregnated with the Spirit of the true Religion of Jesus Christ,
which engages to love, meekness, condescension, mutual forbearance amongst
Saints.

3. False Doctrine, Worship. This also had an early entrance amongst the
Churches. The denial of the Resurrection of the dead, substituting in the room
thereof, a metaphorick Resurrection, betimes infected some (at least) of the
Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 15. with 2 Timothy 2.18. Justification by the Law, by
Works was introduced into many of them; as the Churches at Rome, Galatia, etc.
against whom the Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul, smartly disputes in his
Epistles directed to them. Into the pure Worship of God, the inventions,
traditions of men were at last so introduced, that God could no longer own it
as his Worship at all. And in respect of both these, none ever were so
degenerate, corrupt as the Synagogue of Rome. To enumerate particulars were
endless; what more contrary to Truth, sound Doctrine, than their assertions,
that the Original Hebrew, and Greek, of the Old and New Testament is corrupt;
That the Scripture is not perspicuous, clear: That to one Man (the Pope) the
interpretation of Scripture does belong, who is Infallible; and Judgment,
Conscience, all, is to be subjected to him: That he is the alone Judge of
Controversies: who has the Spirit of God, given to him above others for his so
doing: That the Pope can dispense with the Law of God: That he is Universal
Head of the Church: That he is not to be questioned for his Doctrine, or
Actions. ( Si Papa infinitas animas in infernum traheret, tamen nemo debet ei
dicere, quid facis? If the Pope should carry an infinite number of Souls
headlong to Hell, none ought to say to him, what do thou? For the will of
the Pope stands for reason, Glossa). By his own Authority he can make Laws to
bind the Consciences of the faithful: He has Power, Authority over Princes;
can crown, un-crown; set up, depose as he pleases. That the Scriptures are not
a sufficient Canon, or rule of Faith, and Manners; but Traditions written, and
un-written, are also necessary: That Traditions are sufficient without the
Scriptures; but the Scriptures are not sufficient, without Traditions: That
Christ is mediator only according to his humane Nature: That it is unlawful for
Priests to marry: That there is a certain place in which (as in a prison) after
this life, souls are purged, who were not here perfectly purged; that being so
purged, they might enter into Heaven: That Saints are to be Worshipped: That
Images are to be Worshipped with the same Worship that is due to those whose
Images they are (as the Image of God, Christ --): yea, so that the Worship be
terminated in the Image: That the Sacraments confer grace ex opere operato:
That they justify, That there are seven Sacraments: That the Church has power
to Institute new Ceremonies for spiritual ends: That persons un-Baptiz'd are
damned; there is no salvation without it: That Baptism takes away all sin: That
the Bread and Wine is converted into the Body and Blood of CHRIST: That the
Priest offers up Christ a propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick, and dead, to
God the Father: That there are sins in their own nature Venial: That
Concupiscence in those that are renewed, is no sin: That men may be saved if
they will; it is in their own power to believe, etc. That men are not justified
by Faith without Works: That inherent Righteousness justifies: That none can be
certain, in this Life, either of their Election, Justification, Perseverance to
the end, or Eternal Life: That we are justified by Works, that we merit Eternal
Life by them. And these are some of those pure streams that too many have a
great mind to return to drink of; and would by force, bloody cruelty, compel
others to drink, and be poisoned with them.

4. False Visions, lying Revelations; upon which many times, false Doctrine,
Worship, has been built, supported. Somewhat of these was also in the Apostles
times. Divine Visions, Revelations there were many, see Act. 10.11 --. and
16.9. and 18.9, 10. and 23.11. and 27.23, 24. Gal. 1.12. and 2.1, 2. 2 Cor.
12.4. Act. 7.55. and 10.3. Some also there were who were full of their false
Visions, Revelations, 2 These. 2.2. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming
of our Lord Jesus, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not
shaken in mind -- neither by Spirit -- i. e. by any that shall pretend to
Revelations by the Spirit --. To mention what of this kind was in after days,
is endless: somewhat is spoken to it, chap. 3. Of the ensuing Treatise.

5. Pretensions to a more than Ordinary Authority, Power. False-Prophets,
Pseudo-Apostles there were even in the Apostles days, 2 Cor. 11.13. Such are
False-Apostles Transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. See Mat.
24.5, 11. Rev. 2.2. and many have risen up since, whereby the Faith of some
have been perverted, and they have been drawn off from the ways of Christ.

6. False Miracles, Lying Signs and Wonders. Of this we have an account, Mat.
24.24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders --. Mar. 13.22. 2 These. 2.9. Even him whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying wonders, Rev.
13.13, 14. And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire to come down from
Heaven on the Earth in the sight of men: and deceives them that dwell on the
Earth by the means of those Miracles. Antichrists Kingdom has been full of
such lying signs, and wonders, whereby the Faith of some has been Shaken, and
they drawn off from the pure Worship of Christ.

7. Open, avowed, oppositions to Gospel-Institutions of this device of Satan to
ruin the Churches of Christ, we might give a distinct, and large account; some
there were of old that opposed, denied, some particular Ordinances; others
refused communion with the Churches, as no Churches of Christ. In the third
Century, the Manichees denied baptism with Water, August. l. 2. de mor. Manich.
and l. 6. Contra Faust. The Meletians in the fourth century refused communion
with the Churches, says Theodoret. And Augustine, ad quod vult, etc. tells us,
that they would not so much as Pray with the Saints. The Audaeans, or
Anthropomorphites (who held that God had a humane form, or shape as a man)
denied communion with the Churches in the same Century, Epiphan. in Anacephal.
August. ad quod vult, etc. Theodoret, l. 4. c. 10. The Donatists held in the
same century, that the Church of God was wholly lost, and to be restored by
them; amongst whom in Africa 'twas only preserved, August. l. 2. Cont. lit.
Petil. c. 15. l. 2. Cont. Cres. c. 37. (for which they pretended Miracles,
Visions, Dreams): What open, avowed oppositions have been (are) in our days
made to the Churches, Institutions of Christ, is known, and ought to be
bewailed by us: These things might have been more at large spoken to, but I am
sensible how far I have transcended the due bounds of an Epistle to so small a
Treatise, and shall only add, That,

1. I plead not for the Continuance of This, or That, particular Church of
Christ. Many such have been dis-churched, and may be so. God may be so far
provoked against This, or That Church, as to Write Lo-ammi, Lo-ruhamah upon it;
to disown his relation to it, or its relation to him. Where is the Church of
Ephesus, Pergamos, Laodicea, etc. but only argue, that God does, will, continue
the Gospel-Church-state, Ordinances, in some particular Church, or Churches in
the World, to the next personal coming of Christ. Much less,

2. Do I plead for the corruptions of Churches, which indeed are too many, and
great, perhaps amongst the best, purest Churches at this day; and in some, at
that height (as the synagogue of Rome) that there is no communion to be held
with them, without God-provoking iniquity, that will without Repentance, bring
his Wrath, Vengeance, upon us, Rev. 18.4.

3. That persons had need take heed how they speak evil of, slight, oppose,
persecute the Churches of CHRIST, his Worship, Institutions, Ordinances. The
Judge stands before the door, the Lord of the Vineyards is ready to be
revealed, and in flaming fire to take Vengeance on them that know him not, and
obey not his Gospel. Nor will it be a sufficient plea at that day, for any to
say, we accounted them not thy Churches, Ordinances; therefore we so managed
our selves toward them, a despising, rejecting these, is one way of casting
off the Authority of Christ, as we afterward demonstrate.

4. That it highly concerns all that know the Lord, who are either separated
from; or, were never adjoined to any Church of Christ; to testify their love,
and subjection to him; by subjecting to his Commandments in this matter, lest
not being found where Christ expects them, they be blamed, shamed, at his day.

5. That the utmost care should be taken, industry used, to keep those
Iniquities out of particular Churches, as may provoke the Lord to spew them out
of his mouth, as he did Laodicea of old. Particularly

1. Schisms amongst themselves: Which as they are an Argument of Carnality, 1
Cor. 3.3. so they distaste, greatly provoke the Lord. 2. Formality,
Lukewarmness. 3. Pride, both inwardly, in Heart, Spirit: outwardly, in Apparel,
Garb; God resists the Proud; sets himself in battel-array against them. 4.
Covetousness, which is Idolatry. A wretched spirit, that has too much
overspread, prevailed upon the body of Professors: Such as are Baptized into
it, are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18, 19. 5. Sinful compliance
with, and Conformity to this World. 6. Carelessness as to sanctifying the Name
of God in every part of Worship: The nature of this great work is opened in the
following Treatise; with many other things, of which we must not now speak.

6. That particular Churches ought, to be much, often considering their ways,
get a sense of their miscarriages upon them, pollutions amongst them, to
remember from whence they are fallen; repent, do their first works. And if ever
'twere the duty of the Churches of Christ to attend carefully to these things,
it is much more now. What languishing, dying Churches have we? How is Jehovah by
word, providential Dispensations crying aloud to them, to be zealous, Repent,
return? What little attendment to his Voice amongst many? How does he discover
his unwillingness to leave them? How does he seem to hover over them? How many
ways has he been alluring, drawing by cords of Love unto himself; and if after
all, he should pull down these Tabernacles, and erect others for himself in
some remote part of the World; leave poor England, suffer Papal Darkness,
Superstition, Idolatry, to overspread the Land; must we not say, he is Holy, we
reap the fruit of our own doings: He is faithful to his Word: Churches
(Ordinances) He will have in the world to bear his Name, though we are reduced
to Rubbish, Ruins. I have been, am trembling within my self, lest he should at
last be provoked to leave us (at least for a season): Woe, woe, woe, unto us if he
depart from us. Repent oh England; Awake, awake Churches; awake, awake
Professors; lay hold on God, renew your Covenant with him, labor to find out
every accursed thing that may be in the midst of you; cast it away with
loathing, abhorrency; bemoan your selves for the sins, iniquities, are with
you; be conscientious in filling up the relation you stand in each to other, as
members of the same Body: cry to God to fill you with Presence, Glory; to
communicate the suitable grace to you, that you may be able to glorify him in
the Fires; Oh Watch and Pray, that you may be accounted worthy to escape the
things that are to come to pass, and stand before the son of man. Oh! Wait,
look for his Coming as those that are indeed ready for it. And if you meet with
any spiritual good, and advantage, by the serious perusal of the ensuing
Treatise, let God have the Glory, and pray for him, who accounts it his honor,
to be,

A Servant of Christ, and the meanest of his Children, R.B.

THE PREFACE To the ensuing Discourse.
OF the Creation of Man. Divine Institutions in the State of Innocence. Man's
fall. A New-state of things thereupon introduced. Christ the Foundation of
Instituted Worship, and Man's Communion with God therein. A Church State in
Adam's Family. Cain Excommunicated. The Church State preserved pure, till about
the days of Enosh. Separation from carnal Worshippers in his days, Genesis 4.26.
Explained. The Church State preserved in a great measure of purity for (about)
a thousand Years. A grand Apostasy therefrom in the days of Noah. The purity
of Worship preserved in his Family. Apostates destroyed by the Waters of the
Flood. A solemn Covenant made by the Lord with Noah upon his coming out of the
Ark. The Statutes God gave to him. The purity of Worship continues
uninterrupted for (about) forty Years. Ham excommunicated. A dredaful Apostasy
about the thousandth Year after the Flood. A remnant kept pure. (...), and
(...) Who they are. The general defection, Idolatry that overspread all in
Abraham's time. His call. The erection of the pure Worship of God in his
Family. Corruptions in Jacob's Family before their going into Egypt, whilst
there. Jehovah's bringing them out from thence: giving the Law at Mount Sinai.
Their Idolatry. The ten Tribes led captive beyond Assyria; the two Tribes into
Babylon: God looks after them there: brings them from thence. A new Reformation
begun by Ezra, Nehemiah, etc. Their Apostasy afterward; yet they are not
totally rejected, till they had refused, rejected, crucified the Son of God.
Then their Church State is vertually dissolved. A new-Church-state set up by
Christ. What a Gospel Church is. That it is of the Institution of Christ,
together with the Ordinances thereunto belonging, Proved.

BEfore I come to that which is the main design of this Treatise; viz. A plain
Scripture-Demonstration of the Continuance of Gospel-Churches, to the next
Personal, Glorious coming, and Kingdom of Christ, 'twill not be altogether
unprofitable, nor impertinent to take a view of the Churches of God, that have
from the beginning been in the World; so far at least as any footsteps of them
remain in the sacred Scriptures, the alone unerring guide in this matter.

First Then, that God made Adam upright, in his own likeness, after his own
Image, and gave him a Law to walk by, with promises of a higher state of Glory,
if he continued in his integrity (figured forth by the Tree of Life in the
midst of the Paradise of God) and threatening of death in case of defection
therefrom, is evident, Genesis 2.16, 17. That in this state of Innocence, Adam
offered Sacrifices to God; and that the skins wherewith he was afterward
clothed, were the skins of the sacrificed Beasts (as some affirm) seems to be
an un-scriptural foolish figment. This is certain, that upon man's disobedience,
a New-state of things was introduced.

1. He that could converse with God, as a friend; now flies from him as an
enemy, Genesis 3.8, 9, 10. Nor,

2. Can he any longer treat with God upon the terms of the first Covenant; nor
draw nigh to him (as formerly) immediately by himself in his original, created
Righteousness. He had quickly (by his disobedience) forfeited all his primitive
Glory, Privileges, with which in the day of his Creation he was invested; and
brought miseries, deaths of all kinds, Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal, both upon
himself, and all his Posterity that sprang from him by a natural generation: So
that in him, All sinned, and came short of the Glory of God, Romans 3.23.

3. As an immediate discovery of Jehovahs displeasure against him for his
rebellion, he drives him out of Paradise; and guards the Tree of Life with
Cherubims, and a Flaming Sword that he come not at, or eat of the fruit of it,
Genesis 3.24.

4. It was therefore necessary that another Foundation be laid for fallen-mans
drawing nigh to God (from whom he had thus dreadfully Apostatized) which being
provided in the eternal counsel of God, and agreed upon in a Solemn-Covenant,
betwixt the Father and the Son, is immediately (of the inconceivable Grace of
GOD) revealed to Adam, viz. the Seed of the Woman, the Lord Jesus, the only Way
to the Father, Genesis 3.15. Joh. 14.4, 6.

5. That upon this Revelation of Jesus Christ (mankind multiplying exceedingly
by the Power of that word of God, Genesis 1.28.) there was a Church State erected
by the Authority and Command of God in Adams Family, where solemn Worship was
managed; as Praying, Preaching, offering Sacrifices, Genesis 4.3, 4. And out of
this Church, were open notorious offenders Excommunicated. So was Cain, Genesis
4.12, 14. By whose ejection the Church was kept pure, till about the Age of
Enosh.

6. Much about that time, degeneracy in Worship had so far prevailed, that the
Rigteous Seed, saw a necessity of separating from the generality of the
Worshippers of that day, and gather themselves together as a distinct People,
for the solemn carrying on Divine service amongst themselves, Genesis 4.26. The
words are (...), which are variously rendered. He began to invocate the Name of
Lord, so the Vulgar Latin, and Syriac. He hoped to invocate the Name of the
Lord, so the Seventy. Then (in his days) the Sons of men ceased from calling
upon the Name of the Lord, so the Chaldee. Then the Name of God began to be
called upon, so the Samaritan, Arabic Translations renders it. I know there
are some who will have the words to point at a great degeneracy in Worship, a
sad lapse into Idolatry. But that a defection in Worship cannot be intended, is
evident; for there had been long before, a great degeneracy, a total Apostasy
therefrom in the Cainites: but somewhat that men began to do, which hitherto
had not been attempted, is intimated thereby; which can be nothing else, then
that Segregation, and aggregation in order to purity of Worship before
intimated: For men had before, called on the Name of the Lord; but there was
never tell now, so visible a separation from the rest of the World, for the
solemn management of Religious Worship amongst themselves. And as they began
now to call upon the Name of the Lord, or to call themselves by the Name of the
Lord, as the margin reads, so are they upon the account of this act of theirs,
Styled, The Sons of God, Genesis 6.2.

7. About one thousand Years after (all which time there was in a great measure
purity preserved amongst them) great corruption invades the Church. The nature
of it together with its occasion, and spring, we have an account at large of,
Genesis 6. And yet even now the Lord leaves not himself without a Witness. The
truth and purity of Worship, together with practick-godlinesss, being
maintained in Noah's Family, Genesis 6.8, 9. and 7.1. who are ensafed in a
fluctuating Ark; whilst the whole body of Apostates, are swallowed up with the
Waters of the Flood: of which Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 3.6.

8. When Noah, and his Family are brought out of the Ark, the Waters of the
Flood being gone from off the face of the Earth; Jehovah enters into a solemn
Covenant with him; gives him several Statutes, and Judgments to Conform to,
Genesis 9. These are generally said to be seven.

1. The First, (...); against extraneous Worship, or Idolatry, the Worshipping
the Stars, or Images.

2. (...), against Blaspheming the Name of God.

3. (...), against shedding Blood.

4. (...), against unjust, carnal Copulations.

5. (...), against Rapine, or Robbery.

6. (...), of Judgments, or Punishments, against Malefactors.

7. (...), against eating any member or flesh of a Beast taken from it alive. A
special blessing as to propagation is given to him, Genesis 9.7. So that the
Church in his Family soon enlarged its borders. The purity of worship continues
amongst them uninterrupted for forty years, or thereabout. When the Wickedness
of Ham committed against the light of Nature, in discovering the nakedness of
his Father, breaks forth; by whom he is Cursed, Excommunicated; so the purity
of the Church State is preserved, Genesis 9.25. Cursed be the Father of Canaan; so
the Arabic reads is. About the Hundredth year after the Flood, many
Apostatized from the pure ways of God, rose up in rebellion against him; in
defiance of him will build a Tower, the top whereof might reach to Heaven. But
yet even in this grand defection, there were some (at least) of the posterity
of Shem that kept pure; with whom therefore the Hebrew language remained
entire, as Genebrardus Chron. lib. 1. tells us: The truth is, as the learned
Bochartus says, in his Geographia Sacra, l. 1. c. 10. It cannot be imagined,
that either Noah, or Shem, or Arphaxad, or Sala, or Heber (with whom it is
groundedly to be thought not a few continued) were in this mad attempt. The
Spirit of the Lord seems to intimate the contrary; they which were engaged in
it, were (...), the Sons of Men, Genesis 11.5. viz. an apostate, vile crew, who
stand in direct opposition to (...), the Sons of God, as the faithful were
called in the days of Enosh, as was before said.

How long the purity of Worship remained after this, is uncertain. This is most
certain, that when God called Abraham out of Ur of the Chaldees, Superstition,
Idolatry, overspread all. At that time both his Father, and he, were Idolaters,
Jos. 24.2.

9. This call of God to Abraham was effectual, he obeyes it, separates from the
degenerate, Idolatrous World; constitutes a New-Church, sets up the pure
Worship of God in his Family: Enjoyes more clear, full openings of Divine
Mysteries than any before him. God enters into Covenant with him, institutes
circumcision -- See Genesis 12.3, 7, 8. and 13.15, 16. and 15.1, 5, 6. and 17.1,
2, 9. and 22.17, 18. So that the Church of God in Abraham's Family grows up in
to greater glory, visibility, than before. Several corruptions are not long
after amongst them in Jacobs Family before their going into Egypt, which he
reforms, Genesis 35.1, 2, 3, 4. They polluted themselves with Idolatry in the Land
of Egypt, Jos. 24.14. Ezekiel. 23.2, 3. (brought their Whordoms from thence, ver.
8. which they practiced in the Wilderness, Exodus 32. (and never totally left
till they were carried captive into Babylon): Nevertheless, the Lord casts them
not off: but oh the wonder of Love! brings them from under their bonds, leads
them to Mount- Sinai; makes a Covenant with them, gives them good Statutes and
Judgments to walk by. And now that Church becomes as a City on a Hill, visible,
conspicuous unto the Nations round about: is decked, adorned, with visible
excellency, and glory* that her renown goes forth through the Nations, Ezekiel.
16.14. But woe, and alas! after all the grace of the Lord showed to her, his
wonders wrought for her, she quickly forgets, departs from him. Is more
notorious for spiritual Whordoms, Wickedness, than all the Nations round about
her: Yet God gives her not up, woes, allures her to return to him --. But all
to no purpose, Israel (or the ten Tribes) is led Captive by Salmanassur: Judah
(or the two Tribes) is not betterd by it; but though now and then under the
conduct of some good Kings, a reformation is introduced; yet anon all is
spoiled, marred again. Jehovah call's to return, but their ear is deaf, their
hearts hardened, none obey his voice: He professes for all this, he knows not
how to give them up, his bowels turn within him toward them, repentings are
enkindled for them. Yet this affects them not, so that at last he is forced to
send them into Babylon; yet does not take off his love, care for them there,
nor disregards them as a People unchurcht; looks upon them as his own in
Covenant with him, brings them from thence to their own Land again. Then is a
new, most absolute reformation begun, by Ezra, Nehemiah, etc. The Temple is
rebuilt; the men of the great Synagogue instituted. A most diligent
consideration of the exemplars of the Holy Scriptures is set upon. The word of
God is sedulously Preached, Neh. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. The wicked are
excomunicated, Ezr. 4.2, 3. From the mixed People, there is a perfect separation,
Ezr. chapters 9.10. Neh. chapter ult. So that the Church seems to be again comely,
through the comeliness that God put upon her: But long abides not firm with
him, pollutes his Worship, with the inventions, traditions of men; departs from
the Doctrine he had delivered to her; particularly, the Doctrine of the free
Justification of a sinner before God; in opposition to which, they introduce
justification by the works of the Law. In a word, they become as filthy, and
abominable every way, as a people can well be* Nevertheless, God bears with
them, their Church State is not dissolved, they have their Temple, Ordinances,
and even the most holy amongst them attend there, as Zachary, Elizabeth,
Simeon. The Lord sends a Prophet to them, John ( Elias in spirit) to reform,
bring them back from their Apostasy. At last he sends his Son to reclaim them;
Who* would have gathered them as a Chicken under his wings, but they would not.
Him they refused, thrust away, by wicked hands, took, condemned, crucified,
slew him; and now the measure of their Fathers iniquity being filled up, and
the time appointed by Jehovah, to take down that Tabernacle, being fully come,
and to set up another in the room of it by the Messiah, CHRIST, he puts a full
period to it, apotomizes, cuts them off, perfectly unchurches them, and (at
last) lays waste, destroys their City, Temple, with an utter Destruction. Now
was the total ruin of that Apostatick Judaick Church. And to purpose, in
capital letters, is Lo-ammi, and Loruhamah written upon them, viz. Ye are not
my People, I have no mercy for you; and not so plainly at any time as now.
'Twere easy to make many remarks to the advantage of the present truth we are
risen up in the defense of, from the foregoing discourse. The prudent Reader,
can do it himself. To whom we leave it. The whole Church-politie of the Jews,
being vertually dissolved at the death of Christ, a New-Church-state is
introduced by him: New Churches formed according to his rule, model,
new-institutions appointed by him, which it is the duty of those Churches to
conform to.

Two things must here briefly be enquired into.

1. What a Gospel Church, or an Instituted-Church of Christ is.

2. That such a Church is of the Institution of Christ.

As touching the first, A Cospel-Church is a Society of Believers, once dead in
trespasses, and sins; but now quickened by the Spirit, sanctified, justified, by
the Free Grace of God in Christ; illuminated by the same Spirit in the
knowledge of his Will, separated from the World, and voluntarily joined
together for the exercise of the Communion of Saints in the due observation of
all the Institutions, Ordinances of Christ. This description of a Gospel Church
is proved in every part of it, from the ensuing Scriptures, Ephesians. 2.1. And you
has he quickened who were dead in trespasses, and sins, ver. 5. When we were
dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ. 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are
washed, sanctified, justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God. 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. What
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the
living God -- Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. Heb. 3.1.
Holy Brethren, partakers of the Heavenly calling. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will
begat he us by the word of Truth. Rev. 1.20. The seven (Golden) Candlesticks
which thou saw are seven Churches, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.21, 22, 23.

As touching the second, that such a Church was instituted by Christ, is
evident,

1. From Christ's appointment, and approbation of such a Church, Mat. 18.15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20.

2. Christ charges his Apostles, Mat. 28. to teach those, who should be
converted by their Ministry, to observe whatever he commanded them. In
pursuance of which charge, we find, that as soon as any were converted to the
Faith, by the direction of the Apostles, they were gathered into
Church-Societies, Acts 2.41, 42, 47. 8.1. 11.26. 14.23, 27.

3. These are called the Churches of God, of Christ. Act. 20.28. 1 Cor. 1.2.
and 10.32. 11.22. and 15.9. 2 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.13. 1 Timothy 3.5. Romans 16.16.
because of their institution, establishment by him.

4. The Apostles, in the Name, Authority of Christ, direct their Epistles to
them as such. 1 Cor. 1.1. 2 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.2. Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.2. and 4.16.
1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1. compared with Acts 20.17. 1 Pet. 5.2. or
unto particular persons, giving directions touching their carriage, deportment,
and duty toward them. 1 Timothy 3.15. Tit. 1.5.

5. Christ calls them his Churches, Rev. 1.20.

6. Own's himself to be their Head, Husband, Lord, King; they his Body, Bride,
House, Family -- of which afterward.

7. A great part of the Apostolick-writings consists in giving Precepts,
Exhortations, Counsels to guide, lead them in their duties to each other, in
such a relation; and for their preservation in Purity, and Order. Of which we
shall have occasion particularly to make mention in the ensuing Discourse.

8. His special care of them.

9. The particular notice he takes of them, in the book of the Revelations,
sending particular Epistles to them; Exhorting, reproving, counselling,
encouraging them; taking no notice of any that did not appertain to them, Rev.
chapters 2. and 3. with much more that might be said, does abundantly
demonstrate that the Church described, was of the institution of Jesus Christ.

That the Ordinances practiced in and amongst those Churches; such as Preaching
the Word, Prayer, Baptism, breaking Bread, etc. were of the Appointment of
Christ, will not be denied, se Act. 2.42. and 6.2. 1 Cor. 14.3. 2 Timothy 4.2.
Heb. 13.7. Act. 6.4. and 13.2, 3. 1 Timothy 2.1. Mat. 28.19. and 26.26, 27. 1 Cor.
11.23.

ERRATA.
Reader, Some few mistakes in Printing, are here remarked; the rest being
inconsiderable, are left to thee to amend.

IN the Epistle to the Reader, p. 10. l. 21. r. bloody. l. 36. abominable. p.
13. l. 3. has. In the body of the Book, p. 7. l. 2. r. it is. l. 3. this. p.
16. l. 10. blot out, the. p. 17. l. 11. r. letter. p. 20. l. 34. persons. p.
21. l. 15 inasmuch. l. 17. that. p. 30. l. 14. their. p. 39. l. 5. blot out,
are. p. 54. l. 8. r* 1 Job. p. 56. l. 32. apostasy. p. 63. l. 15. women. p. 66.
l. 33. after much, r. as. p. 73. l. 30. tu es. p. 77. l. 19. increase. p. 79 l.
30 throughout. p. 85. l. 28. for, have. r. are. p. 114. l. 7. (...). p. 117. l.
22. after have, add, said.

Gospel-Churches, A Standing ORDINANCE OF Jesus Christ.
CHAP. I.
Gospel-Churches an Institution of Christ, to continue to his next coming,
demonstrated from the Appellations given in Scripture to such Churches. They
are called, 1. The Kingdom of God. Why they are so called, opened. Mark 9.1.
Acts 1.3. and 19.8, 9. Explained. Several inferences from hence. A twofold
Kingdom, viz. of God, and of the Devil, and Antichrist. Several ways Satan
takes for the support of the Antichristian Kingdom. An Objection Answered. 2. A
House built upon a Rock, Matthew. 16.18. opened at large. Peter not the Rock, but
Christ, proved. The Gates of Hell, what they import. Satan's attempts by
subtlety and power, to destroy the Church, invalid. An Objection Answered. 3.
The Kingdom of Heaven. Why the Gospel-Church-State is so called, An Objection
Answered. 4. A Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.27, 28. explained. 5. The
Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8. opened at large. 6. The Body of
Christ. Gospel-Churches hereby intended, proved. Upon what accounts they are so
called, shown. Several inferences from hence demonstrating the continuation of
them. 7. The Temple, Tabernacle, House, Building of the Lord. Upon what
accounts they are so called. An Objection Answered.

HAving already demonstrated what a particular Church of Christ is, and that as
such, it is one of the Gospel-institutions Commanded, Erected by him; i. e. It Is
the Will of Christ that all believers (ordinarily) should adjoyn themselves to
some one or other such Church. That which is Incumbent on us further to Evince,
is, that such Churches (or the Gospel-Church-State) with the Institutions,
Ordinances, Worship thereunto Affixed, shall continue unto his next glorious
Coming and Kingdom; which we now Address our selves to the dispatch of.

Demonstration I.
The Appellations given in Scripture, to such a Church (or Churches) of Christ,
do evidently evince the Truth hereof.

First, It Is called the Kingdom of God, Mar. 1.15. The Kingdom of God is at
hand: And Chap. 9.1. Till they have seen the Kingdom of God come with Power. He
seems to have respect to the day of Pentecost, when the Spirit was poured down
from on high on the Apostles, who were then endued with Power from above
according to the promise of Christ to them: by which they went forth to preach
the Gospel, plant Churches, etc. Mar. 15.43. Who also waited for the Kingdom of
God, i. e. the Gospel-ministration, Luke, 7.28. He that is least in the Kingdom
of God is greater than he: See Chap. 10.9. and 23.51. Joh. 3* 3, 5 Act. 1.3.
And speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, i. e. the Laws,
Institutions, Rules, Orders, relating to the Churches. See Chapter 8.12. and 19.8,
9. -- disputing, and persuading the things concerning The Kingdom of God -- But
when diverse spoke evil of that way: -- What way? The way of
Gospel-Ministrations; or the worship of God in a Gospel-day; which they spoke
evil of as Heretical ( After the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the
God of my Fathers, Act. 24.14.) Chap. 20 25* with 28. and 28.33, 34.

Upon what Accounts the Gospel-Church-State is called, The Kingdom of God, must
a little be enquired into. It Is so called upon the Account,

1. Of its Glory, and Excellency. Persons, and things said to be of God, are
therefore so said to be. As men of God, Jud. 13.6, 8. 1 Samuel 2.27. and 9.6. 1 Chronicles. 23.14. Hill of God, 1 Samuel 10.5, 10. Psalm. 24.3. and 42.6. and 68.15.
This ministration excels all that went before it, for excellency and glory, 2
Cor. 3.7, 9, 10. (of which more anon.)

2. Of its Extract, and Original. There Is nothing of man in it, it is all of
God: given by the Father to Jesus Christ, who came into the World to reveal,
and discover his Will touching that matter, Joh. 1.14.

3. Of Believers open, visible subjection to, owning, acknowledging of God in
their Obedience thereunto.

4. Of Gods care of it, protection over it, engagement to continue, support,
maintain, uphold it to the end. Whence it evidently follows,

1. That there must be a continuance of this ministration of the Gospel, the
Gospel-Church-State, with all the Laws, Institutions, Ordinances, Orders,
thereto appertaining, till it be suspended, abrogated by Jehovah. Who has
Power, Authority over his Kingdom? or can presume to disannul, suspend any
thing he has therein Instituted; but by such an Act he advances himself above
God, and so proclaims himself to be the Antichrist that was to come? Denies the
Father, and that supreme?? Authority, from whence the original of the
Gospel-ministration does flow.

2. The veracity, faithfulness, wisdom, power of God, are all engaged for the
support, and upholdment of this Ministration. It Is of him, from him: He Is
obliged upon that foot of account, to exert, and put forth the perfections of
his Nature for the upholdment of it. What Devils, beasts of Prey, yea, what
inward lusts, or corruptions in the Saints themselves, shall be able to evert,
bring to naught that Kingdom he is obliged to support, and continue?

3. That there must be a law produced from this High and Sovereign Lawgiver,
for the suspension, perioding of this Ministration, or it abides in force, and
will do so, whether we be subject to it, or not. Our wills, fancies, humors,
imaginations, any pretended Revelation will not justify any persons
Nonconformity thereunto. Let any Statute Law, from Jehovah be produced for
it is suspension, dissolution, and the Controversy is at an end. Where has God
said, My Kingdom shall continue only for a hundred, two, three, or a thousand
years, and then period; after which I Will leave my Children to act as they
please, with respect to any Laws, or Institutions relating to it? If there be
altum silentium, a deep silence with respect to any such Laws, it becomes, and
greatly concerns persons to take heed, that they withdraw not themselves from,
oppose not his Sovereignty herein, lest they be found fighters against God.

Besides, it is not inconsiderable, that there are but two Kingdoms in the World.

1. The Kingdom of God; which, as has been showed (as to visibility) most
eminently consists in Gospel-ministrations.

2. The Kingdom of the Devil, and Antichrist, (who receives his Seat, Power,
and great Authority from the Dragon, or Devil, Rev. 13.2.) and to one of these
we must needs be visibly subject. Two ways Satan takes for the support of the
Antichristian Kingdom;

1. The one is by establishing Laws foreign, yea, contrary to the Laws of
Jehovah, and compelling all to subject to them. The other is,

2. By casting a slight, contempt, upon the Laws of Divine appointment: and
whether the one way, or the other, he prevail upon poor souls, he has his end;
for Jehovah's Sovereign Authority is thereby trampled upon.

Objection. If it be Objected, that the legal Ministration is called, The
Kingdom of God; and Christ tells the Jews nevertheless, that it shall be taken
from them (and we know that an actual Period is put thereunto) Mat. 21.43. so
that the Church State being called The Kingdom of God, is no Argument to prove
its continuance.

Answer. The Answer is easy, 1. It Is granted, that the Mosaic Ministration is
so called, and that because it had it is Original from God, who descending upon
Mount Sinai, by the Ministry of Angels, gave forth the Law, with the Statutes,
Judgments, and Ordinances. 2. It Is also granted, that the Whole of that
Ministration has expired for above this One Thousand Six Hundred Years. But 3.
There were frequent intimations in the Scripture, that it should so expire,
Deuteronomy. 18.15. 18. Psalm. 40.6. Isa. 65.17. Hag. 2.6, 21. (These present Heavens,
or Judaic Church State, with all the Institutions, Ordinances thereto
appertaining will I shake, so as to remove, totally abolish.) Mat. 24.2. (The
Temple to which the Judaic Solemn-Worship was affixed, shall be utterly
destroyed; so the whole of that service thereto appertaining, cease.) Let but
one the like instance of the purpose of God, for the determination of the
New-Testament-Ministration before the next glorious personal Appearance of
Christ, be produced, and there is an end of this Controversy. 4. They were not
the Powers of the world, nor the declensions, apostacies of the Subjects of
that Ministration, that put a Period to it; but the Act of God himself, the
Sovereign thereof. 5. Whatever the corruptions of the Church State were (as
they were very great) it is the commendation of the Lords poor people that they
continued in it, as Zachary, Elizabeth, etc. because in so doing, they testify
their subjection to the Lord, who Instituted it. 6. Nor was it actually
removed, but by the introduction of a new, more spiritual, sublime
Ministration, set on foot by Jesus, the Son of God, fore-prophesied of, as the
great Prophet of the Church, who was to period that Ministration, and set up
another; to whom we are charged to attend in all things.

Secondly, Gospel-Churches (or the Gospel-Church-State) are said to be a House
built upon a Rock, Mat. 7.25. and 16.18. Upon this Rock I will build my Church.
It Is necessary that we Enquire;

I. What we are to understand by this Rock.

1. The Papists tell us, that by this Rock, we are to understand Peter. The
vanity of which pretension, is evident: For, 1. It Is not ((...), but (...))
upon This Peter, but upon This Rock. 2. Peter no where in any of his Epistles
asserts himself to be the Rock upon which the Church is Built, nor do any of
the Apostles in any of their Epistles so affirm of him. He accounts himself but
as an Apostle of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.1. (...), a Co-Elder (with the rest of
the Presbyters, or Elders) 1 Pet. 5.1. 3. Christ is asserted to be the alone
Rock, Foundation of his Church, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 3.11. in opposition
to all others. 4. He himself, as well as other Believers, was built upon the
Rock, which bare him, and not he it, or the Church. 5. Paul expressly asserts, 2
Cor. 11.5. that he was not inferior to the very chiefest Apostles; which had
been false, if Peter had been constituted the Rock upon which the Church was
built. 6. If he were the Rock when he denied Christ (as he did dreadfully) and
at last fell asleep, What became of the Rock, Foundation of the Church? But
this vain pretension is hardly worth our considering; nor should it be granted,
would it at all conduce to the support of the Roman Papal Synagogue, to which
good service it is designed. Therefore,

2. By the Rock, we are to understand the Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator of
the New Covenant. He is expressly so called, 1 Cor. 10.4. Upon what account, is
not to our purpose at present to Enquire.

II. What we are to understand by the Church.

1. Not particular Believers in a scattered, dispersed State.

But 2. Saints gathered together in the order, and fellowship of the Gospel.
This is evident, as if written with the beams of the Sun; for to particular
Believers, as such, in their scattee red dispersed State, the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, ths Power of binding and loosing, does not appertain; But to
thy, Church (congregated) it does, v. 19.

III. What is signified by the gates of Hell; which it is said-shall not prevail
against this Church.

First, The subtlety, policy of Satan. Over the gates of the City, was wont to
be the Council-house. Let all the Devils in Hell sin in Council against the
Lords Church, they shall not be able, by all their cunning, subtlety, to
prevail against it. The subtle attempts of Satan to undermine, destroy this
Church, have been (are) various. To enumerate particulars, is not our present
design: It Is enough, that our Lord assures us, whatever they are, they shall
prove ineffectual. Yet perhaps it may not be altogether impertinent to mention
some few of his subtleties, with respect to this matter. He has then attempted
to destroy it in subtlety,

1. With respect to Doctrine; laboring to undermine, destroy the fundamental
Doctrines of the Gospel, thereby subverting the Faith of some. His attempts
against the Person of Christ; sometimes endeavoring to create a mis-belief,
with respect to his Eternal Deity (to which John opposes himself in his Gospel,
by impregnable, undeniable Arguments); at other times, to the verity of his
Humanity (against which the same Apostle advances himself in his Epistle, 1 John 1.) his designs against the Offices of Christ were also early in the
Apostle's days, particularly against his Priestly Office, laboring to
introduce a justification by the Works of the Law, or, as it were by the works
of the Law, Romans 9.32. viz. partly by Christ, and partly by Works, or internal
Sanctification. A design subtly managed, and carried on by the bloody Jesuits
and others, at this day (as is known); to which the Apostles in their Epistles,
and other Worthies since, have opposed themselves. But though he has hereby
drawn off (at seasons) not a few, from the simplicity of the Gospel; yet there
has all along been a Testimony born in the Churches against him, which he has
not been able to withstand, or repel.

2. With respect to Worship, and that two ways:

1. By introducing humane Observances into the service of God, and Christ, so
polluting, defiling it, that he accounts it not his Worship. And hereby for a
season, he almost totally prevailed upon the body of Professors of Christanity.
So that the whole world (as 'twere) wondered after this Beast, Rev. 13.3. And
the whorish Woman, or false Church, being her self bewitched with this
intoxicating Cup of Fornication, she held it forth to the Nations (with
External pomp and grandeur) to drink of it; and they generally drank of it, and
were drunk, and mad with it, Rev. 17.2, 3, 4, 5. Yet all along Christ had his
Remnant, that witnes'd against these Abominations, (amongst whom the true
Church State was continued, and the purity of Ordinances remained) who also
Sealed their Testimony with their Blood.

2. By reproaching, reviling, contemning, despising the pure Institutions of
Christ, as poor, low, and carnal, pretending to a more sublime, high, spiritual
Ministration. As some even in the Apostles days, and since. And herein Satan
eminently appeared as an Angel of Light, withdrawing persons from the
fellowship, ways of the Gospel, under the pretense of greater Spirituality,
Heavenliness, leaving the Word of the Beginning, and pressing after Perfection.
A brave Pretext! wherewith the minds of many have been (are) not a little
taken, ensnared. But neither this way has he been able to destroy the Church,
which has weathered this point also, with, and prevailed against, him: Being
from its own experience (as from the Scripture) ascertained, that the more they
are in a conscientious Observance of the Institutions of Christ, the more do
they grow up into the Spirit, Life, and Power of divine things. Their spiritual
progress, and growth in Grace, depending singly upon Jehovah's Blessing; which
is promised solely (and they meet with it) in their conscientious attendment on
him in divine Appointments.

Secondly, The force, power, tyranny, oppressive, destroying practices of the
Wicked One, are also intended by these Gates. The armoury of the City was over
the gates of it. But in this forcible attaque of the Church, he has also
failed. He did his uttermost by bloody cruelty during the first Persecutions.
But what was the issue? The executioners of his wrath the Roman-Pagan-Emperors,
had Torments within them, perpetually gnawing them, whilst the Holy Ones that
kept the Commandments of Jesus were filled with Peace and Joy, and triumphed
over them in the Spirit, and Power of Jesus both living and dying. The
vengeance of God eminently wrought on their notorious Persecutors, whilst the
blessing, and good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, was with these; and the
more they were Persecuted, the more they grew: So that it became a Maxim,
Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae; The Blood of the Martyrs, the seed of the
Church. And Satan not being able to hold it in the Roman-Pagan-State, enters
into the Papal-Antichristian-Monarchy, and has therein hectored, and ranted,
breathing forth nothing but threatenings and slaughters against the Saints of
the Most-High, who have the Commandments of God, and Testimony of Jesus.
Millions of the Lords poor People have been destroyed by this
Roman-AntiChristian-Beast in days past: and of late not a few; In the Massacres
of Paris, Ireland, and the Valleys of Piedmont, etc. Not to mention the
Bonfires they made of the bodies of our Brethren, in the bloody Mary's days:
Which (notwithstanding their haughty confidence) they will shortly pay dearly for.
The judgments of the Lord God Almighty will speedily come upon the great
Whore, for these cruelties; his Wrath will consume Her utterly. But what is the
Issue? The number of the Lambs-followers are multiplied; their faith,
confidence, and courage heightened. And let the Pope, and that bloody Crew,
know, that they are ready to withstand him in his next attaque, and advance
against them, being encouraged thereunto, by that great Cloud of worthy
Witnesses they are encompas'd about with; and that plerophory of assurance,
that in this last Attempt, he, with his whole Party, will stumble, fall, go
into Perdition never to appear more.

The sum is, 1. The Church is built upon a Rock; who then is able to evert,
overturn it? What winds, blasts, storms, what ragings of Waves, Seas, can
over-whelm, destroy it? Satan has failed in all his Attempts hitherto against
it, and proved in-successful. 2. Christ has engaged that it shall continue
un-shaken, immovable, notwithstanding all attaques by fraud, or force. Is he
not faithful? Will he not make good his Word? Can he depart from it? Wants he
Will, or Power to accomplish what he has promised? What more derogatory to
Christ, impious, wicked, can be Asserted?

Object. But Churches may Apostatize, and so dis-Church themselves: They may
provoke the Lord by his judgments to do so. The first, is notoriously Evident
in the Church of Rome. The latter manifestly true with respect to other
Churches.

Answ. Both the first, and second, is granted. But,

1. The promise of Christ cannot fail. Therefore,

2. The defection of this, or that particular Church, the removing the
Candlestick from it, the taking away its Church State was never denied by us.
Such a dispensation is not in the least contrary to the promises of Christ,
Mat. 16. But,

3. A total Apostasy of all the Churches of Christ in the World, with the
suspension, cessation, of the Ordinances of the Gospel-thereupon, is what is
impleded by us, as diametrically opposite to this promise of our Lord.

Two things are also heedfully to be attended to,

1. That we un-Church not a Church, when that is not to be found upon it; for
which the Lord has declared they are un-Churched; nor before he does un-Church
them. Some Errors in doctrine, formallity, luke-warmness, departure from
first-love, does not un-Church a Church rightly Constituted. These things were
found in the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Laodicea, etc. yet at the same time
true Churches of Christ: The latter are owned, writ to by Christ as such, as
the former was by the Apostle of the Gentiles, when yet these evils were found
amongst them, 1 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 2. Rev. chapter 23.

2. That it is the Duty of particular Believers, upon the un-Churching a Church,
to join themselves to some other Church; or if a number sufficient of
themselves so to do, to form themselves into a body, or Church of Christ; for
otherwise they disobey, and offer an open affront to the authority of Christ in
that great Gospel-appointment of his, and so indeed lift up themselves against
his Kingly Sovereignty over them.

Thirdly, This Church State is represented under the Notion of the Kingdom of
Heaven, (...), that Kingdom of Heavens, Mat. 13.24, 31, 33, 44, 45, 47. and
25.1. The Kingdom of Heaven shall be likned unto ten Virgins, etc. And it wants
not its weight, that this Kingdom of Heaven, or Gospel-Church-State
(notwithstanding the declension, drowsiness, sleepiness, of the subjects of it,
or Virgin-professors, visibly Espoused to Christ, in respect of their
subjection to his Institutions, 2 Cor. 11.2.) is expressly affirmed to continue
unto the coming of our Lord, v. 6, 7, 10. And at midnight there was a Cry made,
Behold the Bridegroom (Christ) comes, go ye out to meet Him. Then all those
Virgins arose, and trimmed their Lamps, etc. And while they went to buy, the
Bridegroom came, and they that were ready, went in with him to the Marriage,
and the door was shut.

I. Why the Gospel-Church-State is represented under the Notion of the Kingdom
of Heaven, must a little be inquired into. It Is so upon the account,

1. Of its Original from thence. It Is not of man, but from Heaven, as was
John's Doctrine, Baptism, Ministry.

2. Of its supereminent Glory; whatever persons account of it; it is of Heaven,
heavenly, beautiful, glorious.

3. Of the design of God in the Institution, Erection of it, viz. to lead
Persons to Heaven, Eternal Life.

4. Of its Stability, Duration. Heavenly things are stable, abiding. The
Kingdoms of this world are changing, mutable; the Kingdom of Heaven fixed,
permanent.

II. That none but He who dwells in Heaven, is higher than the Highest; who is
the alone, Supreme Sovereign of this Kingdom, has Power to alter the Frame of
it, put a Period to it. The Devil has no Power, or Authority in it. He Is
indeed styled the Prince of this World, Joh. 14.30. the Prince of the Power of
the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. The whole World is said to be in subto him, 1 John 5.19.
((...)) He has a Presidency, Authority in the Antichristian Kingdom, is the
Head of it, is Worshipped in it. The Devil gave him (the Beast, the Pope) his
Power, Rev. 13.2, 4. And the Anti-Christians are expressly said to Worship
Devils, Rev. 9.20. because they Worship Idols of Gold, Silver, etc. A Worship
Instituted, introduced at first by them. But with respect to the Kingdom of
Heaven, he has nothing to do, nor can he by any of his Wiles, Strength, cause
it to pass away. The same may be said, concerning the sons of men. They may
it is true advance against it; attempt to shake, remove it, (as they have done,
and do with all their force, and cunning) but it is a Kingdom so far above them,
so supported, strengthened by the King of Heaven, that they never succeed in
their Attempts. Vain, ridiculous are their Consultations, Aggregations,
together in order hereunto. Can they pull the Stars out of the Firmament? Stop
the Sun in its Course? Turn it into blackness, darkness? Pull it from the place
God has Ordained for it? Are not all Attempts of such a Nature worthy to be
scorned, derided at, as acts of the greatest Folly, and desperate Madness? Such
are the advances of the Anti-Christians against this State, Kingdom: Whilst God
sits in the Heavens, he will laugh them to Scorn, and have them in Derision.
There must first be a Power, Authority above God's, before this Kingdom can be
brought to a Dissolution by any, save he that Erected it.

Object. But does not God say, that he will create new-Heavens, and a
new-Earth; and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind, Isa.
65.17. And the Apostle Peter assures us 2 Pet. 3.7, 10, 12, 13. that the
Heavens that now are, are kept in store, reserved unto Fire, etc. that there is
a time in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, etc. They shall
be dissolved; that the Saints look for New-Heavens.

Answ. 1. Dato non Concesso, granting for Disputation's-sake, that by Heavens,
we are to understand a Church State (perhaps somewhat else is intended in the
places under considerations, viz. the purifying, delivering the Creation from
that vanity, corruption, to which 'twas subjected by reason of Sin, the
Introduction of the Restitution of all things by Jesus, Act. 3.21.) yet,

2. It does not yet appear, nor is it in have like to be proved, that by the
Heavens that are to pass away, more is to be understood, than the removing of
the Judaic Church State; which indeed passed away, and was melted down by
fervent heat, when the Temple to which 'twas affixt, was consumed with Fire,
not long after Peter writ that Epistle. The New-Heavens spoken of, may perhaps
signify the Gospel-Church-State; there is not a tittle spoken of their Passing
away, but the contrary, Isa. 65.22. But

3. That we may give to this Objection (such as it is) the greatest weight it is
capable of, Let it further be granted, that by the Heavens in Peter, which
shall Pass away, is to be understood the Gospel-Church-State; and that Isaiah,
and Peter speak of a New-Church-State which shall succeed that* The first
Heavens Pass not away till the consuming Fire is kindled; nor is it in the
Power of man to set Fire to them, to cause them to cease to be; as the Creation
of the New-Heavens is the peculiar Act of God; so is the dissolution of the Old.

Fourthly. This Church State is represented under the Notion of A Kingdom which
cannot be shaken, moved, Heb. 12.27, 28. Wherefore, we receiving a Kingdom
which cannot be moved, let us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably
with reverence, and godly fear. A few things must be inquired into, viz.

I. What we are to understand by this Kingdom?

Answ. The Gospel-Church-State we are discoursing of. This is Evident, for,

1. It Is a Kingdom introduced immediately upon the shaking of the Heaven, so as
to remove the things shaken, i. e. upon the putting a period to the
Judaic-Church-State, with the removing of all the carnal Ordinances thereunto
appertaining. When God gave forth the Law upon mount Sinai, his voice shook the
Earth, v. 26. But then was the solemn, visible beginning, or creation of their
Heaven, or Church State, which now is shaken by the death of Christ; so that
it is virtually removed, and Saints are no longer to be subject to it.

2. It Is a Kingdom introduced by Christ's speaking from Heaven, v. 25. or of
his establishment as coming from the bosom of the Father, and declaring his
mind to the Sons of Men. Which can be nothing else, but the Gospel-oeconomy, or
ministration introduced by him.

3. It Is a Kingdom which they, the Jews (believers at least amongst them) were
(...), then receiving, or undertaking, subjecting to, which was the
Ministration spoken of: And is indeed one part of the design of the Apostle in
this Epistle, to persuade them fully to embrace, or receive, with the rejection
of Mosaic antiquated observances.

4. It Is a Kingdom with respect to which they are said to serve God acceptably,
with reverence and godly fear, v. 28. Gr. (...) -- which though in the general
it denotes to serve in any kind of work or service; yet its special
signification, as used by the Seventy in the Old Testament, and Christ and his
Apostles in the New, is, to worship God in ways of his own institution, and
appointment.

II. In what sense it is affirmed concerning this Kingdom, and the things
appertaining to it, that it cannot be shaken, moved? That those things which
cannot be shaken may remain. The words are variously rendered; That those things
may remain which are immovable, V.L. Which are not to be moved, Ar. Which are
not to be shaken, Aeth. Which are void of motion, Sir. The words are (...). The
word (...), signifies to be moved, or shaken, as with Winds or Tempests; as the
ship in the Sea with storms. -- The Seventy use it when the earth is said to be
moved, 2 King. 22.16. And the Pillars of it shaken, Job. 9.6. to be by force
removed out of its place, 1 Chronicles. 16.30 Job 41.15. Job 9.28. with respect to
which the Gospel-Ministration, with the Ordinances of it, are said to be (...),
Immovables, things that cannot (are not to) be removed taken down: Storms and
Tempests it meets with, but it abides firm and immovable under all.

A Kingdom which cannot be moved; which is also diversely rendered, an immovable
Kingdom, V.L. A Kingdom which is not shaken, Ar. Which cannot be shaken, Aeth.
The word is (...), immovable, unshaken, firm, stable, that bears up against
winds and tides. The most rough winds, impetuous storms, waves, cannot shake,
sink it.

The meaning is, the Mosaic Ministration, the Judaic Church State, was liable
to shakings; 'twas at last so to be shaken, as to be utterly removed, taken out
of the way; but this Kingdom, the economy of the Gospel, the
Gospel-Church-State is not such. It Is true, it shall at last period, but not by
any shakings that shall dissolve it, as the former to make way for a new, and
better Ministration: It shall continue immovable till it run into, and be
swallowed up in the Glorious Visible Kingdom of the Messiah, or New-
Jerusalem-State.

Fifthly, The Church State is called, the Ministration of the Spirit, (...),
That Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8.

That by the Ministration of the Spirit, we are to understand the whole
Gospel-oeconomy, or Ministration, the Doctrine, Worship, Institutions thereof,
is evident,

1. From its Antithesis unto the Ministration of the Letter, or legal Mosaic
observances, called the Ministration of Death, and Condemnation, v. 6, 7, 9.
which the Apostle tells us was done away; now 'twas that whole Ministration, as
made up of Institutions, Ordinances peculiar to it, that was done away.

2. 'Twas such a Ministration as the Apostles were Ministers of, v. 6. i. e.
which they Preached, declared from Jesus Christ, according to his charge to
them, Matthew. 28.20. and were ministering to him, and the Saints in. 'Twas not
the Doctrine of the Gospel, inward purity, practick Godliness only, that they
declared as the mind of Christ; but the Worship thereof, institutions of his
appointment thereunto appertaining. No sooner were Persons converted to the
Faith of Christ, but they were gathered by the Apostles into a Church State;
Acts 2.41, 42, 46. and 9.31. and 11.22, 26. and 14.23, 27. and 15.41. and 16.5.
and 20.28. This is too evident to be denied.

3. 'Twas such a Ministration, Wherein as in a Glass with open face (compared
to those* veiled, dark sights they had in their Passover, Sacrifices, etc.
under the Mosaic Ministration) they beheld the Glory of the Lord, and were
changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord, v. 18. The first Primitive believers, 'twill not be denied, attended upon
the Lord in Gospel-Institutions. It Is evident they did so from the Scriptures
but now quoted. In their so doing they beheld the glory of the Lord, had choice
discoveries, displayes of it; grew up into a Conformity unto him in their
conscientious waiting on him herein. And whatever any say, thousands of
believers at this day, that are found waiting upon the Lord in his own
institutions, such as the Church Fellowship, Breaking Bread, Prayer, etc. meet
with presence, sights of Glory, Divine Transformations, renewals in the Spirit
of their minds. When any are found in institutions shaken in their minds,
touching them as the institutions of Christ, that by virtue of His Sovereign
Authority, Command, they ought to attend to, it is no wonder if they see not his
Glory, know nothing of his transforming power through them. They come not in
faith, sanctify not his name in what they do; therefore meet not with his
blessing.

Quest. The Question is upon what accounts this Ministration is called, The
Ministration of the Spirit?

Answ. It Is so called with respect.

1. To it is Super-eminent, Super-excelling Glory: For Excellency, Glory, far
superior unto any Ministration that went before it. What compare is there,
betwixt Spirit, and Letter; that which has life in it, and that which has
none?

2. To the Communication of the Spirit through it, by it. Gal. 3.2. Received ye
the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?

3. To its being given forth by Christ through the Holy Spirit, Acts 1.2. The
Lord Jesus being constituted by the Father, Mediator of the New Covenant,
Prince, Ruler, Priest, Prophet to the Church; was to reveal the whole of his
mind, and Will, to them as such: For his inablement whereunto the Father pours
out of the Spirit without measure upon him; through this Spirit he gave
Commandments to his Apostles relating to Gospel Worship, with a charge to them
to Communicate them to others. Matthew. 28. ult. Which also they did.

4. To that Glorious effusion of the Spirit in the day of Pentecost, Act. 2. at
the beginning, or first Public setting up of this Ministration.

5. To evince that it is the highest, last Ministration of institutions, or
visible Ordinances, that Saints are to expect: that when its taken down, there
shall be no more (nor indeed will there be need of any;) what Ministration can
be supposed to be higher than the Ministration of the Spirit? What can
supersede it? Yea, the Apostle fairly intimates that it shall so remain, not to
pass away as the Ministration of the ter, or Law that went before it, 2 Cor.
3.7. which was to be done away. For if that which is done away was Glorious,
much more that which Remains is Glorious. And it is not to be passed by in
silence, that the Apostle makes part of the excelling Glory (above that of the
Law) of the Gospel-Ministration to consist in the duration of it. If that which
is done away, was glorious; much more that which remains, (...), that fixed,
abiding, unalterable Ministration.

6. The managery of all the Worship, Ordinances, appertaining to this
Ministration, is to be in the Spirit. Without whom all that is done, is not,
will never be acceptable to God.

7. The means of its support, upholdment, continuance, progress, is the same
Spirit, 2 Cor. 10.4. The Weapons of our warfare are not Carnal, but Mighty
through God --. Antichrist has other ways to support, promote his filthy
Worship, senseless traditions, ridiculous fopperies, viz. the arm of flesh,
Horrid, Bloody Plots, Conspiracies, to massacre, destroy, cut off, such as
stand in the way of his devices: Prisons, Gibbets, Stakes, Flames to consume,
devour such as refuse to drink of the Cup of his Fornications; but, Lex nova
non se vindicat ultore gladio, the Law of Christ knows no such ways, methods
for its support, increase. It Is the Spirit, Power of God by which it is (ever
was) maintained: a neglect of whom; and turning aside to the Power, Wisdom of
Man, warring after the flesh, was the bane of Christianity, and the first
spring off the Antichristian apostasy.

Three things necessarily follow from hence.

1. That a slighting, undervaluing, withdrawing from Gospel-Institutions, is a
slighting of the most glorious Ministration, that ever was set on foot in the
World.

2. It Is a contempt, undervaluing of the Holy Spirit of the Lord; whose they
are, and from whom they did proceed. Let persons pretensions be what they will,
it cannot be otherwise. Gospel-Institutions are of, through the Spirit; to
slight, these is to cast contempt upon him from whom they are.

3. That the Spirit is obliged to support, maintain them against all
oppositions. He remains with his People for ever for that end, John 16.13.
Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is come, he shall guide you into all Truth. v.
14. He shall Glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto
you. And he has actually done so hitherto, keeping alive a blessed witness,
testimony to them, for them, in his called, chosen witnesses more or less, in
every day. Though sometimes this their testimony has cost them dear; viz. loss
of Goods, Enjoyments, Friends, Liberty, Life it self; yet they have Gloryed,
Triumphed under all through this Spirit of Glory, and of God that rested upon
them, and enabled them in this work. The very truth is, as the great
controversy of Christ, with the Nations of the European World, has been upon
the account of their Spiritual fornications, or false worship; so the great
controversy of Antichrist against the Lord's Children, has been, is, and will
be, till he be destroyed upon the account of their abiding by the institutions
of Christ, Rev. 12.17, The Dragon (or Devil) was wroth with the Woman, (the
Church) and went to make War with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
Commandments of God. -- Commandments! What Commandments? Such as relate to what
is obvious to the eye of the Devils Instruments, viz. Gospel-Institutions (of
which afterward.)

Sixthly, Gospel-Churches are said to be the Body of Christ, Romans 12.4, 5. But
as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same Office:
So we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members of another. 1
Cor. 12.12. For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members
of that one body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ, (Christ the
head, and Saints the members make but one Christ Mystic.) v. 27. Now ye are
the body of Christ, and members in Particular. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. The Head Christ
from whom the whole body fitly joined together, -- makes increase of the body
unto the edifying of it self in Love.

In which places the Church is called a Body, the Body of Christ. Two things
are briefly to be enquired into;

1. What we are to understand by the Church?

2. Upon what account it is called the Body of Christ?

I. As touching the first, I shall not run over the various acceptions of the
word Church in the Scripture, (I have done it elsewhere.) That in every one of
the places instanced, in a particular instituted Church of Christ, is intended,
is evident. For,

1. Paul directs his Epistles to them as such. Those whom he styles the Church
in the beginning of his Epistles, 1 Cor. 1.2. or beloved of God, called to be
Saints, Romans 1.7. ( i. e. the particular Church at Rome, Romans 16.1, 21.) Or the
Saints which are at Ephesus, the Faithful in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.1. ( i. e.
that particular Church there, Rev. 2.1.) He afterward calls the Body of Christ
in the places fore-quoted.

2. Such a Church is intended, amongst which a Schism may be, 1 Cor. 12.25. but
Schism is entirely in one Church, among the members of one particular Society.

3. It Is such a Church as has Officers set, and placed among them, 1 Cor.
12.28, 29. see Act. 18.8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. These are placed of God in
particular Churches, relate to them as such, Act. 14.23. and 15.2, 4, 6, 22,
23. and 16.4. and 20.17. and 21.18. Tit. 1.5. Jam. 5.14. Act. 20.28.

II. Upon what account this Church is called the Body of Christ, must nextly be
considered. It Is so called, because,

1. Of the forming, fashioning of Christ* Particular Churches (whatever is
pretended) may not be modified, formed, fashioned according to the wills,
humors, or lusts of men; but according to the Type, or Pattern of them given
forth by Jesus. He shall build the Temple of the Lord, Zach. 6.12.

2. Of their Union, with relation to the Lord Jesus. The Union betwixt Head and
Body, is a real, near Union; cannot be separated, but by the Destruction of the
whole.

3. Of Christ's Love to, care of, defense over it. The Head is careful of the
Body -- Nor can it be supposed without the highest advance against the
Faithfulness, Wisdom, Love of the Lord Jesus, that he should not be so to his
Church.

Three things necessarily follow from hence;

1. That Christ is obliged to preserve his Gospel-Church-state, in some
particular Churches who may glorify him, in their professed subjection
thereto. They are his Body: now every one will nourish, cherish, his own Body.

2. That therefore this Church State, in some particular Churches, is preserved
by Jesus Christ. If it be not, he is unfaithful, fills not up that relation he
stands in to his Body, the Church. Besides, if he preserve it not, it is either
for want of Love, or Power so to do. The first cannot be asserted; for no man
yet hated his own flesh, but loves, nourishes, cherishes it; nor the second;
for all power in Heaven and Earth is given to Him.

3. If the Church State be not continued; then Christ has now no body, is a
head without a body. For they are Saints, as walking in such a state, viz. the
Order and fellowship of the Gospel, that are so called, as I have proved.

Seventhly, Gospel-Churches are styled The Temple, Tabernacle, House, Building
of the Lord. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of the Living
God. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the Temple of the Living God. Rev. 13.6. And he opened
his mouth in Blasphemies against God, to Blaspheme his Name, and his
Tabernacle. Prove. 9.1. Wisdom has builded her House. (i. e. Christ has done
so, Builded, Planted, his Churches) She has hewn out her seven Pillars.
Christ's House (or Churches) is said to be built upon seven Pillars, to point
out its sure, and stable Foundation. Heb. 3.6. Whose House are we. 1 Cor. 3.9.
Ye are God's Building. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively Stones are built up a
Spiritual House. Saints are the House, building of Christ says a reverend, and
learned Author, upon a treble account;

1. Of their peusons. In them he dwells really by his Spirit, Ephesians. 2.20, 21,
22. 2 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. John 14.17.

2. Of their being compact together in Church Order, according to his
institution, whereby they are built up, cemented, united, and become an House,
like the Tabernacle, or Temple of God, Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.19.

3. Of their Joynt-Worship performed in that order; wherein, and whereby he
also dwells among them, or is present with them unto the Consummation of all
things, Rev. 21.3. Mat. 28.20.

This must be a little further considered.

Saints Congregated together in the Fellowship of the Gospel, are his Temple,
Tabernacle, House, Building, (in a scattered divided state, they cannot
strictly be so called) and so denominated in Scripture, with respect to the
Tabernacle; Temple of Old, that were the Lords Building, viz. Built by his
Command, express direction in every part of them. These were Types of
Gospel-Churches.

Now insomuch as the Temple of Old was the most considerable type hereof; Let Us
a little consider upon what accounts Gospel-Churches are so called, with
respect to the Building.

They are so upon various accounts.

1. The Temple of Old was built of precious, hewen-stone, ready prepared for
the building, 1 King 5.17, 18. and 6.7. Gospel-Churches are made up of
Living-stones, formed, prepared, as fit materials for this Royal Building, 1
Pet. 2.4, 5.

2. That was built by Solomon, an Eminent Type of Christ. These by Christ
himself, Zach. 6.12. (of which afterward.)

3. That was renowned for its Magnificence, Excellency, and Glory: These
however debased, reproached, by one, and another, shall be so, Isa. 60.13.

4. That had in it, the Ark, the Mercy-Seat -- all Types of Christ, and the
special presence of Jehovah. These have most eminently the presence of the Lord
with them, Mat. 18.20. 2. Cor. 6.16. Rev. 1.13, 20. and 2.1.

5. Nothing unclean might come into the Temple: nor any impure, unholy persons,
into the Churches of Christ. If any such privily creep in, when discovered,
they are to be ejected, cast out.

6. There was the (...), The Daughter of the Voice, the Answer of God; who
spoke unto the people from the Oracle. The secret voice, and teachings of God
is amongst these, Isa. 8.16. The Vial-Angels have light into their work in the
Temple (or Gospel-Churches); for out of it they come, when they address
themselves to it, Rev. 15.5, 6.

7. In the Temple every one spoke of his Glory, Psalm. 29.9. in and amongst
these is he praised, Ephesians. 3.21.

8. All the solemn Worship of God was of old affixt to the Temple: It Is now to
Gospel-Churches.

9. His special care, protection, was over his Temple to preserve, defend it.
So it is over his Churches, Hence is their continuance, notwithstanding the
furious, various advances of Men and Devils against them.

10. He severely punished the violaters, destroyers of his Temple, Jer. 50.28.
and 51.11. He has done, will do so, with respect to such as attempt the ruin,
destruction of these.

Five things evidently follow from what we have been discoursing touching this
matter.

1. That Gospel-Churches being God's Temple, etc. He is obliged to support,
defend, uphold his own Building, House, Temple.

2. That if there be no Churches at this day, he has no Temple, nor solemn
visible Worship.

3. That none have Power over these Churches, to plant, pull down; nor have
they, or shall they, have permission so to scatter, destroy them; that the
Church State should not somewhere, or other, be kept up in the World.

4. That Gospel-Churches are Honorable, Glorious. They are God's Temple,
House, Building. --

5. That those who reproach, revile them; Blaspheme God, his Temple,
Tabernacle, and them; that dwell in Heaven, Rev. 13.6.

Object. But though the Tabernacle, Temple, were God's Building; yet both the
one, and the other, were taken down, abolished.

Answ. True! And so shall the present Church State be dissolved at last. But,

1. Neither the one, nor the other, were taken down, but by God's own Authority
and Appointment: and that too (at last) to make way for a more glorious State.

2. The Worshippers in that Tabernacle, Temple, never deserted it, till God
drove them out of it. They offered not violence to it themseves: attempted not
with their own hands, to consume, destroy it. It Is true, as to the last Temple,
Josephus tells us, that the Jews themselves set fire on it; but these were not
the Worshippers in it, but a company of apostate, deboyst miscreants, that
cared neither for God, Temple, or Worship.

CHAP. II.
The continuance of Gospel-Churches farther evinced from the Titles given to
Jesus Christ, with respect to such Churches. Christ the Builder of them, Zach.
6.12. Heb. 3.3, 4. explained. What Christ did, does as the Builder of these
Churches. Christ the Foundation, Head, Lord of Gospel-Churches. In what sense
He is so. The Husband, Bridegroom of them. Upon what accounts he is so called.
Objections Answered.

HAving in the former Chapter evinced the continuance of Gospel-Churches, from
the Titles given by the Spirit of the Lord to the Gospel-Church-State, and
those who Worship him therein: We purpose in this Chapter, further to evince
the truth thereof, From,

Demonstration. II.
The Titles, Appellations, given to Jesus Christ, with respect to such
Churches; each of which is an unshaken basis upon which their continuation is
founded. We think it necessary to premise, that it is not our intendment to
discourse of all the Titles given to Christ in the Scripture; but only of such
as give countenance, assistance, strength, to the matter of our present
enquiry; and of these only so far as is necessary thereunto.

I. Then, the Lord Jesus Christ is styled in Scripture, the Builder of these
Churches, Zach. 6.12. He shall build the Tem-of the Lord. So, the Vulgar
Latin. The House of the Lord, Seventy, Ar. The Temple of the Lord, Sir. The
Chaldee reads the whole verse thus, Behold the Man, his Name is Christ, who is
to be revealed, and magnified, and about to build the Temple of the Lord. For
he shall Build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the Glory. The Hebrew
is (...) Behold the famous (Noble) Man the Branch. It Is evidently-spoken of
Christ, who is frequently called Tsemach, the Branch. Isa. 4.2. Jer. 23.5. and
33.15. Zach. 3.8. Of whom Joshua was a Type. (...), He himself shall build that
Temple of Jehovah; viz. that Temple which was to be erected upon his coming
into the world; whereof the Temple that Joshua, and Zerubbabel, were in
building was a Type, viz. Gospel-Churches. These Christ is said to Build,
because he gave forth Directions, Laws, to his Apostles for their Erection,
Establishment. Heb. 3.3, 4. Inasmuch as he who has builded the House, has
more honor than the House: For every House is builded by some Man: But he that
built all things, is GOD. ((...) is put for, (...), all these things, the the
Church, Persons, Ordinances pertaining thereunto.) The design of the Apostle is
to evince Christ's pre-eminence above Moses: It Is true, Moses was an honorable
Person; he received testimony from God, that he was faithful in his House; but
he was but a servant in it, a part of it; Christ is the Builder of the House,
or Church; (For that by House we are to understand the Church, or Churches,
with all the Ordinances of Worship in it, was before proved) Mat. 16.18. Upon
this Rock I will build my Church.

Three things Christ did, does, as the Builder of this House.

1. Gives forth the idea, and platform of it, in its Laws, Ordinances, and
Institutions.

2. Provides materials: by his Spirit in the Ministration of the Gospel,
quickening, sanctifying, making lovely, excellent, glorious, dead, polluted,
vile, base sinners.

3. Closely conjoyning, compacting these materials, that they may grow up
together a spiritual House, an habitation of God through the Spirit. To this he
uses not outward Compulsion, Force, Violence; but sweetly allures, inclines
their hearts by the power of his Spirit, making them willing visibly to give up
themselves to the Lord, and one another, by the Will of God. And in this work
the Lord Jesus met, meets with the greatest opposition imaginable: All the
Power, Wisdom of Satan, the greatest, wisest of the World, appearing against
it: Sin, Corruption, in the hearts of those that are to be prepared for
materials for it, advancing also against it: but Christ being invested with
infinite Power, carries the work through the difficulties, and makes the
greatest Mountain become a Plain before him; and having erected, set it up,
comes and takes up his dwelling, makes his abode in it, as was before proved.

Four things necessarily follow from hence.

1. That there is really a Glory in the Churches of Christ. It Is true, they
have been (are, as to outward view) as the Tents of Kedar, Poor, Mean,
Contemptible; so are all the Ordinances, Institutions appertaining to them. The
materials of which they are constituted for the most part, are visibly base and
contemptible, the poor of the World -- But Christ is the builder of them (a
greater than Solomon) and he builds them for himself, an Ivory Palace for the
great King: and therefore they must needs be amiable, lovely, glorious, comely
as the curtains of Solomon.

2. That none can approach, advance themselves against them without pouring out
contempt upon, advancing themselves against Jesus Christ.

3. That he is obliged to protect, defend them against all oppositions
whatsoever. He has done, will do so.

4. That none has power to pluck them down; nor can they be dissolved but by
his Authority. For any to go about to do so, is to assume a Power to themselves
coequal, nay, superior to Christ who built them.

II. As Christ is called the Builder of these Churches; so he is said to be the
Foundation of them. They are built upon him as their noble, glorious
Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10, 12. Ye are Gods Building; according to the Grace of
God which is given to me, as a wise Master Builder I have laid the Foundation
-- other Foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 22. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.

Three things necessarily flow from hence;

1. That Gospel-Churches are not built upon the Old Covenant, (as some talk)
except we will suppose Christ to be a part of that Covenant: wherein yet
there is not the least notice of him to be found.

2. That they are a firm, unshaken building. Christ himself being their
Foundation, they must be so.

3. That none can dissolve them, put a period to them, but he who is their
Substratum, Foundation; who as such supports, upholds them, and is obliged so
to do.

III. He is also styled their Head, Lord, Ephesians. 4.15. May grow up into him in
all things who is the Head, even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined
together -- Col. 1.18. He is the Head of the Body the Church. and 2.19. And not
holding the Head from which all the Body -- Two things must be considered;

1. Upon what accounts Christ is said to be the Head of the Church.

2. What influence this Headship of Christ has into the confirmation of the
truth pleaded for. As touching the first, it is confes'd, that he is not a
natural head of the body, the Church. The Expression is Metaphorical. Seven
things are pointed forth by it.

1. His Preference, Dignity, Excellency, above them all.

2. His Comeliness, Beauty. The truth is, all the comeliness of the Body (the
Church) is Christ. It Is eminently, superlatively in Him; it flows from him.

3. He is the seat of all that Life, Spirits, the Church is made partakers of.
All Is in him in fullness.

4. His Sympathy with them in all their sorrows, distresses, sufferings.

5. Their guidance, direction from Him. He is their dux viae, glorious conduct,
leader in the way they should go.

6. His Dominion, Ruledom, Authority over them.

7. Their Protection, Safety in, and under Him.

As touching the second particular.

Secondly, The continuance, abiding of Gospel-Churches, is a necessary
consequence from hence: For Christ being their Head,

1. Want's not love, affection to them, to support, uphold them. Nor,

2. Does he want power so to do. All power is given to him in Heaven and in
Earth. He is for that end constituted Head over all things to the Church. Ephesians.
1.21, 22. that he might be able to defend, preserve it.

3. He is an everlasting Head; therefore as such, must have a body to rule,
govern, by those Laws, Institutions, he has given forth, for their Ruledom
wherein they are to testify their subjection to him. Not to do so, is to cast
off his Regiment, deny his Sovereignty, Authority. Nay,

4. As such (being put into Office, deputed, appointed by the Father, as Head,
Lord, King over them, Psalm. 2.6.) he is obliged to protect, defend, preserve
them. For him not to do so, were a breach of that trust, charge reposed in him,
given to him by the Father.

IV. Christ is the Husband, Bridegroom of these Churches, 2 Cor. 11.2. For I
have espoused you (the Church of God, which is at Corinth, chap. 1.1.) to one
Husband (viz. the Lord Jesus) that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to
Christ. Mat. 25.1, 5, 6. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven, (or
Gospel-Church-state) be likened unto ten Virgins, which -- went forth to meet
the Bridegroom. While the Bridegroom tarried -- Behold the Bridegroom comes.
And these Churches are called the Bride, the Lambs Wife, Rev. 19.7.21.9.22.17.

Upon what account the Lord Jesus is said to be the Husband of the Church, and
She his Bride, Wife, must be considered.

He is so called upon the account.

1. Of his entire, cordial love, and affection to her. He dearly, above all,
loves his Churches. Psalm. 87.2. The Lord loves the Gates of Sion (Saints
gathered together in Gospel-Fellowship, solemnly worshipping him in a
community) more than all the Dwellings of Jacob. He therefore calls them his
Love, his Dove, his Undefiled, Cant. 5.2. expressions demonstrative of his
kindness to them. They also are full of love, endearment to him, Cant. 1.7. 1
Pet. 1.8. The truth whereof they evidence by keeping his Commandments, John
14.21, 23, 24. viz. those Commandments he by the Spirit gave forth to them,
relating to the institutions, worship of the Gospel, Acts 1.2.

2. His giving himself to them, taking them for his own, above all the People
in the World. God is said upon this foot of account, to be the God of Israel,
Exodus 5.1. and 32.27. Number. 16.9. Jos. 8.30. 13.33. etc. They his portion,
peculiar treasure, Deuteronomy. 32.9. Exodus 19.5. Psalm. 135.4. To be married to them,
Jer. 3.14. Christ is said to have them, Joh. 3.29. He that has the Bride, is
the Bridegroom. They give themselves to him, solemnly own, avouch him to be
their Husband in their visible subjection to his appointments. Nor do, or can
any be said so to own him, but with respect to such a subjection, 2 Cor. 8.5.
They first gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us by the will of God.
They are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.23. All are yours, and ye are Christ's. Departure
from, forsaking his institutions, is therefore called, adultery, fornication,
whoredom, Jer. 3.8. Ezekiel. 23.37. Rev. 2.22. Ezekiel. 16.26, 29. Rev. 9.21. and
17.2, 4. and 18.3, 9. and 19.2. Ezekiel. 16.17. Hos. 1.2. Jer. 3.2. And the false
Church is called, the Whore, Rev. 17.1, 15, 16. and 19.2. because hereby they
are unfaithful to Christ in this marriage-relation, whereinto he has taken
them.

3. His care, watchful eye over them. He watches over them for good: keeps
them day, and night; with much more that might be added touching this matter.

Now, can it be imagined, that the Lord Jesus, who has taken a people unto
himself in such a relation, loves them with such a dear, intense love; gives
himself to them, is obliged by Virtue of that relation, that he has taken them
unto himself into, to care for, watch over them, should when in some singleness
of spirit they are testifying their love to him (though with many infirmities,
weaknesses) in subjecting to his appointments; so holding fast his name, and
bearing a testimony to him in the World; I say, can it be imagined, that he
should at once reject, cast them off, unchurch them? credat Apella! Is this the
manner of Husbands (poor mortals, of weak love, finite bowels) to those, whom
they take as Brides to themselves? Has not this Lord said, that It Is not
lawful for a man to put away his Wife, but in case of Fornication, Mat. 5.32.
and shall it be supposed that he who is infinite in bowels, choicest love, will
reject his, when they are not to be charged with such wickedness. God once took
Israel for a People unto himself; and though actually guilty of spiritual
adultery, worshipping in a way that never entered into his heart to prescribe,
serving Idols, offering their Children to Moloch, persecuting also the Servants
of the Lord, that labored to recall them to primitive institutions; yet how
long did he bear with them? He woe's them after they had committed whoredom
with many lovers, to return again to him; with promises of pardon, reception,
new embraces, as if they had never so offended him, Jer. 3. 1, 12, 22. and 4.1.
And when he has thoughts of giving them up, with what seeming regret is it,
Hos. 11.8. Nor did he totally do so, till he had sent his Son, whom they by
wicked hands took, cast out, slew, Mat. 21.37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45. And
are the bowels of the Lord dried up? Has he forgotten to be gracious? Is not
his Covenant Relation with his People in a Gospel-Day, as strong, efficacious,
as in the times of the Law? Besides, has he any where in all the Scriptures
given us the least Iota, or syllable, upon which we may conclude, That this his
relation, with at least some particular Churches, should cease, or expire? En
tabulas! let the Scriptures, Prophecies thereof be consulted.

Object. God took Israel into such a relation to himself. Call's himself their
Husband, Jer. 31.32. says he is married to them, Jer. 3.14. Yet afterward
rejects them.

Answ. 1. This Objection is in part obviated already, and enough said to an
intelligent Reader.

2. Let it be granted that God calls himself their Husband, Jer. 31.32. Though
a better. Translator renders the words otherwise then we read them, viz. Paul,
Heb. 8.9. Because they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not,
says the Lord: That which we translate, although I was an Husband to them; the
Apostle renders, and I regarded them not. And the learned Pocock in his
Miscellanies, Cap. 1. p. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. at large demonstrates
that the word (...), Baalti, (which we read, I was an Husband) signifies, not
to regard, to neglect, refuse, despise; so also the Greek, and Syriac render
it. But I say, let it be granted, as indeed the Lord does own himself to be the
Husband, to be Married to them, though in the place instanced in, he does not
do so: Let a few things further be considered, and the impertinency of what is
objected, with respect to that we are pleading for, will soon appear. For,

1. He himself by signal providence breaking to pieces, destroying their
Church State, and that Temple to which their solemn Worship, as a Church was
affixed, apotomized, cut them off: no such act of God with respect to his
Gospel-Churches can be instanced in.

2. He bare long with them, before he cast them off; and actually continued
with them in that relation for about two thousand years. Nor,

3. Did he reject them, till they had for many years rejected Him, despised his
Institutions, Ordinances: committed adultery with many lovers, Jer. 3.1. In
that matter did worse than the Nations round about them, Ezekiel. 5.6, 7. If this
can be charged upon any of the Churches, let them plead their own cause; I Will
be no advocate for them; nor is it necessary, with respect to our present
controversy, since there are Churches to whom nothing like it can be imputed.
Though this I must say, I know none of the Churches of Christ at this day but
are pure, and unchargeable as to any such guilt.

Oject. 2. The Church of Rome was a true Church, had Christ for her Husband,
Bridegroom. Is it thus with her now? Is not her Church State perioded? Is she
not the apostatick Synagogue? No Bride of Christ, but the Whore, the Mother of
Harlots, and abominations of the Earth!

Answ. 1. God forbid that I should plead for that filthy Strumpet, Synagogue of
Satan, the generation of God's curse, against whom he has indignation for ever.

2. The Church of Rome (so called) that now is, is in nothing like the Church
of Rome that then was, as to its Constitution, Matter, Form, Worship,
Ordinances. That was a particular-Church of Christ; this (pretends to be)
Catholic, Universal. That was constituted according to the Mind of Christ; its
matter, visible Saints; its form, their free, spontaneous giving up themselves
to the Lord, and to one another, according to the Will of God: This constituted
by the cunning, subtilty, lying Miracles of the man of Sin; by the Lusts, Laws,
Compulsions of an arm of Flesh. Its Worship, Ordinances had for their
Substratum the Law, Commandment, Authority of Jesus Christ: the Worship of Rome
is bottomed upon the Authority, Canons, Laws, Traditions of Popes, sinful men,
false pretenses to the personal appearance of Christ, the Virgin Mary, etc. to
them; giving them in charge to practice this, and that, as his Worship,
Appointment, not found in the Scriptures, contrary to them. So that the Church
of Rome (so called) that now is, was never a Church of Christ, but a Synagogue
of Satan, set up in opposition to his True Churches.

3. Had it been never so much a True Church of Christ; it has actually
dis-church'd it self, by its horrid Idolatry worse than the Heathen Worshipping
Idols of Gold, Silver, Wood, Stone, with the same Worship, that is due to them,
whom they set these up to represent; so as that their Worship (as Bellarmin
tells us) is terminated in these; which scarce ever entered into the heart of an
ingenuous Heathen to affirm; upon the account whereof they are called Gentiles,
Rev. 11.2. Her persecution also, bloody cruelty against Christ in his members,
sufficiently bespeaks her to be deserted, rejected by the Lord, actuated by
another Spirit, than the Spirit of the Gospel, which is pure, peaceable,
gentle, meek: so far from having any resemblance of the Churches of Christ,
that it is the very shambles of Satan, by whom as his butcherly, bloody
instruments, they have destroyed, poured forth the blood of millions of the
meek, innocent Lambs of the Lord Jesus.

4. Let the argument be considered; There was a Gospel Church of Christ at
Rome; the members of it fell asleep in Jesus, having served the Lord in their
generation: by the subtilty of Satan, and the man of Sin upon that spot springs
up a sort of Professors, bearing the name of Christ, calling themselves a
Church; that (at last, at least) have nothing to be found upon them, like unto
what they pretend to be; therefore there is a period put to the Church State, to
all Churches, Christ's relation to them as the Builder, Foundation, Head,
Husband notwithstanding. And why so I pray? May not there be true Churches of
Christ, and he stand thus related to them, and as their Builder, etc. support,
uphold, preserve his Church State amongst them; though that, and many other
Churches prevaricate, depart from him? That he has actually done so from the
time of his first planting Churches to this day, we shall (if the Lord will) in
the ensuing discourse demonstrate. In a word, let it be proved against the
present Churches, That they have unchurch'd themselves by Idolatry, bloody
cruelty against the Saints -- as this pretended Church of Rome has done, or
this objection must be acknowledged to be of no weight.

To shut up all we have to say upon this argument; Christ is the Builder,
Foundation, Head, Lord, Husband of particular Churches, and so called with
respect unto a special relation to them as such, as has been proved; either
then there must be such Churches, or this relation is at an end. And thus far
touching the second argument.

CHAP. III.
The continuation of Gospel-Churches further demonstrated. The Scripture, the
sole Directory both with respect to Doctrine and Worship. Whatsoever Christ
has instituted, given in charge therein, it is the duty of Saints in every day
to be found in the practice of. Christ of old prophesied of, as the great
Prophet whom God would raise up to instruct his People, whom they were bound to
attend. Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. explained. Christ's instructions contained in the
Scriptures. No other way or means, intimated by God the Father, or Christ, for
the indoctrination of the Saints as to Doctrine, or Worship, besides the
Scriptures. Of Popish Traditions, Visions. The Personal appearance of the
Virgin Mary, of Christ to them. These the Foundation of their festivals,
religious orders. God sends us to the Scripture for Direction in Faith and
Worship: has under each Ministration commanded his People to observe whatever
he has appointed therein without Addition, or Substraction. It Is sufficient to
instruct and guide us. 2 Pet. 1.19. Explained. Objections Answered. Of
pretensions to Christ's personal appearance: That there has been no personal
appearance of Christ, on the Earth, to any since his Ascension, proved. Of the
appearance of Christ to Stephen, Paul, John: That he conversed not with them on
Earth, proved.

Demonstration. III.
THat the Scripture is our sole Directory, both with respect to Doctrine, and
Worship: that it is the duty of the Saints in every generation to attend to the
Laws, Commandments, Rules of our Lord laid down therein; that none have power
to supersede any Law, Commandment of Christ, has hitherto been generally owned
as a truth amongst all the reformed Churches. It Is true, some amongst the
Papal-Synagogue have blasphemously asserted, That the Pope, that man of Sin,
and Son of Perdition, has authority to dispense with the commands of Christ;
and he, and some Combinations of Men (called Councils) amongst them, have
actually so done in many cases. But as was said amongst those, that separate
from that Synagogue of Satan, none have as yet doctrinally declared the
lawfulness thereof. What is of that nature practically done by any of them, is
not to our present purpose to enquire. This then might (one would think) be
taken for granted; whatever Christ has instituted, charged, commanded upon his
People in the New Testament, is the duty of the Saints in every day to be found
in the practice of. Yet insomuch as the most plain, indisputable principles,
commonly received maxims, are by one, or other, in this day questioned and
opposed; it may not perhaps be altogether useless, briefly to discover the
basis upon which this Principle is built.

I. Then, 'twas long before the exhibition of the Lord Jesus prophesied, That
God the Father would raise up a Prophet to his Church like unto Moses, to whom
it was their duty to attend in all things, should be declared, taught them by
him: under the most severe penalty was this charged upon them, Deuteronomy. 18. 18,
19. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto thee;
and will put my word in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I
shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken
unto my words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. The
Seventy render it, I will take vengance on him: And the Hebrew Doctors so
explain the words, He that transgresses against his words is guilty of death
by the hand of God, as it is written, Deuteronomy. 18. I will require it of him;
Maimon. in Jesud. Hatorath, C. 9.. 2. And the word require, often signifies to
require by punishment, Genesis 9.5. 42.22. the Apostle expounds this place of of
Christ, and this requiring, to be destroying from amongst the people, Act.
3.22, 23. That this Prophet is Christ, he tells us, ver. 26. Nor is this
Prophecy interpreted by any of the ancient, or modern Rabbis, except some
very few, but only of the Messiah: Nor can it be interpreted of any other;
every particular being exactly fulfilled in him. A Prophet.] Mat. 21.11. This
is Jesus the Prophet. From among your Brethren] Christ was raised up from
amongst his Brethren; and it is particularly mentioned out of what Tribe amongst
them he was taken, Heb. 7.13, 14. viz. of Judah; and the Family he was of in
that Tribe, namely, that of David, is frequently mentioned, Luke 1.69. And will
put my words in his Mouth] Accordingly Christ said to God the Father, Joh.
17.8. I have given unto them the words which thou gave me. He shall speak
unto them all that I shall command him] This Christ did, Joh. 12. 49, 50. I
speak not of my self, but the Father which sent me; he gave me a commandment
what I should say, and what I should speak -- whatsoever I speak therefore,
even as the Father said unto me, so I speak, Joh. 15.15. All things that I have
heard of my Father have I made known unto you. Joh. 17.8. I have given unto
them the words which thou gave me, and they have received them. So that
evidently Christ is the Prophet here spoken of. Two or three things are worthy
our special remark.

1. That Christ is a Prophet, raised up, sent by the Father.

2. That the end of God in his Mission of Christ as a Prophet, was to instruct
the Sons of Men in the whole of his Will, that he thought meet to manifest to
them.

3. That Christ actually made such a discovery of the Fathers will. John 1.17,
18. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace, and Truth came by Jesus Christ: No
man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of
the Father, he has declared him. Heb. 1.1, 2. God, who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in
these last days, spoken unto us by his Son.

4. That all Persons whatsoever are obliged, bound under the severest
penalties, to attend to whatever was revealed by this Prophet. This is also
enforced by a voice from the excellent Glory. Mat. 17.5. This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. So then the Scriptures of the
New Testament are our Directory; whatever Christ has enjoined therein, all
Saints are to have regard to. For what he declared from the Father, is therein
contained, and no where else. But,

II. There Is not the least intimation given by God the Father, or this great
Prophet of the Church, of any other way, or means of instruction in his
Worship, or Service, but only the Scriptures. It Is true, the Popelings talk of
Traditions, (as did, do, the Jews before them) and much of their Worship; many
of their orders is bottomed upon, receives its Original from pretended Visions,
Revelations, the personal Appearance of the Virgin Mary, yea, of Christ himself
(as they vainly pretend); and perhaps Satan might appear to them as an Angel of
Light, and avouch himself to be the Lord Christ. As touching the Carthusians,
it is acknowledged, that Hugo, who joined with Bruno, in laying the Foundations
of that Order, had a vision of Gods Building an House, with seven Stars
conducting them to a place, called, La grand Chartreuse; from whence the whole
Order has taken its name. The Order of the Carmelites was from a Vision that
Simon Stock had, wherein the blessed Virgin appeared with the Habit in her
Hand, which she would have them wear; with a Promise, that whoever dyed in that
Habit, should not perish by everlasting Flames. Innocent the third has a
Vision of St. Francis, and St. Dominic, supporting the Lateran Church; whence
the Franciscan and Dominican Orders sprang. As for the Jesuits, their Grandsire
Ignatius was full of Visions. Sometimes Peter appeared to him, sometimes the
Virgin Mary, with a great deal of Glory, and her Child in her lap; whereby he
was greatly strengthened, and encouraged. But above all, the strangest Vision he
had, was a Vision of the Blessed Trinity plainly, under a corporeal
Representation, which filled him so full of Joy, that he could not hold weeping
before all the People; and was so strangly enlightened by it, that he began to
write a Book of the glory of the Blessed Trinity. In one of his Exstasies he
continued eight days; in which it is probable, says Orlandinus, he saw the
frame and model of the Society of the Jesuits. Christ appeared to him once, and
again; sometimes he was lift up from the ground, the room where he was, being
filled with a great Light. In a Vision he saw God the Father commending himself
and his Brethren, to his Son Jesus bearing his Cross; whom he very kindly
received, and with a smile, said to Ignatius, I will be favorable to you at
Rome; which greatly comforted him, and his Companions. And in the issue, it
fell out accordingly; his order being confirmed by P. Paul the third, his Bull
dated October. 3. 1540.

As were their Orders, so their Festivals were instituted upon the bottom of
pretended Visions, and Revelations: The Festival of Corpus Christi was
instituted by Urban the fourth, in honor of Transubstantiation, by the
Revelation of a famous Virgin called Juliana; which had many raptures, and so
prophetic a Spirit, as to discern the thoughts, and intentions of her
neighbors hearts; she wrestled with Devils, discoursed with the Apostles, and
wrought many Miracles. Bullar. Romans Tom. 1 p. 147. Paul the Hermit was
Canonized for a Saint, upon the Authority of a Vision, and Revelation.

The Feast of Michael the Archangel, upon a Revelation to the Bishop of
Siponto, and a few Drovers upon the Mountain Garganus. To which many more might
be added. These are the ways Satan has used to establish his Kingdom by, and
to introduce his false, superstitious, idolatrous Orders, and Worship,
destructive to the bodies and souls of Men. But in Christ's Doctrine, Gospel,
there is a deep silence touching any such matter. He himself, and his Apostles
after him, introduce nothing upon the account of such Revelations, but appeal
to the Scriptures, and prove their Doctrine from thence. Not the least
intimation is there of any way, or means of instruction in his Worship, but
only the Scriptures. If there be, let the place be produced, and we are
satisfied. If there be not, as most certain there is not, to hearken, attend to
Visions, Revelations, is (to say no more) unsafe, dangerous. Nor can it be
consistent with the Love of the Father to his Church, had he intended any other
way of Instruction, not to give the least notice of it to them; nor with his
Wisdom, to make that discovery of his mind and will in the Scriptures, to give
it forth as our Rule, when upon this supposition it is a most imperfect one. But,

III. God sends us to the Scripture for direction in this matter, Isa. 8.20. To
the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this word,
(whatever their pretentions are of the morning, or the breaking forth of a more
glorious day) it is because there is no (...) morning in them: They have not
the Light of the Glorious morning they speak of. Luke 16.29. They have Moses,
and the Prophets ( i. e. the writings of Moses and the Prophets) let them hear
them. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life; and they are they which testify of me.

IV. Jehovah himself, in and under each Ministration, has commanded his People
to observe whatever he has appointed in the Scripture, without Addition, or
Substraction. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add to the word which I command you,
neither shall you diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the Commandments of
the Lord your God, which I command you. and Chap. 12.32. What thing soever I
command you, observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from
it. Josh. 1.7. That thou may observe to do according to all the Law, which
Moses my Servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand, or to the
left. Prove. 30.5, 6. Every word of God is pure -- Add thou not unto his words,
lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar. Rev. 22.18, 19. For I testify
unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this Book: If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are
written in this Book: And if any man shall take away from the words of the Book
of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and
from the things which are written in this Book. Evidently, God ties up his
people under Law and Gospel to a strict, and sole attendment unto what he has
given forth in the Scriptures; And that because,

V. These are sufficient, able, and perfect (as he affirms of them) to instruct
and guide us, Psalm. 19.7. The Law of Jehovah is perfect -- 2 Pet. 1.19. We have
also a more sure word of Prophecy (more sure than what? than the voice that
came from the excellent Glory, when Christ was transfigured upon the Mount)
whereunto we do well to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. The word of
Prophecy contained in the Scripture is a sure word, it is a light (every way
sufficient as such, to direct us in the way we should take) and is carefully to
be attended to, till the morning of the day of the Son of Man, or the
Revelation of Jesus. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. -- Thou have known the Holy
Scriptures, which are are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through Faith
which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works.

The sum of what we have been Arguing, Proving, is this, That the Holy
Scriptures are our Directory with respect to Worship; all then (and no more)
whatsoever Christ has commanded his people therein, Saints are bound to
attend, and give up to. And if so (as is clearly demonstrated) then Christ
having given charges therein, touching Saints walking together in the
fellowship of the Gospel, Worshipping, Waiting on him in Gospel-institutions,
Praying, Preaching, Baptism, breaking Bread, is unquestionably the duty of
Saints in every generation: Quod erat demonstrandum.

Object. It Is true, these things were once of the institution of Christ, but
they are now ceased.

Answ. 1. They are the Scriptures of the Lord (as we have proved) we are solely
to attend to, both with respect to Doctrine, and Worship; let but then one
syllable, tittle, be produced therefrom, that demonstrates the cessation of
these Institutions of Christ, and the matter is at an issue. The honor of our
Lord Jesus being so deeply concerned herein, no sober Christian (except under a
great power of temptation) will be willing to part with them upon easier terms.
It Is not pretensions to Visions, Revelations, Angelick Appearances, that will
remove them from their stedfastness to the institutions of Christ; those that
depart from them upon such pretensions, will never answer it, in the day of
Christ. But,

2. By the same reason, the institutions, Ordinances under the Mosaic
Ministration, might long before the fullness of time, for their dissolution,
have been exploded; so all the Authority of God, with respect to Worship, been
rejected. To the very time of their passing away by the exhibition of Jesus,
who was greater than Moses, by whom the Law was given, John 1.17. greater than
Angels, whose Ministry was made use of in its solemn Promulgation, Act. 7.53.
The Lord charges his People to be found in the practice of them, Mal. 4.4. And
those that were so (as corrupt as the then Church State was) were honored,
signally blessed by the Lord; as Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon. --

3. There Is not the least mention of the freedom, exemption of any of the Lords
Children from these Institutions, till the personal Appearance of Christ; but
the contrary.

Object. 2. Well then, it seems 'twill be granted, that when Christ does
personally appear on earth, there is to be a cessation of, and period put to
this Church State, with the Institutions, and Ordinances thereunto
appertaining: what if he has so appeared already?

Answ. 1. As touching the first, we very readily grant it: upon Christ's next,
visible, glorious appearance, there will certainly be a dissolution of this
Fabric. But,

2. As to the question, whatever the pretensions of any are, or may be, of
Christ's personal appearance to them, its evidently false, and untrue; not to be
believed, heeded, or attended to, for these Reasons;

1. Christ foretells us, there shall be such pretenders, and charges us not to
believe them, or go forth after them, Mat. 24.26. Therefore if they shall say
unto you, Behold he is in the desert, go not forth: Behold he is in the secret
chambers, believe it not.

2. The Scripure mentions but one second coming of the Lord Jesus, Heb. 9.28.
And unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin,
unto Salvation. Upon this pretext, there may be, must be, many comings of
Christ.

3. The Heavens must receive him till the times of the restitution of all
things; when (and not before) God the Father will send him, Act. 3.20, 21. Of
these times there is nothing appears that bears the least resemblance.

4. Christ gives his Church no notice of any such thing: which had he designed,
and for such an end, as is pretended, viz. to put a period to the present
Ministration, and to erect a new one, send forth new Apostles, etc. he would
certainly have done. A total silence herein, were there any such thing intended
by him, is perfectly inconsistent with the Love he bears to his Children.

5. It Is expressly said he must sit at Jehovah's right Hand till his Enemies are
made his Footstool, Psalm. 110.1 which as yet we are sure they are not.

6. The Work of Intercession now in Heaven, where he is constantly to attend
it; will not admit him to come from thence, tell he bring the New- Jerusalem
down with him: For he makes Intercession as God-Man, in that Nature, Body, in
which he was Crucified; which though a glorious Body, yet is limited,
circumscribed, else 'twere not a Body.

7. The Scripture is express, that when he comes from thence, he comes visibly
as he went away, so that every eye shall see him. Mat. 24.27, 30. For as the
lightning comes out of the East, and shines even unto the West, so shall also
the coming of the Son of Man be -- Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man
in Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn: and they shall see
the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with Power, and great Glory. Act.
1.9, 10, 11. And when he had spoken these things while they beheld, he (Christ)
was taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight. And while they
looked steadfastly toward Heaven, as he went up, behold, two men stood by them,
in White Apparel, which also said, Ye men of Galilee, Why stand ye gazing up
into Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall SO
COME, in like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Rev. 1.7. Behold, he
comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him.

8. When Christ comes, Satan shall be bound, Rev. 20.1, 2. the dead Saints
raised, 1 These. 4.16. 1 Cor. 15.23. Antichrist perfectly destroyed, 2 These.
2.8. The Kingdoms of this World become his, Dan. 7.13, 14.

Object. But Christ came personally on Earth to Stephen, Paul, John.

Answ. Nothing more false. As to Stephen, it is expressly said concerning him,
that he saw Jesus in Heaven standing on the right hand of God, Act. 7.55. The
same line of Interpretation is to be drawn over that sight that Paul had of
him. 'Twas a sight of him not on Earth, but in Heaven. May be, when he was
caught up into Paradise. John's was evidently visional. For, 1. He expressly
tells us, he was in the Spirit, in a Prophetic exstasie, or rapture ( Rev.
1.10.) taken out of himself; when objects are not presented to the outward
senses (which are not in an ecstasy, capable of seeing, or beholding them) but
to the inward mind. 2. He also tells us, that he whom he saw, was (only) like
unto the Son of Man, ver. 13. was not really, substantially so. 3. If it were a
real, personal appearance, then the seven golden Candlesticks must be seven
real golden Candlesticks; the white Garment down to Christ's feet, the golden
Girdle, girt about the paps -- the seven Stars in his right hand; the sharp
two-edged Sword coming out of his Mouth must also be real; which is absurd,
ridiculous to imagine; 'twere to make Christ a monster. 4. It Is expressly said,
that he sent, and signified the Revelation God gave him, by an Angel, Rev. 1.1.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ, (every particular, the whole, of what is
contained in this Book) which God gave unto him -- he sent and signified it by
his Angel unto his Servant John. Repeated again, Rev. 22.6. The Lord God of the
Holy Prophets, sent his Angel to show unto his Servants the things which must
shortly be done. John, it is true, mistakes him for Christ, ver. 8. but is
quickly rectified, ver. 9. I am thy Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren the
Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this Book.

CHAP. IV.
The Book of the Revelaetion contains a Prophetic discovery of the State of
the Church, from the time of its being given forth to the glorious personal
appearance of Christ. The continuance of Gospel-Churches prophesied of in this
Book, to the time of Christ's coming. The seven Churches of Asia, a Type of
Gospel-Churches, and their continuation to that time. Four signal periods of
time mentioned in the Revelation. viz. The time of the Roman-Pagan Empire; of
the Prophesying of the Witnesses; of the last Dragon-War; of the Witnesses
rise, and pouring forth of the Vials, which periods in the personal coming of
Christ. The continuation of the Church State through these several periods of
time, demonstrated. The Woman's (or Church's) flight into the Wilderness, and
the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloath contemporize. Her feeding in the
Wilderness, what, the manner of it. An Objection answered. The two Witnesses
are not two particular Persons, proved. They are before the last of the last
days. Who meant by the Gentiles, Rev. 11.2. Why called Gentiles. The Court
without the Temple, and the Holy City, the treading under foot of the Holy
City, the Temple of God, the Altar, and Worshippers therein, Explained. The
fourty-two Months, or 1260 Days, not ordinary Months, or Days, evinced. The
Antichrist is long since come. The Papal Kingdom is the Antichrist. Rev. 12.17.
at large explained. The Dragon, Woman, remnant of her Seed, who they are: to
what period of time that Prophecy has relation, The slaughter of the
Witnesses, not a corporeal slaughter, proved. The risen Witnesses, and the
Vial-Angels Contemporize. None of the Vials yet poured forth, Rev. 15.5. at
large opened. What Is meant by the Temple: Why called the Temple of the
Testimony. What the opening of the Temple signifies.

Demonstration. IV.
THroughout the Book of the Revelation, we have a plain, and full account, of a
Church State, or Saints Worshipping God in Gospel-Churches, till the Personal
appearance of Christ.

Two things must be premised.

1. This Book of the Revelation is a discovery from God the Father to Jesus
Christ, of things (especially relating to his Churches) that were shortly to
come to pass, Rev. 1.1. i. e. the accomplishment of some of the things there
prophesied of, was immediately to take place. Yet,

2. It contains a prophetic discovery of the State of the Church, from that
time to the personal coming of the Lord Jesus, Rev. 20.1. And I saw an Angel [
Constantine, say some; an Archangel, so others; Christ, the Angel of the
Covenant, so rather] come down from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless
Pit. (Christ alone has so, Rev. 1.18.) chap. 21.3. The Tabernacle of God is
with men. And 22.20. He which testifies these things says, Surely I come
quickly, Amen; even so come Lord Jesus.

So then, if we demonstrate, that the Continuance of a Church State, or
Gospel-Churches, is prophesied of throughout this Book, the continuation of
Gospel-Churches, with the Worship, Ordinances, Institutions peculiar to them,
cannot be denied.

A late learned Author (and some others before him) asserts, that by the seven
Churches of Asia ( Rev. 2. and 3.) the State of the Church of Christ downwards,
to the end of all things, is represented. And the truth is, with that strength
of Arguments, that I know not how it can be refelled. The Church of Ephesus
representing the State of the Church of Christ to the tenth of Nero's reign,
A.D. 63. Smyrna, the State of the Church from 63. tell A.D. 324. (when
Constantine had subdued the most potent Enemies of the Church) and comprises
the Ten Presecutions. Pergamos, the state of the Church from 324. to A.D. 1242.
when the Popes Legate Amelin, made an end of the Albigensian War, with
Trancavel, Bastard of the Earl of Beziers. Thyatira, the State of the Church
from 1242. till whole Nations fell off from the Papacy. Sardis, from the rise
of the Witnesses to the last Vial. Philadelphia, from the time of the Last
Vial, to the fourth Thunder. Laodicea, the State of the Church from the fourth
and fifth Thunders, i. e. from the loosing of Satan, to the appearing of
Christ's coming to Judgment under the sixth Thunder. Now, though I have several
reasons why I cannot comply with this Learned Author, as touching the
computation of time; yet his Arguments, to prove the State of the Church, from
that time to the Confummation of the World, to be represented by the seven
Churches of Asia, seem unanswerable As, 1. The title of the Revelation, ver. 1.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ -- to show unto his Servants things which must
shortly come to pass. The Asiatick Churches then were; this Book contains a
Revelation of things that were to be. 2.. John's present saluting of the Seven
Churches upon his calling this a Book of Prophesies, with this Salutation,
Grace be unto you, and Peace from him which is, and which was, and which is to
come, manifests as much. 3. The description he gives of Christ, which is, and
which was, and which is to come, ver. 4.8, 11. does intimate that he is
treating of what reaches from the beginning of the Church to the latest Ages
thereof (even to the coming of Christ, ver. 7.) 4. The preamble into the Vision
of the seven Churches, ver. 10. and that of the seven Seals is so like, that
it seems they are both of like extent and importance. 5. Else no Reason can be
given, 1. Why, after the Spirit had given notice, that this Book is a prophecy
of things to come, he should presently start from the title, and intended
subject, to write Seven Epistles that have nothing considerable of Prophecy in
them; and that he should do this, with as great pomp, and as high a preamble,
as when he begins the Prophecy of the Seals, and the opened Book. 2. Why the
Epistles should be writ to the Churches of Asia, rather than to the Churches of
Europe, and Afric. 3. Why he gives the precedence to this Church rather than
that. 4. Why just Seven, neither more, nor less. 5. Why these seven, rather
than any others, which might have the very same Virtues and Vices. 6. Why
Christ is described holding the Seven Stars in his right hand, in the Epistles
to the Churches of Ephesus, and Sardis. 7. Why the Church of Ephesus of all
others, should be commended for their trying false Apostles. 8. Why it is said
to the Church of Smyrna, more than to any other, Be thou faithful nnto Death,
and I will give thee a Crown of Life. 9. Why such an Ataxy in the ranging of
the Churches, that the two irreprehensible Churches, Smyrna, and Philadelphia,
are not joined together; Ephesus, Sardis, and Laodicea against whom there is no
complaint of eating things offered to Idols; and then Pergamos and Thy^tira, in
which there is. 10. Why Christ, before the Epistle to the Church in Pergamos,
is set out by a two-edged Sword; and in the Church of Thyatira, by his feet
like fine Brass [as if they burned in the Furnace; for that supplement must be
added.] 11. Why Antypas should be named by name (in a Book so full of
aenigmatical involutions.) 12. Why Christ expresses a greater disgust against
the Church of Laodicea, than that of Sardis, which is said to be quite dead.
13. Why in every Epistle, that phrase is used, I know thy works; which is a
thing of small importance in the literal sense; but in the prophetical, it
seems on purpose so repeated, to intimate an allusion in Asia, to the Hebrew
word (...) (as if (...), was intended to answer (...)) that Asia may also be
significant, as well as the names of the Seven Churches. 14. Why a particular
Woman should be taken notice of by name in the Church of Thyatira, more than
others. 15. Why the promise of ruling over the Nations, and receiving the
Morning Star, should be made to the Church of Thyatira more than others. 16.
Why the temptation that was to come upon all the World, should be mentioned
rather to the Church in Phyladelphia, than others. 17. Why upon her should be
written the Name of the City of God, etc. 18. Why the Church of the Laodiceans
should account her self so hugely rich, increased in goods, and to have no want
in any thing. 19. Why that phrase, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear --
which our Savior is found so often to add at the end of his Parables, should
be used in every Epistle; they being no Parables, but Epistles sent to each of
those Churches in Asia respectively --

The sum is, the seven Asiatick Churches were Types of the State of the Church
(or the Churches of Christ) from that time to the end of all things. There must
then all along be Churches to answer to these Types. Sometimes ('it is true) more
Pure, Spiritual, Splendid, Visible; sometimes less, as the Types of them
represent; but always such as Christ ownes for his Churches, and as such walks
in the midst of them.

But further, The State of the Churches as represented in the Book of the
Revelation, may be considered under a fourfold period of time.

I. The time of the Roman-Pagan Empire: That then there were true Churches of
Christ, will not be denied. Against them, Satan the great red Dragon, in that
Pagan-state, set himself with all the cruelty imaginable, pouring out the blood
of Myriads of the Lords faithful Ones. These Churches wrestle with God night
and day, in Faith, Prayer, Supplication; and at last the whole State (as a just
Judgment of God upon them, for their cruelties exercised upon his Children)
passes away, Rev. 6. These Churches, are the Woman clothed with the Sun,
having the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of Twelve Stars, Rev.
12.1.

II. The time of the prophesying of the Witnesses, which Synchronizes with the
time of the Wild-Beast, or Antichrist. That during this time, which is one
thousand two hundred and sixty Days, or fourty-two Months (which according to
the Grecian account, thirty days to a Month is the same.) There were
Gospel-Churches, is evident. For,

1. The Witnesses themselves are such; therefore called Two Candlesticks, Rev.
11.4. These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks standing before
the Lord of the Earth. Candlesticks! Who, or what are they? The Palmoni,
wonderful numberer, the interpreter, one of a thousand, shall answer for us
(and one would think the interpretation he gives, should pass without question
among those who call themselves by his name) Rev. 1.20. The seven Candlesticks
which thou saw, are seven Churches. Object. But why here but two
Candlesticks? Answ. The Antichristian apostasy had now so far prevailed, that
Christ could own but a few as standing in such a relation unto himself.

2. During this period, there is a Temple of God, an Altar, and such as Worship
therein: which can denote nothing less than a Gospel-Church-state, and
Gospel-Worshippers therein; in opposition to the Court without, and Holy City
which is given to the Gentiles, (or Antichristians) to tread under foot, Rev.
11.1, 2. And this Temple, etc. is to be measured with a Rod, ver. 1. 'Twill not
be altogether impertinent to enquire; what is held forth by the Measuring of the
Temple, etc. Five things I humbly conceive the Spirit of the Lord intends by it.

1. The Churches of Christ that were in a Witness for him, being reduced to
more Purity, and Scripture-simplicity than was with them a little before.
Through the cunning working of the man of Sin (though then in a Mystery)
professors had not a little swerved from Scripture-rule. The body, generality
of these are swallowed up in the Antichristian Apostasy; a little remnant are
awakened to stand up, as Witnesses for Christ; and they perceiving disorders
amongst themselves, reduce all to the Scripture-standard; The only way to heal
all the differences amongst Christians, touching Worship at this day.

2. The paucity of true, sincere Worshippers, so few, that they might easily be
Measured.

3. The difference God makes betwixt Professors; some he curiously Measures,
others he deals not so with, as not worth minding, being Virgins, Nullius
Pretii, of no reckoning, value.

4. That the building of the Church is Gods work; his measuring-line, not Man's
must be stretched over it.

5. His care to preserve this remnant in that purity, simplicity of Worship,
that was according to his Will, and they had attained to, during the whole time
of the Antichristian Apostasy, and Prophesying of the Witnesses against it.
Measuring in Scripture (sometimes at least) denotes the care, concern of Jehovah
for the thing measured.

III. All the time of Antichrist's rampancy, there are two Witnesses that have
Power given them from the Lord (at least till the time of their slaughter) to
prophecy against Antichrist; i. e. to stand by the Lord of the whole Earth
against him, Rev. 11.3, 4. viz. to take Christ's part against Antichrist;
maintain, defend the things of Christ against the encroachments, devices,
carnal inventions of Antichrist. Now this man of Sin made not only advances
against the Doctrine of the Gospel, but against the economy, order thereof,
with respect to Worship, Christ has his particular Churches with fixed
Officers in them (Institutions, Orders, of his own affixed to them) all
gathered by the Power of the Spirit, and voluntarily giving up themselves, to
the Lord and one another: Pastors, Teachers, chosen by them from amongst
themselves, He the Head of them all: Antichrist has his ecumenical, Universal
Church, Officers, Institutions, Ordinances, Foreign, contrary to Christ's: He
sets up himself as Head of this Antichristian-Church; gathers into it, by
force, violence; rules, governs it, by Canons, Laws of his own. If then Christ
has his Witnesses, and their work be to Witness for him against Antichrist's
innovations; they must be found not only pleading against these, (which would
be only a negative testimony) but witnessing for the Order, Institutions of
Christ; and so consequently be in the practice of these. For it cannot be
imagined, that Christ's Witnesses should own that in Principle, and plead for
it, which they are themselves out of the practice of. Nay the truth is, this
last is that, wherein their witness signally lies.

IV. That the Woman's flight into the Wilderness* Rev. 12.6. and the Witnesses
prophesying in Sackcloth, contemporize, is not only generally granted; but
it is from hence evident, because the time of the Witnesses prophesying in
Sackcloth, and the Woman's continuing in the Wilderness, is the same. Rev. 11.3.
They shall Prophecy a thousand two hundred and sixty days clothed in
sackcloth. Rev. 12.6. And the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she has a
place prepared of God that they should feed her there one thousand two hundred
and threescore days. That she was in the Wilderness in a Church State waiting
upon the Lord, in Institutions, Ordinances of his own appointment, is evident.

1. She is therefore called the Woman; as the false Church is called the
whorish Woman, because of her Antichristian Church State, Worship, Ordinances.

2. It Is said, They should feed her there. Quest. Who shall feed her there?
Answ. Persons appointed by the Lord, and chosen by the Church in this her
Wilderness-state shall do it. Quest. How should they feed her? Answ. There Is no
extraordinary way of feeding pointed at by the Spirit of the Lord; therefore
she is to be fed in God's Ordinary way; in her attendment on Institutions of his
own appointment for that end.

So that evidently there were Churches, Church-Institutions, Worship, all the
time of the Witnesses prophesying.

Object. All this may be granted, and yet the continuance of Gospel-Churches
not proved; for the Witnesses began not to Prophecy till a few years ago.

Answ. Though this Objection be very weak, frivolous, the basis upon which it
is built, generally exploded by all Reformed Christians, and therefore may seem
not worthy our notice: yet resolving not willingly to pass by any thing, that
may seem to have the least shadow of Argument in it, against what we are
pleading for; and for the sake of some that are (or may be) in danger to be led
aside, by such pretensions as these, we shall particularly examine it. Several
things are supposed, as the basis upon which this Objection is built, that are
evidently false; which being demonstrated to be so, the Objection will
presently evaporate into smoke, and vanity. As,

1. That the two Witnesses spoken of, are two particular Persons.

2. That they are to come in the last of the last days.

3. That the time of their Prophecy is but One thousand two hundred, and
threescore natural days. Now the Heterodoxy of all this, will presently
appear.

I. As touching the first, it is true, Bellarmine the Jesuit, and others, tell
us, not only that they are two particular Persons, (whom some of late follow)
but also who they are, viz. Enoch and Elias (who they say shall come, and fight
against Antichrist in Jerusalem, and there be put to death by him, Bellar. de
Romans Pontif. l. 3. c. 13.): But that they are not, cannot be two particular
Persons, is evident.

1. The Two Witnesses are called, two Candlesticks; which Christ interprets to
be Churches (as was said before.)

2. The Two Witnesses Prophecy, all the Wild Beast's (Antichrist's) Reign,
viz. Fourty-two Months, or One thousand two hundred sixty days, viz.
prophetic days, i. e. Years, as shall by and by be demonstrated. It Is not to
be imagined, that any two particular Persons should ever live so long.

3. During the time of their Prophecy, They torment them that dwell upon the
Earth, Rev. 11.10. i. e. the Antichristian Kingdom: which it is not probable,
two particular Persons (especially considering that those which hold this
notion, assert also, that the 1260. days, are natural days, or three Years
and an half) should do in so short a time.

4. When they are slain, and lie dead in the street of the great City three
days and an half, (natural days as they will have it) they of the People, and
Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations ( viz. the multitude over which Antichrist
presides) see their dead bodies, and rejoice over them -- Which that they
should do, if but two particular persons, and they lie dead for so short a
time, is the firstborn of absurdities. It Is impossible, within that limit, the
persons mentioned should all hear of it, much more come to see it.

II. That the two Witnesses are to come in the last of the last days, is also
an unscriptural-vanity, as is evident.

1. The two Witnesses Prophesying, and the Gentiles treading under foot the
Holy City, contemporize, Rev. 11.2, 3. But the Court which is without the
Temple leave out, and measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the
holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two Months. And I will give
Power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall Prophecy 1260 Days clothed in
Sackcloth. The forty two Months, according to the Grecian account, are exactly
1260. Days: so long then as the Gentiles tread down the Holy City, so long are
the Witnesses to Prophecy. A few things must further be inquired into. 1. Who
we are to understand by the Gentiles. 2. What by the Holy City. 3. What their
treading under foot the Holy City, means. 4. What space of time the fourty-two
Months take up, in which it is said, the Gentiles shall tread down the Holy City.

1. By the Gentiles, we are to understand the Antichristians; particularly the
bloody Papists, headed by the Pope [ That (...), Man of Sin, that Son of
Perdition, that Lawless One, 2. These. 2.3, 8.] These are called Gentiles,
because, 1. Of their Introduction of Idolatrous Worship practiced amongst the
Gentiles. I mean not only the Worship of Statues, Idols of Wood, Stone, Brass,
Silver, Gold; but the Worship of Heroes, (or Saints) in imitation of the
Gentile-Heroes, whom they Worshipped. 2. Of their being actuated by the same
Spirit of bloody cruelty, against the Worshippers within the Temple and Altar
(or the true Spiritual Worshipers), with which the Gentiles before them were
actuated against the Primitive Believers; and actually murdering the true
Servants of the Lord, as they did.

2. The Court without the Temple, and the Holy City (which Type out the same
thing) is the Antichristian Church State, Worship, Worshippers, Orders,
Ordinances. The Temple of God, the Altar, and the Worshippers therein, v. 1.
are the Gospel-Church-state, with the Worship, and Worshippers thereunto
belonging (as has been proved.) The Court then without the Temple, and the
Holy City, to be left out (as a matter of no worth) is the false Church State,
with its Worship and Worshippers.

3. Their treading under foot the Holy City, denotes.

1. The numerousness of the Antichristian Worshippers.

2. Their frequency in their Antichristian Service, as the Phrase is taken,
Isa. 1.12. Psalm. 121.2. q. d. Measure not the Court --. The false Worship,
Worshippers, are so contemptible, vile, they deserve not to be taken notice of:
are so numerous, that they cannot well be measured -- They throng the City, as
if they would tread it under foot at once.

4. The fourty-two Months cannot possibly denote fourty-two ordinary Months, or
One thousand two hundred and sixty natural Days, or three years and an half,
for these Reasons.

1. The Papacy (represented under the notion of the Gentiles --) have been
already rampant hundreds of Years; persecuted, murdered, destroyed millions of
Saints, for not treading together with them, the Holy City.

2. As was said, The forty-two Months, and the One thousand two hundred sixty
days are the same: Now, a day for a year is the prophetic reckoning. See Number.
14.34. Ezekiel. 4.6. So in the prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 8.21, 23. and 9.24. and
12.11, 12* And for ought I find in all Prophetic Books, where any signal time
is spoken of.

3. That the Gentiles treading down the Holy City, and the wild Beast, Rev.
13.2, 3. are the same, has hitherto been taken for granted; and it is evident
they are so; as from other considerations, so from this, that the same term is
given to them both, ver. 5. And Power was given to him forty-two Months (or One
thousand two hundred and sixty Days, as was before intimated.) Now, it is
impossible, that what is said to be done by, and ascribed to, this wild Beast,
should be shut up in so short a period, as three years and an half. For,

1. He brings the whole world under his subjection, is a dread and terror to
them; grows so considerable, that none is able to make War with him, ver. 4, 7.
And they Worshipped the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able
to make War with him.

2. All the World wonders after the Beast. ver. 3. (...) --. The Word is very
emphatick, denoting honor, reverence, fear of any one, upon the account of
some wonderful strange thing done by him. It Is translated Jude. 16. The having
(men's persons) in admiration. It comes from the Hebrew (...) greatly to
observe, reverence, worship, to magnify, have in great esteem. Some read it, He
was admired in the whole Earth. The Arabic translates it, The whole Earth
wondering, followed the Beast. Which is indeed the sense of the place. q. d.
such wonderful things shall be done by the Beast in the sight of the World,
that with the greatest admiration, highest approbation and consent, they shall
take the Beasts part, list themselves under his standard. The Aethiopick reads,
And the whole Earth wondered, and followed this Beast; to the same purpose.

3. He makes War with the Saints, and overcomes them, v. 7. Acts that must
certainly take up more time than three Years and an half for their production.

III. Antichrist, who is the same with the Wild Beast, but now mentioned (as is
granted by all) was in the womb in the Apostles days; wrought then under
ground in a mystery, laboring to come forth; which he at last did, Exalting
himself above all that is called God, or worshipped, showing himself that he is
God, 2 These. 2.4, 7. He more openly showed himself, whilst the Apostle John was
yet alive, than he did in Paul's days, John 2.22, 23. and 4.2, 3. So that it is
evident, that the Antichrist was in the womb in the Apostles days; and openly
discovered himself not long after the (...) (that which let) called the
(...) (the Letter, or he which lets) 2 These. 2.6, 7. was taken out of the
way. Various are the sentiments of the Learned touching this Letter. The
Learned Brightman makes him to be the sixth head of the Roman Empire: others
think him to be the Holy Spirit, who by his signal presence, power with the
Primitive believers, kept Antichrist from ascending to that height of dignity,
supremacy, he aimed at. Some adjudge it to be the apostasy spoken of, ver. 3.
Except there come a falling away first, and that man of Sin be revealed, the
Son of Perdition. q. d. The general Apostasy must first be, ere the man of Sin
(or Antichrist) openly manifest himself; when that is, he will quickly appear
to head it. Its not yet coming, is that which lets his Revelation. The
generality take it for the Roman-Pagan-Empire, or Emperor, in his full Power,
and Majesty, flourishing, and living at his seat in Rome. Which I humbly
conceive is Paul's intendment. For, 1. No reason can be given, why Paul
expresses himself in so dark terms; that which lets this Letter, if the
Roman-Pagan-Empire be not intended; but if so, the reason is obvious: They had
an opinion, that this Empire was everlasting; to have talked of its removal,
would have stirred them up to have persecuted the Saints, as the Enemies of it.
Less occasions they many times took so to do. 2. Antichrist's seat was to be
Rome, Rev. 17.9. The seven heads are seven Mountains on which the Woman
sits, i. e. The City built on seven Hills, is Antichrists Seat, viz. Rome,
alone famous amongst Historians upon that account. Septem urbs alta jugis, toti
quae praesidet orbi.


The Seven-hill'd City that governs the World, says Propertius.

But take the Letter, or that which Lets, in either of the forementioned
senses, and he has been actually taken away for above this thousand Years.
Immediately upon which Antichrist was revealed; whose time, and the Beast's,
are the same; for they themselves are the same. Therefore the fourty-two Months
cannot possibly denote fourty-two Ordinary Months, or One thousand two hundred
and sixty natural days, viz. Three Years, and a half; but a much longer tract
of time.

By what has hitherto in this matter been offered, the Judicious Reader will
find a plain probation of the main Thesis, we are now in the confirmation of,
viz. that the two Witnesses come before the last of the last days. For,

2. The two Witnesses are expressly said to prophecy One thousand two hundred
and sixty Days, i. e. Years, according to the Prophetic reckoning, as we have
proved.

3. The Witnesses Prophesying* and the rampancy of the Wild-Beast, Rev. 13.2,
3. -- take up the same time of forty two Months, or, One thousand two hundred
and sixty Days; but it has been demonstrated, that the term of the Wild Beast
is not so short as three Years and an half; therefore the Witnesses Prophesying
cannot be thrust into so narrow a compass.

4. The time of the Witnesses Prophesying, and Antichrists day (after his
Revelation) are the same: For Antichrist, and the Wild Beast, Rev. 13. are the
same. And the Witnesses Prophesying, and the rampancy of the Wild Beast take up
the same time, as has been proved. That Antichrist has been revealed in the
World for hundreds of Years past, has also been demonstrated. Therefore the
Witnesses Prophesying has been also thus long, so must have their existence as
Prophesying Witnesses before the last of the last Days; Quod erat
demonstrandum.

As touching the third supposition upon which the Objection is built, viz.

III. That the time of the Witnesses Prophecy; is but for One thousand two
hundred and sixty natural days: the contrary has been, from what has been
said touching the second particular, abundantly evinced; to which add, The
Witnesses are to Prophecy all the time of Antichrist (as has been proved:)
The truth is, they are raised up, Spirited by the Lord as witnesses to
prophecy against him, and his encroachments upon the Sovereign Authority of
Christ. It Is true, the Papists, that they may clear the Pope of the charge has
been by the Protestants laid against him as the Antichrist, assert, That
Antichrist is not yet come; that he is not to come till toward the period of
time; to continue, when he comes, but three years, and an half. Thus Bellarmin
l.3. De Pontif. Antichristus debet regnare non nisi tres annos cum medio
praecise. Antichristi adventus erit paulo ante finem mundi: continuo post
mortem ejus mundus finetur. i. e. Antichrist ought to reign but three years,
and an half precisely. The coming of Antichrist, shall be a little before the
end of the World: By and by, after his death, the World shall terminate.

Two things in this matter are easily demonstrated.

1. That Antichrist is long since come.

I. That the Papal Kingdom is the Antichrist spoken of: which, if plainly from
Scripture demonstrated, it undeniably follows, that the time of the witnesses
prophecy cannot be shut up within the limits of one Thousand two Hundred and
Sixty natural days.

1. That Antichrist is long since come, is evident; for,

1. He is Prophesied of, as to come when the Apostasy should break forth, 2.
These. 2.3. Except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed: So that evidently upon the coming in of the Apostasy, the man of sin,
or Antichrist, is to be revealed. But the Apostack has been already for
several hundreds of years: witness the corruption in doctrine, viz.
Justification by Works, Transubstantiation, etc. in Worship, viz. the
veneration of Relics, the invocation of Saints, the Worship of the breaden
God, Images, etc.

2. The Mystery of Iniquity wrought (viz. in Order to the bringing forth of the
man of Sin) in the Apostles Days, 2 These. 2.7. It cannot then be imagined, but
his birth was near. What? in the Womb then, and not to be brought forth for
hundreds of years after? credat Appella! It Is a figment, that the repetition
of, is refutation sufficient.

3. The (...), or that which let his Revelation, 2 These. 2.6. was long since
removed out of the way, as has been demonstrated. Immediately upon which, he
was to be revealed, ver. 8. The truth of this, will more evidently appear in
our discussions of the second particular, viz.

2. That the Papal Kingdom, is THE ANTICHRIST spoken of in the Scripture: Which
we shall in a distinct Treatise (...) fully demonstrate.

The third Period of time mentioned in the Revelation is,

III. The time of the last Dragon-War: When we have an account also of a
Gospel-Church-state; Churches Worshipping God, according to the appointment of
Christ. Of this War we have an account, Rev. 12.17. And the Dragon was Wroth
with the Woman, and went about to make War with the remnant of her Seed. V.L.
And the Dragon was Wroth against the Woman, and went to make War with the rest
of her seed. Ar. Therefore that Serpent was wroth against the Woman; and went
to wage War with the Seed of the Woman, that was left. Sir. And that Dragon was
wroth against the Woman, and went to make War with them, who are the residue of
her Seed. Aeth. And this Beast was wroth against this Woman, and went that he
might oppugn the rest of her Sons. Much to the same purpose.

A few things must be considered.

1. Who is meant by the Dragon. 2. Who by the Woman. 3. Who are the Remnant of
her Seed. 4. What this War is. 5. To what Period of time it has Relation. 6.
That in the time of this War, there is a Gospel-Church-state of the appointment
of Christ, to which Saints are found in Conformity.

I. As touching the first, by the Dragon we are to understand the Devil. So the
Spirit interprets, ver. 9. And the great Dragon was cast out, that Old Serpent
called the Devil, and Satan. So also, Rev. 20.2. So called upon the account of
his, 1. Sublety. 2. Malice, Enmity against mankind, especially the Saints. 3.
Cruelty, in devouring, swallowing them up. 4. Strength, Power to put in
Execution (by Divine sufferance) his enmity against them. But yet the Devil as
acting not in the Roman-Pagan-state, but in the Antichristian; wherein he most
evidently displayes his enmity, bloody cruelty, subtilty, and Power. Now this
seems to be very evident. For this Dragon is said to have Seven Heads, and Ten
Horns, and Ten Crowns upon his Heads. The Seven Heads are interpreted, Rev.
17.9, 10. not only to be Seven Mountains, but also Seven Kings, or seven sorts
of Government; whereof five were fallen, when John writ, viz. Kings, Consuls,
Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dictators; and one then was, viz. Pagan-Emperours; and the
Seventh was not yet come, viz. Christian Emperors; amongst whom springs
Antichrist, who is said to be the Eighth and yet of the Seventh, ver. 11. So
then during the time of the Roman-Pagan-Emperors, the Dragon had but Six Heads;
therefore by the Dragon we are not to understanding the Devil as acting in that
state, but in the Antichristian, when he had his Seven Heads complete. The Ten
Horns are also interpreted, Rev. 17.12. to be Ten Kings which had at that time
of John's writing, received no Kingdom: They respect a time when the
Roman-Empire should be divided into Ten Kingdoms, which was not while the
Empire was Pagan, but under the Seventh Head, about the Year Four Hundred fifty
six. To which add that John does painly enough intimate, that these Ten Horns
did not appertain to the Sixth Head that then was, or the Roman-Pagan-Empire,
but to the Seventh, which was to come; for though he tells us, they were Ten
Kings, yet he adds, that they had received no Kingdom at that time; i. e. they
were Kings not actually, but only in the purpose of God, to be produced as such
under the Seventh Head, or Roman-Christian-Empire. Besides, the Beast with
Seven Heads, and Ten Horns, is expressly said to carry the Whore, or
Antichristian-Church, Rev. 17.3. From all which its most clear, that the Dragon
with Seven Heads, and Ten Horns, is to be understood the Devil, as acting not
in the Roman-Pagan, but Christian (or rather Antichristian) State.

2. By the Woman, we are to understand the Churches of Christ: So called upon
the account of their visible espousal to him, or giving up themselves to him as
their Lord, and Husband; owning his despotick Authority, in their professed
Subjection to all his Institutions. This seems evident. Because,

1. By Woman in the first verse, is meant the Churches of Christ (as is
generally granted) the Primitive Churches, say most; the Churches of Christ, as
appearing in a latter-day-glory, say others: And as the Woman was at first
called of (...), Ish the Man, (...) Isha Woman, because she was of him: So are
the Churches of Christ called, (...), Hashulammith, Shulamitesse, or Salomona,
or she that is peaceable, of him who is the true (...) Sheloma, Cant. 6.12.

2. These are frequently, as is already proved, called the Bride, the Wife of
Christ, said to be betrothed, espoused to him: He is called their (...) Ish,
Lord, Husband.

3. The Woman (as related to Christ) is in the Book of the Revelation, set in
opposition to the Whore, or Mother of Harlots, Rev. 17. Now she types out the
false Churches: therefore by the Woman we are to understand the true Churches
of Christ.

3. By the remnant of the Woman's Seed, some understand such as were brought
forth by her in the Wilderness, or particular members of the Church (as others)
who by reason of the iniquity of the times, cannot come together to Worship God
in the Solemn Assemblies openly, as formerly, yet seperately and apart, they do
worship him. Now there are several things that I humbly conceive lie in the way
of these interpretations.

I. This War is not in, but out of the Wilderness: For into the Wilderness the
Dragon could not, it seems, pursue her. Therefore he casts a Flood of Water
out of his mouth, to swallow her up, but with little Success, for the Earth
helps her, opens her mouth and swallows up the Flood, Rev. 12.15, 16. Besides,
he would (if he could) have attaqu't the Mother in the Wilderness, as well as
the Children brought forth by her there; whereas this is a particular War
against the remnant of her seed. Nor,

2. Can I see, how their Worshipping severally, and a part, is consistent with
the Characters given of the remnant of the Woman's seed, ver. 17. who are
expressly said to Keep the Commandments of God, and to have the Testimony of
Jesus Christ. Nor,

3. Would Satan have looked upon them in their divided State, to be so
considerable, as to go about to make so formal a War against them, as is
intimated: could he disunite, break, dissipate, scatter the Disciples of
Christ, he would think he had done his work; at least so far, that he might
pick them up by degrees, as he saw meet; and not put himself to the cost and
trouble [(...)] of raising a War against them. Little do some think, how much
they serve Satan, by driving on a design of scattering the Saints, and calling
them off their Church Assemblies: A work he has been attempting by various
artifices, and methods, ever since Christ had his Churches in the World; but
hitherto without success.

This matter then must farther be considered. By the seed of the Woman (in the
first Scripture-Notion of that expression) we are to understand the Messiah,
Christ, Genesis 3.15. Here it has respect to the Saints, begotten by the Word,
and Spirit of Jesus: called the seed of the Woman, because born in the midst of
the Churches of Christ, before that their flight into the Wilderness,
mentioned, v. 14. As also because like her, of the same nature, spirit, temper,
walking in the same footsteps, owning the same Principles, Doctrine, practicing
the same Worship, found in the observation of the same Institutions,
Ordinances, with her. By the remnant then of her seed, we are to understand,
such as remain behind her, when she flies into the Wilderness, go not with her
thither. The Wilderness points out a state of secrecy, retirement, and so
safety: The Woman (i. e. the body of the Churches) Flies into the Wilderness
from the face of the Serpent, Worships in holes, corners; whilst this remnant
keep on in their visible owning the Ways, Ordinances, Institutions of Christ
as formerly. Who (with submission I speak it) I conceive to be most strictly
the Witnesses in their last testimony to Jesus.

4. As touching the fourth and fifth particular, what this War is, and to what
period of time it has relation; It seems (at least to me) evident from what
has been already offered, that it is the last advance of the Dragon, or Devil,
acting in the Papal-Antichristian-Wilde-Beast, ascending out of the bottomless
Pit (or coming forth in more than ordinary malice, fury) against the two
Witnesses, or such of the Woman's seed, who shall at this time most strictly
have the Spirit of Prophecy with them; and so bear up for a season, in a
testimony for Christ against him; the issue whereof, shall be their slaughter,
or the driving them off that public testimony they are bearing, into the
Wilderness, whether the Woman, or the body of the Churches was before fled. And
this seems more than Probable. Because,

1. Though here is mention of the Dragons going about to make War with the
remnant of the Woman's seed; yet there is no intimation of the least execution,
as to any corporeal slaughter he makes upon them: but they seem rather (with
respect to that) in as great safety as the Woman that before was fled into the
Wilderness: In answer to which, the slaughter of the Witnesses is not, cannot
be a corporeal slaughter, as amongst others is most evident from this single
consideration: viz. Such as their slaughter is, such will their Resurrection
be; if their slaughter be corporeal, their Resurrection must be so: But their
Resurrection is not, cannot be a corporeal Resurrection; because it crosses the
Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.23. Every one in his own order, Christ the first fruits,
afterward those that are Christ's at his coming: clearly asserting, that the
Saints rise not till the personal coming of Christ: But now the Witnesses rise
before; as is granted by all.

2. After this advance of the Dragon, you hear no more of this remnant of the
Woman's seed, till the great Randezvouz upon Mount Sion, Rev. 14.1. Where they
are the risen Witnesses, represented under the notion of One Hundred forty and
four Thousand, with their fathers name upon their foreheads -- going forth
under the conduct of the Lamb, to execute the Judgments written against
Antichrist, ver. 7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. to the end. And no wonder, for all this
while, viz. from the time of their slaughter, to the time of their rise, they
lie Dead, as to any public visible witness for Christ; which formerly they
bear, till the Spirit of Life, from God, reenters into them; and they stand
upon their feet --.

3. This War against the remnant of the Woman's seed, is much about the same
time with her second flight into the Wilderness, ver. 14. That that flight of
the Woman into the Wilderness is a second flight, is evident. For,

1. She is represented, ver. 10, 12. as coming out of it with Triumph,
Shouting, having greatned confidence, that she should never return thither
again; for she sings, ver. 10. Now is come Salvation, and Strength, and the
Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ.

2. The Wilderness whether she flies, is called HER PLACE, ver. 14. viz. with
respect to what is said, ver. 6. with relation to her first flying thither. And
the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God.
Into this place, which is now called, her place, because before prepared for
her of God, does she now fly. Now that second flight of the Woman into the
Wilderness, is exactly the same with the time of the Witnesses lying dead; She
is nourish't for a time, times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent:
So the Witnesses lie dead a time [one Year] times [two Years] and half a time
[half a Year] viz. Three Years and a half which is congruous to the
Scripture-Notion of time, or times, Dan. 4.23, 25.

VI. That in the time of this War, there is a Gospel-Church-state, is evident.
For,

1. There Is the Woman, i. e. the Saints in Church Communion Worshipping God in
the ways of Christ's Institution (for upon this account she is called the Woman,
Bride of Christ, as has been proved) fled into the Wilderness, just (as
'twere) upon its commencement.

2. The Remnant of the Woman's seed which keep the Commandments of God, ver. 17.
If by the Commandments of God, we understand the Commandments of God the
Father, or of Jesus Christ, it comes all to one. For one great Commandment of
the Father to the Sons of Men, is to hear Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. And on the
Holy Mount, a voice is heard to the same purpose, Mat. 17.5. And Christ tells
us, that those that have heard, and learnt of the Father, come to him; viz. to
be instucted by him, John 6.45. And he that hears him, i. e. obey's, subjects
to him, his in-doctrinations, teachings, hears the Father.

3. They are also said to have the Testimony of Jesus. i. e.

1. Negatively, they hold not to the Decrees, Canons, Laws, Institutions of
Pope, Councils, Fathers, etc. They abhor to comply with any Antichristian
Superstitions, Worship, Orders, Ordinances: would they have done so, the Devil
had never gone about to make War against them. The Spirit testifyes of them,
that they were not defiled with Woman, Rev. 14.4. i. e. with none of the
Idolatries, Superstitions, Fornications of the great Whore, or any of her
Daughters.

2. Positively, they do visibly own Jesus Christ, in all his Offices, Laws,
Institutions; nor will they be persuaded to leave them, or cease to conform to
them whatever it cost them. The Lord testifies of them in their risen-state,
that they are Virgins, Rev. 14.4. i. e. chaste to Christ, faithful to his
Institutions.

And thus much touching the Third Period of time, in which it is evident, there
are Churches of the institution of Christ. That there are so,

4. At the Witnesses rise, and all along the pouring out of the Vials, is very
evident by the same Book of the Revelation: By the way I would modestly give my
Judgment touching Two things.

I. That the risen-Witnesses, and the Vial-Angels, contemporize. This seems
evident. For,

1. The time of the Witnesses Prophesying, is a time of Mourning to them, being
in their Sack-cloth-state, and for the most part the time of Antichrist.
rampancy: but at the time of their rise, the scene begins to alter; and the
Vengance of God falls so fearfully upon the Antichristians, that the tenth part
of the City falls; or one of the Ten Kingdoms totally draws off from
Antichrist, and is brought into subjection to Christ: The time of the beginning
of the pouring out of the Vials, is a time of Mourning to the Antichristians:
for the Vials are Vials of the Pure Wrath of God Almighty poured forth in his
Authority, and by his Appointment, upon them.

2. From the Witnesses rise, the destruction of the Kingdom of the Beast, or of
Antichrist goe's on, till he be wholly destroyed, and the Kingdoms become the
Lords, Rev. 11.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. The same fate befalls the Antichristians
under the pouring forth of the Vials: their Kingdom is gradually wasted,
consumed, till it cease to be, Rev. 16 from first to last. But this is not a
place fully to prosecute this matter.

II. That there are none of the Vials yet poured forth: These few things
(amongst others) which must not now be mentioned) lead me captive to the belief
of this Assertion.

1. The Witnesses, I humbly conceive, are not yet risen, it is to be feared not
yet slain. Now the risen-witnesses, and Vial-Angels synchronizing, they not
being risen, these have not poured forth one Vial.

2. We have not yet seen the preparatory work, to the pouring forth of the
Vials mentioned, Rev. 15.

3. The subject of the Vials are the persons, or things of Antichrist. The
Vials being Vials of pure Wrath; on whatever persons, or things, they fall,
they totally consume them; so, as that they shall never stand up, or exist
more. What of the Persons, things of Antichrist have been thus removed,
destroyed; Are they not all in their splendor, height, glory at this day?

4. The Vial-Angels, and the Stone-smiting, Dan. 2. synchronize: the effects of
the one, and the other, are the same; viz. the total destruction of Antichrist,
and introduction, exaltment, of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus. But the Stone
has yet not begun to smite; for when it begins so to do, it shall never cease,
till the Image be wholly destroyed; and it (the Stone) become a great Mountain
filling the whole Earth, Dan. 2.34, 35. Therefore none of the Vials are yet
poured out. But of this matter we must not now speak at large.

That there are particular Churches upon the rise of the Witnesses, and the
pouring out of the Vials, will receive a speedy dispatch.

1. Now the Witnesses (which we have proved to be particular Churches) stand
upon their feet --. Begin openly, with their wonted, and perhaps, greater
courage and boldness to assert, and give Witness to the Ways, and Institutions
of Christ; which all the time of their Prophesying, they were publicly, and in
the time of their slaughter, they were privately found in the practice of, Rev.
11.11.

2. Now the Woman that had fled into the Wilderness, and was nourisht there all
the time of the Witnesses slaughter, comes out from thence, and shows her self
as the true Loyal Spouse of Christ, in her visible subjection to him; in all
his glorious Institutions, and Appointments. To which time, that prophecy
seems to have respect, Cant. 8.5.

3. Now the Temple, of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven is opened,
Rev. 15.5. A few things must be enquired into.

1. What we are to understand by the Temple.

2. Why it is called, The Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony.

3. In what sense it is said, to be opened.

1. By the Temple, we are to understand the Gospel-Church-state, the Churches,
Ordinances, Institutions of CHRIST: which has been before proved, are
represented under that notion, with the Reasons thereof.

2. It Is called, The Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony; because the
presence of God, his Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, were with them, amongst them,
in a special peculiar manner. The Tabernacle of Old was a Type of his special
presence with his people then, Exodus 25.8. and 29.45, 46. Levit. 26.11, 12.
Therefore God is said to dwell in the Tabernacle; its called his Habitation, 2 Samuel 15.25. There he promised to meet with, and speak to his People, Exodus
29.42, 43. This Tabernacle is called, the Tabernacle of Testimony, Exodus 38.21.
Acts 7.44. because in it was the Ark, wherein was the Law, or Testimony. 'Twas
at last brought into the Temple at Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 8.4. -- 2 Chronicles. 5.5.
This here is said to be in Heaven (or appertaining to the Gospel-Ministration)
perhaps on purpose to obviate any mistake, the Jews might have of the
restitution of their Temple-Worship; q. d. Though I speak of the Temple of the
Tabernacle of Testimony; don't think, that I intend that which was built, by
Moses, Solomon, and that your Old-Worship thereto affixed, shall be restored;
no, I am treating of another kind of Temple, under another Ministration, viz.
an Heavenly, which he that speaks from Heaven has introduced. To which
appertains the Testimony, Laws, Institutions, he has given forth; wherein he
has promised to meet his People, bless them, fill them with his Company,
Presence, Glory.

3. By the Opening of the Temple of the Tabernacle in Heaven, we are not to
understand, the introduction of a New-Gospel-Ministration: The vanity,
emptiness, ridicule of such an interpretation is from hence manifest; that John
says not, that there shall be a New-Temple built; but only, that the Temple
shall be opened, i. e. the Old Temple of the Tabernacle that was standing all
the times of the Pagan-Antichristian persecutions. And this very Scripture is
of it self evidence sufficient, that at least all the times of Antichrist,
there was an abiding Temple, or Gospel-Church-state, Worship, Worshippers
therein. For at the rise of Antichrist we find a Temple, Rev. 11.1. and now at
the going forth of the Vial-Angels, this very Temple is opened: not the least
tittle, syllable, of the constituting a new one; but the opening the old. The
word is not (...) to build; no, nor so much (...), to restore, or repair; but
(...), to open that which was already built, and sufficiently beautified by the
Lord. The words are perhaps an allusion to 2 Chronicles. 28.24. and 29.3. The first
Scripture tells us, that Ahaz had shut up the doors of the House of the Lord;
the latter, that good Hezekiah opened them* 'Twas the same House, the same
doors (not others) that was shut up and opened. The meaning is, Gospel-Churches
that a little before were Worshipping more retiredly, privately, are now again
brought to public view; returned from their Wilderness, retired-state, to an
open profession, owning of the Laws, Ways of JESUS.

4. The Vial-Angels come out of this Temple thus opened, Rev. 15.6. For they
are some of the most Spiritual, principal of the Temple-Worshippers (or members
of these Churches) as is evident from their Priestly-array, they are clothed in
pure and White-linnen, having their breasts girded with Golden-Girdles: The
attire of the Priests, Exodus 28.6, 8. Temple-Worshippers are a Royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9.

5. During the whole time of the pouring out of the Vials (at the close of
which, as is generally granted, Christ comes) we find the continuance of this
Temple, ver 8. And the Temple was filled with Smoke from the Glory of God, and
from his Power, ( i. e. there was a more than ordinary presence of God, with
these Temple-Worshippers) and no man was able to enter into the Temple ( viz.
to interrupt, disturb the Worshippers there, as formerly they had done) till
the seven Plagues of the seven-Angels were fulfilled, ( i. e. till they were
all poured out) Antichrist by them perfectly destroyed, the Glorious Kingdom of
our LORD and SAVIOVR introduced.

CHAP. V.
Gospel-Churches part of that Ministration set on foot by Christ: The whole of
that Ministration permanent, to continue to the end of the World. Mat. 28.19,
20. 1 Cor. 11.26. Explained. An Objection Answered. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. Explained.
Heb. 1.1, 2. Considered, opened. The Excellency of the discovery God the Father
made of his Will by his Son, above all other discoveries he had before made:
nothing new to be added to it. Dan. 9.24. Explained. The (...) who. Vision, and
Prophecy what it is. The sealing it up, what it imports. There Is no ground
left for any New-Ministration, or any alteration in that set on foot by Christ.
The reasons of the alteration of the Old Testament-Ministration, with the
Institutions thereto belonging. The Gospel-Ministration, Ordinances, must
continue, except a greater than Christ come.

Demonstration. V.
THe Gospel-Church-state, with the Churches Institutions, Ordinances thereunto
belonging, is part of that Ministration, that was set on foot by the Lord
Jesus, when he Tabernacled amongst men; as has already been demonstrated. Now
the whole of that Ministration that was then set on foot by him, is permanent,
and inviolably to be observed to the end of the World. To the proof of which,
we now address our selves.

I. Christ himself seems to intimate as much, when he gives commission to the
Apostles, to go forth to preach the Gospel, teaching them who shall be
converted by their Ministry to observe his whole charge, Mat. 28.19, 20. Go ye
therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit: Teaching them to observe all things
whatever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end
of the World. Two things are plainly asserted. 1. That whatever Christ gave
them in charge to communicate to others, was to be observed and kept by them to
the end of the World. 2. That the Lord Jesus Christ would all along communicate
his presence, to such as should, to that great period of time, be found in the
observance of what he commanded.

II. The great Apostle of the Gentiles, who also had seen the Lord, and
converst with him, when he was caught up into the third Heavens, expressly
asserts concerning one part of this Gospel-Ministration, or one great Ordinance
appertaining thereunto, (and such an one as none can regularly be found in the
practice of, but such as are in a Church State, Act. 2.42.) viz. The Ordinance
of Breaking Bread, that it was to continue to the coming of our Lord, 1 Cor.
11.26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth
the Lords death until he come. Christ commanded his Disciples a little before
he was offered up a Sacrifice for them, to be found in this practice, Luke
22.19, 20. -- This do in remembrance of me. And afterward charges them as they
love him, to be found in the observance of it (as of other his Commandments)
John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. Tells them it is an argument of
their love, and true friendship to him so to do, John 14.21, 23. and 15.14. Ye
are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Which says our Apostle, we
are to do till our Lord comes.

Object. 1. But we witness the Lord already come to us: therefore we are no
longer to be under the observation of it.

Answ. And thus some in the Apostles days, were wont to talk, that they had
experienced the Resurrection, 'twas to them past already; so endeavoring to
evert the great Doctrine of the Gospel, the Resurrection from the Dead. Against
whom he smartly disputes, 1 Cor. 15.

But in what sense it is, that any pretend, that Christ is already come, must
be a little considered.

1. He is come in Spirit, Power, say some. Answ. And so he was before the
writing of this Epistle: yea, before any one particular Church was gathered by
the Apostles. Never such a coming of Christ in Spirit and Power, as was that in
the day of Pentecost, Act. 2. Every believer, it is true, witnesses his coming
to him in Spirit, Power, Quickening; Raising him from the death of Sin, to the
life of Righteousness, Sanctifying, Cleansing him; which, whoever does not,
whatever his profession is, or by what name soever he is called, he is not a
Believer: but in this sense, he was already come to these Corinthians, before
Paul writ this Epistle to them. He ownes them for a Church of God, affirms
that they were Sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, that the grace
of God was given them by Christ Jesus; that in every thing they were enriched
by him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge, that the testimony of Christ
was confirmed in them; so that they came behind in no Spiritural gift; that
they were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5, 6,
7, 9. with much more that might be mentioned, evidently declaring, that Christ
was in Spirit, Power, already come to them; yet the Apostle speaks of another
coming, till which, the Saints are to be found in the practice of this
institution; which coming also, these Corinthians waited for, 1 Cor. 1.7.
Waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Object. 2. He is come already to some in person; say others, there is therefore
an end of this Institution, the whole Ministration.

Answ. But the coming of Christ in a corner, is not the coming the Apostle here
speaks of --. It Is an unscriptural, anti-scriptural notion (as has been
demonstrated); but that coming which the Corinthians, with all the Saints ever
since his departure, have been waiting for, viz. his Glorious, Visible coming
in the Clouds of Heaven, when every eye shall see him.

III. The same Apostle most solemnly charges his beloved Son Timothy, to keep
the Commandment without spot, to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy
6.13, 14. I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and
before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession,
that thou keep this Commandment without spot -- till the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ. What Is meant by Commandment? Answer, The words in the Greek are
(...), That you keep the Commandment. So the Ar. Sir. V.L. render it; His
Commandment, so the Aeth. reads it: (...), is put for (...), the Commandment,
for the Commandments; so Piscator renders it, Vt serves haec mandata, that thou
keep these Commandments, viz. the Commandments he had, as the Apostle of Jesus
Christ, communicated to Timothy from Christ. These Believers were to observe,
keep, till the appearing of Christ Jesus. If the words be strictly adhered to,
and there be no enallage of the number allowed, it comes to the same purpose.
For 'twill not I presume, be denied, that by Commandment we are not to
understand any Commandment given forth by Paul's private Spirit; but the
Commandment of Christ through him. Now of all Christ's Commandments, there is
the same reason, our reception, owning of, obedience to any one, is grounded
upon his Sovereign Authority: If I may reject one, I may reject all; and if I
am bound to attend to, obey one, I am bound to attend to, obey all. For it is
the same Lawgiver, that has given them all forth. Besides, the Apostle in
this Epistle, Chap. 5.21. charges him before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Elect Angels, that he observe the things delivered to him, without
preferring one before another: which seems to be the Commandment, he thus
solemnly charges him in the words under consideration, to keep without spot,
and unblameable to the coming of Christ. The plain meaning is, the Apostle
writes this Epstle to Timothy, on purpose to instruct him how to behave himself
in the Church of God, Chap. 3.15. He had given him sundry directions touching
the Officers to be chosen in the Church, Chap. 3. Speaks of the Apostasy from
the Doctrine, and Worship of the Gospel that should be in an after-day, Chap.
4. (of which also he had treated in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians,
Chap. 2.) would have him put the Brethren in remembrance of these things, Chap.
4.6. charges him to give attendance to the work of the Ministry, to which he
was called; to take heed to the Doctrine, relating to Faith, and Church Order,
which was delivered to him, Chap. 4.14, 16. which he calls that which was
committed to his trust, which he commands him to keep, Chap. 6.20. yea, to
command and teach to others, Chap. 4.10. And having charged him to observe all
these things without partiality, Chap. 5.21. he in this place most solemnly
commands him to keep that Commandment of his. The sum is, 1. Whatever the
Apostle had charged upon Timothy, relating to the Doctrine and Worship of the
Gospel; to the Church, and the Institutions thereof; he was not only to observe
himself, but to command others also to do so. 2. That these Orders,
Institutions, Ordinances, were to continue to the next Glorious Personal coming
of our Lord Jesus, and the Saints in their several Generations, are till then,
to be found in the conscientious observance, and practice of them; whence it
necessarily follows, that the Ministration introduced by Christ (which for the
most part consists in what we have but now instanced in) must continue till
that day.

IV. Our Apostle give us a farther, and most ample demonstration of the Truth
pleaded for, Heb. 1.1, 2. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke
in times past to the Fathers, has in these last days spoken unto us by his
Son. The last days, are the last days of the Judaick Church State, the whole
economy; all the Laws, Statutes, Orders, Institutions thereunto appertaining.
God has spoken -- i. e. God the Father has done so by his Son, in his
personal Ministry, when he tabernacled amongst men. The design of the Apostle
in the words under consideration it is obvious, is to give the
Gospel-Ministration a preferrence above all that went before it. And this he
does especially two ways.

1. The discoveries God made of his Will to the Fathers in times past, he made
by the Prophets: but the discovery of his Will in the Gospel-Ministration, is
by his Son. Now though it is true, the Prophets were worthy, excellent, glorious
ones; yet they were but (...), mere men; but (...) the Sons of Adam: The Son of
God, the Mediator of the New Covenant (by whom the Father spoke, when he dwelt
amongst us) is fair, fair above them all, Psalm. 45. Transcends them all in
Beauty, Excellency, Authority, Glory, as being (...), that Son, that
well-beloved Son of the Father in whom he was well pleased.

2. All the discoveries that were before, were but partial, gradual. He gave a
hint to Adam, to Noah; spoke more plainly to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Genesis 12.1,
2, 3, 4. Chap. 15.11, 12. and 17.1, 2. and 26.24. Chap. 49. Afterward to Moses
in giving the Law, and erection of the Judaick-Church; when there was such a
discovery of the mind of God, that looked like so perfect a model, that nothing
further was to be expected; yet he afterward spoke by David, the Prophets,
Ezra, etc. but now by his Son, he has made a perfect, and full discovery of
his Mind, and Will; so as nothing more, nothing new, nothing beyond it is to be
expected. That such a discovery should be made by him, was before Prophesied of
him, Dan. 9.24. Seventy Weeks are determined upon the People -- to finish the
transgression -- to seal up the Vision, and Prophecy, and to anoint the most
Holy. That it is a Prophecy of Christ, is generally acknowledged by both
Christians, and Jews. Nachmanides tells us (...), this Holy of Holies (or the
most Holy, as we translate) is the Messiah, who is sanctified from amongst the
Sons of David. The work he was to do when he came in the World, is amply
decypher'd, viz. to Finish transgression, to make an end of Sins, to make
reconciliation for iniquities, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, and
to seal up the Vision, and Prophecy. This last is, what we are at present
concerned to take notice of. Two things must be enquired into.

1. What Is meant by Vision, and Prophecy.

2. In what sense the (...) the Holy of Holyes, or the Holiness of Holinesses,
the Messiah, CHRIST, sealed up the Vision, and Prophecy.

1. Touching the first, by Vision and Prophecy, we are to understand, all the
ways of discovery of the mind and Will of God, he was pleased to make use of
for the instruction of the Judaick-Church therein.

2. As to the second, Christ sealed the Vision and Prophecy, by finishing,
perfecting it, so as no more was, or needed to be added thereunto, as to the
making the discovery of the Fathers will complete. So the Word (...) Chatham
(translated seal) signifies, Ezekiel. 28, 12. Thou sealest up the Sum: Vatablus,
and the Tigurine render it, Tues omnibus numeris absolutum exemplar; Thou art
in all respects a perfect example. And to the same purpose, Castalion. The
Syriack renders it, by a word that signifies as to Seal, so to complete, make
perfect; and the Arabic, by a word, that signifies to make an end of speaking.
When a man has writ the whole of his mind he intends to communicate in his
letter, he seals it up. The meaning is, God had diverse ways, and manners, in
days past, revealed his Will to the Church; at last he sent his Son, as the
great and last Prophet, who fully, perfectly discovers his mind to her; so that
a further Instruction there needs not, nor is there to be expected. But,

V. There Is no ground left for any New-Ministration, or any Alteration in that
set on foot by Christ. The reasons of the alteration of the
Old-Testament-Ministration, with the Institutions, Ordinances thereunto
appertaining, may be reduced to a twofold-head.

1. They all pointed at, had respect to the Messiah, Christ, to come, Romans
10.4. Christ is the end of the Law. This the Apostle asserts to be the ground
of its abolition, Heb. 10.1, 9.

2. Christ was to come during its continuance, as Lord over his own House, with
more ample Power, and Authority than any that went before him, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3.
and 3.5, 6. He had then Power, Authority, to confirm, remove, abolish as he
pleased; and none could say unto him in this matter, What do thou? But
neither of these can be supposed as the ground of altering, discontinuing the
Ministration set on foot by Christ. He was then already come, tabernacled among
men: and come he was, as the great Prophet, Lord, King, of the Church; and as
such, gives forth Laws for them to subject, conform to.

VI. The Gospel-Ministration, Institutions, must continue, except a greater
than Christ come. The Law was given forth by Moses, it continued thousands of
Years; and notwithstanding the degeneracy, corruption that was amongst the
People, none could put a period to it; the Church was bound to the observation
of it, to the coming of Christ, Mal. 4.4. with Deuteronomy. 34.10. and that upon this
foot of account; because till Christ, none rose up greater than he. Therefore
Paul going about to demonstrate to the Jews the abolition of the Mosaic
Ministration, lays the Foundation of his discourse in the super-eminent
Authority of the Lord Jesus. It Is true, the Law was most solemnly given forth
by the Ministration of Angels in the hands of Moses, but Christ is above
Angels, Heb. 1.4. and 2.2. above Moses, chap. 3.3. Is there any greater,
superior to Christ? If not (as most certain it is there is not; to assert it,
is the height of Antichristianism, it is blasphemy against the Son) then the
Ministration instituted by him, must of necessity continue till he come to put
a period to it. For it must be a greater, and superior, that can abolish or
alter what is established.

CHAP. VI.
The end for which Christ Instituted the Gospel-Church-state, Churches,
Ordinances, the same; and will continue so to the time of the consummation of
all things. The particular ends instanced in. Sanctifying the Name of the Lord
in Worship, what it is. A solemn, public, avowed, owning, subjection to
Christ, setting forth the Lords honor, publishing his praises. Ephesians. 3.21.
Explained. Saints mutual edification, growth. The confirmation of their mutual
Love to each other. Are some of the ends for which Christ instituted
Gospel-Churches, Ordinances, demonstrated.

Demonstration. VI.
THE end for which, the Lord Jesus established the Gospel-Church-state,
Gospel-Churches, Institutions, Ordinances, is the same that ever 'twas, and
will continue so to be till the time of the consummation of all things. Whence
its continuation necessarily follows. Let Us a little consider what were the
ends for which God from the beginning, instituted a Church State in the World.
Amongst others that perhaps might be mentioned, these are the chief.

I. The Sanctification of his name therein, Lev. 10.3. This is that which the
Lord has said, I will be Sanctified in all those that draw nigh to me --. It Is
of the solemn Worship of God in that Church State he is there speaking: In
particular, touching that Institution of sacrificeing to the Lord. The
sanctification of his name therein, is asserted to be one great end of the Lord
in that institution: a failure wherein cost Nadab, and Abihu dear; they thereby
provoked the Lord, and he brake forth in his fury against them, and slew them
before the People. This also is asserted to be the end of the
Gospel-Church-state, Gospel-Institutions, Heb. 12.28, 29. Wherefore we
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us have grace whereby we may
serve God, acceptably with REVERENCE, and GODLY FEAR, for our God is a
consuming Fire. By the Kingdom which cannot be shaken, we have already
demonstrated, is meant the Gospel-Church-state, therein they were to serve God
acceptably, with reverence, and Godly fear, i. e. they were to sanctify his
name in their attendment on him in the Institutions appertaining thereunto;
which if they neglect to do, they may expect to find the Lord, as Nadab, and
Abihu did, a consuming fire to them. Before we come to a full Conclusion of
this matter, 'twill not be altogether impertinent or unprofitable to remark
what it is to sanctify the Name of the Lord in Solemn-Gospel-Worship. In order
whereunto there must be,

1. A single respect to, a Holy reverence of God's Sovereign Authority in its
appointment. The Laws, Edicts of men, have no place here. Should we be found in
the practice of what God commands, and therein have no regard to his
Commandment, Authority; but the Commandments, Injunctions of men, we sanctify
not his name therein. The Authority of God instituting it, is laid as the
Foundation of, and motive to all our Worship, Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5, 6, 7. and 28.58.
Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Heb. 3.4, 5, 6. What Is bottomed merely upon the wills, laws
of men, is not the Worship of God; it is Superstitious, Idolatrous, Vain, Empty,
good for nothing; that which the Soul of the Lord loathes, abhors; it provokes
him to Jealousy, whatever outward splendor, beauty, show of Devotion it may
seem to have in it. How great a part of the Worship of the Papacy is hereby
discarded, is known: It being solely built upon the Authority of Popes,
Councils, Fathers, Traditions, Laws, Edicts of Men; totally foreign, contrary
to Jehovah's Law.

2. There must be also Faith in the Promises of God annexed to the observance
of these Institutions. That there are special promises of Favor, Grace,
Kindness to such as Conscientiously attend upon him herein, shall afterward be
demonstrated. Faith is required with respect to these Promises: He that comes
unto God (draws nigh to him in Gospel-Institutions) must believe that he is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Heb. 11.6.

3. There must be a Holy, Awful regard unto his special Presence in them. He
walks in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.13. dwells in his
Churches, 2 Cor. 6.16. It Is true, he fills Heaven, and Earth, with his
presence, is indistant to no creature, the vilest of Men, or Devils; but he
has promised a more special Presence with his Children, as they are attending
him in his own appointments, for their further enlightening, quickening, comfort,
strengthening, growth, increasment in the Grace of God, Mat. 18.20. If persons
attend on Divine Institutions, and realize not the special presence of the Lord
there; no wonder if they are carnal, formal, dead, lifeless in them, meet with
no feeling of his Power, sights of his Glory --.

4. There must be an attendment to the due order, in which the Lord will have
all managed. A failure herein, caused the Lord of old to make a breach upon
Vzzah (he smote him, slew him, when they were about to bring the Ark from
Kirjath-jearim, 1 Chronicles. 13.11.) 1 Chronicles. 15.13. The Lord our God made a breach
upon us for that we sought him not after the due Order. All must be managed in
the Spirit, Power, of Jehovah: he is put into office by the Father, and the Son,
to enable in the managery of Divine Service, Romans 8.26. Alas! sorry weak man,
is altogether unable for the dispatch of such sublime, Heavenly Work. Let men
at their utmost peril, contemn, deride the assistance of the Spirit herein;
they never worship God aright, who are strangers to it, nor without it will
ever be able to please him in what they do.

5. There must be also a holy delight in God: the lively stirring up,
exertings, puttings forth of the grace of God in us. It Is not so easy a matter
for persons to sanctify the Name of God in Worship, as many suppose it to be.
We cannot of our selves, in our own creaturely power, serve him who is a
jealous God.

6. There must be a perseverance, continuance, unto the end, in obedience to
him, in a due observation of, and subjection to him, in Gospel-Institutions:
otherwise we deny his name, profane it (as much as in us lies, make Religion,
Christianity, a ridicule, contempt in the World) instead of Sanctifying it. Are
any of these things vacated, not to be heeded, attended to? Who that pretends
in sobriety to Christianity, has the forehead to avouch, affirm it?

II. Another end of Gospel-Institutions is, Our solemn, public, avowed, owning
of, subjection to the Lord Jesus. 'Twas from the beginning, one end of God, in
his erecting of Worship, that his People might therein, solemnly own, avouch,
him to be their God, Lord, Sovereign; and they his Loyal Subjects, faithful
Servants, Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17, 18. This day the Lord thy God has commanded thee to
do these Statutes, and Judgments: Thou shall therefore keep, and do them, with
all thy heart, and all thy soul. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy
God, and to walk in his Ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments,
and his Judgments, and to harken unto his Voice. And the Lord has avouched
thee this day, to be his peculiar People as he has promised thee, and that
thou should keep all his Commandments. If we will have God for our God,
visibly own him as such, we must conform to his Institutions; our public
acknowledgment of him, as such, lies therein. The World know nothing of the
Saints actings of Faith, Love, the secret communion they have with GOD: nor do
they, can they take much notice of them as to their Closet, Family-Service: but
when found in the practice of the Institutions of the Lord, then are they in
the view of men, publicly declaring that God's their God, and they his People,
Josh. 24.18, 21, 22. is to the same purpose, 2 Cor. 8.5. First gave their own
selves to the Lord, i. e. chose him for their God, resigned up themselves, all
that they were, and had, wholly to the Lord to be at his dispose: And unto us
by the Will of God; i. e. they solemnly avouched, publicly owned, declared
this God to be theirs, by their entering into the fellowship of the Gospel,
walking in the ways of his appointment, owning, subjecting to, the Ordinances
of Jesus declared to them by us. Nor can there be a full owning of the Lord (to
speak modestly) without a conscientious walking herein: neither will the Lord
look upon ought we do, whilst in the wilful neglect of his Institutions to be
such an owning of him. He will be acknowledged to be our God, not in the way of
our own wills, but in the ways he has appointed us so to do. The sole
question is (and yet one would wonder it should be a question amongst any that
profess the fear of the Lord) Whether it be the duty of Saints publicly to
own, acknowledge him to be their GOD? Which if granted, it cannot be denied,
but the Gospel-Church-state, with the Institutions thereunto belonging, is yet
in being; and must be so, whilst there are any Saints in this World, whose
duty it is so to own him: for one end aimed at by the Lord Jesus in the
establishment of these Institutions, was, (as has been proved) that Saints
should solemnly own, acknowledge him therein.

III. A third end of this Gospel-Church-state, is to set forth the Lords
honor, publish his praises, Ephesians. 3.21. Unto him be glory in the Churches by
Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without end, Amen.

Two things are here plainly asserted by the Apostle.

1. That there shall be a continuation of Churches thoughout all ages, World
without end: and of such Churches, both for Matter, and Form, (at least) as
were in the Apostles days; walking with Christ in all the ways of his
appointment. One would wonder at the confidence of persons, who have the
forehead to assert the cessation of Churches, Ordinances, in open opposition to
what is affirmed here by the Apostle of our Lord: who speaks so fully, plainly,
to their continuation, 'till the end of the World, that all the wit of man
cannot possibly find out any evasion. Had he said only, They should continue,
(...), to, or throughout Generations, or Ages, 'twould have been said, true;
but when the Apostles fell asleep, and a second Generation also was past, a
general apostasy came in, and there was a period of the Church State: To
obviate which cavil, he industriously (as 'twere) affirms their continuance
(...) into all, or throughout all Generations, or Ages: and as if that were not
full enough to express his intendment of their continuance till time should be
no more; he adds, that they should be (...), throughout all Ages of the World,
of Worlds, or Age of Ages. The Apostles seems to allude to two Hebrew Phrases,
(...) Psalm. 10.6. I shall never be in Adversity; the word is, unto Generation,
and Generation: And that Isa. 45.17. (...) Ye shall not be ashamed, nor
confounded, World without end. Their continuance till the end of this World, is
evidently what is his intendment.

2. That one end of the Institution of these Churches, is, that God may be
praised in them, by them, is also asserted. Is this end terminated? Is it not
the duty of Saints to praise the Lord; and to praise him in the ways he has
appointed? If he has instituted Churches for this end; it is the duty of Saints
to praise him in them. If for this end he has Appointed their continuance
throughout all Ages, they must of necessity so continue, or God fails of his
end, which is abominable Blasphemous to assert. See to the same purpose, Heb.
2.12. 1 Pet. 2.9.

IV. Another end of the Gospel-Church-state, is Saints mutual Edification,
Growth, till they all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of GOD, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, 1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done to edifying, Ephesians. 4.11,
12, 13, 29. 1 These. 5.11. Jude 20. Have Saints no further need of edification,
building up? Are they come to a Perfect man, unto the measure of the Stature of
the fullness of Christ? Who dare aver it? Can there be a more proper medium,
way, or means, fixed upon, for the effecting this noble, and glorious end, than
what the Lord proposed, viz. their walking together in the fellowship of the
Gospel, in the practice of all the Institutions of Christ? What ever persons
may think, as none can desert the way Appointed by the Lord, for the production
of this end, without a tremendous advance against the Wisdom of God, his Love
to, and Care of his Children; so they will find, any other fixed upon by them, will
prove altogether insuccessful as to the end aimed at.

V. The confirmation of the Saints mutual love one to another, is also
frequently asserted to be one great end of this Appointment, Ephesians. 5.2. 1 These.
3.12. 1 John 3.22. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. It Is certainly our duty to keep this
Commandment of our Lord, yea, to abound in love more and more each to other:
The means then appointed by the Lord for that end, must Conscientiously be
atended to.

CHAP. VII.
The Gospel-Church-State, with the Institutions, Ordinances thereunto
appertaining, is annexed unto, and bottomed upon the New Covenant: Demonstrated
from Scripture-Prophesie, Isa. 59.21. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. and 36.25, 26, 27. at
large explained. From several places in the New Testament; wherein it is clearly
asserted so to be, Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Heb. 10.16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Considered. That they belong not to the Old
Covenant, proved. The donation of the Spirit, Faith, Peace, Joy, etc. From the
New Covenant: these Communicated, as we are found attending on the Lord in
Gospel-Institutions. These are given forth to the Saints for the trial of their
Love, Loyalty, as they stand related, are betrothed to him in the New Covenant,
Jer. 3.14, 15. Explained.

Demonstration. VII.
THE Gospel-Church-state, with the Institutions, Ordinances thereunto
appertaining, is annexed unto, bottomed upon the New Covenant: Therefore it is
perpetual, abiding. The consequence is evident; what is annexed to, bottomed
upon, that which is permanent, cannot be it self otherwise: it must abide,
continue, as that to which it is affixt, on which it is bottomed does. The whole
Judaick-Church-State, with all its Ordinances, Institutions, was built upon
that Covenant God of Old, took Israel into, Heb. 9.1. This Covenant was
mutable, changeble; a time was fixed by the Lord for it is abolition: Represented
at first in the breaking of the Tables of Stone, in which the Law, or Covenant
was writ, Exodus 32.19. Yet so long as that abode, the Institutions thereunto
appertaining were in force; therefore the Apostle, being to prove the cessation
of the Jewish-Church-state, amongst other mediums, makes use of this as one,
that the Covenant God took that people into, was perioded, abolished, Heb. 8.6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 13. So then, if the Gospel-Church-state, Ordinances, are annexed to
the New Covenant; they are, cannot but be, permanent: except that Covenant also
be supposed, and can be proved to be otherwise. That the Gospel-Church-state,
and all the Ordinances thereof, are annexed to, and bottomed upon the
New Covenant, is evident from

1. Scripture-Prophesie, declaring that so it shall be, Isa. 59.21. As for me,
this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and
My Words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth; nor
out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed's Seed, says
the Lord; from henceforth, and for ever. It Is the Covenant that God takes
believers into, the Gospel Covenant that he speaks of: This is my Covenant with
them; these are called: Christ's Seed. So Chap. 53.10. Concerning them, he
says, that the words which he puts into the mouth of Christ, i. e. whatever he
gave Christ (as the great Prophet of the Church) in charge to communicate to
them; all the Laws, Institutions given forth by Christ, were part of Gods words
he put into his mouth. Shall not depart out of their mouths, i. e. they shall
be found in the practice of, subjecting to them; whilst there are any Saints in
this World, they shall be so. And this as a branch, part of that Covenant God
takes them into, Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. And I will give them one heart, and I will
put a new Spirit within you, and I will take the stony-heart out of their
flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh: that they may walk in my Statutes,
and keep mine Ordinances, and do them; and they shall be My People, and I will
be their GOD. The former part of the words, I will give them one heart -- and
the latter, they shall be my People, and I will be their GOD; are the sum, and
substance of the New Covenant, Jer. 32.29. Unto this then the Statutes, and
Ordinances do evidently appertain: for the Lord takes them to be his People,
gives himself to them to be their GOD; gives them one heart, puts a new Spirit
within them -- that they may walk in his Statutes, keep his Ordinances, and do
them. If there be any Saints under the New Covenant, if a new Spirit be put
within them, then are there also Statutes and Ordinances (Gospel-Institutions)
for them to walk in; and in their doing so, they discover themselves to be Gods
People, as he is their God, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. is fully to the same purpose:
Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthyness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you: A new Heart also will I
give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the
Stony-heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. And I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to Walk in in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my Judgments to do them. If the donation of the Spirit,
Regeneration, Sanctification, be a part, branch, of the New Covenant; the
Statutes, and Judgments of the LORD are so too: and these, such a part of it,
that there is at least ground of Jealousy, whether any are really made
partakers of the former, who are found (except under the power of temptation)
in the total neglect, rejection of these: for the Spirit, etc. is given to
cause them to Walk in Gods Statutes, and to keep his Judgments. And it is worthy
observation, that God has equally obliged himself to cause his People to walk
in the ways of his Institution, as to give the Spirit, etc. to them. So that
evidently, there must be a continuation of Churches, Ordinances; or there are
no Saints, there is an end of the New Covenant.

2. And as it is fore-prophesied of that, in the days of the
New-Covenant-oeconomy thus it should be; so it is evidently declared, that upon
the Introduction of that Ministration, so it was: Gospel-Institutions, and
Ordinances, are plainly asserted to be annexed to the New Covenant. Christ
himself intimates, as much, Luke 22.19, 20. And he took Bread, and gave Thanks,
and break it; and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body which was given for
you: This do in remembrance of me: likewise also the Cup after Supper, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you. As
circumcision was called the Covenant (as upon other acounts, so) because, 'twas
a part, or branch of it: so is this institution of Christ, called the
New Testament; because a part, or branch thereof. And if it be Objected, That
this is only asserted of the Cup, one part of one institution, not of the
whole; much less of all Gospel-Institutions: The Answer is easy; what is
asserted of any one part, is true of the whole; and if the Cup be the
New Testament, the Bread is so; and if one institution be so, every one is so
too. At the same rate the Apostle speaks after he had seen the Lord, and
conversed with him, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. And most evidently, fully, Heb.
10.16, to 26. where he tells us, that our drawing nigh ( viz. to God in ways
of Gospel-Institutions, the profession of our Faith (which lies eminently in
our subjection to him therein) the assembling our selves together, to exhort
one another (which he would not have us forget) is annexed to, bottomed upon the
New Covenant, of which he is ex professo treating: And a wilful rejection of
these in open despite of Christ, and contempt of his Authority, he calls, v.
29. A treading under foot the Son of God, because it is a high affront to his
Sovereign Authority) an accounting the Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing
(not only because these Institutions are annexed to that Covenant which was
ratified by the blood of Christ; but also because they have all their
Foundation in that Blood, our approximation to God in them, our advantage by
them, is the issue of its effusion) and a doing despite unto the Spirit of
Grace; because as has been proved, they are all the Ministration of that
Spirit: should God immediately by himself speak from Heaven to us, and declare
in so many words, These Gospel-Institutions established by My Son, are all of
them bottomed upon, annexed to the New Covenant; we could not have a greater
certainty that they are so, than what is in that Scripture-evidence we have
hitherto been discoursing of. But,

3. They belong to the Old-Covenant, or the New. There Is no medium. To the
Old-Covenant, it is most* certain they appertain not. Other manner of
Ordinances, which were only to continue to the Gospel-day, as Circumcision,
Sacrifices -- appertained thereunto: not the least notice under that Covenant,
as any part of the economy thereof, of particular Churches, Baptism,
Breaking-Bread -- Christ came to put a Period to that Paedagogie; and all the
Laws, Institutions thereunto appertaining; and vertually did so by his Death;
actually, by providential dispensations; taking out of the way, destroying that
Temple to which they were peculiarly affixt. And becoming a Mediator of a
better Covenant, established upon better Promises, as such, he gives forth the
Laws, and Institutions we are pleading for; of which afterward.

4. The Communications of Divine Life, the Royal manifestations of the Love of
GOD to us; the bestowment of the Spirit upon us; Divine peace, comfort,
support, upholdment, with whatever Grace we are made partakers of, are all
conveyed in the way of the New Covenant. Now, whatever any talk, the
communication of these, as it is promised to us, as we have found attending upon
the Lord in his own Institutions (of which more anon); so the Saints, in every
day, at this day, through wonderful riches of Grace, are under the enjoyment
of. The Spirit is received, Faith communicated, Peace, and Joy shed abroad upon
the hearts of Believers, as they conscientiously attend on these appointments
of Christ. Such as know not these things, or having known them (through the
power of temptation) slight, undervalue them, are to be pitied, not attended
to, or regarded in their present apprehensions touching them.

5. That God has a people, that he has in the New, and everlasting Covenant
taken unto himself, for a peculiar People, will not be denied. To these God
gives himself as their GOD; he betroths, marries them to himself; and they give
up themselves spontaneously unto him as a People, to own, subject to his
Authority, Sovereignty, and to profess their so doing by a conformity to
whatever Commands, Injunctions, he shall lay upon them. Gospel-Institutions he
gives forth for the trial of their Love, Loyalty to him; charges them to be
found in the practice of them (as has been proved). Their obedience,
subjection hereunto, he looks upon as a great part of their Loyalty to him in
the Conjugal-Covenant he has taken them into with himself, Jer. 3.14, 15. Turn
O backsliding Children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you, and I will
take you one of a City, and two of a Family, and I will bring you to Zion. And
I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge, and understanding. Where coming unto Zion, or our attendment on God
in ways of his own Appointment, is asserted to be that wherein our
Marriage-relation to him stands: Hence departing from these, is called
Whoredom, Adultery; and those that do so, The great Whore, the Mother of
Harlots, and fornications of the Earth. The sum is, Gospel-Churches,
Institutions, are bottomed upon the New Covenant: therefore abiding.

CHAP. VIII.
The Churches that have been, are, are the Churches of Christ, or Antichrist.
They are not the Churches of Antichrist, proved. The matter of
Antichristian-Churches; and of the present Churches: The Form, Foundation,
Doctrine, Worship, Nature, Characters, Properties, of the one, and the other,
considered. 1 Timothy 4.1. The Demons there mentioned, what they are; Their
Original, Office, manner of Worshipping them; the Doctrines of Daemon's the
Doctrine of the Apostatick-Synagogue of Rome.

Demonstration. VIII.
THat there have been persons under the profession of the Name of Christ,
congregated together, for the solemnization of Ordinances, from the first-times
of the Gospel hitherto, has been before proved: That there are so still,
cannot be denied. Now these Churches must be either the Churches of Christ, or
the Churches of Antichrist. There Is no medium. A Church that was neither of
Christ, nor Antichrist, was never yet heard of in the world, since the
first-dawning of the Gospel-day. So then, if we demonstrate, that the present
Churches are not Antichristian-churches, we evince them to be the Churches of
Christ; and a continuation of the Gospel-Church-State, at least hitherto, is
evidently discovered. That they are not Churches of Antichrist is easily
demonstrated. They wholly differ from the Antichristian-Church in respect of
matter, form, foundation, doctrine, worship, nature, characters, properties.
Touchching which, it is needful that we particularly discourse.

First then, the Matter of the Antichristian-church, is, whoever own's the
Christian Faith, make's a Profession of it, though never so deboysh, vile,
wicked; to every good work, reprobate. Notwithstanding all their pompous shows
of Religion, Forms of Godliness, they are really such as have pleasure in
Unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.12. Is this the matter constitutive of the present
Churches? Do they admit persons of so black a character into their Communion?
If any such spots are found amongst them, do they tolerate, indulge them? Are
not the rules of Christ prosecuted, till they (appearing to be persons of a
reprobate mind) are rejected out of their fellowship? Is it not the avowed
principles of all the Churches, that such as these, are not fit matter for any
Church of Christ? Can they be charged with walking contrary to their principles
in this matter? Who has the confidence, impudence, thus to charge any one of
them? It Is true, now, and then, some scandalous persons are found amongst them
(and so there were in the Primitive Churches, as in the Church of Corinth,
etc.) that crept in unawares; but they are matter of grief, humbling to them;
and they do not, dare not, cannot suffer them in their Communion.

2. The Form (if it may be so called) of the Antichristian-Church lie's in a
forcible compelling persons into, and violent keeping them in its communion,
and fellowship. If you will not be one with them, then Fines, Imprisonment, Bonds
attend you; Penal Laws, and Statutes are Enacted for this end; and by these are
men brought into, and kept in the Antichristian-church: And were these weapons
of* its warfare taken away, 'twould soon become as a garden of Cucumbers, or
perish with its own weight. The attempts of the Papacy, to reduce persons into
their Communion, by Fire, and Sword; their labors to preserve the Uninity of
their Church this way is known. Is there any thing like it owned by, or to be
found, amongst the present Churches? Do they not with one mouth affirm, that
it is a voluntary departure from the worlds way, and a spontaneous giving up
themselves to the Lord, and one another, to walk with him in a subjection to
his institutions, wherein the form of the Churches lies? Herein is a most
Evident difference betwixt Them, and the Antichristian-Church. They talk of no
compulsions, but those of the Spirit, and Love, that make a people Volunteers
in the day of the Lord's Power. Lex nova non se vindicat ultore gladio, is
their Motto, as is known.

3. The Foundation of the Antichristian-Church, is not Jesus Christ; but the
Sons of men, one, or other of them; their Laws, Canons, Decretals, upon which
it is built. Is this the case of the present Churches? Do they not all of them,
with full consent, proclaim their abhorrency of such a Foundation? Is not
CHRIST, in their account, the alone Foundation of all the True Churches in the
world, and they practice accordingly. Their debates touching this matter, with
the Papelins, about Mat. 16.18. from whence these endeavor to prove Peter, and
consequentially (as they would have it) the Pope to be the Rock upon which the
Church is built; is known to all that look upon themselves concerned in these
matters.

4. The Doctrine of the Anti-christian-Church, is a Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy
4.1. (...), the doctrines of Demons, so the learned Mede renders it. Some
carry it thus, doctrines which devils are the Authors of: There Is a great deal
of truth in that, all the doctrines of the Anti-christian-church, that are
peculiarly hers, are the doctrines of Devils. But I rather think, with that
learned person, that by doctrines of Demons, is meant those doctrines that
have the Demons for their Object. Now these Demons (that were worshipped by
the Pagans) were 1. For their nature, and degree, supposed by the Gentiles, an
inferior, and middle sort of divine powers, between the sovereign and heavenly
Gods, and mortal Men. 2. For their Office, to be as mediators, and agents
between these sovereign Gods, and Men. 3. For their original, either Angels, or
the Deified-souls of Worthy-men after death. 4. For the way of Worshipping
them, to find and receive benefits from them; 'twas by Consecrated-Images, and
Pillars. 5. Their very Relics were adored, and brought into Temples. They
that desire to see more touching this matter, may at their leisure, consult the
famous Medes Apostasy of the latter times. The Doctrines of Demons then, are
the Doctrines of the Apostatick Roman-Antichristian-Synagogue, touching the
worshipping of Saints, and Angels, in imitation of the Pagan - Demon -
Worship* But take the words in the largest Sense, as comprehensive of all those
Doctrines that are not of Christ, have the devil for their Author: Some
whereof, are mentioned by the Apostle afterward, v. 3. Forbidding to Marry,
and commanding to abstain from Meats -- the Doctrines of Justification by
Works, or inherent Sanctification, of Purgatory (or a state of Purifying after
this life) -- any Principles, Opinions, contrary to sound Doctrine; the form of
wholesome words, or the Doctrine which is according to Godliness; which of the
Churches can be justly charged with holding, maintaining any such Principles?
It Is true, perhaps amongst some of them, there may be found one, or other, that
speak perverse things (as there was of old in the Church of Corinth, and some
other Churches, in the Apostolic times) but are they countenanc't therein? Can
their corrupt Doctrines be charged as the Doctrines of the Churches? What more
evidently, notoriously false, can be suggested, or fixed on?

5. The Worship of the Antichristian-Church, is a Worship of devils, idols of
gold, silver, wood, stone, the work of men's hands, Rev. 9.20. It Is an
idolatrous, whorish, adulterous, superstitious Worship, Rev. 17.1, 2, 4, 5.
whose whole substratum, foundation, is the Commandments of men; ( Mat. 15.9.)
Traditions, etc. It Is formal, sapless, lifeless. It Is managery in the Spirit,
is not at all attended to: His Assistance is contemned, reviled, blasphemed; as
that which is fantastic, whimsical, heretical, schismatical for any to talk
of, or pretend to. Is the Worship of the Churches, such a Worship? Who has the
forehead to aver it? They witness against all such Worship, and Worshipper's,
both in Word, and Writing, as is known: Are studious to walk by Scripture-rule
in their Worship, both with respect to the matter, and manner, thereof.

6. The nature, characters, properties of the Antichristian-Church, are amply
described by the Apostles of our Lord. They are such as receive not the love of
the Truth, that they might be saved; upon whom God has sent strong delusions,
that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned, who believed not
the Truth, but had pleasure in Unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. That give
heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Demons, speaking lies in
hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. covetous,
boasters of themselves, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents; unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection; truce breakers, false Accusers, (or
make-bates) incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good: traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures* more than lovers of God; having a form
of Godliness, but denying the power thereof -- 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Such as
Worship the Dragon gave power unto the Beast, and Worship the Beast, Rev. 13.4,
5, 8. Receiving his mark (in their right hand, or in their foreheads) his Name,
or the number of his Name (which whosoever did not) might neither buy, nor
sell, v. 16, 17. The great Whore that sits upon many waters, with whom the
Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, and the Inhabiters of the Earth
have been made drunk with the wine of her Fornication* A Woman sitting upon a
scarlet-colour'd Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads, and ten
Horns. The Woman arrayed in Purple, and scarlet color, and decked with Gold,
and precious Stone, and Pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of
Abominations, and filthiness of her Fornication; upon whose forhead is a Name
written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of
the Earth: The Woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the Blood
of the Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In whom (in the great
Inquisition that God will make) will be found the blood of Prophets, and of
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth, Rev. 18.24. In a word, the
Antichristian-church is that part of the body of professors that the great
Antichristian-Apostasy spoken of, by these Apostles, gather's up; who is
described, charactered, by her false Doctrine, idolatrous, superstitious
Worship, (of which before) immorality in conversation, persecution, bloody
cruelty against the Royal Seed, the Saints of the most high. Who so seared,
hardened in heart, and conscience, as without a blush, from a soul filled with
deep consternation, can bear the sight of a thought springing up to affix the
characters of this Antichristian-church, unto the present Churches? So then,
these being in respect of Matter, Form, Foundation, Doctrine, Worship, Nature,
Characters, perfectly different from the Antichristian-church, must of
necessity be the Churches of CHRIST (and accounted so by all, who are not
resolved against the plainest Demonstrations, to hold their persuasion with a
nunquam persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris) except some Hermaphrodyte-Church, that
is neither of Christ, or Antichrist, can be found out.

CHAP. IX.
The Church State, Gospel-Institutions, are bottomed upon the Mediatory Office
of Christ. Their continuation from thence dedemonstrated. Of Christ's
Prophetic, Priestly, Kingly-Office. Christ as the great Prophet of the Church,
has revealed the Gospel-Church-state, with the Institutions, and Ordinances.
Christ called an Apostle, and why. Said to be sent by the Father: Such a
Prophet as never was in the World before; nor has there, or shall there be,
any like him. What of the Father he revealed. The continuation of
Gospel-Churches evinced from hence. Of the Priestly-Office of Christ,
Gospel-Churches, Institutions, bottomed upon it, at large demonstrated. Of the
Kingly-Office of Christ. Gospel-Churches bottomed thereupon.

Demonstration. IX.
THe Church State, Gospel-Churches, Institutions are bottomed upon the
Mediatory Office of Christ; from whence a continuation of them till his next,
second, glorious coming does necessarily follow. To Christ, as Mediator, a
threefold-Office (whereinto by Solemn Unction he was inaugurated by the Father)
does appertain, viz. Prophetic, Priestly, Kingly: Arguments from each of
these, might at large be insisted on, to demonstrate the truth we are at
present contending for.

I. That Christ is the great Prophet of the Church, will not be denied, Deuteronomy.
18.18. Act. 3.22. and 7.37. As a Prophet, he is fully acquainted with the Will
of God, and has perfectly Revealed it to the Church; both in respect of
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline. The truth is, his whole work, as a Prophet,
is to reveal the Will of God, and therein to Teach, and Instruct us. He is also
called, The Apostle of our Profession, Heb. 3.1. The Prophetick-Office of
Christ, with respect unto his immediate, Authoritative, Mission from the
Father, is that which is intended by the expression. He is said frequently, to
be sent by the Father, Isa. 19.20. and 48.16. and 61.1. Zach. 2.8, 9. He whom
the Father sent, is the description he gives of himself, Joh. 3.34. which is
frequently repeated, John 3.17, 18, 28, 34. and 5.23, 24, 30, 36, 37, 38. and
6.29, 38, 39, 40, 44, 57. and 7.16, 28, 29. and 8.16, 18, 29, 42. and 9.4. and
10.36. and 11.42. and 12.44, 45, 49. and 13.26. and 14.24. and 15.21. and 16.5.
and 17.3, 18, 21, 23, 25. and 20.21. A Prophet he is, and such a Prophet as
never was in the World before; nor any other like him, was there to be; and as
a Prophet he reveals the Father himself, John 1.18. And his Name, Chap. 13.6.
and 17.3. i. e. the mystery of the Covenant of the Grace of GOD, his Love,
Kindness to the Sons of Men; his Worship, whole will, respecting our Obedience,
and Salvation. And for this work, he was sent from the Father; had his
Authority from him, and furnitures through the Spirit (poured out upon him
without measure) for the dispatch of it. So that, he that hears Christ, hears
the Father; and he that refuses Christ, refuses the Father also: because he
acts in his Name, Authority, in this his Office. That from hence, the
continuation of Gospel-Churches, Institutions, must necessarily follow, is
evident. For,

1. Christ, as the great Prophet of the Church, has declared these to be one
part of his Fathers Will, that (as such) he was to Reveal (as has been
proved). That at any time it should be lawful for us, to oppose the Will of the
Lord, thus solemnly revealed, none will sure have the confidence, to affirm.

2. The Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 1. and chap. 2. makes Christ's coming, as
the great Prophet of God, one argument of the abolition of the whole Mosaic
Paedagogy, and the introduction of those Gospel-Institutions they were in the
practice of. God that spoke in the Prophets, has spoken in his Son, q. d. You
expected a Prophet (for so they did) who should bring in a New-Ministration,
reveal the whole will of the Father to you; this is He, he is the Apostle sent
from him for this end: attend him, consider him, Heb. 3.1. Now certainly if the
Apostle looked upon this as a good argument for the same (at least one of the
same) ends for which it is produced by us, 'twill be immodesty for any to look
upon it, as impertinent, incogent.

3. Christ as the great Prophet, when he Tabernacled in the World, revealed
this State, the Laws, Institutions relating to it: Had we lived in the time
when, and been one of those to whom he had communicated them, ought we to have
believed, obeyed, subjected to them? Sure! 'Twill not be denied, but we ought.
Are not the same Laws, delivered to the Apostles, recorded in the Scriptures?
This will not be opposed. What then? Have the Laws of CHRIST, by their being
written, lost their Authority? This will not (I am sure it cannot with any
pretext of Reason) be said. It remains therefore, that Churches, with the
Worship affixt to them, being once of the discovery of CHRIST, must still
continue so to be; and our practice suitable to that discovery, necessitate
precepti, necessary.

4. Is there any greater Prophet than Christ risen up? Does he come in his
Fathers, or in his own Name; What Is his message that he brings? Is he upon a
new discovery of the Fathers will, pouring contempt upon what has been
Revealed by Christ? Every spiritual believer knows what reception he ought to
have with him, viz. neither he, nor his Message to be received, but rejected,
as an impostor, a lie, 2 John 10.11.

5. Has Christ ceased to be a Prophet, Since he was signally inaugurated into
that Office by the visible descent of the holy Spirit upon him in the form of a
Dove, Mat. 3.16, 17? Shall he do so till he deliver up the Mediatory-Kingdom to
the Father? Neither the one, nor the other will be asserted. Does he now any
other ways discharge that Office, than by his written Word, and Spirit,
opening the understanding of believers to perceive his Instructions contained
therein? Surely no. The Revelation then made by him, with respect to
Institutions, Worship, is in every day to be attended to by the Saints. A
Church State is then bottomed upon the Prophetick-office of Christ, and to
continue from the time of its erection by him, to the consummation of all
things.

II. As it is bottomed upon the Prophetick-Office of Christ, so it is upon his
Sacerdotal, or Priestly. The Apostle argues from the change of the Levitical
priesthood, to the change of the whole of that Church-polity, its Laws and
Institutions, Heb. 7.12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of
necessity, a change also of the Law. If this be a cogent Argument, it follows
strongly on the contrary; If there be no change of the priesthood (as the
Melchizedekian Priesthood, or the priesthood of Christ after the order of
Melchizedeck abides for ever, as the same Apostle tells us) then there is no
change of the Law, or institutions appertaining thereunto. That the whole of
Gospel-institutions have a dependence upon the Priestly-Office of Christ, is
manifest.

1. That the legal Ministration, or Worship, was affixt to, had a dependence
upon the Aaronick Priesthood, the Apostle plainly enough declares in the
forecited place, Heb. 7.12. Now if the Worship of that day had such dependence
upon that Priesthood, that it lived and dyed; stood, and fell with it: the
Gospel-ministration, and Worship, must have the same dependence upon the real
Eternal Priesthood of CHRIST; for that was Typick of this throughout.

2. Christ by his Death, or the Oblation of himself, which was a principal part
of his Priestly-Office, vertually, put a period to the Law of Commandments
contained in Mosaick-Ordinances, Ephesians. 2.15. And so by the removing of them,
made way for the erection of the Gospel-church-state, with the Institutions
appertaining thereunto. This the Apostle fully declares, v. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
For through him (as our High Priest, for as such, he is discoursing of him, as
is Evident, from v. 13, 14, 15, 16*) we both ( viz. Jews, and Gentiles) have
an access (in Gospel-institutions) by one Spirit unto the Father. Now therefore
ye are no more Strangers, and Forreinners, but Fellow-citizens with the Saints,
and of the household of God. And are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles,
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone: In whom all
the building fitly joined together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. In
whom you are builded together for an Habitation of God through the Spirit.
Nothing could be more Evident, if written with the beams of the Sun, than this;
that Gospel-churches (called the Household, the Building of GOD) with all the
Institutions of CHRIST, through which they have access to God, are bottomed
upon the Priestly-Office of Christ. It Is through him, as our Priest, that we
have access in Worship to the Father; and equally, in, and through him, (as
such) that we are of the household of God, his Habitation, Temple.

3. All the fittings, preparings of Souls, as fit materials for this
Spiritual-Temple, Building, and the management of the Ordinances thereof, are
bottomed upon the Priestly-Office of Christ. That men in their natural state,
are altogether unfit, for such a building, or work, will be granted; otherwise,
Arguments enough lie near at hand, for it is confirmation. Our Lord has
solemnly determined this Controversy (if with any it be a Controversy) Joh.
3.3, 5. That persons fitness lies in the communication of the Spirit, a divine
principle of Life, the participation of the grace of the Covenant; that therein
also lies their meetness, ability for the work, and service of this Temple,
will not be denied. Now whence flows all this, but from the Oblation,
Intercession of Christ; the two signal parts of his Priestly-Office. Nay

4. The Saints coming to God with their Temple-Worship (all of it) has its
Foundation here; were it not for the Priesthood of Christ, they must stand off
at an eternal distance; Jehovah would be a terror, consuming fire to them. This
all know, who have a sight of themselves in their lapsed, corrupt, depraved
state; and of the infinite, purity, and righteousness of God. This the Apostle
treats of, Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. and 7.19. Yea

5. All the acceptance of their Persons, and all their Temple-worship, with the
Father of Spirits, is bottomed here. Were not Christ our High Priest, had he
not (as such) made an Atonement, Reconciliation for us; did he not make
Intercession (as such) for us; both we, and our most solemn performances would
be loathed, rejected, by the Lord.

6. Their encouragement to come to God with boldness, the great motive to abide
in their Temple-Worship, and not to forsake the Assembling themselves together;
to be diligent in the discharge of the duties they are obliged to perform to
one another in their Church-relation, is fixed here, Heb. 10.20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25. Their rejection of Gospel-communion, is accounted an undervaluing of
the Priestly-Office of Christ, v. 28, 29. To which add

7. That the preservation of Gospel-churches, Ordinances, is a fruit of the
Priestly-Office of Christ, bottomed upon his Oblation, Intercession. Why are
they not dispersed, scattered? Why have not their Adversaries ruined, destroyed
them? Whence is it that they have liberty to tread the Lords Court, and Worship
before the footstool of his Throne in Peace? yea, whence is it, That the Devil
with all his power, policy, has not been able to ruin, destroy the Churches of
Christ? It Is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again; who ever lives
to make Intercession, Romans 8.34. so that in this matter, hear's full measure of
Demonstration, pressed down, running over, that Gospel-Churches, Institutions
appertaining to them, are bottomed upon the Priestly-Office of Christ. If he
continue our High Priest, if there be any virtue in his death, energie, power
in his Intercession, they must continue also. And when these fail, we are
content to sink, perish. Maluimus cum Christo perire, quam cum Caesare regnare.


III. Gospel-churches, Institutions, are also bottomed upon the Kingly-Office
of Christ; whence their perennity, perpetuity, is Evident. That Christ is a
King, has his Subjects, Laws, by which he governs them, cannot be denied. That
he has (yet does) exercised his Kingly-soveraignty over them, will be granted;
if he do not do so, he is not King, his despotick authority is at an end. Who
are his Subjects? Those that dwell in Sion, his Church, his Body, his House,
his Kingdom; which has been demonstrated to be Saints embodied, and
worshipping him in a Gospel-church-state; to these he is a Head, Lord, King.
What are the Laws he Rules them by, gives forth for the trial of their Faith,
Love, Obedience? They are Gospel Ordinances of his own institution, and
appointment. And as of old, the people of the Jews, that Church of God, when
they rejected his Ordinances, are said to reject him, cast off his Sovereignty,
Ruledom: So because of their pertinacious adherence to the Laws of Moses, when
Christ had perioded that Ministration, had left the World, and was gone to his
Father; with a rejection of him, and the Ministration introduced by him, they
are said to be Citizens that hated him, and send a message after him, saying,
We will not have this man Reign over us, Luke 19.14. It Is true, Christ as King,
rules in the Saints by his Spirit, Grace: but visibly by his Word, and
Gospel-institutions does he Reign over them. These are his Chariot, or Throne
of State, wherein he shows himself publicly in Majesty and Glory. They are
his insignia regalia, or Kinglyarms, or Ensigns: none can offer despite,
affront, to these; but they affront him, and are guilty of high treason against
him. We justly condemn the Papists as opposers of the Kingly-Office of Christ;
because, contrary to his Precept, they have taken away one part of the
Institution of Christ, viz. the Cup from the Laity: and what is to be thought
of those who turn their backs upon all, and attempt the pulling down of that
house of the appointment of Christ, wherein they are to be ministered. If Christ
be King, he has his Churches, over whom (as such) he does preside; and his
Laws, as royal Ensigns, in the midst of them, for them to conform to.

CHAP. X.
A Tenth Demonstration of the Continuation of Churches, Ordinances; otherwise a
great part of the Scriptures of the New Testament have been, are, of little use
to the Saints. An Eleventh, A Twelfth evidence to the same thing; Christ has
power to preserve his Churches, and it is his will so to do. There are special
promises, both under the Old economy, and the New, to Saints, as they attend
upon Jehovah (as a Church) in the Observation of Ordinances. Exodus 20.24.
Explained. And 29.42, 43, 44, 45. at large. Why the Tabernacle is called (...)
Isa. 4.5, 6. Opened. Zach. 2.10. Mat. 18.20. 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 3.10.
Considered. A Thirteenth, Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Sixteenth, Demonstration of
the continuation of Churches, and Ordinances. It Is the duty of Saints in every
generation to confess Christ. Gal. 3.27. Opened. Subjection to the Institutions
of Christ, one signal way of confessing him. Saints are charged to hold fast
whatever they have received from Christ till he comes. Much of the Glory of
Christ, as Mediator of the New Covenant, lies in his Churches. Many evil and
absurb consequences of the denial of the Continuation of Gospel-Churches,
Ordinances, remarked.

Demonstration. X.
IF there have not been, be not, a continuation of Gospel-Churches, Ordinances,
a great part of the Scriptures of the New Testament, have been, are, of little
use to the Saints. Now it cannot be imagined, that the Lord Jesus, out of his
special love to, and care of his People, should appoint the Scriptures to be
written; and yet no small part of them to be of no concern in this World to
them. Of this kind are all those Scriptures, which contain rules of direction
to the Saints, touching their embodying together, in order to their becoming a
Church of Christ; discovering who are fit matter, their Power for the Election,
setting apart of Officers, to minister in the name of Christ amongst them; the
qualification of such as are to be chosen by them; their Office, Work, Duty in,
and to the Church; the Church's duty to them: the way and manner of the
management of the Institutions of the Gospel amongst them: the mutual duties of
Church Members each to other, as they stand in a Covenant Relation together.
How great a part of the Scriptures of the New Testament, and particularly the
Epistles to the Churches, is taken up in these things, is known; to enumerate
particulars, is almost endless. See, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Act. 2.41, 42. 1 Cor.
12.28. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Matthew. 18.17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 4.17. and 7.17. Act. 14.23.
Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 3.15. and 2.1. Act. 6.4. and 13.2, 3. Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Cor. 14.3. Act. 6.2. Heb. 13.7. Matthew. 26.26, 27. 1 Cor. 11.23.
Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Rev. 2.3. Romans 1.5, 6. 1 Cor. 1.2. and 14.15. Heb. 3.1. Jam.
1.18. Rev. 1.20. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.21, 22, 23. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. Act.
20.17, 18. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Phil. 1. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. and 5.17. Heb.
13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 5.1. Ephesians. 4.8.13. Tit. 1.7, 8, 9. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1
Pet. 5.2, 3. Act. 13.2. 1 Timothy 5.22. and 4.14. and 3.10, 11, 13. and 4.12. 2 Timothy 2.3. Col. 1.24. Phil. 2.17. and 3.17. Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.28. 2 Timothy 2.15.
and 4.2. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 6.20. Jude 3. 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. 1 Timothy 3.15. and
4.14, 15, 16. Act. 20.18, 19, 20, 25, 26. 1 These. 3.5. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. Romans
12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17. and 3.5. Col. 4.17. 2 Cor. 10.4, 8. 1 Timothy 4.11. Tit. 2.15.
1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 These. 5.12, 13. 1 Cor. 16.16. Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col. 4.3. 2
These. 3.1. Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.14. and 16.10. 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. 2 Timothy 4.16.
Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 6.3, 5, 6. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13. Phil. 2.15, 16. and 4.8, 9. 1 These. 3.8. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11, 12,
13, 14. 1 Timothy 3.15. Heb. 10.23. Act. 2.38, 39, 46. and 16.33. 1 Cor. 1.16. and
11.20, 21, 22, 26, 28, 29, 33. Act. 20.7. Mat. 16.19. Romans 12.8. 2 Cor. 10.4,
5, 6. Rev. 2.2, 20. Mat. 24.45. Ephesians. 4.13, 14. 1 Timothy 3.5. and 5.17. Heb.
13.17. 1 Pet. 2.3. 1 These. 5.12. Gal. 6.1, 2. 1 Cor. 4.14. and 5.2, 4, 5. 2
Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. 2 Timothy 4.2. Mat. 18.15. 1 These. 5.14. Tit. 1.13. and 2.15. 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Timothy 5.19, 20. Mat. 18.16, 17. Tit. 3.10. 1 Timothy 1.20. 1 Cor. 5.5.
Gal. 5.12. and 6.1. 2 Cor. 2.7. 2 These. 3.15. Gal. 6.2. 1 Cor. 5.2, 4, 5, 12. 1
Cor. 6.2. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. Phil. 2.10. and 2.15. 1 Cor. 10.32. 1 These. 2.
11.12. Tit. 2.10. Joh. 6.15. Act. 26.18. 1 Pet. 2.9. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 6. 1 Timothy
1.19, 20. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. Tit. 1.13. Jude 3. Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 2 Cor.
8.5. Act. 8.20, 23. Tit. 1.10. Rev. 2.2. Act. 18.26. 1 These. 2.7, 8, 11. Act.
9.26, 27. Romans 14.1. 1 Cor. 13. throughout. and 10.32. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Timothy 2.1. 2
Cor. 8.4, 6. Act. 11.29, 30. Romans 15.26, 27. and 16.1, 2. 3 John 8.9. Act.
15.2. 1 Timothy 3.15. Cum multis aliis. -- Are all these Scriptures (with many
more) of no use to the Saints? Are they not at all concerned in them? Credat
Apella! And yet this must be asserted upon the supposition, that there are no
Churches of the Institution of Christ; for as such, are the Saints alone
concerned in them.

Object. If it be Objected, that a great part of the Old Testament is of
little, or no use to the Saints now; therefore the argument is invalid, of no
weight.

Answ. The Answer is easy. It Is readily granted, that whatever is spoken in
the Old Testament, touching Circumcision, Priests, Altar, Temple, Sacrifices,
Vestments, etc. We are not under the Gospel-Ministration at all concerned with;
an introduction of these things, is a plain practick-denial of Christ come in
the flesh: But whilst that Priesthood, economy stood in force, 'twas the
duty of all the Saints, to attend diligently to the commands of the Lord,
relating to them: not to have done so, had been Rebellion, High Treason against
him. Till a Prophet greater than Moses, a Priest greater than Aaron, even Jesus
the Son of God came, and put a Period to the whole of that Ministration, and
erected a new one by that Authority that was given to him of the Father as
Mediator of the New Covenant, every tittle of that Law contained in Ordinances
they were obliged to. Whilst that Church State continued, they were concerned
in them. And so by a parity of reason are the Saints with all the Laws given by
Jesus Christ in the New Testament, 'till either a greater than he come, (which
can never be) or he by his own Sovereign Authority, supersede them; by his
second personal glorious coming, introducing a New State of things, without any
Institutions, or Ordinances, put a Period to them.

Demonstration. XI.
IF there be not a continuation of the Church State, with Institutions
thereunto belonging, it is either because Christ could not, or would not
continue it. The first connot be asserted. All power is given unto him in
Heaven, and in Earth, Matthew. 28.18. He is King of Kings, Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy
6.15. Rev. 17.14. and 19.16. The Almighty, Rev. 1.8. Is above Principality,
Power, Ephesians. 1.21. Has all Angels, and men at his foot; can order, dispose of
them as he pleases. Nor the second, for he has promised its continuance;
engaged his presence with it, for that end: These are all the visible ensigns
he has in the world of his Authority, Sovereignty; not a relation he stands in
to them, his concern in point of honor, and glory, in their preservation; the
prophetic discoveries of his resolution, that they should Continue, (of which
we have already treated) amply discover, that his will is their continuation.
They then that oppose, advance themselves against the Churches of CHRIST,
resist his will, and are found fighters against G0D.

Demonstration. XII.
THe Lord has, both under the Old-oeconomy, and the New, made special promises
to his people, as they attend him, wait upon him (as a Church) in the
Observation of Institutions, and Ordinances. So in the Old Testament, Exodus
20.24. An altar of earth thou shall make unto me, thou shall sacrifice thereon,
thy Burnt-Offerings, and thy Peace Offerings: thy Sheep and thine Oxen: In all
places where I record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
The latter words are variously rendered. In every place in which shall be the
memory of my Name, V.L. Where ye remember my Name, Sy. Ar. Wheresoever I shall
name my Name, Seventy. Where I shall cause my Glory to dwell, Chapter Where I shall
make my Name to be remembered, Pi. Where I shall make the memorial of my Name,
or cause the remembrance of my Name to be, or make you to remember my Name,
Ainsworth. The meaning is, in every place, in every institution of mine, where
I command you to Attend me, as a Church, in public Worship, and Service, (as
at the Tabernacle, Temple, etc.) there I Will come to thee, meet thee, manifest
my gracious presence to thee, assuredly bless thee, Exodus 29.42, 43, 44, 45.
This shall be a continual burnt-Offering, throughout your Generations, at the
door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation before the Lord, where I will meet
with you, to speak there unto thee. And there I will meet with the Children of
Israel, and shall be sanctified by my Glory (the Tabernacle is not in the
Hebrew; some render it, Israel; others, the Place, or the Tabernacle, shall be
sanctified by my Glory) And I will sanctify the Tabernacle of the Congregation
-- And I will dwell amongst the Children of Israel, and I will be their God.
That the Tabernacle was at that day, the place that Jehovah had appointed, for
the Church of Israel as a Church to Worship him, is known. As you do so, says
the Lord, Ple meet with you (or as the Greek translateth, will be known unto
thee) to speak there unto thee, etc. It Is the special presence of God with
them, that is intended by those Expressions. And the Tabernacle, is called, the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, Heb. (...) Tabernacle of Assembly, or
Convention, because there God, and his people met together; he to Instruct them
by his Word, they to Worship Him, and to receive His Oracles. See Exodus 40.34.
Lev. 1.1. and 9.23, 24. Number. 1.1. and 7.89. and 12.4, 5. and 14.10. and 16.19,
42, 44. So also in the Gospel-day, Isa. 4.5, 6. The Lord will Create upon every
dewlling place of mount Sion, and upon her Assemblies, a cloud, and smoke by
day, and the shining of the flaming fire by night, for upon all the glory shall
be a defense: And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from
the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm, and from
rain. The word translated the dewlling place, is not (...) an ordinary
dewlling place, or common Habitation; but (...) a prepared place of, and for
God. They are the Church Assemblies he intends by it. To these he promises his
Presence, Favor, Direction, Guidance, Defense, Protection, under the notion of
the Cloud, Pillar, Tabernacle; which were the signal visible Ensigns of these
to his people of old, Zach. 2.10. sing and rejoice, O daughter of Sion; for lo,
I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, says Jehovah. And many nations
shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people. ('It Is
evidently of the Conversion of the Gentiles, and their walking together in
Gospel-fellowship, that he speaks) and I will dwell in the midst of thee --
Mat. 18.20. where two, or three (a few Saints walking together in the
fellowship of the Gospel, for these two or three are called the Church, v. 17.)
are gathered together in my Name, (or Authority) there am I in the midst of
them. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye (the Church of God at Corinth. v. 1.) are the Temple of
the living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. -- Rev. 3.10. Because thou have
kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of
temptation, that shall come upon all the world to try them that dwell upon the
earth. The words are a promise made to the Church in Philadelphia, and so to
all Gospel-churches; especially to such as are the Antitype to the
Philadelphian-Church, of preservation from the temptations, snares, distresses,
that are coming upon Professors: others shall fall by them, sink under them;
she shall be kept, because she kept the words of Christ's patience, i. e. the
Doctrine, Precepts, Institutions of CHRIST, he delivered in the day of his
patience, when he Tabernacled amongst men, and endured the contradiction of
Sinners. The sum is, as under the Old Law, so under the New; there are special
Promises made to Saints Worshipping God in a Community, as a Church: Whence
three things necessarily follow:

1. That there must be Gospel-Churches, to whom these Promises may be made good.

2. That a denial of a Gospel-Church-state, Churches, Ordinances, is as much as
in us lies, to make these Promises of GOD of none effect. For if their be no
Churches, there are none to whom they should be performed. And besides, some of
them have in them a special engagement for their preservation. As that Isa.
4.5, 6. Is God unfaithful? Can any charge him with breach of Promise, without
being guilty of horrid Impiety, Blasphemy against him.

3. That a withdrawment from Church Fellowship, Ordinances, is a
practick-contempt of the presence of God promised to his People, as they are
found walking according to his will herein.

Demonstration. XIII.
It Is the Duty of Saints in every Generation, to confess, make a Profession of
Christ, as well as to believe in him, Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy
mouth, the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart --. This will not be
denied! Now our solemn, most signal Profession of our Lord Jesus, lies in a
visible subjection to him in Church-Institutions. Therefore are we said, by
Baptism, to put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. ( i. e. have taken upon you a most solemn
profession of his name): And our Lord tells us, Mar. 8.38. That to be ashamed
of his words, is to be ashamed of him: that we show our selves his Friends, if
we do whatever he commands us, John 15.14. So that evidently an owning of,
visible subjection to, the Words, Institutions of Christ, is that wherein our
Profession of his name does lie. That it did so in the Primitive days, will
not, cannot be denied: Well then, either there are no Saints in the World, or
they are discharged from the command, to confess Christ, or there are Churches
walking together in Gospel Ordinances at this day; and must be such, to the
consummation of all things. The truth is, it is utterly impossible, for any to
hold the nullity of the Church State, Ordinances; but they must affirm, (as
some have done) that there are no visible Saints in the World. For the same Law
of Christ, which directed the Saints, in the first-dayes of the Gospel, to make
a profession of Christ by their subjection to his Institutions, abides still,
as a standing rule for them to walk by.

Demonstration. XIV.
THe great charge of Christ to his People, is, To hold fast that which they
have received 'till he comes, Rev. 2.25. and 3.11. Now it is not only the grace,
and Doctrine of the Gospel, that they received, but the Laws, Institutions
thereof, relating to Gospel-Fellowship, Worship. These then, in every day, they
are bound to hold fast till Christ comes: and those that do so, are upon that
foot of account publicly commended by him, Rev. 14.12. Here is the patience of
the Saints, here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of
Jesus.

Demonstration. XV.
MUch of the Honor, Glory of the Lord Jesus, as the Mediator of the
New Covenant, lies in his Churches, Zach. 6.13. He shall build the Temple, and
bear the Glory. Let these be removed, and he will have but little glory in the
World.

Demonstration. XVI.
MAny are the evil consequences that follow upon the denial of Gospel-Churches
--. We'll instance but in a few.

I. The Ministration of the Law wherein Moses was a Servant, was more lasting,
than the Ministration the Son was on purpose sent from the Father to introduce.

II. That it is lawful to be partial in Jehovah's Law. It Is true, we are to pray
by our selves, or perhaps some very few with us; to watch, attend the inward
work; press after a further degree of sanctification, conformity to Christ; we
are to love him, believe in him: But as to the law of Institutions, we will
have nothing to do with it. And why so? Are not these last, as much the charge,
Law of Christ to his people, as the former?

III. It Is a condemning the generation of the Righteous (which we ought to be
tender of) and that many ways.

1. They are (have been) a generation of Will-worshippers. Their Church State,
fellowship, breaking bread -- is Will Worship: Churches are gathered,
Ordinances administered in the will of man.

2. They are Self-persecutors, Self-murderers, Self-destroyers. The loss of
their liberty, goods, enjoyments, lives, for their being found in these ways,
they may thank themselves; for, they bring it upon themselves: for Christ
requires no such thing at their hands.

IV. It Is a Justifying, Gratifying, the Wicked against the Righteous. As,

1. A Justifying them in their charge against the Lords People. You may (say
they) be of what religion you will, pray, preach, a few of you together; but
nothing will please you, except you have a great company together. You talk of
conscience, this is nothing but your stubbornness, self-will, pride of Spirit.
And the truth is, it must be somewhat of that nature (for conscience to Christ
it cannot be) if Church Assemblies, with the administration of Ordinances in
them be not of Christ's appointment.

2. It Is a Gratifying Satan, Antichrist, in his grand design, he has from the
beginning been managing against the Lord, and his People, viz. to dissipate,
scatter, drive them into corners.

3. It Is a Justifying the wicked in all their bloody persecutions of the
Saints. They persecute them not as the Worshippers of Christ; for he requires
them not so to Worship him, but as breakers of the Law, Factious, Seditious
ones.

V. It Is as much, as in us lies, a dispoyling Christ of all the visible
Sovereignty he has at this day in the World.

VI. It Is a Withdrawment of our selves from that Yoke of Christ he commands,
encourages his Disciples to take upon them. Mat. 11.29, 30.

VII. It Is to be ashamed of Christ's words in an Adulterous Generation, Mar.
8.38. with much more that might be instanced in. These things might have been
particularly more improved, but we have already past the bounds designed in the
managery of this Controversy. And if what has been said, will not convince
Gainsayers, I am out of hopes by any thing that I can offer (though with the
brightest Scripture-evidence) so to do: and shall pray to God, to show them the
error of their way, and reduce them to his Foot. It Is time we attend to those
Objections that are made (at least as many of them as we have heard of) against
the subject matter of the present discourse: which is the design of the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
Objections against the continuation of the Gospel-Church-state, Churches,
Ordinances, particularly considered, answered. Object. 1. Some of the Officers
that were in the Churches, viz. Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists are now
wanting: that hence a cessation of Churches, Ordinances does not ensue,
evinced: for then there had been a cessation of these, ever since the Apostles
days; the absurdity whereof demonstrated. That 'twas never the intendment of
Christ, that these Officers should be continued, proved, 1 Cor. 4.9. explained.
That the essence of a true Church of Christ depends not upon these Officers,
Demonstrated. Apostles as Apostles, are neither foundation, matter, or form of
the Church, proved. Object. 2. The Apostasy Prophesied of, has covered,
swallowed, up all the Churches; Answered. The Apostasy spoken of, not a
universal Apostasy, proved. Object. 3. That there are no Wise-master-builders;
removed out of the way. 1 Cor. 3.10. Explained. Object. 4. The gifts in the
Primitive-Church, wanting, Answered. It Is Grace, not Gifts, that constitutes a
Church, proved. Object. 5. The present Churches, have only the Form, deny the
Power, removed. Object. 6. From the pollution of the Churches, Answered.
Object. 7. The Churches were at first gathred in the will of man; Considered,
Answered. Object. 8. From the want of a presence among the Churches, Answered.
The various ways of God's being present with a people, Considered.

HAving in the precedent discourse, at large evinced, The continuation of the
Gospel-Church-state, Churches, Ordinances; that which remains, is the removal
of Objections out of the way, which we now address our selves to.

Object. 1. We grant a Church State, Churches, Institutions to be of Christ,
but there is now no such thing; for you want some of the principal Officers that
were in the Churches, viz. Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11.

Answ. That the Officers mentioned, were of the Institution of Christ, is
readily yielded: that such are not, now in any of the Churches of Christ, is
also granted: but that a cessation of Churches does not hereupon ensue, is very
easily demonstrated. For,

1. Then there has been a cessation of Churches for above a thousand, and some
hundred of years; yea, ever since the Apostles days: for, after those
particular persons invested by Christ into the Offices, and Ministry
beforementioned, none such have stood up. Now it is the firstborn of
absurdities, that Christ should with such solemnity, as he did by the pouring
forth of the Spirit in the day of Pentecost, set up a Ministration (wherein
also he spent forty days after his Resurrection to instruct his Disciples) and
should in a few scores of Years, suffer it to be taken down again. And it
cannot be supposed, to consist with the Wisdom of Christ, so to do: it is also
perfectly inconsistent, with the Gospel Covenant, Mediatory Offices of Christ,
and signal promises made to his Churches -- (of which we have already
distinctly treated).

2. 'Twas never the intendment of Christ, that such Officers should be
continued in the Churches. Which is evident, as if written with the beams of
the Sun, from these few considerations:

1. If he had indeed intended their continuation, they should have been
continued: for 'twill not it is presumed, be asserted, that Christ fails of his
intendment.

2. There are no intimations given in the Scripture of any Succession of such
Officers; nor any rules laid down for the Churches to proceed upon in their
Election. Of Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, we have an account, and directions
given for their setting apart to Office; but of Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, ne gry quidem, not the least syllable, or Iota, touching their
continuation, or the way to be used in order thereunto. Nay,

3. When the first-Churches were planted, we find by the advice of the
Apostles, Teachers and Deacons chosen to Office, but no choice made of new
Apostles; nor any intimation given, that more than these were necessary, or
expedient for the continuance, or preservation of the Church.

4. When Christ writes to the seven Churches of Asia, he blames them (most of
them) for several things amiss amongst them; but charges them not, with any
neglect, or sin, that they had not the Officers mentioned amongst them; which
yet they had not. For Apostles, it is certain, they had none; of them only John
was alive at that day, the rest were fallen asleep; and he was not with them,
but in the Isle of Patmos: Christ owns them as his Churches notwithstanding.
It Is true, he threatens some of them to un-church them; but not because they
wanted these Officers, but for other reasons mentioned by him.

5. We have an almost express Declaration, that after the Apostles fell
asleep, there were to be no more Apostles to succeed them, 1 Cor. 4.9. For I
think God has set forth us the Apostles last: So we render it, but not so
fully expressive of the Greek; which is (...) -- For I think, (or I conclude,
for the word does not always signify a doubtful opinion, but a certain
conclusion, it is used in the determination of that famous Council, Act. 15.28.)
that God has set forth, or exhibited us, the last Apostles. So the Arabic,
Syriack, V.L. God has showed us the last Apostles. God has designed his last
Apostles, so the Aethiopick. So then evidently, no new Apostles were designed
by Christ after them. It Is true, many have pretended so to be; some such (as it
seems) came to the Church at Ephesus, who upon trial found them Liaers, Rev.
2.2. But

6. The whole weight of the Objection lies upon this single basis, That the
Essence of a true Church of Christ, consists in having the Officers mentioned
amongst them. For if it does not, the Churches are as really true Churches of
Christ, without these Officers, as the first Apostolick-Churches, that had
them, were. This is that then we shall demonstrate, that Apostles -- are not of
the Essence of a true Church of Christ. For

I. There was a true Church of Christ of Converted Believers, before they ever
saw the face of an Apostle, even in the Apostles days. Not to mention what is
probable, that the Eunuch being brought over to the Faith of Christ, Act. 8.
went in to Ethiopia, Preached Christ, gathered Churches there. In which, some
think that Prophecy had its accomplishment, Psa. 68.31. nor, what some affirm,
that the Gospel was Preached, Churches gathered here in England by Joseph of
Arimathea. What may we think of the Church at Antioch? Was that a true Church?
the Apostles owned it as such. And it is evident, that 'twas constituted without
the Officers mentioned Act. 11.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26. and here the
Disciples were first called Christians. It Is true, there came Apostles, and
Prophets to them; but they were, before their coming, a Church of Christ. The
like may be said of Samaria, where by the Ministry of Phillip, were Converts
brought over to Christ, and Baptized, before ever the Apostles heard tittle of
it; who at this time kept privately at Jerusalem, Act. 8.1, 5, 6, 8, 12, 14.
That by the same hand, Churches were planted at Azotus, Caesarea, Act. 8.40.
with 9.30. is more than probable. At Ptolemais you have an intimation of a
Church of Christ; but no account of any Apostles going thither, till Paul in
his journey salutes the Brethren that were there, and tarries with them one
day, Act. 21.7. The Church at Colosse was gathered by Epaphras, Col. 1.7. as
were several Churches, before ever any Apostle came to them. So that, if
because they have not Apostles, the present Churches are no Churches of Christ;
neither were the Primitive-Churches, at least some of them, such: The Objection
lies as directly against them, as any after-Churches. But

II. The Apostles, as Apostles, are neither Foundation, matter, or Form of the
Church; so far are they from being of the Essence of the Church.

1. Foundation they are not; for Christ is the alone Foundation, as has been
proved. It Is true, Saints are said to be built upon the Foundations of the
Apostles, and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20. but the intendment thereof, is no more than
that, they were built upon the Doctrine was Preached by the Apostles; the
substance whereof was Christ.

2. Not the Matter, as Apostles: as Saints it is true, they were so, as well as
others; but no otherwise.

3. The Form of the Church they are not: for that lies in somewhat else, as
before was Demonstrated.

III. Let Us suppose, that, which may be supposed. (It has been, as is known)
that by the Providence of God, the meanest Saint is cast upon any spot, where
the Gospel never was. He preaches Christ to the Natives, they are Converted by
the Spirit of the LORD accompanying his Ministry: may these Converts give up
themselves to the Lord, and one another, to walk with him in ways of his own
Institution, or not? If the first, actum est periisti Antichristiane, there may
be true Churches, without Apostles; for herein lie's the Essence of a true
Church: If the Second, it is lawful, then it seems, for believers to disobey the
Commands of Christ (which will at least sound harsh in the ears of sober
Christians) for Gospel-fellowship, Churches -- we have proved to be commanded
by Christ. Nay

IV. The Apostles, qua Apostles, never belonged to any particular Church.
Authority in the name of Christ they had in, and amongst them all; never
related to any particular Church, as such. They were non-residents,
ubiquitaries, and the Office whereunto they were called by the Lord Jesus,
required, that they should be so, Mat. 28.18, 19.

V. What the Apostles were to the Gospel-Churches, that (at least) Moses and
Aaron may be supposed to be in the Judaick Church. The Law came by Moses. In
every difficult Case, he was their Mediator to God, and gave responses to them:
from him Aaron had his Vrim and Thummim, whereby he gave (in matters proposed
to him) infallible answers from the Holy One. They had also the Ark, with the
Mercy-Seat, and Cherubims. The Fire from Heaven: the Majesty or divine Presence
(viz. the Oracle in the most Holy Place, where God dwelt between the Cherubims.
Number. 7.89. Psa. 80.2.) the Holy Spirit (viz. the Spirit of Prophecy, not only
in the Priests, but in the Prophets) were these of the Essence of the Church?
was their Church State dissolved because of their want of them? What more
frivolous can be asserted? Moses, and Aaron soon fell asleep, before they came
into the good Land. As for the last mentioned, they enjoyed them not under the
second Temple (as the Jews themselves acknowledge); yet their Church State
continued till the death of Christ, as is granted by all. It Is impossible to
fix upon any Argument to prove the necessity of Apostles for the continuation
of a Church State in Gospel-dayes, which will not also evince a necessity of
what we have instanced in, with respect to the necessity of the existence of
Moses, etc. for the continuation of the Judaick Church State; than which
nothing is more false. Besides

VI. The Church was never Built upon the Apostles (one or other of them) but
upon their Doctrine, which from the Lord Jesus they delivered; or rather upon
Christ the sum, and substance thereof. It Is true, the Papists tell us (as has
been intimated) that 'twas Built upon Peter, from, Mat. 16.18. upon which they
have labored to build their Babel, endeavoring to substitute the Pope in his
room. The vanity of which attempt, has been discovered by several, and by none
more than the every-way learned, and accomplished J.O. in his Animadversions on
Fiat Lux. But as was said, 'twas their Doctrine, not their Persons the Church
was Built upon. This through the wonderful kindness of God, we have continued
to us; and therefore no need of their personal Ministry. Yet,

VII. Suppose we had Apostles amongst us, the self-same Apostles that were sent
forth, and instructed by Christ, to indoctrinate the Saints in his will, to
charge them to Observe whatever he had commanded them. They would declare to us
the same things, or they would not* If the same, they are upon record in the
Scriptures of truth; and are as much to be heeded by us, as if they had been
delivered to us by them Viva voce. The latter cannot be imagined. The Apostle
has for ever shut the door against any such conceit, Gal. 1.8, 9. Though we,
or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed --. So that evidently the want of
Apostles is the most weak, frivolous argument, that ever men of the least
reason, or converse with the Scripture, or knowledge of that faith that ought
to be with us in these matters, ever fixed upon.

Object. 2. But there was an Apostasy foretold by the Apostles of our Lord,
which we find actually came to pass within a few hundreds of years after
Christ. Therefore there are no true Churches; for the Apostasy has covered,
swallowed up all.

Answ. That an Apostasy was foretold, as intimated, that it was also
introduced, is granted. But this proves not, the nullity of Churches,
Ordinances. For,

1. It Is expressly declared, that the Apostasy mentioned, should not be a total
Apostasy, 1 Timothy 4.1. (...), not (...), but (...), not all, but some shall
depart, or make a revolt from the Faith. I confess had the Scripture asserted a
universal Apostasy, the objection would have seemed, to have had some strength
in it. I say 'twould have seemed, for really it has none. For had the
Apostasy, as is falsely pretended, overspread all for a season (as sometimes
it did in the Churches of old, as was demonstrated in the preface to this
discourse); yet it follows not, but in persons (by the call of God) delivered
from under that Apostasy, a true Church State might exist. Which is
notoriously true, with respect to thousands, that for some while the Papacy
drank in. But,

2. We have already proved [ Demonstrat. 4. c. 4.] that all along the
Apostasy, the Lord had his true Churches witnessing for him against it. So
that we need not say more touching this matter. There was an Apostasy
foretold, that should overspread the greatest part of the Churches, prevail in
most places of the Christian World. It did so to purpose at Rome -- etc. Ergo,
there are no true Churches, risum teneatis amici, or rather pity; pray for
them, who by reason of prejudice, temptation, have their understanding so far
blinded, as to think there is any weight to be laid upon such Puerile Ludicrous
arguments.

Object. 3. But you have no Wise-master-builder; which the Apostle says he
was, 1 Cor. 3.10. therefore you have no true Churches.

Answ. This Objection is the same with the first. To it we will nevertheless
speak a few words, which will abundantly evince the emptyness of it.

1. Paul asserts himself to be (...), a Chief-Bulder, not with respect to
Christ; for so he was not, but an under-work-man; but with respect to others,
who afterward built upon that Foundation [CHRIST] he had laid. Nor does he

2. Assert himself to be the Chief-builder, with relation to all the Churches;
but with respect to that particular Church at Corinth. Were all the rest of the
Churches, that had not this Master Builder, false Churches? This will not be
asserted. Yet we hear of no Wise-master-builder, with respect to any other of
the Churches. The word is only used here. But,

3. Paul, as wise a Master Builder as he was, was sure a Workman under Christ;
who is the Builder of the House, or Churches (as has been proved) and he was
indispensibly bound to walk by rule; the rule of his Lord and Master, Christ
Jesus. This he tells us he did, 1 Cor. 11.23. Now

4. The Saints have this Rule, and they have the Spirit of the Lord with them,
in them, to open it, and explain it to them. For if they have him not, and for
this end (to lead them into all truth) they are not Saints, Romans 8.9. what
hinders then, but that Saints having the same Rule the Apostle walked by, and
the Spirit to instruct them in it, they may conform to it, and so constitute
Churches of Christ? If they have but so much Wisdom as to understand the rule
constitutive of Churches; and so much Conscience and honesty, as to apply
themselves to it (and they are poor Saints that are devoid of the one or the
other) they cannot but do so. The very truth is, Paul, none of the Apostles
were Builders, or Wise-master-builders, but with respect to the Rule of Christ:
To have Built in their own Wisdom, with a neglect thereof, had been folly and
madness. So that any that attend to this Rule in Church-Work, may be as well
said to be Builders; and if they lay the Foundation of a Church afterward built
upon by others, as truly said with respect to such a Church to be
Wise-master-builders, as Paul, etc. 'Twould hardly be an effectual argument to
a man under the sense of inconveniences (almost to starving to death) by
winds, and storms, for want of an habitation to dwell in; to tell him, it is
true, here are Materials for a House, and here is a Rule to build it by; which
if you attend to, you cannot build amiss, but the Truth is, the
Wise-master-builder, who acted by the same Rule in building all the strong, and
beautiful Houses in the Country, is thousands of miles off, and perhaps may not
come hither again till you are dead, and rotten in your grave; therefore you
had best not attempt the work, till he come. Nay stay, will the poor man say, I
have the Rule that he walked by, and I Will up, and be doing as well as I can;
and I hope the Lord will be with me --. Christ commands (as has been proved)
to build an House; gives us rules to walk by in such a work; but has no where
said, he will send us such Wise-master-builders in every respect as Paul was;
nor told us the Work must cease till they come; but the contrary.

Object. 4. But you have not the gifts of the Primitive-Churches; therefore you
are no true Churches of Christ.

Answ. 1. It Is Grace, not extraordinary Gifts, that is the qualification of
Church Members, that constitute a Church. When the Apostles speak of
Church Members, they decypher them as Sanctified ones, partakers of the Grace
of God --. Christ requires no other qualification of a Churchmember, than
being born again of God, John 3.3, 5. which persons may be without those
extraordinary Gifts. Nay, the truth is, the Churches that have most excelled in
these, have not been the most comely, or beautiful Churches. For instance, the
Church at Corinth, who perhaps in these Gifts excelled other Churches; but I am
sure, came short of some of them in Divine graces.

2. It Is most evident, that the Primitive-Churches were constituted, converted,
believers added to them, without any immediate participation of these gifts,
Act. 2.40, 41, 42. We have an account of Three Thousand Souls added to the
Church, but not a tittle of their partaking of these extraordinary Gifts. The
Church at Antioch was a true Church of Christ, before the Apostles (any of
them) came to them, or they had received the Holy Spirit ( i. e. were made
partakers of the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit) Act. 8.12, 14, 15, 16, 17.
The like may be said of other Churches.

3. The Apostle having discoursed at large of these Gifts, 1 Cor. 12. at the
close, v. 31. tells them, that he shows unto them a more excellent way, (or the
most excellent way, as the Greek reads it) viz. the way of love: of which he
discourses at large, chap. 13. And this (not the Gifts mentioned) is that which
Christ makes the badge of his Disciples, Joh. 13.35. Were there more of this,
there would not be so much talk of the nullity of Churches, as there is amongst
some at this day; nor that undue withdrawment from them.

4. These Gifts are so far from being essential to a Church; that the Apostle
tells us, persons may have them all, and yet not be fit matter for a Church:
for they that have them, may nevertheless be nothing, devoid of true grace, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2.

Object. 5. But the Churches have only the Form of things, and deny the Power;
and from such we are commanded to turn away, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Answ. 1. I must crave leave, to say, that the framers of this Objection, are
ascended not only to the height of censorious uncharitableness; but invade the
Throne of God himself, and will become Judges of the secrets of hearts. For,
who told them that they deny the Power? did any of the Churches themselves? Do
any principles owned by them, any practices found amongst them declare as much?
Let the individuals hereof [ Guilty] plead for themselves, I Will not be their
advocate. Though I must add, I know no such Churches, and yet they are not a
few I am acquainted with.

2. It had been severe enough for the Objectors to have, that They have the
Form, but not the Power; therefore are not true Churches. But this perhaps they
thought would not have served their purpose. Inasmuch as the Lord himself says
concerning the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1. Thou have a Name to live, and art
dead; and of Laodicea, v. 15. Thou art neither cold, nor hot, v. 17. Wretched,
Poor, Miserable, Blind, Naked: yet even these are owned by Christ for his
Churches, Rev. 3.1, 14.

3. That they have not the Power, is also notoriously false. It Is true, they
have not so much of it, as in a former day; but that all is lost, there are a
thousand Witnesses to confute.

Object. 6. The Churches are polluted; therefore no true Churches.

Ans. 1. This is a most evident non-sequitur: They may be polluted, and yet
true Churches. The question is, whether there be such pollutions found upon
them, either with respect to Worship, or Conversation, that by any Rule of
Christ declare them Vn-church'd; which we are only to attend to in this matter.
We may stab, and kill each other in a distempered fit, and think we do well;
but 'twill be found Murder by the righteous judge; if what we do, be without
his Rule, and Authority.

2. What Pollution is there to be found amongst the Churches, that was not to
be found even in the Apostolic Churches; and greater too, at least, in some of
them?

3. Do they justify, plead for, any Pollutions amongst them? Is not the sight
of them, matter of grief, burden to them; at least, to many amongst them.
Though there were but a few names in Sardis, that had not defiled their
Garments, Rev. 3.4. yet Christ ownes them for his Church.

Object. 7. The present Churches were at first gathered in the will of man:
Therefore they are no true Churches.

Answ. 1. Prove This, and take the Cause. I Would be he, after all I have writ,
that would cast the first stone at them. But saying so, is but a sinful
Calumniation, no Argument. Let Us a little further consider this matter.

2. Why are they gathered in the Will of Man? Is it, because they are gathered
by the authority of man, driven together by penal Sanctions? This cannot be
asserted. What then? Are they gathered, constituted of visibly profane
persons? Nor can this be affirmed. If the gathering together of Saints called
out of the world, as Volunteers giving up themselves to JESUS CHRIST, and one
another, to walk together in Gospel-fellowship, be a gathering in the will of
man; it is true, they are so gathered. But the best on it is, we have good
company under the same Condemnation, even all the primitive-churches.

Obj. Oh! but you were not gathered by Apostles!

Answ. Oh! but this has been already spoken to, and removed out of the way:
several of the first Churches we have proved, were not gathered by the
Apostles; Ergo, they also were gathered in the will of man, were not true
Churches.

Obj. 8. But there is no Presence among the Churches: Therefore no true Churches.

Answ. 1. Should it be granted, that there is no presence, yet from thence it
does not follow that they are not true Churches. For the glory was departed
from the Temple, Ezekiel. 3.12 the blessed glory of the Lord is gone from his
place, and yet the Temple was standing. In the second Temple, there was not the
Schecinah, or divine presence; yet the Judaick Church State, not dissolved till
many years after. The house may stand, and be a true house as much as 'twas
before, tho the master be gone out of it; perhaps he has a special end for the
good of the House, Servants, Children, for a season to leave it. God may have
blessed designs toward his Churches in his temporary leaving them, yet true
Churches. I Would ask, does not the Lord sometimes withdraw his presence from
particular Saints? What Child of God, but at one time, or other, finds cause to
complain of his departure from him? He seeks him, yet cannot find him. Does
this destroy his Saint-ship? Who Will affirm it? Well then, the with-drawment of
God from Churches, is no Argument they are none of his.

2. It may be there may be some mistake in this matter, and God is only
supposed to be a great way off, when he is near. Mary laments for the absence
of her Lord, when yet he stood by her, Joh. 20.15, 16. It Is necessary we
enquire a little touching the presence of God with a People. He is said to be
present.

1. In respect of his Essence, and being, so he is present with All; indistant
to none. He fills Heaven and Earth; all things with his Presence, Psa. 139.

2. In respect of providential dispensations, preserving, defending a People,
giving them the Victory over their Enemies. In this sense, through wondrous
riches of Grace, the Lord is yet present with his Churches; the Plots,
Confederacies, Advancements of the Children of Men against them, have hitherto
been in-successful.

3. In respect of sensible manifestations of his grace and love in the way of
the New Covenant to them; quickening, causeing their graces to flourish;
renewing, strengthening, comforting them. Now though it is true, (and touching
it, deep searchings of heart should be upon us, and mournings after the Lord)
that there is not in this sense, such a presence of the Lord as has been
formerly; yet we must say, to the praise of matchless- grace, we are not wholly
destitute of it; and are crying, as we can, Let our Beloved come into his
Garden, that the Spices thereof may send forth their odoriferous smell. Yet
who will despise a day of small things? It Is a mercy, for a rebellious beggar, to
have a crum, a drop, of the bread, waters of Life. And were we more thankful
for, did we prize, improve as becomes us, that little God gives us, we might
have more.

4. In respect of his real, actual presence in the New Covenant, though not
sensible manifestations of it. Thus God is present with us, (though we complain
of his absence) when he strengthens us to wait on, for him, in the ways of his
appointment; enables us to seek to him. For without his presence, we were not
able to do that. Thus (through grace) he is present with his Churches, and
every member of them.

3. Is not Prayer, Prayer, because we have not his sensible presence with us?
who will affirm it? Is it lawful to omit that Duty, in our Closets, retirements;
because we enjoy not God in it? Who dare aver it? This were an Effectual, and
expeditious way, to drive Christianity, all Religion, Devotion, out of the
World. What though there be not a sensible Enjoyment of God in Churches,
Institutions -- * There he has promised to meet his people, and bless them;
and there it is our duty to wait for the returnal of his Presence, and Glory.
Thus far in Answer to Objections: Which are all I have met with. And in the
whole, have been with PRAYER and SUPPLICATION, following the Lord for leadings;
have not willingly reflected upon, or used exasperating Expressions concerning
any; nor designedly pleaded the cause of any PARTICULAR PARTY, but the general
concern of all the Saints, who look upon their subjection to Christ in
Gospel-Institutions any part of their concern. In simplicity, and godly
sincerity (though with much weakness) have I been managing this affair; and
because I believe, that the truth of the Lord is herein with me, therefore have
I spoken. If any may be profited, let God have the Glory; If any be otherwise
minded, I pray God will manifest this also unto him in due time.

FINIS.

