Excellent Memorables for all Mourners: Especially Mourners for the Loss of
Dearest (...) Gathered out of Mr. B's prepared (though not Preached) Farewell
Sermon, at Kederminster, Aug. 24. 1662. upon our Saviors (...)
John 16.22. (...) therefore have sorrow, but I will see you again, (...)
Hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no Man take^^ (...) you.


THE Separation of dear Friends, made by Persecution or Affliction, does
somewhat resemble Death it self. It does so in Eleven particulars.

1. Death is the Separation of dear Companions; and (...)

2 Death is Vnwelcom unto Both of them: so is the said Se^

3 Death is the end of Humane Converse; so is that.

4 Death is the end of Earthly Comforts; so is that.

5 Death is the end of Humane Labors; so is that.

6 Death is the effect of Sickness, and usually of Folly, and In^ and Oversight
of our selves; so is that also, most com^

7 Death puts surviving Friends into Mourning; so does that.

8 Death is the end of all the Living; so is that.

9 Death is followed with Judgment, God's and Man's; so is ^

10 Death destroys not the Relations of Soul and Body, sepa^ does the said
Separation of Friends destroy their (...) unto each other.

11. Death's Power is not Everlasting; there will be a Resur^ So the Power of
the said Separation is not Everlast^ Godly Friends will surely meet again in
that Kingdom (...) admits of no parting.

12. Death, I would add, Works good to the Saints: and so in the said
Separation, as grievous as it is to sense, Romans (...)

But yet this said Separation resembles not Death in all (...) ^or,

1. (...) Friend is the Life of his Friend; no Pastor is the Life (...); as the
Soul is the Life of it is Body. It is Christ alone is our Head and Life.

2. And the Continuance of ones Welfare depends not on the con^ of my Friend
with us. A Church State depends not on (...) of any one single Pastor whatever.

The Text contains, [and happy is he that well attains and (...),] these Six
Doctrinal Propositions.

D 1. Sorrow goes before Joy, with Christ's Disciples. Even^ before Morning.
Their Sowing in Tears, before Reap^ in Joy. Their Pain of Travel, before Joy of
Birth. Se^ (...) of Sorrow, go before their complete Joy.

1. Sinful Sorrows go before it. Though they should not do (...) do ever so do.
Worldly, Passionate, Peevish Sor^ (...) that are Positively Sinful.

2. Sorrows in their nature Lawful, and only in their degree sin^ (...) before
it. These be our Excessive troubles, at things (...) we may Lawfully Sorrow
for, with Moderation.

3 Sorrows merely Natural do go before it. Such as Weariness (...) Labor,
Painedness with our Diseases, grievous Feel^ (...) of Heat and Cold, of Hunger
and Thirst.

4 Sorrows Castigatory go before it. These be God's Cha^ (...) which have a
tendency to do us good, if they be (...) improved. Such be all Sufferings in
our Souls, Bodies, (...), Estates and Friends.

5. Sorrows Honorable and gainful go before it. These be Sufferings from Men
for the sake of Christ and the cause of Christ.

6 Sorrows Penitential do go before it. These are Contrition (...) true
Repentance, Fasting, Abstinence, and Humiliation. ^^ese Sorrows we must inflict
upon our selves, to Kill Sin, (...) to Promote the work of Grace.

7. Sorrows Charitable do go before it. These be such as the (...) of God and
of his Church; and our Pity of the perish^ World, do affect us with. Even as
long as we live in a (...) so full of Sin and Misery.

Hear five Reasons for Sorrow's going before Joy.

R 1. God will have some Conformity between the order of PLACE and NATVRE. In
Nature, Nothingness was be^ (...) Being; Infancy before Manhood; Weakness
before (...); Crying before Laughter. No wonder then, if (...) Sorrow be before
our Joy.

R 2. Sin goes before Grace; and we are the first Adam 's (...), before we are
Christ's. It is therefore but just that (...) should be before Joy, where Satan
goes before Christ.

R 3. God sees this to be the fittest Method for our Cure. (...) may Deny our
selves, we must know how little we (...) beholden to our selves; and must smart
by the fruit of our (...) and Folly, before we are eased by the fruit of Grace
and (...).

R 4. Foregoing Sorrows raise the price of following Mercies. (...) that come
out of great Tribulation, will joyfully sing (...) of their Redeemer.

R 5. God will have the Members conformed unto their Head. (...) went to the
Crown by the Cross; and so shall they ^ ^e Christ's. God's Will, alone, should
satisfy our (...) concerning this matter: But these Reasons do set to (...)
the Equity and Goodness of God's Will and Way.

Learn hence two things Exhorted.

E 1. Judge of your Sorrows not by your present Sense, but by (...) Use and
Tendency. Count them Purges, and Vomits; (...) you like best, when they work in
the way wherein (...) use to Cure such as take them. Remember, Sirs, and (...),

^ 1. Who is it you suffer by? Is it one that you suspect of (...) of Power,
Wisdom, or Goodness?

Q. 2. See you not that Carnal Pleasure is far more dangerous than all your
Sorrow? Would you be in the condition of the ungodly, that prosper in the World?

Q. 3. Would you not rather follow your Savior, and be conformed to Him and
his Saints, than to the Wicked? Would you not go the common way to Heaven?

Q. 4. Has not Suffering done you good, and the Cross bore you good Fruit? Why
then afraid of it, and why so desirous of the Ease and Pleasure that has often
Hurt you?

Obj. But it is not all Sorrow that foretells Joy.

Sol. No, but all Sorrow of these three sorts does foretell it.

1. Sorrow undergone in sincerity for Christ's cause and sake.

2. Sorrow performed as a Duty, for Gods dishonor by our own and other Men's
sins, and for Miseries thence rising.

3. Sorrow of Chastisement patiently suffered, and improved unto Reformation.

E. 2. Condemn not the Generation of the Just, because you see them suffer more
than other Men. Be not as some Beasts; which, when one of their Fellows is
wounded, do all forsake him. -- And yet, err not on the other hand; think not
that all be Blessed hereafter, that be Afflicted here. Know the Cause, e're you
judge of the Suffering.

D. 2. Christ's Death and Departure was the cause of his Disciples Sorrow.
Three things grieved them;

1. That their Beloved Lord must be took from them.

2. That He must Die in such a manner, painfully and ignominiously.

3. That He must Die while they had so little foresight of his Resurrection
and Return. Had they known what would follow, they had been less troubled.

D. 3. The Sorrows of Christ's Disciples are but short. For,

R. 1. Life is but short.

R. 2. God's displeasure with his Servants, is but short, Psalm. 30.5.

R. 3. Our Trial, must be but short. God will see that the Furnace be not too
Hot, nor we in it too Long.

R. 4. The Power of those that afflict us, is but short.

Observe then,

I. 1. Religion is not a whit disparaged by short and small Sufferings. Do any
think them long? Let them consider,

1. Your Suffering will be no longer than your Sin.

2. Nor any longer than you make them NECESSARY.

3. No, not so long as you do deserve.

4. Nor so long as the Sufferings of the Ungodly, etc.

5. Nor so long as your following Joys; nor so great.

I. 2. It is reasonable that we moderate and mix our Sorrows with Joy. Being
they be as has been said; Rejoice evermore, is no unreasonable command.

D. 4. Christ will again visit his sorrowful Disciples. He means not to forsake
them, when he hides his Face from them. For why?

R. 1. He has Conquered the greatest Enemies already; and there be none
remaining to Conquer Him.

R. 2. He retains still his Relation unto his Disciples. He is their Head,
while they suffer so in the World.

R. 3. He loves us now He is in Heaven as much as ever He did on Earth. He
lays not by the least measure of his Love.

R. 4. His Covenant with his Servants is still in force. And his Promises
cannot be broken.

R. 5. His own Interest, Honor, Office, Preparations, do engage him to return
unto his disconsolate Flock. It does so; And,

R. 6. It is for their sakes that He withdraws for a time. The Bitter of it,
is intended as Medicinal for their Benefit. John 16.7. It is expedient for you
that I go away.

Mark ye then, and be Exhorted.

E. 1. Misunderstand not the Departings of your Lord. Say not with the Evil
Servant, My Lord delayeth his coming.

1. He will Return to Judge the World, at his appointed day, Job 19.25.

2. He will Return to his seemingly Forsaken Flocks. And give them Pastors
after his own Heart, Jer. 3.14.

3. He will Return to the Souls of his particular Servants seemingly Forsaken.
Weeping endures for a Night, but Joy comes in the Morning, Psalm. 30.5.

E. 2. Learn to behave your selves well, till Christ does Return unto you.
Particularly,

1. Bear his Absence, but be not Pleased with it.

2. Be not too Indifferent neither, but Resent it much.

3. Be not drawn to take another Lord, or Portion, in his stead. Let not
Riches, etc. serve you instead of Christ.

4. Be not emboldened to Sin by his Absence.

5. Be not discouraged from Duty, by his Absence, Heb. 12.12.

D. 5. When Christ shall again appear to his Disciples, their Sorrows shall be
turned into Joy. When He comes, Joy comes with him. When the Sun rises, it is
Light day, and Frosts are thawed, and all things revived.

1. The Deserted Soul turns from Complaint, to Triumph. He that said, There is
no hope; now says, My Lord and my God.

2. The Deserted Church does the same. Joying in its restored Ordinances,
Order, Opportunities, and Advantages.

3. The Universal Church shall have an end of their Sorrows, and a Harvest of
Joys, when Christ returns at the last day.

And here attend ye well.

1. It is Christ Himself that is the Believers Joy. The Beloved of their Souls.

2. And He will not come Alone neither. He brings an innumerable Company of
Blessed Saints and Angels.

D. 6. The Joy that comes at Christ's return will be a secure and everlasting
Joy. Who should deprive us of it?

1. Not our Selves. For our trying time will be out, and Confirmation will be
the reward of Conquest.

2. Not Devils. For there they cannot corrupt our Imaginations, or pervert our
Understandings, or disturb our Passions.

3. Not any Men. The Holy and Blessed, will increase our Joy; their Joy will be
ours. And as for the Wicked, they will be disenabled to hurt us, either by
Flatteries, Threats, Reproaches (...) ^cusations.

Now observe;

I. The belief of this, rejoices the Soul under all Disappointment (...) Though
the ART, and FORM, and WORDS of Holiness (...) so do.

I. 2. Be not Deceived by a Flattering; nor Dejected by a Frou^ World. No, but
place your hopes on the Joys which no Man can tak^ from you.

O Neglect not these Counsels and Requests.

C. 1. Spend most of your Studies, in confirming your belief of, 1. The Truth
of the Gospel. 2. The Immortality of the Soul; And, 3. The Life to come. Lay up
Treasure in Heaven; and Live for it, as Worldlings Live for the Flesh.

C. 2. Flatter not your selves with the hopes of Long Life. But make it the
Sum of your Religion, Care, and Business, to be ready for a safe and
comfortable Death.

C. 3. Live as in a constant War against all Fleshly Lusts, and Love not the
World as it cherishes those Lusts. He is never to be trusted, that falls
deeply in Love with Riches.

C. 4. Be Furnished beforehand with Expectation and Patience, for all Evils
that may befall you. And make not too great a matter of Poverty, or Wrong from
Men.

C. 5. Take heed of a Self-conceited, Vnhumbled Understanding, and of hasty,
and rash Conclusions. It is a Fool that rages, and is confident.

C. 6. Maintain Union and Communion with all true Christian Churches. Hold to
Catholic Principles of mere Christianity. Love CHRISTIANS as Christians, but
Love the BEST most.

C. 7. Be sure you maintain due Honor and Subjection unto your Governors,
Prove. 24.21. Obey no Man against God. But if you fall under persecuting
Governors, in patience possess your Souls, trust God, and hold fast Innocence,
and abhor Rebellion and Revenge. Do nothing but what God will own. Self-saving
Men, are usually the destroyers of themselves and others. Peter, that drew his
Sword for Christ, denied him the same Night, with Oaths and Curses. Fools trust
themselves, and Wise Men trust God. -- We may learn Wit from that Fool, who
seeing great Guns and Muskets, asked, What they were to do; and being told,
they were to Kill Men, said presently; Do not Men Die here without Killing? In
our Country they will Die of themselves.

C. 8. Be sure you keep up Family Religion. Especially in the Education of
Youth.

C. 9. Live in the Love of God and Man. Blessed be they that faithfully
practice those three Principles which all do profess. Sc. 1. To Love God as God
above all, and so to Obey him. 2. To Love our Neighbor as our selves. 3. And
to Do as we would be done unto.

Notes of the same Author, from Luke 20.20.

Doctrine. To have our Names written in Heaven, is the greatest Mercy, and
first, and chiefly, and only for it self to be Rejoiced in. Which so puts the
estimate on all inferior Mercies, that further than they refer to this, they
are not to be the matter of our Joy. For why?
R. 1. All common Mercies may consist with present Misery.

R. 2. Yea, they are also the ordinary and strong Means of making Men
miserable, and holding them in Misery.

R. 3. They are often made the Devils Tools to do his Work by, and are used
against God, to the hindrance of the Gospel, and injury of the Church.

R. 4. All of them may end in Misery, and leave the Owner in Everlasting Woe.

But I challenge all the World to tell me,

Q. 1. What should be Rejoiced in if not a Name in Heaven? If not the Lord of
Life himself, the Joy and Glory of Saints? What is Heaven, but the Enjoyment of
Him?

Q. 2. Is it not fit we now Rejoice, in that wherein we must Everlastingly
Rejoice? If you knew the Friend and Place in which you were to have but an
hundred years Joy, that fore knowledge would make them presently more
delightful to you, than any other.

Q. 3. And, Is not this Joy a Divine, Pure, Profitable, and a Warrantable one?
Need you be Ashamed of this? Is not he the best Christian, that has most Love,
Joy, and Gratitude? Is not he the likest to perform best his other Duties, and
to conquer his remaining Sins?

You may be sure your Names be written in Heaven;

1. If Heaven has the pre-eminence in your Practical Esteem. If you are
resolved to stick close to Christ whatever it cost you, and take God for your
Portion.

2. If obtaining Heaven be your principal^ Care, Business, and Work, which you
mind in the World.

3. If finding your selves Lost and filthy in Sin, you see Christ's Sufficiency
and Necessity, and unfeignedly take him for your Savior and Lord.

4. If the Heavenly Nature be most amiable in your Eyes.

5. If you have a special Love to the Heirs of Heaven.

Rejoice not, till you have these Evidences; For, 1. God (...) not you to
Rejoice. 2. Your Joy is Unreasonable. 3. It is Dishonest (...) Disingenuous. 4.
It is Dishonorable and Shameful. 5. It can be but Short. 6. And it is
Unprofitable, yea Hurtful.

Rejoice evermore, when you have these Evidences; For, Joy b^longs to you, it is
your Privilege and your Duty. Let not So^s and Firebrands of Hell, live a more
Joyful Life than you, who must be Everlastingly as full of Joy, as the Sun is
of Light.

Did you but know 1 how God approves holy Right Rejoicing, more than your
Pining Sorrow; and 2 how it strengthens the Soul, and 3 sweetens (...) 4 caseth
Sufferings, and 5 suits Gospel Grace, and 6 encourages (...) 7 serves to
subdue the Sins that trouble you, you would labor and (...) your drooping
Spirits raised.

However; if Melancholy, and your Mistakes, (...) shall keep you sad here; as
to your Happiness, (...) comparatively great. Heaven will wipe away (...) Those
Joys will be long enough, when they come.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers Chapel. 1691.


