A Petition for Peace: with the REFORMATION OF THE LITURGY.

As it was Presented to the Right Reverend BISHOPS, BY THE DIVINES Appointed by
His Majesty's Commission to treat with them about the alteration of it.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. MDCLXI.

A Petition for Peace.
To the most Reverend Archbishop and Bishops, and the Reverend their Assistants
commissioned by His Majesty to treat about the Alteration of the Book of
Common Prayer.
The humble and earnest Petition of others in the same Commission.
Most Reverend Fathers, and Reverend Brethren,
THe special Providence of God, and His Majesty's tender regard of the Peace
and Consciences of His Subjects, and his desire of their concord in the things
of God, has put into our hands this opportunity of speaking to you as humble
Petitioners, as well as Commissioners, on the behalf of these yet troubled and
unhealed Churches, and of many thousand souls that are dear to Christ; on whose
behalf, we are pressed in spirit in the sense of our duty, most earnestly to
beseech you, as you tender the peace and prosperity of these Churches, the
comfort of His Majesty in the union of his Subjects, and the peace of your
souls in the great day of your accounts, that laying by all former and present
exasperating and alienating differences, you will not now deny us your consent
and assistance to those means that shall be proved honest and cheap, and
needful to those great, desirable ends, for which we all profess to have our
offices, and our lives.

The things which we humbly beg of you are these.

1. That you will grant what we have here proposed and craved of you in our
Preface; Even your charitable interpretation, acceptance of, and consent unto
the alterations and additions to the Liturgy now tendered unto you, that being
inserted, as we have expressed, it [may be left to the Ministers choice to
use one or other at his discretion] upon His Majesty's approbation, according
to his gracious declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs. And that (seeing
we cannot obtain the form of Episcopal Government, described by the late
Reverend Primate of Ireland, and approved by many Episcopal Divines) we may at
least enjoy those benefits of Reformation in Discipline, and that freedom from
Subscription, Oaths and Ceremonies, which are granted in the said Declaration,
by the means of your charitable Mediation and Request.

2. Seeing some hundreds of able, holy, faithful Ministers are of late cast
out, and not only very many of their Families in great distress, but (which is
of far greater moment) abundance of Congregations in England, Ireland and
Wales, are overspread with lamentable ignorance, and are destitute of able,
faithful Teachers: And seeing too many that are insufficient, negligent, or
scandalous, are over the Flocks (not meaning this as an accusation of any that
are not guilty, nor a dishonorable Reflection on any party, much less on the
whole Church) we take this opportunity earnestly to beseech you, that you will
contribute your endeavors to the Removal of those that are the shame and
burdens of the Churches; and to the Restoration of such as may be an honor
and blessing to them. And to that end, that it be not imputed to them as their
unpardonable Crime, that they were born in an Age and Country which required
Ordination by Parochial Pastors, without Diocesans: And that Reordination
(whether absolute or hypothetical) be not made necessary to the future
exercise of their Ministry. But that an Universal Confirmation may be granted
of those ordained as aforesaid, they being still responsible for any personal
insufficiency or crime. Were these two granted (The Confirmation of the Grants
in His Majesty's Declaration, with the liberty of the Reformed Liturgy offered
you, and the restoring of able, faithful Ministers to a capacity to be
serviceable in the Church of God, without forcing them against their
consciences to be Re-ordained) how great would be the benefits to this
unworthy Nation? How glad would you make the peoples hearts? how thankful
should we be (for the cause of Christ, and the souls of men) to those that
grant them, and procure them; being conscious that we seek not great things
for our selves, or for our Brethren; that we are ambitious of no greater
wealth or honor, than our daily bread, with such freedom and advantage for
the labors of our Ministry, as may most conduce to the success, the increase
of holiness and peace; we shall take the boldness to second these Requests,
with many of our reasons, which we think should prevail for your consent,
choosing rather to incur whatsoever censures or offense may by any be taken
against our necessary freedom of expression, than to be silent at such a time
as this, when thousands of the servants of the Lord, that are either deprived
of their faithful Teachers, or in fears of losing them, together with the
freedom of their consciences in Gods worship, do cry day and night to Heaven
for help, and would cry also in your ears with more importunate Requests, if
they had but the opportunity as now we have.

And 1. We beseech you bear with us while we remember you, that you are
Pastors of the flock of Christ, who are bound to feed them, and to preach in
season, and out of season, and to be laborious in the Word and Doctrine; but
are not bound to hinder all others from this blessed work, that dare not use a
Cross or Surplice, or worship God in a form which they judge disorderly,
defective, or corrupt, when they have better to offer him (Mal. 1. 13, 14.) Is
it not for matter and phrase at least as agreeable to the holy Scriptures? If
so, we beseech you suffer us to use it, who seek nothing by it, but to worship
God as near as we can, according to his will, who is jealous in the matters of
his worship. If indeed yours have more of strength, and ours of weakness, yet
let not Fathers cast the children from the House of God, because they are sick
or weak, and need the more compassion; let not our Physicians resolve their
Patients shall all be famished, or cast off, whose temperature and appetites
cannot agree to feed on the same dish, with the same preparation and sauce. He
that thrice charged Peter as he loved him, to feed his Lambs and Sheep, did
never think of charging him to deny them food or turn them out of his fold, or
forbid all others to feed them, unless they could digest such forms and
ceremonies, and superscriptions as ours.

2. May we presume to mind you, that the Lord of the Harvest has commanded
us to pray that more Laborers may be sent into the Harvest. (For still
proportionably the Harvest is great, and the Laborers are few) Mat. 9. 37. And
that the Lord has not furnished them with his gifts in vain, nor lighted these
Candles to put under a Bushel, but to be set on a Candlestick, that they may
give light to all that are in the house, Mat. 5. 15: And that there are few
Nations under the Heavens of God, as far as we can learn, that have more able,
holy, faithful, laborious and truly peaceable Preachers of the Gospel
(proprotionably) than those are that are now cast out in England, and are like
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, to be cast out, if the old Conformity be
urged. This witness is true, which in Judgment we bear, and must record
against all the reproaches of uncharitableness, which the Justifier of the
Righteous at his day will effectually confute. We therefore beseech you, that
when thousands of souls are ready to famish for want of the bread of Life, and
thousands more are grieved for the Ejection of their faithful Guides, the
Laborers may not be kept our, upon the account of such Forms or Ceremonies,
or Reordination; at least till you have enough as fit as they to supply their
places, and then we shall never petition you for them more.

3. And we beseech you consider when you should promote the joy and
thankfulness of His Majesty's Subjects for his happy Restoration, whether it
be equal and seasonable to bring upon so many of them so great calamities as
the change of able, faithful Ministers, for such as they cannot comfortably
commit the conduct of their souls to, and the depriving them of the Liberty of
the Public Worship; calamities far greater than the mere loss of all their
worldly substance can amount to: In a day of Common Joy to bring this
causelessly on so many of His Majesty's Subjects, and to force them to lie down
in heart-breaking-sorrows, as being almost as far undone, as Man can do it;
this is not a due requital of the Lord for so great deliverances: Especially
considering, that if it were never so certain, that it is the sin of the
Ministers that dare not be Re-ordained, or conform; its hard that so many
thousand innocent people should suffer even in their souls for the faults of
others.

4. And if we thought it would not be mis-interpreted, we would here
remember you, how great and considerable a part of the three Nations they are,
that must either incur these sufferings, or condole them that undergo them; and
how great a grief it will be to His Majesty, to see his grieved subjects; and
how great a joy it will be to him, to have their hearty thanks and prayers,
and see them live in prosperity, peace and comfort under his most happy
Government.

5. And we may plead the nature of their cause, to move you to compassionate
your poor afflicted Brethren in their sufferings. It is, in your own account,
but for refusing Conformity to things indifferent, or at the most, of no
necessity to salvation. It is in their account for the sake of Christ, because
they dare not consent to that which they judge to be an usurpation of his
Kingly power, and an accusation of his Laws as insufficient, and because they
dare not be guilty of addition to, or diminution of his Worship, or of
worshipping him after any other Law, than that by which they must be judged,
or such as is merely subordinate to that. Suppose they be mistaken in thinking
the things to be so displeasing to God; yet it is commendable in them to be
fearful of displeasing him, and careful to obey him; a disposition necessary to
all that will be saved, and therefore to be loved and cherished in them by
the Pastors of the Church; who should be very tender of putting them to
suffering, or casting them out of the Church, because they dare not do that
which they judge to be so great a sin against the Lord, deserving damnation to
themselves. Should not the love of Christ command us to be tender of those
that are so tender of his honor, and to take heed what we do to men for
taking heed of sin, and being afraid to offend the Lord; and should not the
special love of Christians, and the common love of men, command us, to be
loath to drive men by penalties, upon that which they judge does tend to their
everlasting damnation, and which indeed does tend to it, because they judge it
so to do; For he that will do that which he thinks to be so great a sin as
is before described, to please men, or to escape their punishment, no doubt
deserves the wrath of God, and should we not be loath to drive men upon sin
and condemnation: though we were sure that their own infirmity is the
occasion. If it be said, that by this Rule nothing shall be commanded, if men
will but scruple it. We answer, Things in themselves necessary, or commanded
by God, must be commanded by man, because scruples make them not unnecessary,
and make not void the Laws of God, and it will be a sin even to the scrupulous
to disobey: But things dispensible, and of themselves unnecessary, should not
be rigorously urged upon him, to whom they would be a sin, and cause of
condemnation. It is in case of things indifferent in your own judgment, that
we now speak. If it be said, that it is humor, pride, or singularity, or
peevishness, or faction, and not true tenderness of conscience that causes the
doubts, or nonconformity of these men. We answer, such crimes must be
fastened only on the Individuals, that are first proved guilty of them; and
not upon multitudes unnamed and unknown and without pro^^; and you know it is
the prerogative of God to search the heart, and that he has said, Judge not
that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
Mat. 7. 1, 2. And who art thou that judge another man's servant, to his own
Master, he stands or falls; yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able
to make him stand. Romans 14. 4. And who can pretend to be better acquainted
with their hearts, than they are themselves! For what man knows the things of
a man, save the spirit of a man, which is in him; 1 Cor. 2. 11. And they are
ready to appeal to the dreadful God, the searcher of hearts, and the hater of
Hypocrisy, that if it were not for fear of sinning against him, and wounding
their consciences, and hazarding, and hindering their salvation, they would
readily obey you in all these things; That it is their fear of sin and
damnation that is their Impediment, they are ready to give you all the
assurance, that man can give by the solemnest professions, or by oath if justly
called to it.

And one would think that a little Charity might suffice to enable you to
believe them, when their noncompliance brings them under suffering, and their
compliance, is the visible way to favor; safety, and prosperity in the world.
And if men that thus appeal to God concerning the intention of their own
hearts, cannot be believed, even when the State of their worldly interest
bears witness to their professions, but another shall step into the Throne of
the heart-searching God, and say [It is not as they say, or swear, It is not
conscience, but obstinacy or singularity] all humane converse upon these terms
will be overthrown: And what remedy have they, but patiently to wait, till God
that they have Appealed to, shall decide the doubt, and show who were the
Assertours of truth or falsehood.

6 And we crave leave to represent to you the great disproportion, in
necessity and worth, between the things in question, and the salvation of so
many, as may be obtained by the free and faithful exercise of the Ministry,
of those that now are, and that are yet like to be laid aside; Do you think
the Lord that died for souls, and has sent us to learn what that means [I
will have mercy and not sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13.] is better pleased with
Reordination, Subscription and Ceremonies, than with the saving of souls, by
the means of his own appointment: If it be said that Public order and peace
and concord do promote the salvation of many, and therefore are to be
preferred before the salvation of fewer. We answer, Concord in holy obedience
to God does indeed promote the salvation of all that entertain it; but Concord
in Ceremonies, or Reordination, or Oaths of obedience to Diocesans, or in your
questioned particular forms of Prayer, do neither in their nature, or by virtue
of any promise of God, so much conduce to men's salvation; as the preaching of
the Gospel does, by able faithful and laborious Ministers. And how comes it to
pass that unity, concord and order must be placed in those things, which are
no way necessary thereto! Will there not be order and concord in Holy
obedience and acceptable worshipping of God, on the terms which we now propose
and crave, without the foresaid matter of offense? We here show you that we
are no Enemies to order, and our long importunity for the means of concord,
does show that we are not enemies to concord.

If it be said, that other men that will conform to the things in question may
convert and save souls better than those that are factious and disobedient: We
first humbly crave that reproach may not be added to affliction, and that none
may be called factious that are not proved such; and that Laws imposing things
indifferent in your judgment, and sinful in theirs, may not be made the rule
to judge of faction: But that men who live inoffensively under civil
Government, and in matters of Faith and Worship, subscribe to all contained in
the holy Scriptures; and endeavor to promote Universal Peace and Cha^y on
these terms, may not be made offenders by the making of Laws and Canons, that
must force them to be such: Consequently Daniel was an offender that would not
forbear praying openly by the space of thirty days. But antecedently to that
Law, he was confessed just, by them that said [Wee shall not find any
occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the
Law of his God] Dan 6. 5, 7, 10. The Law which he must break was made to make
him a breaker of that Law; take away that law and take away his fault. We
accuse none of the like intentions, but we must say, that it is easy to make
any man an offender, by making laws which his conscience will not allow him to
observe, and its as easy to make that same man cease to seem disobedient,
obstinate, or factious, without any change at all in him, by taking down such
needless Laws. We may again remember you what Christ a second time does press,
Mat. 12. 7. [But if ye had known what this means, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.]

And next, to the rest of the objection, we answer; That sad experience tells
the world, that if the Ministers that we are pleading for, be laid aside,
there are not competent men enough to supply their Rooms, and equally to
promote the salvation of the flocks: This is acknowldged by them who still give
it as the reason why Ministers are not to be trusted with the expressing of
their desires in their own words, nor so much as to choose which Chapter to
read, as well as which Text to preach on, to their Auditors, because we shall
have Ministers so weak, as to be unfit for such a trust: And men that are not
wise enough for so easy a part of their duty, as to choose fit portions of
Scripture to read, are unlikely to afford an equal assistance to the salvation
of the people instead of the labors of such as we are speaking for.

7 And it must be remembered that in our Ordination, we must profess that [wee
are persuaded that the Holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all Doctrine,
required of necessity for eternal salvation, etc.] and that we will teach or
maintain nothing as required of necessity to eternal salvation, but that which
we are persuaded may be concluded and proved by the same] and that one of the
articles of the Church contains the same doctrine of the scriptures
sufficiency: and to these we are called to subscribe; And the persons that we
now speak for, are ready to subscribe to all contained in the Holy Scriptures,
and willing to be obliged by the Laws of men to practice it: And he that
has all things necessary to salvation is received of God, and should therefore
be received by the Church, if the Apostles argument be good, Romans 14. 1. 3.
[For God has received him] seeing then you do profess that none of your
Impositions that cannot be concluded from the scripture, are necessary to
salvation, let them not consequentially be made necessary to it, and more
necessary than that which is ordinarily necessary.

If you say, that so many men shall be forbidden to preach, unless they dare
Subscribe and use these things; you will tempt them to infer, that Preaching
being ordinarily necessary to salvation, Romans 10. 14. And these things called
indifferent being made necessary to preaching and preferred before it,
therefore they are made necessary to salvation, and preferred before that which
God has made necessary;

If it be said, that this will as much follow the making of any other
indifferent thing to be necessary to preaching, and so the Church shall make
no orders; We answer.

1. That smaller things must not be imposed by unproportionable penalties.

2. That though the Church may prefer a sober, peaceable Preacher before one
that is Schismatical and unpeaceable (which is not at all to exclude Preaching)
yet the Church may not make any thing necessary to Preaching it self; that is
of it self unnecessary, and not antecedently necessary, at least by accident.

8. And if our Religion be laid upon your particular Liturgy, we shall teach
the Papists further to insult, by asking us, where was our Religion two hundred
years ago? The Common Prayer Book as differing from the Mass Book, being not so
old, and that which might then be the matter of a change, is not so
unchangeable it self, but that those Alterations may be accepted for ends so
desirable as are now before us.

9. And we humbly crave that we may not in this be more rigorously dealt
with, than the Pastors and People of the Ancient Churches were: If we may not
have the Liberty of the Primitive times, when for ought can be proved, no
Liturgical Forms were imposed upon any Church, yet at least let us have the
liberty of the following Ages, when under the same Prince there were diversity
of Liturgies, and particular Pastors, had the power of making and altering them
for their particular Churches.

10. And if you should reject (which God forbid) the moderate proposals which
now and formerly we have made, we humbly crave leave to offer it to your
consideration, what Judgment all the Protestant Churches are likely to pass on
your proceedings, and how your cause and ours will stand represented to them,
and to all succeeding Ages. Though we earnestly desire the tolleration of
those that are tolerable, and the peaceable Liberties of all that agree on the
Catholic terms of Primitive Simplicity, in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline,
yet have we our selves so far drawn near you, as that the world will say, you
reject those that are for Episcopacy it self, and set Forms of Liturgy, and are
not so much as charged by you at all, as disagreeing in any point of Faith, if
you shall reject us. If after our submission to His Majesty's Declaration, and
after our own Proposals of the Primitive Episcopacy, and of such a Liturgy as
here we tender, we may not be permitted to exercise our Ministry, or enjoy
the Public Worship of God, the Pens of those learned, moderate Bishops will
bear witness against you, that were once employed as the chief Defenders of
that cause (we mean such as Reverend Bishop Hall, and Usher) who have
published to the world, that much less than this might have served to our
fraternal Unity and Peace. If you would not grant this Liberty, and Communion
to others, with whom Christ will hold Communion in grace and glory; yet it will
appear more strange to the world, that you should cast out the Episcopal also,
that dare not go beyond the Rule of Holy Scripture, and the Example of
Primitive Simplicity.

And we doubt not but you know, how new and strange a thing it is that you
require in the point of Reordination: When a Canon amongst those called the
Apostles deposes those that Re-ordain, and that are re-ordained; And when it
is a thing that both Papists and Protestants condemn, when not only the former
Bishops of England, that were more moderate were against it, but even the most
servent adversaries of the Presbyterian way; such as Bishop Bancroft himself,
how strange must it needs seem to the Reformed Churches to the whole Christian
world, and to future Generations, that so many able, faithful Ministers should
be laid by as broken Vessels, because they dare not be re-ordained? and that
so many have been put upon so new and so generally dis-relished a thing?

11. And we crave leave to remember you, that the Holy Ghost has commanded
you to over-see the flock, not by constraint, but willingly, not as being Lords
over Gods Heritage, but as Ensamples to the Flock: And that it is not only
more comfortable to your selves to be loved as the Fathers, than to be
esteemed the Afflicters of the Church, but that it is needful to the ends of
your Ministry for the people^ When you are loved, your Doctrine will more
easily be received: But when men think that their souls or liberties are
endangered by you, its easy to judge how much they are like to profit by you.

12. And you know if we are not in point of Ceremonies or Forms in every thing
of your mind; it is no more strange to have variety of intellectual
Apprehensions in the same Kingdom and Church, than variety of temperatures and
degrees of age and strength. If His Majesty should expel all those from his
Dominions, that are not so wise, as solidly to judge, whether the Liturgy as
before, or as thus reformed, be the best, yea whether this be intolerable in
comparison of yours, and whether God be pleased or displeased with your
Ceremonies, it would be too great a diminution of his subjects, and if you
should turn all such out of the Kingdom of Christ, it would be liker a
dissipating, than a gathering, and a destroying, than an edifying of his
Church: And you have not your power to destruction, but to edification, 2 Cor.
10. 8. and 13. 10. you must do all things for the peoples edifying, 2 Cor. 12.
19. Ephesians. 4. 12.

13. And how Christ will take it of you, to cast out from the Ministry or
Communion of the Church, or to grieve and punish all those that dare not
conform to you in these matters; for fear of displeasing the Lawgiver of the
Church, we beseech you judge (when your souls are most seriously thinking of
the day of your Accounts) by such passages of Holy Scripture as may fully
acquaint you with his mind. He is himself a merciful High Priest, a gracious
Savior, a tender Governor. He despises not the day of small things, Zech.
4. 10. He feeds his flock like a Shepherd, he gathers his Lambs with his
Arm, and carries them in his bosom, and gently leads those that are with
young, Isa. 40. 11. A bruised reed will he not break, and the smoking flax
will he not quench, Isa. 42. 3. Matthew. 12. 20. God does instruct the Plowman
to discretion, and teaches him not to thresh the Fetches with a
Threshing-instrument, nor to turn the Cart-wheel upon the Cummin, but the
Fetches are beaten out with a staff, and the Cummin with a rod, Isa. 28. 26,
27. Gods Servants are his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. He will spare them as a man
spares his Son that serves him, and he that touches them, touches the apple
of his eye, Zech. 2. 8. Remember the near relation they stand in to God in
Christ, that they are the children of God, coheirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17.
The members of his body, his flesh and bone, which he cannot hate, who ever
hate them, Ephesians. 5. 29, 30. Remember how dear they cost him, and to what
honor he will advance them; and that these same persons that love him in
sincerity, must be where he is, to behold his glory, Joh. 12. 26. and 17. 24.
and shall be like the Angels of God, Luke 20. 36. and shall judge the world, 1
Cor. 6. 2, 3. and that Christ will come to be glorified and admired in them, 2
These. 1. 10. and they shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father, Mat. 13. 43. Remember with what tender usage he treated his weak
imperfect members upon earth, and when he was ascending to prepare a place for
them, that they might be with him where he is, how affectionately he
bespeaketh them, Joh. 20. 17. Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend up
to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God. And lest you should
say, that he will not own those little ones, that (whether for Truths sake, or
for their infirmities) do bear disgraceful titles in the world; Remember that
at the day of udgement he will say, Inasmuch as you did it not, or did it, to
one of the least of these my Brethren, you did it not, or did it unto me, Mat.
25. 40. 45. If his Elect cry to him day and night, though he bear long, he
will avenge them, and that speedily, Luke 18. 7, 8. Bear with us while we add
this terrible passage, which we once before made mention of, Mat. 18. 5, 6.
[Who so shall receive one such little child in my name, receives me; but
whose shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better
for him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned
in the depth of the Sea.] Undoubtedly if you consider duly by such passages,
how Christ will take it to have his servants not only notvisited,
not-relieved, but to be afflicted, not only in body, but in soul, with that
great affliction to be cast out of the Ministry, or Church, for an unavoidable
dissent in things indifferent, you will never join with those that shall
stretch forth a hand against them for such a cause as this. If yet the old
pretense be made, that they suffer as Schismatics, and disobedient; we must
say again, if any shall make men disobedient by imposing things unnecessary,
which they know are by learned, pious, peaceable men, esteemed sins against the
Lord, and then shall thus heavily afflict them for the disobedience which they
may easily cure by the forbearance of those impositions; let not our souls come
into their secret, nor our honor be united to their Assembly: If they shall
smite or cast out a supposed Schismatic, and Christ shall find an able, holy,
peaceable Minister, or other Christian, wounded, or mourning, out of doors, let
us not be found among the Actors, nor stand among them in the day of their
accounts, when tribulation shall be recompensed to the Troublers of believers,
2 These. 1. 6.

14. We beseech you also to consider, that men have not their understandings
at their own command, much less can they be commanded by others, if they were
never so willing to believe all that is imposed on them to be lawful, they
cannot therefore believe it, because they would, the intellect being not free.
And to dissemble, and say, and swear, and do, the things which they believe
not, is such an aggravated hypocrisy (being in the matters of God, and joined
with perfidiousness) as we may suppose cannot render them acceptable to any,
that have not renounced Religion and Humanity, much less should they be
constrained to it. And when it is known that men's judgments are against the
things imposed, and that penalties are no means adapted to the informing and
changing of the judgment; but to force men to do the things they know, we
conceive they should not be used, and so used in the case of things
indifferent, where they are not necessary to the common good, and where the
sufferers, have never had sufficient means to change their judgments.

If it be said, that it is their own sault, that their judgments are not
changed, and that the means have been sufficient.

We answer, That it is their fault, is the point in question, which the Sword
can easilier take for granted, than the Tongue or Pen can prove: But if it be
so, it is their fault, as it is that they are the Sons of Adam, partakers of
the common corruption of humane nature; and as it is their fault that they are
not all of the highest form in the School of Christ, above the common ignorance
and frailties of believers, and that they are not all the most judicious
Divines of the most subtle wits, and had not the same education and society to
advance your opinions, and represent things to their understandings, just as
they are represented unto yours. And if men must be cast out of the Church, or
Ministry, because they are not wiser than such learned men, as the Pastors of
the most of the Reformed Churches, and as Hildersham, Bar^e, Parker, Ames Dod,
Ball, Nichols, and many such others as have here taken this conformity to be a
sin, how few, alas, how very few will there be left!

And if it be said, that men do willingly keep out the light. We must say, that
few men are obstinate against the opinions that tend to their ease and
advancement in the world, and to save them from being vi^ified as Schismatics,
and undone; and when men profess before the Lord, that they do impartially
study and pray for knowledge, and would gladly know the will of God at the
dearest rate; we must again say, that those men must prove that they know the
dissentors hearts, better than they are known to themselves, that expect to be
believed by charitable Christians, when they charge them with wilful ignorance,
or obstinate resisting of the truth.

15. And we crave leave to ask whether you do not your selves in some things
mistake, or may not do so for ought you know? and whether your understandings
are not still imperfect, and all men differ not in some opinions or other? And
if you may mistake in any thing, may it not be in as great things as these? can
it be expected, that we should all be past erring about the smallest
Ceremonies and Circumstances of worship? And then should not the consciousness
of your own infirmity, provoke you rather to compassionate humane frailty, than
to cast out your Brethren, for as small failings as your own?

16. And we further offer to your consideration, whether this be doing as you
would be done by, would you be cast out for every fault that is as bad as this?
and does this show that you love your neighbors as your selves? Put your
selves in their case, and suppose that you had studied, conferred and prayed,
and done your best to know whether God would have you to be Re-ordained, to use
these Forms or Ceremonies, or Subscriptions, or not? and having done all, you
think that God would be displeased if you should use them, would you then be
used your selves, as your dissenting Brethren are now used, or are like to be;
love them as your selves, and we will crave no further favor for them.

17. But nothing more affects us, than to think of the Lamentable divisions,
that have been caused and are still like to be, whilst things unnecessary are
so imposed: And on the contrary, how blessed an unity and peace we might enjoy
if these occasions of division were removed, and we might but have leave to
serve God as his Apostles did. As in Doctrinals, ten thousand will sooner agree
in an Explicit belief of the Creed, than an hundred in an Explicit belief of
all that Ockam or Scotus have determined; So in the matters of Government and
worship; It is easier to agree upon few things, than upon many, upon great and
certain and necessary things, than upon small uncertain and unnecessary things,
and upon things that God himself has revealed or appointed, than upon things
that proceed from no surer an Original, than the wit or will of man. The strict
prohibition of adding to or diminishing from the things commanded by the
Lawgiver of the Church, Deuteronomy. 12. 3^. does put such a fear in the minds of
multitudes of the loyal subjects of Christ, lest by such additions or
diminutions in the matters of his worship, they should provoke him to
displeasure, as will be a certain perpetual hindrance to any common unity or
Concord, in such humane impositions, of which many of the servants of the
jealous God will have a continual jealousy.

With grieved hearts we now renew the lamentable divisions, occasioned already
by these Impositions, ever since the Reformation in the days of King Edward
6th. and the grievous fruits of those Divisions! How they destroyed Charity
(the character of Christ's Disciples) and exasperated men's minds against each
other: How they corrupted men's prayers and other exercises of devotions, and
made them pray and preach against one another: How their tongues were emboldned
to the censuring of each other, one party calling the other, Factious,
Schismatical, Singular, and Disobedient; and the other calling them
Antichristian, Proud, Tirannical, Superstitious, Persecutors and Formalists:
And such language still increasing the uncharitableness and divisions; till the
increase of imposing rigor on the one side, and of impatience under Sufferings
on the other side, was too great a preparation to those greater calamities
which are yet bitter to the remembrance of all whose interests or passions have
not Conquered their humanity. And the continuance of so much of the causes and
effects, does infallibly prove, that if the same impositions be settled upon
us, the same Heart-divisions will be still continued: Brethren will disdain
the name and love of Brethren to each other; which yet Christ himself by
condiscending and reproving love, vouchsafes to them all. Instead of loving
one another with a pure heart, fervently, there will be, if not hating, yet
grudging at one another, censuring and despising one another; Which effects
will still increase their cause, and make one side think, that they are
necessitated to be more rigorous in their Coercions, and the other think that
they are allowed to be more censorious against those by whom they suffer.

And how many thousands on both sides by such a stream of temptations, will
undoubtedly be carried on in a course of Sin from day to day, and by heart
sin, and tongue sin, by Pulpit sins, or sins in other parts of Worship, will
dishonor God and provoke him to indignation against them and the Land, we may
not without astonishment and grief of heart foresee or foretell.

And its easy to foresee how the innocent will be numbered with the faulty,
and those that do but feel their sufferings; and the sufferings of the Church
on these occasions, and do but groan and sigh to God, and pray for succor and
deliverance, will be thought to be guilty of discontent and faction, and
bringing the Government of the Church, and consequently of the Kingdom into
hatred or dislike, and so their sufferings will be increased: And he that is
commanded by the Laws of humanity to be compassionately sensible of the
Calamities of others, shall be thought an offender for being sensible of his
own. Its easy to foresee, how those expressions in men's Sermons, or Prayers,
or familiar Conference, which seem to any misunderstanding, or suspicious, or
masicious hearers, to intimate any sense of sufferings, will be carried to the
ears of Rulers, and represented as a crime? And nature having planted in all
men an unwillingness to suffer, and denied to all men a love of calamity, and
necessitated men to feel when they are hurt, and made the tongue and
countenance the Index of our sense; these Effects will be unavoidable, while
such Impositions are continued, and while a fear of sinning will not suffer men
to swallow and digest them, and what wrong such divisions about Religion will
be to the Kingdom; and to His Majesty, we shall not mention, because our
Governors themselves may better understand it.

On the other side, what universal ease, and peace, and joy would be the fruits
of that happy unity and concord, which the reasonable forbearances which we
humbly petition for, would certainly produce; how comfortable would our
Ministerial labors be, when we had no such temptations, burdens, or
disquietments? When we lay not under the Reproofs of Conscience, nor the
suspicions, or displeasure of our Superiors, but might serve the Lord without
distraction, and be among his servants without such fears, (Phil. 1. 14. 1
Cor. 16. 10.) How much would the hands of the Builders be strengthened for the
work of God, when they speak the same things, and there are no divisions among
them, but they are perfectly joined together in the same mind and judgment, 1
Cor. 1. 10. when they are like-minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind, doing nothing through strife or vain glory, which will
never be while the one calls the other factious and schismatical, and the other
calls him superstitious and tyrannical; but when Christ has taught us in
lowliness of mind to esteem others better than our selves, and not to look
every man on his own things (his own gifts, and virtues, and worth, and
interest) but every man also on the things of others; and till the same mind
be in us, that was in Christ Jesus, that humbled himself, and took upon him
the form of a servant, and made himself of no Reputation, Phil. 1. 2, to 9. How
much should we honor the Body, the Spirit, the Hope, the Lord, the Faith, the
Baptism, the God and Father of all Believers, which are one, if we were one
among our selves, which will never be, till with lowliness, and meekness, and
long-suffering, we forbear one another in love, instead of hating, reviling
and persecuting one another; and till we endeavor to keep the unity of the
Spirit (though given in various degrees) rather than an unity in unnecessary
things) in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and till the
well-joynted and compacted body do edify it self in love, by a due
contribution of mutual supply, and grow in Christ the proper head, instead of
contending with it self, and dis-joynting and tearing it self into pieces,
because of our different measure of understanding, and our unavoidable
differences about some small unnecessary things, verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. How
beautiful would our holy Assemblies be, and how delightful the worship of God
there celebrated, if we had all laid by, the unchristian spirit of hatred,
envy, emulation, murmuring, wrath, variance, strife, heresies, seditions, and
all uncharitableness, and with one mind, and one mouth did glorify God (Gal.
5. 19, 20, 21. Romans 15. 16.) which will never be done, till those that are
strong do bear the infirmities of the weak, and please not themselves, but
every one of us please his neighbor, for his good to edification, instead of
vilifying him, or undoing him; and till instead of casting each others out of
the Church or Ministry, on the account of things indifferent, we received one
another, as Christ received us to the glory of God, Romans 15. 1, 2, 6, 7. and
till we are thus like-minded one toward another; according to Christ Jesus,
verse. 5. instead of being selfishly minded as men, or maliciously as enemies (1
Cor. 3. 3. 1 Cor. 14. 20. Col. 3. 8. Titus 3. 3.) If the very Babes were fed
with the sincere Milk of the Word, and all malice, and guile, and hypocrisy,
and envies, and evil-speaking were laid aside, it would prove the best way to
their growth, and a surer way to your present and eternal peace, than casting
them out because they cannot bear your burdens, or digest some unnecessary
things, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. How good and how happy a thing would it be for
Brethren to dwell together in unity? (Psalm. 133. 1.) And as those that by one
spirit are baptized into one body, and know they have need of one another, to
contribute honor to the parts that lack it; yea to bestow more abundant honor
upon those members which we think to be less honorable, and more abundant
comeliness, on the uncomely parts, as knowing those members are necessary that
seem to be more feeble. If indeed we would have no Schism in the body, the
natural way is, for the members to have the same care one for another, as
suffering all with one that suffers, and rejoicing all with one that is
honored, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Take their sufferings as
your own, and you will not be hasty to bring them unto suffering. It must be
the Primitive Simplicity of Faith, Worship, and Discipline, that must restore
the Primitive Charity, Unity, and Peace, and make the multitude of Believers to
be of one heart, and of one soul, and to converse with gladness and singleness
of heart, as having all things common, Act. 4. 32. and 2. 46. No such things as
our controverted Impositions, were then made necessary to the unity and concord
of the members of the Church.

18. And we humbly offer to your consideration, which way will most gratify
Satan in his cause and servants, and which will most promote the work and
interest of Jesus Christ. The ungodly that have an inbred enmity to holiness,
and to the holy seed, will be glad to see so many of them suffer, and glad
under the shelter of your displeasure and afflictings, to find opportunity to
reproach them, and add affliction to affliction. The common adversaries of our
Religion, and of the King and Kingdom will rejoice to see us weakened by our
Divisions, and employed in afflicting or censuring one another, and to see so
many able Ministers laid aside, that might do much displeasure to Satan, by the
weakening of his Kingdom, and by promoting the Gospel and Kingdom of the
Lord. And whether this will tend to the edification of the Saints, and the
pleasing of Christ, we have inquired before.

19. And if what you stand for, be indeed of God, this course of unmerciful
imposition, is the greatest wrong to it, that you can easily be drawn to,
unawars; while somany truly fearing God, are cast out or trodden down, and
tempted to think ill of that which themselves and the Church thus suffer by,
and when so many of the worst befriend this way because it gratifieth them, it
tends to make your Cause judged of, according to the quality of its friends
and adversaries. And how great a hand this very thing has had already in the
dislike of that is befallen Diocesans, Ceremonies, and the Liturgy, is a thing
too generally known to need proof.

20. Lastly we repeat what formerly we have said, that the Holy Ghost has
already so plainly decided the point in controversy, in the instance of meats
and days, Rom 14. 15. that it seems strange to us that yet it should remain
a Controversy. A weak Brother that makes an unnecessary difference of meats
and days, is not to be cast out, but so to be received and not to be
troubled with such doubtful disputations: Despising and judging the servants of
the Lord, whom he receives and can make to stand, and that upon such small
occasion is unbeseeming true Believers, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. All should be
here left to the full persuasion of their own mind, verse. 5. Both parties here
acknowledges the sovereignty of Christ, and in observing, or not observing
such things, they do it all to him, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. his judgment should
affright us from despising or judging one another, verse. 10, 11, 12. instead of
judging others we should judge it our duty, that none of us put a stumbling
block, or occasion to fall in his Brothers way; verse. 13. If we grieve those
that esteem that unclean which we do not, we walk not charitably; destroy not
the work of God, nor him for whom Christ died, by your indifferent things;
verse. 14, 15, 20. It is evil to him that judges it to be evil. verse. 14, 20.
Do you believe these things to be indifferent, have this belief to your self
before God, and condemn not your selves in that which you allow, verse. 22. your
Brother is damned if he practice doubtingly, for whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin. verse. 23. and you drive him upon damnation! We may well conclude then,
that it is good, even your selves to avoid such things unnecessary, by which
your Brother stumbleth, is offended, or made weak. verse. 21. Much more to
forbear the forcing them upon him, which those that the Apostle reproves did
not attempt. It is the Kingdom of God that we must all promote; and that
Kingdom consists not in meat or drink, but in righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. And he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and should be approved of men verse. 17, 18. Let us
therefore follow after the things, which make for peace, and things wherewith
one may Edify another. verse 19.

If you say, Rulers imposition makes indifferent things cease to be
indifferent? We answer,

1. They are not indifferent, in the judgment of dissenters, though they be
so in yours.

2. Paul was a Ruler of the Church himself, and yet would deny his own Liberty,
rather than offend the weak, so far was he from taking away the liberty of
others: 1 Cor. 8. 13. And it is to the Church of Rome and Corinth, and so to
the Pastors as well as the rest, that Paul thus writes: We beseech you
therefore plead not Law against us, when our request is that you will join with
us in Petitioning, to his Majesty, and the Parliament, that there may be no
such Law.

The Apostles and Elders Act. 15. 28. declare unto the Churches, that it seemed
good to the Holy Ghost, and them, to lay upon them, no greater burden, than
necessary things; imposing them because antecedently necessary (for that is
given as the reason, of their selection, and imposition) and not only making
unnecessary things, necessary, by imposition, for then the Imposition had been
unnecessary, though it was not a simple, unchangeable necessity, yet it was a
necessity by accident, pro tempore and loco; antecedent to the imposition of
that assembly. Seeing then such things commend us not to God; and if you use
them, at least, you are not the better. Sin not against Christ, by sinning
against your brethren, 1 Cor. 8. 8, 9, 11, 12. much more take heed of forcing
them to sin.

We have presumed to be thus plain and large, in showing you some of our
Reasons, for your consent, to the necessary abatement, of things unnecessary to
the Consciences of your Brethren.

In the conclusion, we beseech you to compare with these the Reasons, that can
move you to deny us these requests. If you will needs use such things your
selves, will it gain you so much to force them upon others, as will answer all
the foresaid Inconveniences? Will it cost you as dear to grant this Liberty, or
abate these things, as the Imposition will cost your Brethren and you? O how
easily, how safely, how cheaply, yea, with what commodity and delight, may you
now make this Nation happy, in granting your Brethren these requests?

If you say that others will be still unsatisfied, and you shall never know
when you have done: We answer,

1. The cause of the Non-conformists has been long ago stated, at the troubles
at Frank-ford, and having continued still the same, you have no reason to
suspect them of any considerable change.

2. Grant us but the freedom that Christ and his Apostles left unto the
Churches; use necessary things, as necessary, and unnecessary, as unnecessary,
and charitably bear with the infirmities of the weak, and tolerate the
tolerable, while they live peaceably, and then you will know when you have
done. And for the intolerable, we beg not your Toleration: We intercede for
those that have Christ for their Intercessor in the Highest: We know when
all is done, there will be Heresies. 1 Cor. 11. 19. There will be self-lovers,
covetous, bousters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers
of pleasures more than of God, having a form of godliness, while they deny the
power. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4. There will be filthy dreamers, that defile the
Flesh, despise Dominion, speak evil of dignities. Jud. 8. And many will follow
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth will be evil spoken
of. 2 Pet. 2. 2. It is not these for whom we are Petitioners: But for those
that are faithful to God and the King, that fear offending, that agree with you
in all things necessary to Salvation; and the common union of Believers, and
that you are like to see at Christ's right hand, who will finally justify them,
and take them to his glory. If you suppose us in all this to have Pleaded our
own cause; We hope we are not such as are intolerable in the Ministry or
communion of the Church: if you suppose us to Plead the cause of others, we
hope you will accept our desires as impartial, when it is supposed the persons
differ from us as well as from you. We have now faithfully, and not
unnecessarily, or unreasonably, spread before you the Case of thousands of the
upright of the Land: We have proposed honest and safe remedies for our present
distractions, and the preventing of the feared increase. We humbly beg your
Favorable Interpretation of our plain and earnest language, which the urgency
of the Cause commands, and your consent to these our necessary requests: which
if you grant us, you will engage us to thankfulness to God and you, and to
employ our faculties and interests with Alacrity to assist you for the common
peace. But if you reject our suit (which God forbid) We shall commit all to
him that judges Righteously, and wait in hope for the blessed day of Universal
Judgment, when the Lord of Hosts their strong redeemer shall thoroughly plead
his peoples cause, and execute Judgment for them, and bring them forth into
the light, and they shall behold his Righteousness. In the mean time, we will
bear the indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against him. Come
Lord Jesus! Come quickly;

Amen.
THE REFORMATION OF THE LITURGY.
Presented to the Right Reverend Bishops, by the Divines appointed by His
Majesty's Commission to treat with them about the Alteration of it.
Right Reverend,
HAVING already given you our judgment of several things in the Book of
Common Prayer, and our desires for the altering of some parts of it, leaving
the rest unaltered; we here tender you some of the said Alterations, which in
our former Paper we showed to be needful, and some Additional Forms in
Scripture Phrase (as near as we well could) suited to the nature of the
several parts of Worship. The Texts are cited in the Margin, to justify partly
the Matter, and partly the Phrase. If any be mis-applied (which we hope will
not be found) we shall be willing upon Information, to retract such
mis-application. If some of the Prayers here offered seem of too great a
length, the substance of them being allowed, we shall upon conference and
mutual consideration, endeavor to contract them. And whereas His Majesty's
Commission does empower and authorize us: To take into our Consideration the
several Directions, Rules and Forms of Prayer, and things contained in the Book
of Common Prayer; And further adds, When we shall have drawn our
Consultations to any Resolution and Determination, which we shall agree upon
as needful or expedient to be done for the altering, diminishing, or enlarging
the Book of Common Prayer, or any part thereof, etc. We have here accordingly
added some Rules or Directions as requisite to give light to the whole, showing
when and how those several Prayers shall be used. But if any of those Rules or
Directions upon debate shall be judged by the Commissioners unnecessary, or
over long, we shall be very ready to submit either to the Alteration, or
Omission of them. And since we for our parts do so freely profess not to
insist on any thing now or formerly proposed, which shall be manifested to be
unmeet; so we humbly crave, and hope for your consent to all the rest; And
that these Alterations and Additions now offered, may find your favorable
interpretation and acceptance, and may by our joint consent be presented to
His Majesty, to the end they may obtain his gracious Approbation; And the
several particulars thereof may be inserted into the several respective places
of the Liturgy, to which they do belong, and left to the Ministers choice to
use the one or the other, according to His Majecties gracious Declaration
concerning ECCLESIASTICAL AFFAIRS.

THE Ordinary Publick-Worship ON THE LORD'S DAY.
The Congregation being reverently composed, let the Minister first crave Gods
assistance and acceptance of the Worship, to be performed in these or the like
words, ETERNAL, Incomprehensible, and Invisible GOD, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Psalm. 147.
5. Mat. 19. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 16. Dan. 7. 10. Isa. 57. 15. Psalm. 149. 4. Heb. 10.
19, 20. Isa. 55. 6. Psa. 95. 6. 1, 2. and 99. 5. and 51. 1, 17. and 89. 7. Jer.
32. 40. Heb. 12. 28. 1 These. 5. 23. Levit. 10. 3. Zech. 12. 10. Romans 8. 26.
Jam. 5. 16. and 1. 6. Isa. 26. 8. Matthew. 15. 18. Joh. 4. 23, 24. 1 These. 2. 13.
Act. 16. 14. Mark 4. 12. Phil. 1. 29. Prove. 1. 24, 25. Eccles. 5. 1. Joh. 6.
45. Heb. 4. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 6.
infinite in Power, Wisdom and Goodness, dwelling in the Light which no man
can approach, where thousand thousands minister unto Thee, and ten thousand
times ten thousand stand before Thee, yet dwelling with the humble and
contrite, and taking pleasure in thy People: Thou have consecrated for us^a new
and living way, that with boldness we may enter into the holiest, by the blood
of Jesus, and have bid us seek Thee, while thou may be found; We come to
Thee at thy call, and worship at thy Footstool. Behold us in thy tender
Mercies. Despise us not, though unworthy. Thou art greatly to be feared in the
Assembly of the Saints, and to be had in Reverence of all that are about thee.
Put thy fear into our hearts, that with Reverence we may serve Thee; sanctify
us, that thou may be sanctified of us, when we draw nigh Thee. Give us the
Spirit of Grace and Supplication, to help our infirmities, that our prayers may
be faithful, fervent, and effectual. Let the desire of our souls be to Thee;
Let us draw near Thee with our hearts, and not only with our lips, and worship
Thee, who art a Spirit, in Spirit and Truth. Let thy Word be spoken and heard
by us as the Word of God; Give us attentive, hearing Ears, and opened,
believing, understanding hearts, that we may no more refuse thy calls, nor
disregardthy merciful, cut-stretched-hand, nor slight thy Counsels and
Reproofs; but be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of Fools. Put
thy Laws into our hearts, and write them in our Psalm. 69. 30. Psalm. 106. 46.
Psalm. 9. 14. Psalm. 105. 3. Psalm. 51. 15. Psalm. 19. 14. Heb. 13. 21.
minds, and let us be all taught of God. Let thy Word be unto us quick and
powerful; a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the hearts; mighty to pull
down strongholds, casting down imaginations and reasonings, and every high
thing that advances it self against the knowledge of God; and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; Let us magnify Thee with
thanksgiving, and triumph in thy Praise. Let us rejoice in thy Salvation, and
glory in thy holy Name. Open thou our lips, O Lord, and let our mouths show
forth thy praise. And let the words of our mouths, and the meditation of our
hearts, be acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior.

Amen.


Or thus, when Brevity is necessary. O Eternal, Almighty, and most gracious
God, Heaven is Isa. 66. 1. Psa. 111. 9. Luke 2. 13. Psa. 103. 20. Heb. 1. 6.
Psa. 149. 1. Lev. 10. 3. Gen 18 27. 2 Timothy 2. 5. Dan. 9. 18. Hos. 14. 2. Romans
8. 26. Heb. 12. 28. (...) These. 2. 10. Luke 19. 48. Isa. 1. 19. 2 Cor. 2. 16.
James 5 16. Psalm. 63. 5. 1 Cor. 7. 35. Psalm. 84. 10. and 73. 28.
thy Throne, and Earth is thy Footstool, holy and reverend is thy Name; Thou
art praised by the heavenly Hosts, and in the Congregation of thy Saints on
Earth, and wilt be sanctified in all that come nigh unto Thee. We are sinful
and unworthy dust, but being invited by Thee, are bold, through our blessed
Mediator, to present our selves and our supplications before Thee. Receive us
graciously, help us by thy Spirit; let thy Fear be upon us: let thy Word come
unto us in power, and be received in love, with attentive, reverent, and
obedient minds. Make it to us the savor of life unto life. Cause us to be
fervent in Prayer, and joyful in thy Praises, and to serve Thee this day
without distraction, that we may find, that a day in thy Courts, is better
than a thousand, and that it is good for us to draw near to God; through Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.


Next, let one of the Creeds be read by the Minister, saying, In the
Profession of this holy Christian Faith we are here assembled.

I believe in God the Father, etc. I believe in one God, etc.

And sometimes Athanasius Creed.

The Ten Commandments. God spoke these Words, and said, etc.

For the right informing and affecting the People, and moveing them to a
penitent believing confession, some of these sentences may be read. GOd
created man in his Image. Genesis 1. 27.


By one man, sin entered into the World, and death by sin: and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned. Romans 5. 12.


For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God. Romans 3. 23.


God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that Joh. 3. 16.
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

He that believes on him shall not be condemned, but he that believes 18
not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the
only begotten Son of God.

And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and 19
men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.

For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, 20.
lest his deeds should be reproved.

Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a Gal. 3. 13.
curse for us.

Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into Joh. 3.
5.
the Kingdom of God.

That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh and that which is born of the 6.
spirit is spirit.

Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little Mat. 18.
3.
Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Say unto them, As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure Eze. 33. 11.
in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live;
Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye dye oh house of
Israel.

I say unto you there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over Luke
15. 10
a sinner that repents.

I will arise and go to my Father, and say unto him, Father, I 18, 19.
have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son.



The Confession of Sin, and Prayer for Pardon and Sanctification. O Most Holy,
Righteous, and Gracious God, who hate Psalm. 5. 5. Romans 6. 23. Ephesians. 1. 6.
12. John 4. 42. Romans 3. 25. Ephesians. 1. 5. Luke 24. 47. Act. 5. 37. Prove. 28. 13.
Rev. 3. 17. Psalm. 51. 5. Ephesians. 2. 3. Isa. 48. 8. Isa. 53. 6. Psalm. 100. 3. 1 Corinthians. 6. 20. 2 Cor. 8. 5. 1 Cor. 10. 31. and 7. 32. 1 These. 4. 1. 1 John 3.
22. Romans 2. 23. 1 Chronicles. 21. 7. Phil. 2. 21. Luke 18. 14. Romans 15. 1. Psalm. 47.
7. Romans 7. 12. Dan. 9. 9. 10. Tit. 1. 7, 10. Rom 8. 5. and 13. 14. and 4 20.
Psalm. 78. 7. 22. Isa. 51. 7, 8. Luke 12. 4, 5. Psalm. 100. 5. 1 John 4. 16.
Psalm. 16. 5. Mat. 22. 37. Psalm. 37. 4. 1. John 2. 15 2 Timothy 5. 7. Joh. 6. 27.
Luke 10. 21, 22. Mat. 25. 26. Romans 12. 11. Ephesians. 6. 11, 13, 14. Mark 8. 38. 2 Timothy 1. 8. Ephesians. 5. 16 Romans 12. 11 9. Act. 11. 23. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Luke 1. 71.
Heb. 12. 28. Psalm. 111. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 1. 9. Phil. 3. 3. Psalm. 29. 2. Rev. 1. 10.
Romans ^3. 37. Tit. 3. 1.
all the workers of iniquity, and have appointed death to be the wages of sin,
but yet for the glory of thy mercy have sent thy Son to be the Savior of the
world, and have promised forgiveness of sin through his blood, to all that
believe in him, and by true Repentance turn unto Thee, and that whosoever
confesses and forsakes his sin, shall have mercy; We confess that we are
vile and miserable sinners, being conceived in sin; by nature children of
wrath, and transgressors from the womb. All we like sheep have gone astray,
and turned every one to his own way. Thou made us, and not we our selves.
Thou boughtest us with a price, and we are not our own; and therefore we
should have wholly given up our selves unto Thee, and have glorified Thee with
our souls and bodies, as being Thine. What ever we did should have been done
to thy glory, and to please Thee, in the obeying of Thy Will. But we have
displeased and dishonored Thee, and turned from Thee, exalting, seeking and
pleasing our selves. Thou art the King of all the world, and Thy Laws are holy,
just and good. But we have denied Thee our due subjection and obedience, being
unruly and self-willed, minding the things of the flesh, and making provision
for its lusts; We have staggered at Thy Word through unbeleef, and have not
fully placed our trust and hope in Thee. We have rather feared man that is
dust, and can but kill the body, than Thee; that can destroy both soul and
body in Hell. Thou art infinitely good, and love it self, yet have we not
fully taken Thee for our portion, nor loved Thee with all our heart, and soul,
and might, nor mads Thee our full desire and delight. But we have inordinately
loved our selves, and the world, and the things of the world, and lived by
sense when we should have lived by Faith, and cared and labored for the food
that perishes; when we should have labored for the one thing needful, and
that which indureth to everlasting life, we have been slothful servants,
yielding to temptations, ashamed of our duty, losing our precious time; when
we should have been fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, cleaving to Thee with
full resolution, redeeming the time, and with diligence making sure our Calling
and Election. We have not with Ephesians. 6. Mat. 29. 39. and 7. 12. 1 Cor. 10.
24. Ephesians. 4. 2. 32. Mat. 5. 44. Heb. 12. 14. Gal. 6. 10. Psalm. 19. 12, 13.
Romans 2. 4. Psalm. 51. 4. Romans 2. 15. Psalm. 78. 32, 37, 4^. Luke 12. 35, 36, 4^.
Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. Luke 14. 17. and 8, 1. Act. 13. 26. Rev. 22. 17. 1 John 5.
11, 12. Matthew. 22. 5. Heb. 2. 3. Psalm. 119. 60. John 12. 48. Heb. 12. 25. Act.
7. 51. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Luke 15. 18. Numb. 16. 38. Romans 1. 18. Ephesians. 5. 6. Dan. 9.
7, 8. Psalm. 51. 1. Psalm. 41. 1. and 143. 2. Psalm. 51. 9, 11. Lev. 26. 25. Rev.
1. 5. Joh. 1. 29. Ephesians. 1. 6. Mat. 12. 18. Gal. 3. 13. Isa. 53. 5. Psa. 85. 4.
and 67. 1. Act 11. 18. Ezekiel. 20. 43. Psa. 51. 17. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Gal. 4. 6. 2
Co^. 6. 16. Jer. 13. 13. Ezekiel. 11. 20. Psalm. 119. 18. Ephesians. 3. 18. Mat. 13.
11. Ephesians. 1. 18. Romans 2. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Psalm 119. 104. Romans 5. 5. and 8. 35,
39. Jer. 32. 40. Mat. 6. 33. Col. 3. 1. Matthew. 6. 20, 21. Phil. 3. 20. Coloss.
3. 5.
due holiness and reverence drawn near Thee, and used thy holy Name, thy
Worship, and thy Day: We have dishonored and disobeyed our Superiors, and
neglected our Inferiors. We have been guilty of not loving our Neighbors as
our selves, and not doing to others, as we would they should do to us, but
have sought our own against their welfare, not forbearing, and forgiving, not
loving our enemies, as we ought, nor following peace, nor studying to do good
to all according to our power. We have sinned secretly and openly, in thought,
word and deed, ignorantly and presumptuously, in passion, and upon
deliberation, against thy Precepts, Promises, and Threats; against thy mercies
and thy judgments, under thy patience, and in thy sight, against our
consciences, our purposes, and our covenants; when we were hasting to death
and judgment, for which, through all our lives we should have prepared; Thou
have commended thy wonderful love toward us in giving thy Son to dye for
sinners, to reconcile us to Thee while we were enemies; and all things being
made ready, thou have sent thy Messengers to invite us to come in, preaching to
us the glad tidings of salvation, and freely offering us pardon and life in
Jesus Christ, but we have made light of it, and neglected this great
Salvation, and made excuses or too long delays; undervaluing our Redeemer, his
blood and merits, his offered grace, and endless glory, rejecting his holy
Doctrine and Example, resisting his Spirit, Ministers, and Wrod. We have
sinned, O Lord, against Thee, and against our own souls, and are not worthy to
be called thy children: We have deserved everlasting wrath; to us belongs
confusion, but mercy and forgiveness unto Thee. Have mercy upon us, O God,
according to the multitude of thy Mercies. Heal our souls that have sinned
against Thee, and enter not into judgment with thy servants. Hide thy face
from our sins, and blot out all our iniquities. Cast us not away from thy
presence, and avenge not upon us the quarrel of thy Covenant. Wash us in the
blood of the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world. Accept us in
thy Beloved Son, who was made a curse for us, and was wounded for our
transgressions, that we might be healed by his stripes. Turn us, O God of our
salvation, and cause thy face to shine upon us. Give us Repentance unto life;
cause us to loathe our selves for all the evils that we have committed. Give
us that broken contrite Gal. 6. 14. Romans 1. 17. Heb. 11. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 1 Pet. 3.
11. Luke 13. 14. 1 Cor. 9. 24. 1 Pet. 4. 2. Col. 1. 10. 2 Cor 5. 9. John 6. 38.
Psalm. 40. 8. Psalm. 1. 2. Tit. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15. 1 Pet. 1. 2^. Ephesians. 4.
2, 32. James 3. 17. Psalm. 15. 4. Ephesians. 5. 15. Phil. 1. 10. Titus 2. 14. Mat.
5. 44. Romans 12. 19. Luke 21. 19. Mark 8. 34. Heb. 11. 26. Romans 8. 17. Rev. 2.
10, 11.
Spirit, which thou will not despise. Create in us a clean heart, O God, and
renew a right spirit within us. Take out of us the old and strong heart, and
give us a new and tender heart. Give us the Spirit of thy Son, and be our God,
and let us be thy People. Enlighten our understandings to know the wonderful
things of thy Law, the dimensions of thy love in Christ, the mysteries of thy
Kingdom, and the riches of the glory of thy Inheritance in the Saints, and
that we may approve the things that are excellent, and may escape the snares
of the Devil, and may hate every false way. Shed abroad thy love in our hearts
by thy holy Spirit, and cause us so to love Thee, that nothing may separate us
from thy love. Put thy fear into our hearts, that we may never depart from
Thee. Cause us to seek first thy Kingdom, and its Righteousness, and (as those
that are risen with Christ) to seek the things that are above, and to lay up a
treasure in Heaven; and let our hearts and conversations be there; mortify
our earthly inclinations and desires. Crucify the world to us, and us unto the
world by the Cross of Christ. Cause us to live by Faith, and look at the things
that are unseen; and use the world, as not over-using it, seeing the fashion of
it passes away; striving to enter in at the strait gate, and running so as to
obtain; let us no longer live the rest of our time to the lusts of men, but to
the will of God, studying in all things to please Thee, and to be accepted of
Thee; let us not seek our own wills, but the will of him that called us; yea
let us delight to do thy will, O God, let our delight be in thy Law, and let
us meditate therein day and night; cause us to deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and to live soverly, and righteously, and godly in this present world,
as obedient children, not fashioning our selves to the former lusts of our
ignorance; but as he that has called us is holy, let us be holy in all manner
of conversation. Cause us to love one another with a pure heart, fervently,
forbearing and forgiving one another, if any have a quarrel against other, even
as Christ forgave us. Give us the wisdom which is first pure, and then
peaceable. In our eyes let a vile person be contemned, but let us honor them
that fear the Lord. Cause us to walk circumspectly without offense, and to be
zealous of good Works, to love our enemies, and not to give place to wrath; and
in patience to possess our souls. Help us to deny our selves, and take up our
Cross, and follow Christ; esteeming his reproach to be greater riches than the
treasures of the world, that having suffered with him, we may also be
glorified with him. Though we must be tempted, help us to overcome, and be
faithful unto the death, and then let us receive that Crown of Life, through
the merits and intercession of Christ Jesus our Lord and only Savior, in
whose comprehensive words we sum up our Requests, saying as he has taught
us, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come,
etc.



Or thus when Brevity is necessary. O Most great, most just and gracious God,
thou art of Hab. 1. 13. Jud. 15. Luke 13. 3. Mar. 16 16. Psa. 51. 5. Ephesians. 2. 3*
Romans 3. 23. Ez^. 20. 37. Mat. 28 19. Ecc. 12. 1. Deuteronomy. 11. 1. Col. 1. 10. 1
Cor. 10. 31. Genesis 5 22. 2 Cor. 5. 7. Phi. 3. 20. Romans 12. 11. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Ephesians.
2. 3. Romans 8. 7. Exodus 20. 4, 7, 8, 11, 12, etc. 2 Per. 2. 9. Romans 13. 8. 9.
Mat. 7. 12. Mat. 6. 33. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Luke 10. 41, 42. Romans 5 8. Luke 24. 47.
Romans 3. 25. Mat 22. 4, 5. Heb. 2. 3. Act. 7. 51. P (...). 1. 23. Jam. 47. 1
P^t. 5. 9. Psa. 51. 4. Psa. 19. 12, 13 Isa. 59. 12. Psa. 103 10. and 50. 11.
Mar. 9. 44 Psa. 52. 8 Ephesians. 1. 12, 13. Psa. 71. 5. and 78. 7. and 119. 81. and.
51. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. 1 John 1. 7. Gal. 4: 6. 1 These. 5. 23. Romans 5. 5.
Deuteronomy. 30. 6 Psa. 31. 16 Mat. 1. 21. 1 These. 1. 10. T^t. 2. 14.
purer eyes than eo behold iniquity, thou condemnest the ungodly, impenitent,
and unbeleevers; but have promised mercy through Jesus Christ to all that
repent and believe in him. We confess that we were conceived in sin, and are
by nature Children of wrath. And have all sinned and come short of the glory of
God. In our Baptism thou tookest us into the bond of the holy Covenant, but
we remembered not our Creator, in the days of our youth, with the fear, and
love, and obedience which we owed thee: not pleasing, and glorifying thee in
all things, nor walking with thee, by faith in an Heavenly conversation, nor
serving thee fervently with all our might: but fulfilled the desires of the
flesh, and of the Carnal mind. We have neglected and abused thy Holy Worship,
thy Holy Name, and thy Holy Day. We have dishonored our superiors, and
neglected our inferiors: We have dealt unjustly, and uncharitably, with our
Neighbors, not loveing them as our selves, nor doing to others as we would
they should do to us, we have not sought first Thy Kingdom, and
Righteousness, and been contented with our daily bread, but have been careful
and troubled about many things, neglecting the one thing necessary. Thou have
revealed thy wonderful love to us in Christ, and offered us pardon and
salvation in him: but we made light of it and neglected so great salvation,
and resisted thy Spirit, Word, and Ministers, and turned not at thy reproof.
We have run into temptations; and the sin which we should have hated, we
have committed in thy sight, both secretly and openly, ignorantly and
carelessly, rashly, and presumptuously, against thy precepes, thy promises, and
threats, thy mercies and thy judgments; our transgressions are multiplied
before Thee, and our sins testify against us; if Thou deal with us as we
deserve, Thou will cast us away from thy presence into Hell, where the worm
never dies, and the fire is not quenched. But in thy mercy, thy Son, and thy
Promises is our hope. Have mercy upon us most merciful Father. Be reconciled
to us, and let the blood of Jesus Christ cleanse us from all our sins. Take us
for thy children, and give us the Spirit of thy Son. Sanctify us wholly, shed
abroad thy love in our hearts, and cause us to love Thee with all our hearts. O
make thy face Col. 1. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ephesians. 5. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Mat. 6. 11.
1 Timothy 6. 4. Heb. 13. 5. Mat. 6. 25. etc. 2 Pet. 3. 1^. Mat. 26. 41. James 4.
8. Gal. 5. 17. 1 John 5. 4, 5. Revel. 2. 17, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 19, Luke 1. 17.
Psalm. 73. 24.
to shine upon thy servants; save us from our sins, and from the wrath to come;
make us a peculiar people to Thee, zealous of good works, that we may please
Thee, and show forth thy praise. Help us to redeem the time, and give all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. Give us things necessary for
thy service, and keep us from sinful discontent and cares. And seeing all these
things must be dissolved, let us consider what manner of persons we ought to
be, in all holy conversation and godliness. Help us to watch against
temptations, and resist and overcome the Flesh, the Devil, and the World; and
being delivered out of the hand of all our enemies; let us serve Thee without
fear in holiness and righteousness before Thee all the days of our life. Guide
us by thy Counsel, and after receive us into thy glory, through Jesus Christ
our only Savior.

Amen.


[Here use the Lords Prayer as before.]

For the strengthening of Faith, and raising the Penitent, some of these
sentences of the Gospel, may be here read.

Hear what the Lord says to the absolution and comfort of Penitent Believers.
THe Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away 2 Chronicles. 30.
9.
his face from you, if ye return unto hine.

If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 1 John 2. 2.
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole World.

Be it known unto you men, and Brethren, that through this man is Acts 13. 38,
39.
preached to you the forgiveness of sins, and by him, all that believe are
justified, from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law
of Moses.

Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, That as sin Romans 5. 20. 21.
reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through Righteousness, unto
Eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

If we walk in the light as he is in the Light, w^^ have fellowship 1 John 1.
7. 8, 9.
one with another, And the blood of Jesus Christ his son, cleanses us from all
sin. If we say, that we have no sin; we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. If we confess our sin, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sin, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Mat. 11. 28, 29, 30.


Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart,
and ye shall find rest unto your souls For my yoke is easy, and my barden is
light.

Whosoever will let him take of the Water of life freely. Rev. 22. 17.


All that the Father has given me, shall come to me, and him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6. 27.


I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and Iniquities
I will remember no more. Heb. 8. 12.




Hear also what you must Be, and Do for the time to come, if you would be
Saved NOw if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Romans 8.
9.


If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are passed away,
behold all things are become new? 2 Cor. 5. 17


There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk Romans 8. 1.
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For they that are after the flesh,
do mind the things of the flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the
things 5.
of the spirit.

For to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is 6.
life and peace.

For the Carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law
of God, neither indeed can be. (...)


So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. 8.


For if ye live after the Flesh ye shall die, but if through the spirit 13.
ye mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live.

Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Gal. 5. 1^.
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of the 20.
which I tell you before, as I have told you in time past, that they which 21.
do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against such there 22.
is no Law. And they that are Christ's, have crucyfied the flesh with the 23.
24. Romans 13. 13.
affections, and lusts.

Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness; not in
chambering and wanionness, not in strife and envying. But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the 14.
lusts thereof.

Love not the World, neither the things that are in the world, if any 1 John 2.
15.
man love the world, the love of the father is not in him. For all that is 16.
in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.

Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way
Mat. 7. 13.
that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. Because 14.
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that find it.

For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared unto all Tit. 2.
11.
men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, looking 12.
for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem 13.
us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people 14.
zealous of good works.

Blessed is the man that walks not in the Counsel of the ungodly, nor Psa. 1.
1.
stands in the way of Sinners, nor sits in the seat of the Scornful. But
his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his law he does meditate 2.
day and night.

The ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor sinners in the congregation
5.
of the righteous.

Wherefore we, receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, Heb. (...). 28. 29.
let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and
godly fear, for our God is a consuming Fire.

Seeing then that these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons 2
Pet. 3. ^1. 12.
ought ye to be, in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and
hasting to the Coming of the day of God.

Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always 2 Cor. 15.
58.
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know, that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord



Then may be said the 95. or the 100. Psalm, or the 84.

And next the Psalms in order for the day; And next shall be read Luke 4. 16,
17. 18.
a Chapter of the Old Testament, such as the Minister finds most seasonable;
or with the liberty expressed in the Admonition before the second book of
Homilies.

After which may be sung a Psalm, or the Te Deum said, then shall Act. 13 27.
and 15. 24.
be read a Chapter of the New Testament, and then the Prayer for the King and
Magistrates. And after that the 67. or 98. or some other Psalm, may be sung or
said, or the Benedictus, or Magnificat. And the same order to be observed at
the Evening Worship, if time allow it.

NExt after the Psalm the Minister shall (in the Pulpit) first Neh. 8. 4. 6.
and 9. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 10 38. Act. 12. 12. 1 Timothy 4. 5. Act. 1. 14. and 16. 13
16. 1 Timothy 2. 8. 1 Cor. 14, 15, 16. Luke 4. 16, 18. Neh. 8. 8. Act. 20. 7, 9. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Act. 4. 20. 2 Cor. 4. 13. Joh. ^6. 29. 1 Cor. 2. 7. 13. Mat. 7.
29. T^ 2. 15. Mar. 21. 45. Mar. 12. 12, 13, 17. Ephesians. 6. 19, 20. Jude 22. 23.
Act. 18. 25. 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Act. 2^ 36. Psa. 2. Rev. 11. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. 2 These. 3. 1, 2. and 2. ^ 1 These. 2. 16. Rev. 18. 19. Mat. 6.
9. etc and 9. 37, 38. 1 Timothy 2. 2. Ephesians. 6. 19. 1 These. 5. 25. Joh. 17. 20. 1 Samuel 12. 2^ 2 Cor. 4. 5. Phi. 1. 15. 16. Jam 3. 1. 15, 16, 17. Luke 9. 55. Cor.
14. 26. 2 Cor. 10. ^. Psa. 92. 1. Rev. 1. 10
reverently, prudently, and servently pray, according to the State and
necessities of the Church, and those especially that are present, and according
to the subject that he is to preach on. And after prayer, he shall preach
upon some Text of holy Scripture suiting his matter to the necessities of the
Hearers, and the manner of delivery to their quality and benefit. Always
speaking from faith and holy experience in himself, with plainness, and
perspicuity, with reverence and gravity, with convincing evidence, and
authority, with prudence, caution, faithfulness, and impartiality, with tender
love and melting compassion, with servent zeal, and persuading importunity, and
with frequency and unwearied Patience, waiting on God for the success. After
Sermon he shall pray for a blessing on the word of Instruction and
Exhortation, which was delivered; And in his Prayers (before or after Sermon)
ordinarily he shall pray for the Conversion of Heathens, Jews, and other
Infidels; the subversion of Idolatry, Infidelity, Mahometanisme, Heresy, Papal
Tyranny and Superstition, Schism and Profaneness, and for the free progress
of the Gospel, and the increase of Faith and godliness, the honoring of Gods
name, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ, and the obedience of his
Saints through the Nations of the Earth. And in special for these Nations, for
the Kings Majesty, and the rest of the Royal Family, for the Lords of his
Majesty's Counsel, the Judges and other Magistrates of the Land, for the
Pastors of the Church, and all Congregations committed to their Care, and
Government. Always taking heed that no mixtures Act. 20. 7. Col. 3. 16, 17.
Psalm. 118. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 3. 5. and 3. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 2, 15. Act. 20. 7,
9.
of imp^^dent, disorderly expressions, of private discontent and passion, of
unreverent, disobedient, seditious, or factious Intimations, tending to
corrupt, and not to edify the peoples minds, do turn either Prayer or
Preaching into sin. And ordinarily in Church Communion, especially on the Lords
Day (which is purposely separated for the joyful Commemoration of the Blessed
Work of man's Redemption) a considerable proportion of the Public Worship must
consist of Thanksgiving and Praises to God, especially for Jesus Christ, and
his Benefits; still leaving it to the Ministers discretion to abbreviate some
parts of Worship, when he sees it needful to be longer, or some other.

The Sermon and Prayer being ended, let the Minister dismiss the Congregation
with a Benediction, in these or the like words. Blessed are they that hear the
Word of God, and keep it. Luke 11. 28. Levit. 6. 24, 25, 26.


The Lord bless you, and keep you; the Lord make his face to shine on you, and
be gracious unto you; The Lord lift up his countenance upon you, and give you
Peace.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the 2 Cor. 13. 14.
Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.



Except there be a Communion in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be
celebrated, or any further Worship to be performed, and then the Minister may
delay the Benediction till the End.

And because when there is leisure, the Prayers of the Church should be as
full as the Rule and our Necessities require; let the following General Prayer
be used, when the Ministers finds it convenient instead of the Letany and
Collects.

Here are also adjoined a Thanksgiving for Christ and his benefits, and a Hymn
to be used at the discretion of the Minister either after Sermon, or at the
Communion, or on other days. A Prayer for the King, the Royal Family, and
Magistrates.
ALmighty God, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree P^or. 8. 15. Dan. 4. 32.
Heb. 2. 9. Psalm. 65. 11. and 90. 14. and 65. 4. and 60. 5. and 80. 13. and 59.
1. and 61. 6. Isa. 45. 1^. Mat. (...). 3. Isa. 59. 8. and 11. 2. 1 K^n. 1. 3,
7, 9. Josh. 1. 8. Z^oh. 12. 8. 2 Samuel 14. 17. Psalm. 15. 4. and 101. 6. Pro. 25.
5. 1 Timothy 2. 2. 2 Timothy (...). 7, 8. Rev. 21. 5. Zec^ 8. 13. Isa. 60. 15. Jam.
3. 17. 2 Samuel 23. 3. Joh. 7. 27. 2 Chronicles. (...). (...). Amos 5. 24. Romans 13. 1,
2, 3. Rev. 11. 15. Psalm. 68. 18. Jer. 31. 23. Matthew. 6. 13.
Justice, who rulest in all the Kingdoms of men, and give them to whomsoever
thou will, who by thy special Providente have set over us thy Servant Charles
our King: Crown him with thy Blessings, and satisfy him with thy Goodness.
Save him by thy right hand, and defend him against such as rise up against him;
prolong his life in Peace and Righteousness, grant him the Spirit of Wisdom
and Counsel, the Spirit of Holiness, and the fear of the Lord, that he may know
how to go in and out before this great People over whom thou have fet him. Let
not thy Law depart out of his mind, or mouth, but let him meditate in it day
and night. Make him as an Angel of God to discera between good and evil, that
in his eyes a vile person may be contemned, due he may honor them that fear
the Lord; that his eyes may be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may
dwell with him, and they that are perfect in the way serve him; Remove the
Wicked from before him, that his Throne may be established in Righteousness,
and grant that under him we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
Godliness and Honesty. And when he has finished his course on Earth, let him
inherit a Crown of Righteousness, and reign with Christ for ever. Bless the
Queen Mother, the Illustrious Prince James Duke of York, and the rest of the
Royal Family, endue them with thy Holy Spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly
Grace, and make them blessings in their Generation. Endue the Lords of His
Majesty's Counsel, and all the Nobility, the Judges, and all the Magistrates of
the Land with Wisdom from above, that they may rule as in thy fear, and judge
Righteous Judgment, and may take heed what they do, as judging not for man,
but for the Lord, that Justice may run down as Water and Righteousness, as a
mighty stream; Let all His Majesty's Subjects duly submit to him and obey him,
not only for wrath, (...) for conscience sake; Let all his Kingd^mes be the
Kingd^mes of the Lord, and of his Son Christ, that God may dwell amongst us,
and if it may be said of them, The Lord bless thee, O Habitation of Justice,
and Mountain of Holiness. For Thine O Father, with the Son and Holy Ghost, is
the Kingdom, and Power, and Glory for ever.

Amen.
The General Prayer.
OMost Holy* Blessed and Glorious Trinity, Father, Son, Mat. 28. 19. John 5. 7.
1 Co. 8. 4. 6. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Mal. 1. 10. He^. 1. 2, 3, 5, 8. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Psalm.
22. 28. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. (...). 10^. 19. L^k. 11. 2.
and Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God, our Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, our Lord our Governor and Father, hear us, and have mercy upon
(...), miserable sinners.

O Lord our Savior God and man (...) who having assum^ Act. 7. 59. Heb. 2. 14.
9. 1 Cor. 15. 4. 1 Timothy 3. 6. John 1. 29. Ephesians. 1. 20, 22. Romans 8. 30. 33, 34.
Ephesians. 5. 1 These. 4. 16, 17. 2 Pet. 1. 10. 2 Timothy 1. 5. Romans 5. 1, 2, 10. 2 Cor.
6. 18. Gal. 4. 6.
our nature by thy sufferings, and death, and burial, wast made (...) Ransom
to take away the sins of the World; who being raises from the dead, ascended
and glorified, art made Head over all things to the Church, which thou
gatherest, justifiest, sanctifiest, rulest, and preservest, and which at thy
coming Thou will raise and judge to endless Glory. We beseech Thee to hear us,
miserable sinners, make sure to us our Calling and Election, our unfeigned
Faith and Repentance, that being justified, and made the Sons of God, we may
have Peace with him, as our Reconciled God and Father.

Let thy holy Spirit sanctify us, and dwell in us, and cause us 1 Pet. 1. 2.
Romans 8. 11. Mat. 8. 34, 35. 2 Cor. 8. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Rev. 4. 11. Joh: 1^.
28. Mat. 5. 16. Psalm. 22. 23, 27, 28. 2 Timothy 3. 2. Mat. 7. 22. Gal. 5. 26. Gal.
2. 19. Ps. 2. and 47. 7. Rev. 11. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Act. 26. 18. Romans 11. 25.
Mat. 9. 38. and 24. 14. 2 These. 3. 1, 2. Rev. (...). 3, 19. and 3. 10. Luke 18.
7. Rev. ^8. and 19.
to deny our selves, and to give up our selves entirely to Thee, as being not
our own, but Thine.

As the World was created for thy Glory, let thy Name be glorified throughout
the World; Let Self-love, and Pride, and Uain-glory be destroyed, cause us to
love Thee, fear Thee, and trust in Thee with all our hearts, and to live to
Thee:

Let all the Earth subject themselves to Thee their King. Let the Kingdoms of
the World become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. Let the
Atheists, Idolaters, Mahometans, Jews, and other Infidels, and ungodly People
be converted. Send forth meet Laborers into the Harvest, and let the Gospel
be preached throughout all the World. Preserve and bless them in thy Work.
Sustain in patience, and seasonably deliver the Churches that are oppressed by
Idolaters, Infidels, Mahometans, or other enemies, or by the Roman Papal (...).

Unite all Christians in Jesus Christ, the true and only universal Ephesians. 4. 3,
5, 13, 15, 16. Tites 3. 10. 2 Cor. 2. 17. 1 ^o. 1. 10. Romans 14. 1. and 15. 1. 3
John 9. Romans 1. 31. Luke 9. 55. Psalm. 77. 10. Phil. (...). 3. Psa. 14. Ephesians. 2.
3. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 2 ^e. 2. 10. Romans 8. 24. Psa. 40. 8. and
1. 2. Isa. 8. 20. Psa. 119. 97. 27.
Head, in the true Christian and Catholic Faith and Love, cast out Heresies
and Corruptions, heal divisions, let the strong receive the weak, and bear
their Infirmities, Restrain the spirit of Pride and Cruelty, and let nothing
be done in strife, or vainglory.

Keep us from Atheism, Idolatry, and Rebellion against Thee, from Infidelity,
Ungodliness and Sensuality from Security, Presumption and Despair. Let us
delight to please Thee, and let thy Word be the Rule of our Faith and Lives;
let us love it, and understand i^, and meditate in it day and night.

Let us not corrupt or neglect thy Worship; nor take thy Holy Mat. 15. 9. Exodus
20. 4, 7, 8. Mark 7. 21, 22. Jam. 5. 12. Eccl. 5. 1, 6. Ezekiel. 22. 26. Neh. 13.
17. Rev. 1. 10.
Name in vain, keep us from Blasphemy, Perjury, profane Swearing, Lying,
contempt of thy Ordinances, and from false, unworthy, and unreverent thoughts
and speeches of God, or holy things, and from the neglect and profanation of
thy Holy Day.

Put it into the hearts of the Kings and Rulers of the World, Pro. 21. 1. Psa.
2. 10, 11, 12. Isa. 49. 23. 2 Chro. 19. 6. Romans 1. 11. 1 Timothy 6. 9. Mat. 21.
44. John 11. 48. Psa. (...). 2, 3, 4.
to submit to Christ, and rule for him as Nursing-Fathers to his Church, and
save them from the temptations that would drown them in sensuality, or would
break them upon Christ, as a Rock of offense, by engaging them against his holy
Doctrine, Ways, and Servants.

Have mercy on thy Servant Charles our King, protect his 1 Timothy (...). 2. Psalm.
5^. 1. 2 Chronicles. 1. 10. and 29. 3. and 15. 12, 13. Romans 13. 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 14.
1 Timothy 2. 2.
Person, illuminate and sanctify him by thy Spirit, that above all things he
may seek thine honor, the increase of Faith, and holy Obedience to thy Laws;
and may govern us, as thy Minister, appointed by Thee for the terror of evil
doers, and the praise of them that do well, that under him we may live a quiet
and peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty.

Have mercy upon all the Royal Family, upon the Lords Psalm. 72. 1. P^ov. 8. 16.
Exodus 18. 21. Job 29. Isa. 1. 17. 23. Psalm. 15. 4.
of the Counsel, and all the Nobility, the Judges, and other Magistrates of
these Lands. Let them fear Thee, and he Ensamples of Piety and Temperance,
haters of Injustice, Covetousness, and Pride, and Defenders of the Innocent: in
their eyes let a vile person be contemned, but let them honor them that fear
the Lord.

Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, and not Romans 13. 1, 2, 5. 1 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
resist; Let them obey the King, and all in Authority, not only for wrath, but
for conscience sake.

Give all the Churches able, holy, faithful Pastors, that may 2 Cor. 3. 6. Jer.
3. 15. 2 Timothy 4. 2. Ephesians. 4. 11. 13. Jam. 3. 17. Ezekiel. 34. 1 Pet. 5. 1 2, 3, 4.
Mat. 20. 25, 26. 27.
soundly and diligently preach thy Word, and guide the Flocks in ways of
Holiness and Peace, over-seeing and ruling them not by constraint, but
willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: not as being Lords over
thy Heritage, but the Servants of all, and Ensamples to the Flock, that when
the chief Pastor shall appear, they may receive the Crown of Glory.

Let the people know those that are over them in the Lord, Heb. 13. 17. 7. 1
These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
and labor among them, preaching to them the Word of God; let them highly
esteem them in love for their works sake, account them worthy of double honor,
and obey them in the Lord.

Let Parents bring up their Children, in Holy Nurture, that Ephesians. 6. 4. Eccl.
12. 1. Exo. 20. 12. Ep^. 6. 1 2. and 5. 25. 22. 1 Pet. 3 7. 1. Col. 4. 1. and
3. 22, 23, 24.
they may remember their Creator in the days of their youth, and let
Children, love, honor and obey them. Let husbands love their Wives and guide
them in knowledge, and holiness; and let Wives love and obey their Husbands.
Let Masters rule their servants in thy fear, and servants obey their Masters in
the Lord.

Keep us from Murders and violence, and injurious passionate 1 John 3. 15. Luke
3 14. 2 Cor. 7. 2. Pro. 29. 22. Mat. 5 22. Mat. 5. 27, 38. ^or. 6 9. Romans 13.
13. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. 12.
words and actions.

Keep us from Fornication and all uncleanness, from Chambering and wantonness,
from Lustful thoughts, and filthy Communication, and all unchaste behavior.

Keep us from stealing or wronging our Neighbor in his Ephesians. 4. 28. 1 These. 4.
(...). Psa. 82. 2. Pro. 19. 5. and 10. 18 Psa. 15. 3. Mat. 7. ^^2.
propriety, from perverting Justice, from false witnessing and deceit, from
slandering, backbiting, uncharitable censuring, or other wrong to the
reputation of our Neighbors.

Keep us from coveting any thing that is. our Neighbors, Exo. 20. 17 Mat. 22
39. Mat. 7. 12.
Let us love our Neighbors as our selves, and do to others as we would they
should do to us.

Cause us to love Christ in his members with a pure and fervent Mat. 25. 40. 1
Pet. 1. 22. Mat. 5. 4^. Gal. 6. 10 Luke 11. 3. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Deuteronomy 28. 3, 4. Psa.
112. and 128. Deuteronomy. 11 14. Phi 2. 27. Romans 13. 13, 14. and (...). (...) Mar. 8.
36.
love, and to love our Enemies, and do good to all, as we are able; but
especially to the household of Faith.

Give us our necessary sustentation and provision for thy service, and
contentedness therewith; Bless our labors, and the fruits of the earth in
their season, and give us such temperate weather as tends hereunto; Deliver
us and all thy servants from such sickness, wants, and other distresses, as may
unseasonably take us off thy service. Keep us from gluttony, and drunkenness,
slothfulness, unlawful gain, and from making provision for the flesh, to
satisfy its lusts.

When we sui, restore us by true Repentance and Faith in 1 John 2. 1, 2. Gal.
6. 1 Jam. 5. 19, 20. Eze. 6. 9. Ephesians. 1. 6^ Heb. 7 25. Mat, 6. 12 14, 15 and 5.
44. Luke 23. 34.
Christ: Let us loath our selves for our transgressions; Forgive them all and
accept us in thy well beloved Son; save us from the curse and punishment which
they deserve, and teach us heartily to forgive others, Convert our enemies,
peri^culors and slanderers and forgive them.

Cause us to watch against temptations, to resist and overcome Mat. 26. 41.
Jam. 4. (...) 7. 1 (...). 2. 13. and 5. 4
the Flesh, the Devil and the World, and by no Allurements of pleasure, profit
or honor, to be drawn from thee, to sin, let us Rom 8. 13. Gal. 5. 17. 1
(...) 16. ^7. 2 (...). 2. 18. Rom 8. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 8 Psa. 140. 1, 2, 3, 1 Timothy
4 ^8. (...) Tim. (...). 17. M^t. (...). 13. Romans 1^. 36.
patiently suffer with Christ that we may reign with him.

Deliver us and all thy people from the enmity and rage of Satan and all his
wicked Instruments; and preserve us to thy Heavenly Kingdom.

For thou only art the Universal King: All power is thine in Heaven and Earth:
of Thee, and through Thee, and to Thee are all things, and the glory shall be
Thine for ever,

Amen.


Concerning the Psalms for Public use.

We desire that instead of the imperfect version of the Psalms in Meeter now
in use, Mr. William Bartons Version, and that perused and approved by the
Church of Scotland there in use (being the best that we have seen) may be
received and corrected by some skilful men, and both allowed (for grateful
variety) to be Printed together on several Columns or Pages, and publicly
used; At least until a better than either of them shall be made.

A Thanksgiving for Christ, and his gracious Benefits.
MOst Glorious God, accept, through thy beloved Son, though Psa (...). (...) 1.
6. Psalm. 116. 17. Co^ 9. 15. ^sa. 109 22. 2 Cor 1. 3. ^s 86. 15. Exo. 34 6, 7.
Isa. 43. 7 Rev. 4. 11. Genesis 1. 27. Psa 8 (...) 6 D^. 31. ^6. (...). 5. (...).
^sa (...). 10. (...) 14 G^. 4. ^4 Ioh. 3 16. H^b 2. 16. Ioh. 1. 14 (...). 3.
(...) 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 12. Heb. 2. (...). Mat (...) 2 Co^. (...) 2.
(...). M^^. (...) 1. (...) 2. 23. (...) ^2. 2. ^ H^. 6. (...) 15. 3. Romans (...)
5.
from the hands of sinners, of thanksgiving, which thy unspeakable love and
mercies, as well as thy Command do bind us to offer up unto Thee. Thou art the
Father of mercies, and the God of all consolation, full of compassion,
Gracious, long suffering, Plenteous in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. For thy glory thou did
create us after thine Image; Thou made us a little lower than the Angels, and
Crownedst us with glory and honor, giving us Dominion over the works of thy
hands, and putting all these things under our feet. And when we fors^^k thee,
and broke thy Covenant, and rebelled against Thee, and corrupted our selves,
and turned our glory into shame; thou did not leave us in the hands of Death,
nor cast us out into utter Desperation; But thou did so love the sinful
World, as to give thy Son to be our Savior. He took nor upon him the nature
of Angels, but of man, The word was made flesh and dwelt among us. This is the
unsearchable Mystery of love which the Angels desire to pryints, He was
tempted that he might succor them that are tempted, and conquered the
Tempter, that had conquered Heb. 2. 14. Gal. 3. 13. Mat. 11. 28. Rev. 22. 14.
Ephesians. 1. 22. Psa. 2. 8 Phil. 2. 9. Mat 28 19. Ioh. 5. 22. Heb. 8 6. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
1 Ioh. 5. 11. 2. Pet 1. ^9. Psa. 119. 130. Ephesians. 2 20 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20. Act. 26
17, 18 Tit 3. 3, 4, 5 (...) 2 Timothy 2 25. Ephesians 4. 18. Joh. 12. 40 1 Timothy 4. (...)
Psa. 81 11, 12 Joh 5. 4. Luke 19. ^7. 1 Pet. 3. 20. Romans 10. 21 Heb. 12. 25.
Ezekiel. 33. 11. Pro. 1. 22, 23. Ioh. 6 44. Act. 16. 14. 1 Ioh. 4 19. Romans 10. 20.
Amos 5. 12. Romans 5. 1. Act. ^1. 18. Romans 8. 14, 15, 16. 17. Ephesians. 5. 30. Gal.
46. Ephesians. 2. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6 Rom 8 28. Ephesians. 3. 12. Heb. 4. 16. Psa. 50.
15. 1 Timothy 2. 8. M^t 21. 13. Ps^. 89. 7. and 28. 6. and 31. 22. Psa. 86 (...).
us* He became poor that was Lord of all; to make us rich. He did not sin,
but fulfilled all righteousness, to save us from our unrighteousness. He made
himself of no reputation, but was reviled, scorned, and spit upon, enduring the
Cross, and despising the shame, to cover our shame, and to bring us unto glory,
thou laidst upon him the Iniquity of us all. He was bruised and wounded for
our Transgressious, that we might be healed by his stripes. He gave himself
a Ransom for us, and died for our sins. And rose again for our justification.
We thank thee for his death that saves us from death, and that he bore the
curse, to redeem us from the curse, and for his life which opened us the way to
life. Thou have given him to be head over all things to the Church, and have
given the Heathen to be his Inheritance, and given him a name above every
name, and given all power, and judgment unto him. We thank thee for the New
and better Covenant, for thy great and precious promises; That thou have given
us eternal life in Christ. That we have the clear and sure Revelation of thy
will in the Holy Scriptures. That thou foundedst thy Church upon Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head Corner stone. And have committed
to thy Ministers the word of Reconciliation, that as Ambassadors speaking in
the stead of Christ they might beseech us to be reconciled unto thee. We
thank thee that by them thou have opened our eyes, and turned us from darkness
unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto God. We were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, taken captive by
Satan at his will; but thy mercy saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. Thou might justly have left us to the blindness
of our minds, and to the hardness of our hearts, to seared consciences, to be
past feeling, to our own hearts lusts, to walk in our own Counsels, and to work
uncleanness with greediness, when we so often refused to come to Christ, that we
might have life, and would not have him to reign over us. But thy patience
waited on us in our sin; And all the day long did thou stretch forth thy hand
to a disobedient and gainsaying People. When we turned from thee, thou
calledst after us, to turn and live. Thou drewest us to thy Son, and openedst
our hearts to attend unto thy calls: Thou lovedst us first, and was found of
them that sought thee not. Thou have pardoned our great and manifold
transgressions, and justified us by Faith in Christ, and given us Repentance
unto life: Thou have adopted us to be thy sons, and joint heirs with Christ;
and made us his members, and given us his spirit: We are no more strangers but
fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of thy household; Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his abundant mercy has begotten us
again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to
an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for us. Thou keep us by thy mighty power through Faith unto
salvation, ready at last to be revealed, though (when they are needful) we
must for a season be in heavyness under tribulations; thou have promised, that
all things shall work together for our good; in all our straits thou grantest
us access to the Throne of grace, bidding us call upon thee, in the time of
trouble, and promising to deliver us, that we may glorify thee, every where
we have leave to lift up unto thee holy hands, Especially in the house of
Prayer, and the Assembly of the Saints. Thou have heard the voice of our
supplications when we have cried unto thee; great is thy mercy toward us, O
Lord. Thou have delivered our souls from the lowest Hell; Thou have sent forth
from Heaven thy mercy and truth; and saved us from the reproach of him that
would swallow us up: Thou art our Hiding place; In the secrets of thy presence
thou preservest us from trouble, from the pride of men, and from the strife of
Tongues. Thou Psalm. 57. 3 and 31. 20. and 32. 7. and 31. 33. and 103 10. and
30. 5. Hab. 3. 2. Psalm. 32. 6. Psalm. 25. 10. Psalm 5. 7. Psalm. 107. 1. Psalm 105.
3. Psalm. 89. 15. 16
do compass us about with Songs of deliverance. O love the Lord all ye his
Saints! for the Lord preserves the faithful, and plentifully rewards the
proud doer. He deals not with us after our sins, his Anger is but for a
moment, but in his favor is life. In his wrath he remembereth mercy; All thy
paths O Lord are mercy and truth to such as keep thy Covenant. We come into
thy house in the multitude of thy mercies, O give thanks unto the Lord for he
is good, for his mercy Endures for ever. Glory ye in his Holy Name, let the
hearts of them rejoice that seek him. Blessed are the People that know the
joyful sound: They shall walk O Lord in the Light of thy Countenance. Psalm. 84
4. Psalm. 90 14. Psalm. 73. 24. John 17. 24. Rev. 22. 4.
In thy name shall they rejoice all the day, and in thy righteousness and
favor shall they be axalted; Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they
will be still praising thee. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may
rejoice and be glad in thee all our days. Guide us by thy Counsel, and
afterward receive us unto thy glory; where with all the blessed host of
Heaven, we may behold, admire, and perfectly and joyfully praise thee. Our
most glorious Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, for ever and for ever.

Amen.
The Hymn.
The First Part.
BLess the Lord O my Soul! And all that is within me bless his Holy Name,
Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all Psalm. 103 1, 2.
his benefits: who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and heals 3, 4. 12.
all thy diseases! who redeemed thy life from destruction, and crowns thee
with loving kindeness and tender mercies. As far as the East is from the West,
so far has he removed our transgressions from us; Behold what love the Father
has bestowed 1 John 3. 1.
on us, that we should be called the Sons of God; because thy loving
kindeness is better than life, my Lips shall praise thee. Psalm. 63. 3, 4. Psalm.
7^. 25.
Thus will I bless thee while I live, I will lift up my Hands in thy name. My
Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, 26, 27.
and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee, and there is none on Earth that I 23.
desire besides thee. My Flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of
my heart, and my Portion for ever. For, lo, Psalm. 94. 19
all that are far from thee shall perish, but it is good for me to draw near
to God. I am continually with thee. Thou have holden Psalm. 73, 24.
me by my right hand, in the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts
delight my Soul. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive
me to glory.

The Second Part.
HOw excellent is thy loving kindeness O God, therefore do the Sons of Men put
their trust under the shadow of thy Psalm. 36. 7, 8. 9.
wings. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and
thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures, for with thee is the
Fountain of life. In thy sight we shall see Light; therefore my Heart is glad,
and my Glory rejoices. My Flesh also shall rest in hope. Thou will show me
Psalm. 16 9. 11.
the path of life. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy Psa. 23. 6,
right hand are pleasures for ever more. Surely Goodness and mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life. And I shall Psalm. 36. 10.
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. O continue thy loving Psa. 20. 12.
kindeness to them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in
heart. To the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be silent,
O Lord my God, I will give thanks to thee for ever.

The Third Part.
GLory to God in the Highest: On Earth Peace; Good will toward men! Praise ye
the Lord, sing to the Lord a new Luke 2. 14.
Song; His praise is in the Congregation of Saints. For the Lord takes
pleasure in his people, he will beautify the meek with salvation. Psalm 149. 1,
4, 5, 6.
Let the Saints be joyful in glory. Let the high praises of God be in their
mouths. All thy works praise thee O Lord, and thy Psa 145. 10. 11 12, 13.
Saints shall bless thee. They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and
talk of thy Power; To make known to the sons of men thy mighty Acts, and the
glorious Majesty of thy Kingdom. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
thy Rev 4 8. 11.
Dominions is through all Generations. The Elders and Saints about thy Throne,
rest not night nor day, saying Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was,
and is, and is to come. Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor,
and and 15. 3, 4.
Power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and
were created. They sing unto thee the Song of and 5 11.
Moses, and of the Lamb, saying Great and mavelous are thy works. Lord God
Almighty, Just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear
thee, O Lord, and glorify 13.
thy Name! for thou only art Holy: For all Nations shall come 9.
and Worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest. 10.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory. For thou have redeemed us to God by thy
blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God.

The Fourth Part.
O That men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for Psa. 107. 8. 21 2^.
his wonderful works to the Children of men! Let them Sacrifice the Sacrifices
of Thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing. Sing unto the Lord,
bless his Name, show Psalm. 96. 2.
forth his Salvation from day to day. Worship the Lord in the Beauty of
Holiness, fear before him all the Earth. Let the Psalm. 29. 2.
Heavens rejoice, and the Earth be glad before the Lord; For Psalm. 96. 9, 11.
he comes, For he comes to judge the Earth. With Righteousness shall he
judge the World, and the People with Equity. 13.
Bless the Lord ye his Angels that excel in strength, that do his
Commandments, hearkening to the voice of his Word. Bless Psalm. 103. 20.
ye the Lord all ye his Hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure;
Bless the Lord all his Works in all places of his Dominions. 22.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, my mouth shall speak the Praises of the Lord, And
let all Flesh bless his holy Name for Psalm. 145. 21. Psalm. 150. 6.
ever and ever. Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. Praise ye
the Lord.

The Order of Celebrating the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.
This or the like Explication of the Nature, Use, and Benefits of this
Sacrament, may be used at the discretion of the Minister, when he sees it
needful to the Instruction of the Communicants. THat you may discern the Lords
body, and understand the nature, use and benefits of this Sacrament, you must
know that God created man in his own Image, to know, and love, and serve his
Maker; That man fell under the guilt of sin and condemnation, and left his holy
Fitness for the work for which he was created. That hereupon the wonderful
love and wisdom of God provided us a Remedy in our Redeemer, to the end he
might not lose the glory of his Creation, that he might pardon and save us
upon terms. Securing the honor of his Justice, and attaining the ends of his
Law and Government, and recover us to his love and service, by appearing to the
world, in the greatest demonstrations of Goodness, Love, and Mercy; By the
greatest Miracle of Condiscension, he first promised, and then gave his only
Son the Eternal Word, to take man's nature into personal union with his
Godhead; that being God and Man, he might be a fit Mediator between God and
Man, to restore us, and reconcile us to himself. Thus Jesus Christ, conceived
by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, became the second Adam, the
Physician and Savior of undone Sinners, the Captain of our Salvation, to be
the glorious King and Head of all that are sanctified and saved. He revealed
the Holiness, the Goodness, and the Love of God, by the perfect Holiness,
Goodness, and Love of his Blessed Person, Doctrine, and Conversation, and by
suffering for us all the Afflictions of this life, and at last the cursed death
of the Cross, as a Sacrifice and Ransom for us. That all this might be
effectual to our Recovery, he made for us a new and better Covenant, and
preached it himself, undertaking the Pardon, Justification, and Sanctification
of all that by unfeigned Faith do take him for their Savior, repenting of
their sins, and consenting to be sanctified by his Word and Spirit (by which
also he inviteth, and draws men to himself, and gives them to believe) Into
this blessed, pardoning, saving Covenant, we are first solemnly entered by
Baptism. And when Christ was ready to leave the world, and to give up himself a
Sacrifice for us, and intercede and exercise the fullness of his Kingly Power,
as the Churches Head; and by his grace to draw men to himself, and prepare them
for his glory; he did himself institute this Sacrament of his body and blood
at his last Supper, to be a continued Representation and Remembrance of his
Death, and therein of his own and his Fathers Love until his coming; appointing
his Ministers by the Preaching of the Gospel, and Administration of these
Sacraments to be his Agents without, and his Spirit within, effectually to
communicate his Grace.

The Lords Supper then [is a holy Sacrament instituted by Christ, wherein Bread
and Wine being first by Consecration made Sacramentally or Representatively the
body and blood of Christ, are used by breaking and pouring out to represent,
and commemorate the Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, upon the Cross once
offered up to God for sin; and are given in the Name of Christ unto the Church,
to signify and solemnize the renewal of his holy Covenant with them, and the
giving of himself unto them, to expiate their sins by his Sacrifice, and
sanctify them further by his Spirit, and confirm their right to everlasting
life: And they are received, Eaten, and drunk by the Church, to profess that
they willingly receive Christ himself to the Ends aforesaid (their
Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification) and to signify and solemnize
the Renewal of their Covenant with him, and their holy Communion with him, and
with one another.]

It being the renewing of a mutual Covenant that is here solemnized, as we
commemorate Christ's Sacrifice, and receive him and his saving benefits, so we
offer and deliver to him our selves, as his redeemed, sanctified people, to be
a living Acceptable Sacrifice, thankfully and obediently to live unto his
Praise.

Before the receiving of this holy Sacrament, we must examine our selves, and
come preparedly: In the receiving of it, we must exercise holy affections
suited to the work; And after the receiving of it, we must by consideration of
it, endeavor to revive the same Affections, and perform our Covenant there
renewed.

The holy Qualifications to be before Provided, and in Receiving exercised,
and after Receiving, are these. 1. A true belief of the Articles of the
Christian Faith, concerning the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the Person,
Offices, Works, and Sufferings, and Benefits of Christ. 2. The sense of our
sinful and undone condition, as in our selves, and of our need of Christ: so as
humbly to loath our selves for our transgressions: with the sense of our
present weaknesses to be strengthened, and sins to be forgiven. 3. A true
desire after Christ for pardon, and spiritual Nourishment and Salvation. 4. A
thankful sense of the Wonderful Love of God, declared in our Redemption, and in
the present offers of Christ, and Life. 5. The exercise of holy love and joy in
the sense of this unspeakable Love, (if these two be not felt before we come,
yet in, and after the Sacrament) we must strive to exercise them. 6. A love to
one another and forgiving wrongs to one another, with a desire after the
Communion of Saints. 7. The giving up our selves in Covenant to God, with
resolution of renewed Obedience. 8. A patient hope for the coming of Christ
himself, and of the Everlasting Kingdom where we shall be perfectly united
in him, and glorified with him.

Those only are to be invited to the Lords Table, and to come, that truly
repent and believe, and unfeignedly consent to the terms of the Covenant
(though all are not to be invited thus to believe and repent, and so to come)
But those are to be admitted, by the Pastors, if they come, who, having the use
of reason to understand what they do, and examine themselves, have made a
Personal Profession of Faith, Repentance and Obedience; and are Members of the
Church, and not justly for Heresy, or scandalous sin removed from its present
Communion.

The benefit of the Sacrament is not to be judged of only by present
Experience and Feeling, but by Faith. God having appointed us to use it, and
promised his Blessing, we may and must believe, that he will make good his
Promise, and what ever we feel at present, that we sincerely wait not on him
in vain.



The Exhortation. YOu are invited hither, Dear Brethren, to be Guests at this
Holy Table, by the Lords Command, to receive the greatest Mercy, and to perform
the greatest duty. On Christ's part, All things are made ready. The Feast is
prepared for you, even for you that by sin have deserved to be cast out of the
presence of the Lord; for you that have so often neglected and abused Mercy. A
Feast of the Body and Blood of Christ, free to you, but dear to him. You were
lost, and in the way to be lost for ever, when by the greatest Miracle of
Condiscending-love, he sought and saved you: You were dead in sin, condemned
by the Law, the Slaves of Satan; There wanted nothing but the Executing-stroak
of Justice, to have sent you into endless misery: When our dear Redeemer pitied
you in your blood, and shed his own to wash and heal you. He suffered, that
was offended that the offender might not suffer. He cried out on the Cross, My
God, My God, Why have thou forsaken me, that we who had deserved it, might
not be everlastingly forsaken. He died, that we might live: O how would the
mercy of Redemption have affected you, if you had first lain one year, or
month, or day in Hell; Had you but seen your dying Lord, or seen the damned in
their misery, how do you think you should have valued the Salvation that is now
revealed and tendered to you; see here Christ dying in this holy Representation.
Behold the sacrifized Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. It
is his will to be thus frequently crucified before your eyes. O how should we
be covered with shame, and loath our selves, that have both procured the death
of Christ by sin, and sinned against it? And how should we all be filled with
joy, that have such mysteries of Mercy opened, and so great. Salvation freely
offered to us! O hate sin, O love this Savior; See that you come not hither
without a desire to be more Holy, nor with a purpose to go on in wilful sin;
Be not deceived; God is not mocked, but if you heartily repent and consent to
the Covenant, come and welcome; We have commission from Christ to tell you,
that you are welcome. Let no trembling, contrite soul draw back, that is
willing to be Christ's upon his Covenant-terms, but believe that Christ is much
more willing to be yours. He was first willing, and therefore died for you,
and made the Covenant of Grace, and sent to invite and importune you to
consent, and stayed for you so long, and gave you your Repentance, your
willingness and desire. Question not then his willingness, if you are willing.
It is Satan and unbeleef that would have you question it, to the injury both of
Christ and you. Come near, observe, believe and wonder at the Riches of his
Love and Grace. For he has himself invited you, to see and taste, that you
may wonder. You are sinners, but he inviteth you to receive a renewed, sealed
pardon of your sins, and to give you more of his Spirit to overcome them. See
here his broken Body and his Blood, the Testimonies of his Willingness. Thus
has he sealed the Covenant, which pardons all your sins, and secureth you
of your Reconciliation with God, and your Adoption, and your right to
Everlasting Blessedness. Deny not your consent, but heartily give up your
selves to Christ, and then doubt not, but your Scarlet, Crimson-sins shall be
made as white as Wool, or Snow. Object not the number or greatness of them
against his Grace. There is none too great for him to pardon to penitent
Believers. Great sins shall bring great glory to his Blood and Grace. But
strive you then for great loathing of your sins, and greater love to such a
God, and greater thanks to such a Savior. Unfeignedly say, I am willing Lord
to be wholly Thine, and then beleevingly take Christ, and Pardon, and Life, as
given you by his own appointment in the sealed Covenant. And remember that he
is a coming. He is coming with thousands of His Mighty Angels, to execute
judgment on the ungodly, but to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in
all that do believe. And then we shall have greater things than these. Then
shall you see all the Promises fulfilled, which now are sealed to you, on which
he causes you to trust; Revive now your love to one another, and forgive
those that have wronged you, and delight in the Communion of the Saints: And
then you shall be admitted into the Church Triumphant, where with perfect
Saints you shall perfectly rejoice and love, and praise the Lord for ever.
Receive now a crucified Christ here represented, and be contented to take up
your Cross, and follow him. And then you shall reign with a glorified Christ in
the Blessed Vision and Fruition of that God, to whom, by Christ, you are now
reconciled. Let Faith and Love be working upon these things, while you are at
this holy Table.



Then shall the Minister use this or the like Prayer. MOst Holy God, we are as
stubble before thee, the Consuming Mal. 4 (...). Heb 12. 29. 1 Sa^. 6. 20. Mal.
3. 2. Isa. 4. Luke 19. ^0. Ephesians. 2. 5 Luke 15. 32. Eze. 16. 6, 8, 9. Col. 1. 13.
Jer. 6. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. 23. Deuteronomy. 6. 5, 6. and 11, 22. Psa. 100. 3. 4. Heb. 12.
25. Deuteronomy. 9 12. and 32. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 2. 1 John 2. 15. Ephesians. 2. 3. Gal. 5. 24.
Mat 22. 37, 40. Luke 10. 42. Mat. 25. 30 Romans 2. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 31. 1 These. 4.
1. Luke 8. 1^. Mat 24. 15. Psa. 1. ^. Deuteronomy 6. 6. Phil. ^ 6. 1 Cor 11. 27 28.
Isa 64. 7. Col. 27. Act. 2. 42, 45, 46, 47. 1 Cor. 11. 29. Mal 1. 7, 10. 1^.
and 2. 10. 1^. Psalm. 85. 8. Genesis 4 16. Psa 51. 11. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Mat. 22. 12.
Man. 7 25. Mal. 1. 10. 1 Pet. 2 24. Isa. 53. 10. Psalm. 51.
Fire, How shall we stand before thy Holiness, for we are a sinful people,
laden with Iniquity, that have gone backward and provoked the Holy one of
Israel, when we were lost, thy Son did seek and save us, when we were dead in
sin, thou made us alive. Thou saw us polluted in our blood, and said
unto us live. In that time of love thou coveredst our nakedness, and enteredst
into a Covenant with us, and we became thine own. Thou did deliver us from
the power of Darkness, and translate us into the Kingdom of thy dear Son; and
gave us remission of sin, through his blood. But we are grievous Revolters,
we have forgotten the Covenant of the Lord our God; we were engaged to love
thee with all our hearts, and to hate iniquity, and serve thee diligently, and
thankfully to set forth thy praise. But we have departed from thee, and
corrupted our selves by self love, and by loving the world, and the things that
are in the world, and have fulfilled the desires of the Flesh, which we should
have crucified. We have neglected our duty to thee, and to our neighbor, and
the necessary care of our own Salvation. We have been unprofitable servants,
and have hid thy Talents, and have dishonored thee, whom in all things we
should have pleased and glorified. We have been negligent in hearing and
reading thy Holy Word, and in meditating and conferring of it, in public and
private Prayer, and thanksgiving, and in our preparation to this Holy
Sacrament, in the Examining of our selves, and repenting of our sins, and
stirring up our hearts to a believing and thankful receiving of thy grace, and
to love and Joyfulness, in our Communion with thee and with one another. We
have not duly discerned the Lords Body, but have profaned thy Holy Name and
Ordinance, as if the Table of the Lord had been contemptible. And when thou
have spoken peace to us, we returned again to Folly, we have deserved O Lord
to be cast out of thy presence. And to be forsaken, as we have forsaken
thee, and to hear to our confusion, Rev. 1. 5. Hos. 14. 2. Eze. 18. 38. Heb. 8.
12, Eze. 33 11. Hos 14. 4. Psa. 35. 3. Ioh 6. 37. Hos. 14 2. Mat. 22. 4. Mat.
5. 6. Joh. 6, 55. and 4. 14. Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Mat. 15. 27. Ioh. 6.
35. 51.
Depart from me, I know you not, ye workers of iniquity. Thou may justly
tell us, thou have no pleasure in us, nor wilt receive an offering at our hand.
But with thee there is abundant mercy. And our Advocate Jesus Christ the
Righteous, is the propitiation for our sins: who bare them in his body on the
Cross, and made himself an offering for them, that he might put them away by
the sacrifice of himself; Have mercy upon us and wash us in his blood, Cloth
us with his Righteousness, take away our iniquities, and let them not be our
ruin, forgive them and remember them no more: O thou that delightest not in
the death of sinners, heal our backslidings love us freely, and say unto our
souls, that thou art our salvation. Thou will in no wise cast out them that
come unto thee, receive us graciously to the Feast thou have prepared for us,
cause us to hunger, and thirst after Christ, and his Righteousness, that we
may be satisfied, Let his Flesh, and blood be to us Meat and Drink indeed,
And his spirit be in us, a well of living water, Springing up to Everlasting
life. Give us to know thy Love in Christ, which passes knowledge. Though we
have not seen him let us love him. And though now we see him not, yet
believing let Psalm. 85. 8. Ephesians. 4. 30. Heb. 3. 13. Col. 3. 5. Ephesians. 3. 16.
Psalm. 119. 175.
us rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; Though we are unworthy of
the crumbs that fall from thy Table, yet feed us with the Bread of Life, and
speak and seal up Peace to our sinful wounded souls. Soften our hearts that are
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin; Mortify the Flesh, and strengthen us
with might in the inward man; that we may live and glorify thy Grace, through
Jesus Christ our only Savior.

Amen.


Here let the Bread he brought to the Minister, and received by him and set
upon the Table, and then the Wine in like manner (or if they be set there
before) however let him bless them, praying in these or the like words.
ALmighty God, thou art the Creator, and the Lord of all Psa. 100 3. Rev. 4. 11.
1 Timothy 1. 17. Psa. 51. 4. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. 1 Ioh. 3. 1. Ioh. 3. 16. Luke 22. 20.
Heb. 9. 17. Luke 22. 19.
things. Thou art the Sovereign Majesty whom we have offended; Thou art our
most loving and merciful Father, who have given thy Son to reconcile us to thy
self, who has ratified the New Testament and Covenant of Grace with his most
precious blood; and has instituted this Holy Sacrament to be celebrated in
remembrance of him till his coming. Sanctify these thy Creatures of Bread and
Wine, which according to thy Institution and Command, we set apart to this
holy use, that they may be Sacramentally, The Body and Blood of thy Son Jesus
Christ.

Amen.


Then (or immediately before this Prayer) let the Minister read the words of
the Institution, saying; HEar what the Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. [For I
have received 1 Cor. 11. 23.
of the Lord, that which also I deliver unto you; that the Lord Jesus the same
night, in which he was betrayed, took Bread, and when 24.
he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, Eat, This is my Body which
is broken for you: This do in remembrance of me: After 25.
the same manner also, he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying, This Cup
is the New Testament in my Blood, This do ye, as often as 26.
ye drink it in remembrance of me; For as often as ye eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come.]



Then let the Minister say. THis Bread and Wine, being set apart, and
consecrated to this Holy use by Gods appointment, are not now Common Bread and
Wine, but Sacramentally the Body and Blood of Christ.



Then let him thus Pray. MOst merciful Savior, as thou have loved us to the
death, Act. 7. 59, 60. Rev. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Luke 22, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 26.
Heb. 7. 25, 27. and 9. 26. John 4. 10. and 6. 63. Romans 8. 9. 11. Heb. 2. 17.
Col. 2. 19. John 6. 27.
and suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust, and have instituted this
holy Sacrament to be used in remembrance of Thee till thy coming; We beseech
Thee, by thine intercession with the Father, through the Sacrifice of thy Body
and Blood, give us the pardon of our sins, and thy quickening Spirit, without
which the Flesh will profit us nothing. Reconcile us to the Father; Nourish us
as thy Members to Everlasting Life,

Amen.


Then let the Minister take the Bread, and break it in the sight of the People,
saying. THe Body of Christ was broken for us, and offered once for all Mat. 26.
26. Heb. 10. 10. John 1. 29.
to sanctify us; Behold the sacrificed Lamb of God, that takes away the sins
of the World.



In like manner let him take the Cup, and pour out the Wine in the sight of the
Congregation, saying; WE were redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, as
of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot.



Then let him thus Pray. MOst holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and the
Mat. 28. 19. Joh. 15. 26. Matthew. 1. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Act. 20. 23. Romans 8. 9. 1
Cor. 12. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 15. and 2. 9. Joh. 14. 16. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Luke 24.
31. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Zech. 12. 10. Romans 8. 5. Joh. 6. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57. Romans 5.
5. Cant. 1. 4. Ephesians. 5. 18, 20. Romans 14. 17. 1 These. 4. 9. Romans 8. 16. 1 Cor.
1. 8. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
Son, by whom Christ was conceived; by whom the Prophets and Apostles were
inspired, and the Ministers of Christ are qualified and called, that dwell
and workest in all the members of Christ, whom hou sanctifiest to the Image,
and for the service of their Head, and comfortest them, that they may show
forth his Praise; Illuminate us, that by Faith we may see him that is here
represented to us. Soften our hearts, and humble us for our sins. Sanctify and
quicken us, That we may relish the Spiritual Food, and feed on it to our
Nourishment and growth in Grace. Shed abroad the Love of God upon our hearts,
and draw them out in love to him. Fill us with thankfulness, and holy Joy, and
with love to one another; Comfort us by witnessing that we are the Children of
God. Confirm us for New Obedience. Be the Earnest of our Inheritance, and seal
us up to Everlasting Life.

Amen.


Then let the Minister deliver the Bread thus Consecrated and broken to the
Communicants, first taking and eating it himself as one of them, when he has
said; TAke ye, Eat ye, This is the Body of Christ which is broken 1 Cor. 11.
24.
for you, Do this in remembrance of him.



In like manner he shall deliver them the Cup, first drinking of it himself,
when he has said, THis Cup is the New Testament in Christ's Blood, or Christ's
Mat. 26. 27, 28. 1 Cor. (...).
Blood of the New Testament which is shed for you for the remission of sins,
Drink ye all of it in remembrance of him.



Let it be left to the Ministers choice, whether he will consecrate the Bread
and Wine together, and break the Bread, and pour out the Wine immediately; or
whether he will consecrate and pour out the Wine, when the Communicants have
eaten the Bread. If he do the latter, he must use the foregoing Prayers and
Expressions twice accordingly, and let it be left to his discretion, whether
he will use any words at the breaking of the Bread, and pouring out the Wine,
or not; And if the Minister choose to pray but once, at the Consecration,
Commemoration, and Delivery; Let him pray as follows, or to this sense.
ALmighty God, thou art the Creator, and the Lord of all. Thou art the Sovereign
Majesty whom we have offended. Thou art our merciful Father, who have given us
thy Son to reconcile us to thy self; who has ratified the New Testament and
Covenant of Grace with his most precious blood, and has instituted this Holy
Sacrament to be Celebrated in memorial of him, till his coming. Sanctify
these thy Creatures of bread and wine, which according to thy will, we set
apart to this holy use, that they may be Sacramentally, the Body and Blood of
thy Son Jesus Christ. And through his sacrifice and intercession give us the
pardon of all our sins and be reconciled to us, and nourish us by the body and
blood of Christ to Everlasting life. And to that end give us thy quickening
spirit to shewChrist to our believing souls, that is here represented to our
senses. Let him soften our hearts and humble us for our sins, and cause us to
feed on Christ by Faith; Let him shed abroad thy love upon our hearts, and draw
them on in love to thee, and fill us with Holy Joy and thankfulness, and
fervent love to one another, let him comfort us by witnessing that we are thy
Children, and confirm us for New obedience, and be the Earnest of our
Inheritance, and seal us up to life Everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord
and Savior, Amen.



Let it be left to the Ministers discretion, whether to deliver the Bread and
Wine to the People (at the Table) only in General, each one taking it, and
applying it to themselves; or to deliver it in General to so many as are in
each particular form; or to put it into every persons hand: As also at what
season to take the Contribution for the Poor. And let none of the people be
forced to sit, stand, or kneel in the Act of Receiving, whose Judgment is
against it.

The Participation being ended, let the Minister pray thus, or to this sense.
MOst Glorious God, how wonderful is thy power, and wisdom, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 1.
24. Ephesians. 3. 10 Romans 3. 22. 26. Tit. 3. 4. Romans 5. 6. Act. 4. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Luke 2. 13, 14. Rev. 5. 12, 13. 9. 10. Romans 5. 20. 1 Pet. 1, 19. Mat. 18. 32.
33. Rev. 3. 21. and 22. 4. Romans 8. 38, 39. Heb. 10. 23. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Heb. 9.
15. Ephesians. 4. 30. Luke 7. 47. Mat. 18. 33. 1 John 4. 11. Ezr. 9. 13, 14. Psa. 44.
17. Romans 6. 1, 2. Col. 3. ^. Phil. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21. Psa. 143. 10. Heb. 5. 9.
Psa. 119. 133. 2 Cor. 5. 15. Ephesians. 1. 11. Mat. 5. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Psa. 119. 5.
Luke 22. 31. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 10 Ephesians. 6, 11. Romans 16. 20. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
thy Holiness and Justice, thy love and mercy in this work of our Redemption,
by the Incarnation, life, death, resurrection, intercession, and dominion of
thy Son! No power or wisdom in Heaven or Earth, could have delivered us but
thine. The Angels desire to pry into this Mystery, the Heavenly Host do
celebrate it with praises, saying, Glory be to God in the Highest; On Earth
peace; Good will toward men. The whole Creation shall proclaim thy Praises,
Blessing, Honor, Glory and power be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to
receive Power, and Honor, and Glory, for he has redeemed us to God by his
blood, and made us Kings, and Priests unto our God. Where sin abounded, Grace
has abounded much more. And have thou indeed forgiven us so great a debt, by
so precious a Ransom? Will thou indeed give us to reign with Christ in Glory,
and see thy face, and love thee, and be beloved of thee for ever? Yea, Lord
thou have forgiven us, and thou will glorify us, for thou art faithful that
have promised. With the blood of thy Son, with the Sacrament, and with thy
spirit, thou have sealed up to us these precious promises. And shall we not
love thee, that have thus loved us? Shall we not love thy Servants, and
forgive our Neighbors their little debt? After all this shall we again
forsake thee, and deal falsely in thy Covenant? God forbid; O set our affections
on the things above, where Christ sits at thy right hand, Let us no more
mind Earthly things, but let our Conversation be in Heaven, from whence we
expect our Savior to come and change us into the likeness of his glory. Teach
us to do thy will, O God, and to follow him, who is the Author of Eternal
Salvation, to all them that do obey him. Order our steps by thy word, and let
not any iniquity have dominion over us. Let us not henceforth live unto our
selves, but unto him who died for us and rose again. Let us have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works Romans 12. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 21 Romans 6. 22.
of darkness, but reprove them. And let our light so shine before men, that
they may glorify thee. In Simplicity, and Godly Sincerity, and not in Fleshly
wisdom, let us have our Conversation in the world. O that our ways were so
directed that we might keep thy statutes! Though Satan will be desirous again
to sift us, and seek as a roaring Lion to devour, strengthen us to stand
against his Wiles, and shortly bruise him under our feet. Accept us, O Lord,
who resign our selves unto thee, as thine own; and with our thanks and praise,
present our selves, a living Sacrifice to be acceptable through Christ. Useful
for thine honor. Being made free from sin, and become thy Servants, let us
have our fruit unto Holiness, and the End Everlasting Life. Through Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.


Next add this, or some such Exhortation, if there be time. DEar Brethren, we
have been here feasted with the Son of God at his Table, upon his Flesh and
Blood, in preparation for the Feast of Endless Glory. You have seen here
represented, what sin deserves, what Christ suffered, what wonderful Love the
God of infinite Goodness has expressed to us. You have had Communion with the
Saints, you have renewed your Covenant of Faith, and thankful Obedience unto
Christ; You have received his renewed Covenant of Pardon, Grace and Glory unto
you. O carry hence the lively sense of these great and excellent things upon
your hearts: You came not only to receive the mercy of an hour only, but that
which may spring up to Endless Joy: You came not only to do the duty of an
hour, but to promise that which you must perform, while you live on Earth.
Remember daily, especially when temptations to unbeleef, and sinful heaviness
assault you, what pledges of Love you here received; Remember daily, especially
when the Flesh, the Devil, or the World, would draw your hearts again from God,
and temptations to sin are laid before you; what bonds God, and your own
consent have laid upon you. If you are Penitent Believers, you are now
forgiven, and washed in the Blood of Christ. O go your way, and sin no more. No
more through wilfulness, and strive against you sins of weakness. Wallow no
more in the mire, and return not to your vomit. Let the exceeding Love of
Christ constrain you, having such Promises, to cleanse your selves from all
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God: And as
a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, to
be Zealous of good works, and show forth the Praises of him that has called
you.



Next sing some part of the Hymn in meeter, or some other sit Psalm of Praise
(as the 23. 116. or 103. or 100, etc.) And conclude with this or the like
Blessing. NOw the God of Peace, which brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his Will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be Glory for ever and ever,

Amen.


THE Celebration of the Sacrament of Baptism.
LEt no Minister, that is therein unsatisfied, be forced against his Judgment,
to baptize the Child of open Atheists, Idolaters, or Infidels, or that are
unbaptized themselves, or of such as do not competently understand the
Essentials of Christianity (what it is to be a Christian) and the Essentials of
Baptism, nor of such as never since they were baptized did personally own their
Baptismal Covenant, by a credible Profession of Faith and Obedience, received
and approved by some Pastor of the Church, as before Confirmation is required,
and in His Majesty's Declaration. Nor yet the Child of Parents justly
excommunicate, or that live in any notorious, scandalous sin, or have lately
committed such a sin (as if the Child be gotten in Adultery or Fornication)
and being justly convict of it, refuses penitently to confess it, and promise
Reformation. But if either of the Parents be duly qualified, and present the
Child to be baptized (or another for them in case they cannot be present)
the Child is to be received unto Baptism.

And if both the natural Parents are Infidels, Excommunicate, or otherwise
unqualified, yet if any become the Pro-parents and owners of the Child, and
undertake to educate it in the Faith of Christ, and Fear of God, and so present
it to be baptized; let it be done by a Minister, whose judgment does approve
it, but let no Minister be forced to it against his judgment. Let the Parents
or owners come to the Minister at some convenient time the week before, and
acquaint him when they intend to offer their Child to Baptism, and give an
account of their foresaid capacity, and receive his further Ministerial
Assistance for the fuller understanding of the use and benefits of the
Sacrament, and their own duty; The Font is to be placed to the greatest
convenience of the Minister and People. The Child, or Children being there
presented, the Minister may begin with this or the like speech directed to the
Parent, or Parents (that presents it.)

THat you may perform this service to God with understanding, you must know,
that God having made man in his own Image, to love, and serve him, our first
Parents wilfully corrupted themselves by sin, and became the Children of Death,
and the Captives of Satan, who had overcome them by his temptation; And as by
one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, so death passed upon all,
for that all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. We are conceived
in sin, and are by nature children of wrath. For who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean. By the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to
condemnation. But the infinite Wisdom and Love of the Father has sent his Son
to be the Savior of the World. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt on Earth,
and overcame the Devil and the World; Fulfilled all Righteousness, and suffered
for our sins upon the Cross, and rose again, and reigns in Glory, and will
come again, and judge the World in Righteousness; In him God has made and
offered to the World a Covenant of Grace, and in it the Pardon of sin to all
true Penitent Believers; and power to be the Sons of God, and Heirs of Heaven;
This Covenant is extended to the seed also of the Faithful, to give them the
benefits suitable to their age, the Parents dedicating them unto God, and
entering them into the Covenant, and so God in Christ will be their God, and
number them with his People.

This Covenant is to be solemnly entered into by Baptism (which is a holy
Sacrament instituted by Christ, in which a person professing the Christian
Faith (or the Infant of such) is baptized in water into the Name of the Father,
the Son, and Holy Ghost, in signification and solemnization of the holy
Covenant, in which as a Penitent Believer (or the seed of such) he gives up
himself, (or is by the Parent given up) to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
from henceforth (or from the time of natural capacity) to believe in, love, and
fear this Blessed Trinity, against the Flesh, the Devil, and the World; and
this especially on the account of Redemption, and is solemnly entered a Visible
Member of Christ, and his Church; a Child of God, and an Heir of Heaven] How
great now is the Mercy, and how great the Duty that is before you? Is it a
small Mercy for this Child to be accepted into the Covenant of God, and
washed from its Original sin, in the Blood of Christ, which is signified and
sealed by this Sacramental washing in water, to be accepted as a Member of
Christ, and of his Church, where he vouchsafes his Protection and Provision,
and the Means and Spirit of Grace, and the renewed pardon of sin upon
Repentance, and for you to see this happiness of your Child! The duty on your
part, is, first to see that you are steadfast in the Faith and Covenant of
Christ, that you perish not your self, and that your Child is indeed the
Child of a Believer; And then you are beleevingly and thankfully to dedicate
your Child to God, and to enter it into the Covenant in which you stand. And
you must know, that your Faith, and Consent, and Dedication will suffice for
your Children no longer than till they come to age themselves, and then they
must own their Baptismal Covenant, and personally renew it, and consent, and
give up themselves to God, or else they will not be owned by Christ. You must
therefore acquaint them with the Doctrine of the Gospel, as they grow up, and
with the Covenant now made, and bring them up in the fear of the Lord. And when
they are actually penitent Believers, they must present themselves to the
Pastors of the Church to be approved, and received into the Communion of the
Adult Believers.

If the Persons be before well instructed in the nature of Baptism, and Time
require Brevity; the Minister may omit the first part of this speech, and begin
at the description of Baptism, or after it. If there be need of satisfying the
People of the duty of Baptizing Infants, the Minister may here do it; otherwise
let the Questions here immediately follow.

The Minister shall here say to the Parent, and the Parent answer as follows.

IT being the Faithful, and their seed, to whom the Promises are made; And no
man will sincerely dedicate his Child to that God that he believes not in
himself; I therefore require you to make Profession of your own Faith.

Quest. Do you believe in God the Father Almighty, etc?

Answ. All this I do unfeignedly believe.

Quest. Do you repent of your sins, and renounce the Flesh, the Devil, and the
World, and consent to the Covenant of Grace, giving up your self to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as your Creator, and Reconciled Father, your
Redeemer, and your Sanctifier?

Ans. I do.

[Or thus rather, if the Parent be fit to utter his own Faith.]

Quest. Do you remain steadfast in the Covenant, which you made in Baptism your
self?

Ans. Repenting of my sins, I do renounce the Flesh, the Devil, and the World,
and I give up my self to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, my Creator, and
Reconciled Father, my Redeemer, and my Sanctifier.]

Quest. Do you present and dedicate this Child unto God, to be baptized into
this Faith, and solemnly engaged in this Covenant unto God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, against the Flesh, the Devil, and the World?

Ans. It is my desire (or) I do present and dedicate him for this end.

Quest. Do you here solemnly promise, that if God continue it with you, till it
be capable of Instructions, you will faithfully endeavor to acquaint this
Child with the Covenant in which he was here by you engaged and to instruct
and exhort him to perform this Covenant, as ever he looks for the blessings of
it, or to escape the curses and wrath of God: that is, That he renounce the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and live not after them; And that he believe
in this One God, in Three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, his
Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; That he resign himself to him as his
absolute Owner, and obey him as his Supreme Governor, and love him as his most
gracious Father, hoping to enjoy him as his Felicity in Endless Glory.

Ans. I will faithfully endeavor it.

Quest. Will you to this end faithfully endeavor to cause him to learn the
Articles of the Christian Faith, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments,
and to read, or hear the holy Scriptures, and to attend on the Public
Preaching of Gods Word? Will you endeavor by your own Teaching, and Example,
and Restraint, to keep him from wickedness, and train him up in a holy life?

Answ. I will faithfully endeavor it by the help of God.

Then let the Minister pray thus, or to this sense. O Most merciful Father, by
the first Adam, sin entered into Romans 5. 12. Ephesians. 2. 3. Joh. 3. 16. Genesis 3. 15.
Joh. 4. 42. Heb. 9. 26. Rev. 1. 15. Romans 5. 10. Tit. 3. 5. Rom 16. 20. Heb 8.
6. Mat 28. 19, 20. Genesis 17. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 20 37. Romans 6. 3, 4. Tit. 3. 5. 1
Cor. 12. 12. Genesis 17. Romans 9. 8. Act. 239. Mat. 23. 37. Deuteronomy. 39. 10 11, 12.
Mat. 19. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Rev. 1. 5. Ephesians 5. 26. Joh. 11. 52. Heb. 2.
13. Ephesians. 2. 19. and 3. 15. Zech. 9. 11, 15. 16. 1 Pet 5. 7. 2 Timothy 4. 18.
the world, and death by sin, and we are all by nature Children of Wrath; But
thou have given thy only Son to be the seed of the Woman, the Savior of the
World, the Captain of our Salvation, to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, and to wash us in his blood, and reconcile us unto thee, and to renew
us by the Holy Ghost, and to bruise Satan under our feet: In him thou have
established the Covenant of grace, and have appointed this Holy Sacrament of
Baptism for our solemn Entrance into the Bonds of the Covenants, and stating us
in the blessings of it, which thou extendest to the faithful and their seed.
We dedicate and offer this Child to thee, to be received into thy Covenant
and Church. We beseech thee to accept him as a member of thy Son, and wash him
in his blood from the guilt of Sin, as the Flesh is washed by this water. Be
reconciled to him, and take him for thy Child, renew him to the Image of thy
Son, make him a fellow Citizen with the Saints, and one of thy Household.
Protect him and provide for him as thy own, and finally preserve him to thy
Heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.



Then the Minister shall ask of the Parent the name of the Child to be
Baptized, and naming him, shall either dip him under the water, or else pour
water upon his face, if he cannot be safely or conveniently dipped, and shall
use these words without Alteration. I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.



And he shall thus Declare. THis Child is now received by Christ's appointment
into his Church, and solemnly entered into the holy Covenant, and engaged if he^
lives to the use of Reason, to rise with Christ to newness of life, as being
buried with him by Baptism, and to bear his Cross, and confess Christ
crucified, and faithfully to fight under his Banner against the Flesh, the
Devil, and the World, and to continue his Faithful Soldier and Servant to the
death, that he may receive the Crown of Life.



Then he shall give Thanks and Pray. We thank thee, most merciful Father,
that when we Romans 5. 12, 18. Gal. 3. 13. 1 John 5. 11. Act. 2. 39. 1 Cor. 12.
12, 13. Psalm. 44. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 8 5. Psa. 119. 94. Ephesians. 5. 24. Mat. 22. 37.
Deuteronomy. 10 20, 21. and 11. 22 and 30. Psalm. 16. 5 and 37. 4. Tit. 1. 2. and Tit.
2. 13. and 3. 7. 1 John 2. 5, 6, 17 Gal. 5. 24. Mat. 6. 13. Psalm 81. 12 Jam. 1.
14 (...). 1. 71* 1 Cor. 10. 16. 1 John 1. 7. (...) Cor. 6 14 Psa 1. 1, 2. Joh.
9 3^ Luke 9. 23. (...). 2. 10. Rev. 2. 10.
had broken thy Law, and were condemned by it, thou have given us a Savior and
life in him, and have extended thy Covenant of Grace to Believers, and to their
^eed, and have now received this Child into thy Covenant, and Church as a
member of Christ by this Sacrament of Regeneration. We beseech thee, let him
grow up in Holiness, and when he comes to years of discretion, let thy spirit
reveal unto him, the mysteries of the Gospel, and the riches of thy love in
Jesus Christ, and cause him to renew and perform the covenant that he has now
made, and to resign himself, and all that he has entirely unto thee his Lord,
to be subject and obedient to thee his Governor, and to love thee his Father
with all his heart, and soul, and might, and adhere unto thee and delight in
thee as the Portion of his soul, desiring and hoping to enjoy thee in
everlasting Glory. Save him from the Lusts and Allurements of the Flesh, the
temptations of the Devil, and the Baits of the pleasure, profit and honor of
the world, and from all the Corruptions of his own heart, and all the hurtful
violence of his Enemies. Keep him in Communion with the Saints in the love and
use of thy word and worship. Let him deny himself and take up his Cross and
follow Christ the Captain of his Salvation, and be faithful unto the death,
and then receive the Crown of life, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

Amen.


Then use this Exhortation, or the like, to the Parents. YOu that have devoted
this Child to God, and engaged it in Covenant to him, must be thankful for so
great a mercy to the Child, and must be faithful in performing what you have
promised on your parts, in instructing and educating this Child in the Faith
and Fear of God, that he may own and perform the Covenant now made, and
receive all the Blessings which God has promised. Hear what God has made your
duty, Ephesians. 6. 4. Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Prove. 22. 6. Train up a child in
the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. Prove. 19.
15. The Rod and Reproof give Wisdom, but a Child left to himself brings his
Mother to shame. Deuteronomy. 6. 5, 6, 7. Thou shall love thy Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might, and these words which
I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, and thou shall reach them
diligently unto thy Children, and thou shall talk of them when thou sit in
the house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. Joshuah says, Josh. 24. 15. As for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord. And Paul says of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15. From a Child thou
have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.



Then say to the People thus, or to this sense. YOu have heard Beloved, how
great a dignity we were advanced to in our Baptism, to how great duty we are
all engaged. O search and try, whether you have kept or broken the Convenant
which you made, and have lived according to the dignity of your Calling. And if
any of you be Atheists, Unbeleevers, or Ungodly, and love not God above all,
and neglect Christ and his Salvation, and are yet unsanctified, and live after
the Flesh, the Devil, and the World, which you here renounced; As you love your
souls, bewail your perfidious Convenant-breaking with God. Trust not the water
of Baptism alone; if you are not born again of the Spirit also, you cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5, 6. Baptism will not save you, if you
have not the answer of a good conscience unto God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. Much less
those wretches that hate Sanctification, and despise and scorn a holy life,
when they were by Baptism engaged to the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier; Can you
think to be saved by the Covenant, which you keep not? O no! your
perfidiousness aggravateth your sin and misery, Eccles. 5. 4, 5. When thou
vowest a vow to God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in Fools:
Pay that which thou have vowed; better it is that thou should not vow, than
that thou should vow and not pay. O bless the Lord, that it is a Covenant of
such Grace which is tendered to you, that yet upon true Repentance and
Coversion, even your Covenant Breaking shall be forgiven; And therefore
penitently cast down your selves before the Lord, and beleevingly cast your
selves on Christ, and yield to the teachings, and sanctifying operations of the
Holy Ghost, yet know the day of your Visitation, and forsake the Flesh, the
Devil, and the World, and turn to God with all your hearts, and give up your
selves entirely to your Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and he will have
mercy upon you, and will abundantly pardon you. But if you still live after the
Flesh, you shall dye: And if you continue to neglect this great Salvation,
there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and Fire, which shall devour the Adversaries.

Let no Children be privately baptized, nor any Minister forced to baptize
them any where, besides in the Public Assembly, unless upon some special
weighty cause, if there be occasion for baptizing the Adult, let the Minister
accordingly suit his expressions.



Of Catechizing, and the Approbation of those that are to be admitted to the
Lords Supper.
SEEing none can be saved at years of discretion, that do not actually
believe, and personally give up themselves in Covenant to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; Therefore as Parents must do their parts, so Ministers must
catechize the Ignorant; and Diligently labor to cause them both to learn the
Form of wholesome words (even the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and
some brief, yet full and sound Catechism) and to understand the meaning of
them, and to engage their hearts into the love of God, and a holy Obedience to
his Laws.

To this end let the Minister either every Lords Day, before the Evening
Prayers, or at some convenient hour, or on some other day of the week, as often
as he can, examine publicly such as are not admitted to the Lords Supper, and
take an account of their learning, and understanding the Creed, the ten
Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the Catechism. And let him by questioning
and explication, help them to understand them; And let such of the several
Families of the Parish come in their turns, when they are called by the
Minister to be thus Catechized. Also let the Minister either go to their
houses, or rather appoint the persons aforesaid in their courses at a certain
hour and place (in the Church or any other fit place) to come to him for
personal Instructions, where he may confer with those that are unmeet to be
catechized Publicly, or unwilling to submit to it, and there with humble,
prudent, serious Instruction and Exhortation, let him endeavor to acquaint
them with the substance of Christian-Faith and Duty, and to help them to make
sure their Calling and Election, and to prepare for Death and Judgment, and
exhort them to love, and to good works, and warn them lest they be hardened
through the deceltfulness of sin. But let him not in public or private meddle
with Impertinencies, or spend the time about smaller matters, or singular
Opinions, nor sift people to know things unfit, or unnecessary to be
disclosed, nor meddle with matters that do not concern him, as a Minister, to
inquire after; But help them to learn, and understand, and practice the
Christian Religion expressed in the Catechism.

The Catechism, See the Rubric for Catechism, and Confirmation in the
Common Prayer, and also His Majesty's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Assa^^s.

LEt none be admitted by the Minister to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
till they have at years of discretion understood the meaning of their Baptismal
Covenant, and with their own mouths, and their own consent openly before the
Church, ratified and confirmed, and also promised, that by the Grace of God
they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to observe, and keep such
things as by their own mouth and confession they have assented to; And so being
instructed in the Christian Religion, do openly make a credible Profession of
their own Faith, and promise to be obedientt o the Will of God.

A Profession is credible, when it is made understandingly, seriously,
voluntarily, deliberately, and not nullified by contradiction in Word or Deed
And that Profession is incredible, that is made ignorantly, ludicrously,
forcedly, rashly, or that is nullified by verbal or practical contradiction.
And it must be practice first, that must make words credible, when the person
by perfidiousness has forfeited his Credit. It is not private persons only,
but the Pastors of the Church that must approve of this Profession. Therefore
before any are admitted to the Lords Supper, they shall give a good account of
their Knowledge, Faith and Christian Conversation, conformable thereunto unto
the Pastors of their respective Congregations, or else shall produce a
certificate, that they have been approved or admitted to the Lords Supper in
another Congregation, of which they were members, and that by an allowed
Minister, upon such approved Profession as aforesaid.

If the person be able and willing, let him before the Congregation give the
foresaid account at large of his Knowledge, Faith and Obedience; But if through
backwardness or disability for public speech, he shall refuse it, let him
make the same Profession privately to the Minister, and own it in the Assembly,
when the Minister shall declare it, and ask him whether he owns it; But unless
it be in case of some extraordinary natural Imperfection, and disability of
utterance, let him at least openly recite the Creed, and profess his consent to
the Covenant with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Let the Minister of every Parish keep a double Register; one of the Names of
all that are there baptized, another of the Names of all that are approved upon
their foresaid credible Profession, and so admitted into the number of
Communicants, or that have a certificate of such Approbation, regularly,
elsewhere performed.

And if Confirmation be continued, let His Majesty's Declaration be observed,
requiring [That Confirmation be rightly and solemnly performed by the
Information, and with the consent of the Minister of the place.]

Let no Minister be enforced to admit any himself to the Lords Supper, who
has been clancularly and irregularly approved.

Those that after this Approbation, prove scandalous offenders, shall not by
the Minister be suffered to partake of the Lords Table, until they have openly
declared themselves to have truly repented, and amended their former naughty
lives.

Of the Celebration of Matrimony.
BEfore the Solemnizing of Marriage between any Persons, their purpose of
marriage shall be published by the Minister, three several Lords days in the
Congregation, at the place or places of their most usual abode respectively.
And of this Publication, the Minister who is to join them in marriage, shall
have sufficient Testimony before he proceed to Solemnize the Marriage; The
Parents consent being first sufficiently made known.

At the Celebration the Minister shall either by a Sermon; or other
Exhortation, open to them the Institution, Ends, and Use of Marriage, with the
conjugal Duties which they are faithfully to perform to each other. And then
shall demand of them whether it be their desire and purpose to be joined
together in the Bond of the Marriage-Covenant, and if they answer
affirmatively, he shall say to them. I require and charge you as you will
answer at the dreadful day of Judgment (when the secrets of all hearts shall
be disclosed) that if either of you do know any Impediment by Precon^ract or
otherwise, why you may not law^ully be joined together in marriage, you
discover it and proceed not.



If no Impediment be discovered by them or others, he shall Proceed to Pray.
MOst merciful Father, who have ordained Marriage for mutual ^^n 2. 18. and
(...). 28. Mal 2. 15. 1 Cor. 7. 14. 9. Heb. 13. 4. Luke 1. 6.
help, and for the increase of mankind* with a legitimate Issue, and of the
Church with a Holy seed, and for prevention of uncleanness: Bless thy own
Ordinance to these persons, that entering this state of Marriage in thy fear,
they may there Ephe. 5. 22 etc. Mal (...). 15, 16. P^al. 127. 3. Mat. 19. 13,
14. D^ut. 29. 11, 12 ^zek. 16. 8. Pro. 20. 7. Ephesians. 6. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 7. 1 Timothy
3. 11. and 5. 13, 14. 1 Co^. 7. 5, 29. Genesis 2. 18. P^o. 5. 18. Heb. 10. 26 1
Cor. 7. 29. Luke 12. 40. 1 Pet. 3. 7. Rev. 19. 7. Joh. 17. 24.
^^tirely devote themselves unto thee, and be faithful in all con^gal
Affections, and duties unto each other [and if thou bless them with Children]
let them be devoted unto thee, and accepted as thine own, and blessed with thy
grace, and educated in thy fear. Subdue those corruptioins If they be young,
it may ^ee said, Bless them with ^hildren, and let them b^^ de^ed, etc.
that would make their lives unholy or uncomfortable, and deliver them from
temptations to impiety, worldlyness, unquietness, discontent or disaffection to
each other, or to any Unfaithfulness to thee or to each other; make them meet
helps to each other in thy fear, and in the lawful management of the affairs of
this World. Let them not hinder, but provoke one another to love, and good to
works, and foreseeing the day of their separation by death, let them spend
their days in a Holy Preparation; and live here together as the Heirs of life,
that must re^oyce at the great marriage day of the Lamb, and live for ever with
Christ and all the Holy Angels and Saints in the presence of thy glory. Amen.



The Woman if sh^e b^e under Parents or Governors, being by one of them, or
some deputed by them given to b^e married, the Man with his Right hand shall
take the Woman by the Right hand, and shall say. I. A. do take thee B. to be
my Married Wife, and do promise and Covenant in the presence of God, and before
this Congregation, to be a loving and faithful Husband to thee, till God shall
separate us by death.



Then the Woman shall take the Man by the Right hand, with her Right hand, and
say. I. B. do take thee A. to be my Married Husband, and I do promise and
Covenant in the presence of God, and before this Congregation to be a loving,
obedient, and faithful Wife unto thee, till God shall separate us by death,



Then let the Minister say. These two persons A. and B. being lawfully married
according to Gods Ordinance, I do pronounce them, Husband and Wife. And those,
whom God has conjoined, let no man put asunder.



Next he may read the duty of Husbands and Wives out of E^hes. 5. 2. Coll. 4.
2. 1 Pet. 3. and Psalm. 128. or some other Pertinent Psalm may be said or
sung; And let the Minister exhort them to their several duties, and then Pray.
MOst merciful Father, let thy Blessings rest upon these Genesis 28. 3. Tit. 1. 15.
1 Timothy 4. 5. 1 Cor. 10. 31. 1 These. 3. 12. Ephesians. 5. 25. Gal. 5. 22. Romans (...).
1. 13. Gal. 6. (...).
Persons, now joined in lawful Marriage, Sanctify them and their Conversations,
their Family, Estates, and (...) unto thy Glory. Furnish them with love to thee
and to each other, with meekness, patience, and contentedness. Let them not
live unto the Flesh, but unto the spirit, that of the spirit they may reap
Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.


Then let him Conclude with a Benediction. GOd Almighty, the Creator, Redeemer,
and Sanctifier, bless you in your Souls and Bodies, Family and Affairs, and
preserve you to his Heavenly Kingdom. Amen.



The Visitation of the Sick, and their Communion.
THe Visitation of the Sick being a private duty, and no part of the Pub^ick
Liturgy of the Church, and the case of the Sick being so exceeding various, as
to soul and body, and it being requisite that Ministers be able to sui^ their
Exhortations and Prayers to the Condition of the Sick, let the words of such
Exhortations and Prayers be left to their Prudence.

So urgent is the necessity of the Sick, and so seasonable and advantageous the
opportunity, that Ministers may not negligently over-pass them, but in love and
tenderness instruct them according to their several Conditions; Endeavoring
the Conversion of the ungodly, the strengthening of the weak, and comforting
such as need Consolation, directing them how to improve their afflictions, and
helping them to be sensible of the evil of sin, the negligences and
miscarriages of their lives, the vanity of the World, their necessity of a
Savior, the sufficiency of Christ, the Certainty and Excellency of the
Everlasting Glory; Exhorting them to repentance and to faith in Christ, and to
set their affections on the things above; And (if they are penitent believers)
comfortably to hope for the Kingdom which God has promised to them that love
him, committing their souls to their Redeemer, and quietly resting in the will,
and love, and promises of God; Resolving if God shall recover them to health,
to redeem the time, and live the rest of their lives unto his glory. And being
willing, if it be their appointed time, to depart and be with Christ; and
they must be exhorted to forgive such as have wronged them, and to be
reconciled to those with whom they have been at variance, and to make a pious,
just, and charitable disposal of their Worldly Estates.

The Order for Solemnizing the Burial of the Dead.
IT is agreeable to nature and Religion, that the Burial of Christians be
solemnly and decently performed, as to the cases; Whether the Corpse shall be
carried first into the Church, that is to be buried in the Churchyard? And
whether it shall be buried before the Sermon, Reading, or Prayer, or after, or
in the midst of the reading, or whether any Prayer shall be made at the grave,
for the living, Let no Christians uncharitably judge one another about these
things, let no people keep up groundless usages, that being suspicio^s, grieve
their Minister and offend their Brethren. Let no Minister that scrupleth the
satisfying of peoples ungrounded desires in such things, be forced to do it
against his Conscience, and let Ministers that do use any of these Customs or
Ceremonies, have liberty, when they suspect that the people desire them upon
some Error, to profess against that Error, and teach the people better.

Whether the Minister come with the Company that brings the Corpse from the
house: or whether he meet them, or receive them at the burial place, is to be
left to his own discretion. But while he is with them, let him gravely
discourse of man's Mortality, and the useful truths and duties thence to be
inferred: And either at the Grave, or in the Reading place, or Pulpit, by way
of Sermon, according to his discretion. Let him (at least if it be desired)
instruct and exhort the people concerning death, and the life to come, and
their necessary preparation. Seeing the spectacle of Mortality, and the season
of mourning, do tend to prepare men for a sober considerate entertainment of
such Instructions, and he may read such Scriptures as may mind them of Death,
Resurrection, and Eternal life, as 1 Cor. 15. or from verse. 10. to the end, And
Job 1. 21. and 19. 25, 26, 27. John 11. 25, 26. and 5. 28, 29. And his Prayer
shall be suited to the occasion.

When ever the Rain, Snow, or Coldness of the season, make it unhealthful to
the Minister or People to stand out of doors, at least then, let the Reading,
Exhortation, and Prayers, be used within the Church.

Of Extraordinary Days of Humiliation, and Thanksgiving, and Anniversary
Festivals.
WHen great afflictions lie upon the Church, or any special part or members of
it, or when any great sins have been Committed among them, it is meet that in
public, by fasting and prayer, we humble our selves before the Lord, for the
averting of his displeasure; and on such occasions it is the Pastors duty to
confess his own, and the peoples sins, with Penitence, and tenderness of heart,
and by his Doctrine and Exhortation, to Endeavor effectually to bring the
People to the sight and sense of their sin, and the deserts of it, and to a
firm Resolution of better obedience for the time to come, being importunate
with God in Prayer for pardon and renewed grace.

Upon the receipt of great and extraordinary mercies, the Church (having
opportunity) is to Assemble for public Thanksgiving unto God, and the Minister
to stir up the people to a lively sense of the greatness of those mercies,
and joyfully to Celebrate the praises of God, the Author of them. And it is not
unmeet in these days to express our joy in Feasting and outward signs of
Mirth, provided they be used moderately, spiritually, and inoffensively, and
not to gratify oursensual desires, and that we releeve the poor in their
necessities (which also on days of Humiliation and other seasons. we must not
forget.) The occasions of such days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving being so
various, as cannot be well suited by any standing forms, the Minister is to
apply himself to the respective duties, suitable to the particular occasions.

Though it be not unlawful or unmeet to keep Anniversary Commemoration by
Festivals, of some great and notable mercies, to the Church or State, the
memory whereof should be transmitted to posterity; nor to give any persons
their due honor who have been the Instruments thereof; yet because the
Festivals of the Churches Institution now observed, are much abused, and many
sober Godly persons, Ministers, and others, are unsatisfied of the Lawfulness
of the Celebrating them as Holy days, let the abuse be restrained, and let
not the Religious observation of those days by public Worship, be forced
upon any that are thus unsatisfied, provided they forbear all offensive
behavior thereupon.

Of Prayer and Thanksgiving, for Particular Members of the Church
BEsides the Petitions that are put up for all in such distresses, in the
General Prayer, it is meet that Persons in dangerous sickness, or other great
affliction of Body or mind; and Women that are near the time of
Childe-bearing, when they desire it, shall be particularly recommended to God
in the Public Prayers of the Church. Because all the members constitute one
body, and must have the same care one for another, as suffering all with one
that suffers, and rejoicing all with one that is honored. And the effectual
servent prayer of the righteous, especially of the whole Congregation, avails
much with God. But because diseases, distresses, and grief of mind, are so
various that no forms that are Particular can suit them all; And because every
Minister should be able to suit his Prayers to such various Necessities of the
people: We desire, that it may be left to his discretion to pray for such
according to their several Cases, before or after Sermon. But we desire that
except in case of sudden necessity, they may send in their Bills of Request to
him, the night before, that he may consider of their cases, and may publish
only such, and in such Expressions, as in prudence he shall judge meet for the
Ears of the Assembly.

In the more ordinary Cases of persons in sickness, danger, and distress, and
that are delivered from them, these following Prayers may be used, or such
like.

A Prayer for the Sick, that is in hopes of Recovery.
MOst merciful Father, Though our Sin does find us out, Number. 32. 23. Luke 23.
41. Lam. 3. 22. Ezra. 9. 13.
and we are justly afflicted for our Transgressions, yet are we not consumed
in thy wrath, but thou punishest us less than our Iniquities do deserve, though
thou causest Grief, yet will thou have compassion according to the multitude of
thy mercies, Lam. 3. 32. 33.
for thou do not willingly afflict and grieve the children of men; Thou
revivest the spirit of the humble, and the heart of Isa. 57. 15, 16, 17. Psalm.
25. 18.
the Contrite ones, for thou will not contend for ever, neither will thou be
always wroth, for the spirit would fail before thee, and the soul which thou
have made. Look down in tender mercy on the affliction of this thy Servant; O
Lord rebuke him not in thy and 6. 1. and 38. 9.
wrath, neither chasten him in thy hot displeasure. All his desire is before
thee, and his groaning is not hid from thee; Have mercy upon him O Lord for he
is weak. O Lord heal him, whose and. 6. 2, 3, 5.
boues and soul is vered. In death there is no remembrance of thee, In the
grave who shall give thee thanks. Remember that and 78. 39.
we are but flesh, a Wind that passes away and comes not Joh. 23. 25. Psalm.
25. 7, 18. and 116. 3. Isa. 38. 16, 19. Psalm. 119. 175. Luke 4. 39. Isa. 38.
21. Psa. 50. 15. Job. 10. 2. Psalm. 139. 23. Lam. 3. 40. Psa. 119. 71. 67.
again, will thou break a leaf driven to and fro, and will thou pursue the dry
stubble? Remember not the Iniquities of his youth, or his transgressions: look
upon his Afffiction, and his pain, and forgive all his sins. Though the sorrows
of death do compass him about, yet if it be for thy glory and his good recover
him, and let him live and praise thy name. Rebuke his sickness, direct unto
such means as thou will bless. In the time of his trouble we call upon thee,
do thou deliver him, and let him glorify thee, however show him the sin that
does offend thee, let him search and try his ways, and confess and turn from
his Inquity, and let it be good for him that he was afflicted. Let this be
the fruit of it to Isa. 27. 9. 1 Cor. 11. 32. Heb. 12. 11. Lam. 3. 24, 25, 26.
27, 31. Psa. 30. 5. Heb. 12. 6, 7. Isa. 38. 19, 20.
purge and take away his sin, That being chastened of the Lord, he may not be
condemned with the world. And though chastisement for the present seems not
to be joyous, but grievous, yet afterward let it yield the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness to this thy Servant, that is exercised therein. In the mean time
O Lord be thou his Portion who art good to the Soul that seeks thee, and
waits for thee. Let him patiently and silently bear thy yoke, let him hope
and quietly wait for thy salvation: Considering Psa. 116. 9. 12. etc. Psalm. 30.
11. 12. 2 Cor. 1. 9.
that thou will not cast off for ever, that thy anger is but for a moment, but
in thy favor is Life. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning: and that whom thou and 4. 16.
love, thou chastenest, and scourgest every son whom thou receivest; and 5. 8.
and that if he endure Chastening thou dealest with him as a Son. If he be
recovered, let him devote himself entirely to Heb. 10 38.
thy glory: That when thou have put off his sackcloath and mourning, and girded
him with gladness, he may speak thy praise, and 2 Cor. 4. 14, 18
give thee thanks. If he receive the sentence of death in himself, let it
cause him to trust in thee that raisest the dead, knowing that as 17.
thou did raise up the Lord Jesus, thou will raise him up also by Jesus:
Therefore suffer not his hope to faint: but though his outward Phil. 3. 9.
man perish, yet let his inwardman be renewed from day to day and 1 Cor. 10. 3.
let him live by faith and look at the things which are not seen, even at the
exceeding eternal weight of glory; Let him be found in Christ, Heb. 2. 14.
not having his own righteousness, but that which is of God by faith. Restrain
the tempter, and deliver thy servant from the sinful fears 1 Cor. 15. 55.
of death, by Christ, who through death, destroyed the Devil that had the power
of death; That he may find that death has lost his sting, and Triumph over
it by Faith in him, through whom we are made more than Conquerers. That by
faith and Romans 8. 37. Col. 3. 1. Ioh. 29 17. and 14. 13. and 17. 26.
love, his soul may now ascend with Christ, that ascended unto his Father and
our Father, and to his God and our God, and is gone to prepare a place for us,
and has promised, that where he is, there his servants shall be also; That
they may behold the glory which thou have given him. Magnify thy self in his
Body whether and 17. 24.
by life or death, and safely bring him into thy glorious presence Phil. 1. 2.
where is fullness of Joy, and Everlasting pleasures, through Jesus Christ our
Life and Righteousness. Psalm. 16. 11.


Amen.
A Prayer for Women drawing near the time of Childe-bearing.
MOst merciful Father, who have justly Sentenced Woman that was first in the
Transgression, to great and multiplied 1 Timothy 2. 14. Genesis 3. 16. 1 Timothy 2. 15.
Psalm. 46. 1. Psa. 37. 3. Ioh. 16. 12 D^ 28. 4. 2 Col. 1. 10, 11. 1 Samuel 2. and
1. ^8.
sorrows, and particularly in sorrow to bring forth Children; yet grantest
preservation and relief, for the propagation of Mankind. Be merciful to this
thy servant, be near her with thy present help, in the needful time of
trouble, and though in Travel she has sorrow, give her strength to bring
forth. Being delivered, let her remember no more the Anguish, for joy that a
Child is born into the World. Bless her in the fruit of her body and being
safely delivered, let her return thee hearty thanks, and devote it and the rest
of her life to thy service, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving for those that are restored, from Dangerous Sickness.
We thank thee O Most Gracious God, that thou have heard (...). 2. and 3, 4.
and 66. 10. and 30. 3. and 103. 3, 4. ^sa. 38. 10, 12. Jer. 26. 3. 13. Psalm.
103. 5. Isa. 38. 11. ^sa. 27. 13. Psa. 3^. 4, 5, and 106. 23. and 32. 6, 7.
and, 73, 26. and 73. 1. and 34 19. and 73. 19, 23
us when we cried unto thee, for thy servant in his weakness and distress,
that thou have not turned away our Prayer; nor thy mercy from him, we cried to
thee and thou have delivered and healed him, thou have brought him from the
grave, thou have kept him alive, that he should not go down into the Pit, thou
have forgiven his iniquity, and healed his diseases thou have redeemed his life
from destruction, and have crowned him with loving kindeness, and tender
mercies, thou have not deprived him of the residue of his years, thou have
repented thee of the Evil: His Age is nor departed; Thou have renewed his
youth, and given him to see man, with the Inhabitants of the World; And to see
the Goodness of the Lord, in the land of the living, day and night thy hand was
heavy upon him, but thou have turned away thy Psa. 60. 11. and 46 1. Psa. 116.
1, 12, 18, 13, 14. Isa. 38. 20. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Luke 2. 29. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
wrath, and have forgiven the iniquity of his sin, for this every one that is
godly shall pray unto thee in a time of trouble; (...) Thou art a hiding place,
thou preservest us from trouble, when our Flesh and our heart fails us, thou
art the strength of our heart, and our Portion for ever; indeed Lord thou art
good unto thine Israel; Even to such as are clean of heart; many are the
afflictions of the Righteous, but thou deliverest them out of all; Though all
the day long they be afflicted, and chastened every morning, yet are they
continually with thee; Thou hold them by the right hand, thou art a present
help in trouble; when all the help of man is vain. Let thy servant love thee,
because thou have heard his voice and supplication, Let him offer unto thee,
the sacrifice of thanksgiving; and pay his vows to the most high; and take the
Cup of Salvation, and call upon thee all his days, let him be wholly devoted
to thy praise, and glorify thee in Soul and Body, as being Thine, and
seasonably depart in peace unto thy glory? through Jesus Christ our life, and
righteousness.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving, for the Deliverance of Women, in Childe-bearing.
WE return thee thanks, Most Gracious God, That thou Psa. 34. 3. 4. Rev. 1.
18. 1 Samuel 2. 6. Psa. 113. 9. and 117 3. and 42. 4. and 100. 4. and 145. 9. 20,
14. 19. Deuteronomy. 28. 8. Psa. 133. 3.
have heard our Prayers for this thy handmaid; and have been her helpin the
time of her necessity, and delivered her from her fears and sorrows death and
life are in thy power, thou killest and thou make alive, thou bring down
to the grave, and thou bring up; Thou make the Barren to keep house, to
be a joyful Mother of Children. We thank thee, that thou have given thy
servant, to see the fruit of her Womb, and that thou have brought her again to
thy Holy assembly, to go with the multitude to thy house, and worship thee with
the voice of joy and praise, that she may enter into thy gates with
thanksgiving, and into thy Court with praise, and we may all be thankful to
thee on her behalf, and speak good of thy Name; Thou art good O Lord to all,
and thy tender mercies are over all thy works, thou preserveit them that love
thee; thou raisest up them that are vowed down; thou fulfillest the desire of
them that fear thee, thou also do hear Isa. 44. 3. Deuteronomy. 8. 11. 14. Psalm.
116. Isa. 33. 20. Mal. 2. 15. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Ephesians. 6. 4. Deuteronomy 6. 6. Prove. 3. 33.
Josh. 24. 15. Zech. 14. 20, 21 Psa. 91. 4. 1 John 2. 15. Phil. 3. 1. 18. 1 Cor.
7. 31, 29, 30. Psa. 23. 3, 4, 6. Jude 24,
their cry, and save them, command thy blessing yet upon thy servant and her
offspring; Let her not forget thee and thy mercies, but let her devote the
life which thou have given her to thy service, and educate her offspring as a
Holy seed, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and as thou have said,
that thy scurse is in the house of the wicked, but thou blessest the habitation
of the just; let her, and her house serve thee, and let holiness to the Lord
be written upon all wherewith thou blessest her; Let her make thee her refuge
and habitation; Give her the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in thy
sight is of great price, let her not love the world, nor mind Earthly things,
but use the world as not abusing of it; Seeing the time is short, and the
fashion of this world passes away; Restore her Soul, and lead her in the paths
of righteousness; though she must walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, let her fear no evil; Let thy goodness and mercy follow her all the
days of her life, and let her dwell for ever in thy Glorious presence; Through
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

If the Child be dead, those passage which imply its living must be omitted,
and if the Woman be such as the Church has cause to judge ungodly, the
Thanksgiving must be in words more agreeable to her condition, if any be
used.

Of Pastoral Discipline, Public Confession, Absolution, and Exclusion from the
Holy Communion of the Church.
THe Recital of the Curses are said in the Book of Common Prayer, to be
instead of the godly discipline of the primitive Church, till it can be
restored again, which is much to be wished, which is the putting of notorious
sinners to open Penitence; His Majesty's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
affairs, determines that all public diligence be used for the instruction,
and reformation of Scandalous offenders, whom the Minister shall not suffer to
partake of the Lords Table, until they have openly declared themselves to have
truly repented and amended their former naughty lives, provided there be place
for due appeals to Superior Powers.

And the law of Christ commands, if thy Brother trespass against thee, go and
tell him his faults between him and thee alone, if he shall hear thee, thou
have gained thy Brother, but if he will not hear thee, then take to thee one
or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses; every word may be
Established, and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church,
but if he shall neglect to hear the Church; let him be unto thee as a Heathen
man, or as a publican. Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. And it is the office of the Pastors
of the several Congregations, not only to teach the people in General, and
guide them in the Celebration of the public Worship, but also to over-see
them, and watch over each member of their flock particularly, to preserve them
from Errors, Heresies, Divisions, and other sins, defending the truth,
confuting gainsayers, and seducers, instructing the Ignorant, exciting the
Negligent, incourageing the Despondent, comforting the Afflicted, confirming
the weak, rebuking and admonishing the disorderly and scandalous, and directing
all according to their needs in the matters of their Salvation, and the people
in such needs should have ordinary recourse to them, as the officers of Christ,
for guidance, and resolution of their doubts, and for assistance in making
their salvation sure; and in proving, maintaining, or restoring the peace of
their consciences, and spiritual comfort.

If therefore any member of the Church be a scandalous sinner, and the Crime
be either notorious or fully proved, let the Pastor admonish him, and set
before him the particular command of God which he transgresses, the supreme
Authority of God which he despises, the promises and mercies, which he
treads under foot, and the curse and dreadful condemnation, which he draws
upon himself, let this be done with great compassion and tender love to the
offenders soul, and with gravity, reverent, and serious importunity, as
beseems men employed on the behalf of God, for the saving of a soul, and yet
with judgment, and cautelous prudence, not taking that for sin which is no
sin, nor that for a gross and scandalous sin, which is but an ordinary humane
frailty, not dealing as unreverently with a Superior as with an inferior, nor
making that public, which should be concealed, nor reproving before others,
when it should be done more secretly, nor speaking unseasonably, to those who
through drink or passion are incapable of the benefit, nor yet offending by
bashfulness or the fear of man, or lukewarmness, negligence, or slighting over
great offenses, on the other extreme.

Prudence also requires them to be cautelous of over-medling, where the
Magistrates honor, or concernment, or the Churches unity, or peace, or the
reputation of others, or the interest of their Ministry requires them to
forbear.

These Cautions observed, If the scandalous offenders continue impe^itent, or
unreformed, after due admonitions and patience, let the Pastor in the
Congregation when he is present rebuke him before all, that the Church may
sufficiently disown the Crime, and others may see the odiousness and danger of
the sin. But let this also be with the love, and seriousness, and prudence,
before mentioned.

If the offender in obstinacy will not be there, the Pastor may open the crime
before the Congregation; And present or absent (in case he remain impenitent)
if the case will bear so long delay, it is convenient, that the Pastor
publicly pray for his conviction, and repentance, that he may be Saved.

And this he may do one, or two, or three, or more days, as the nature of the
case, and prudence shall direct him.

If during these means for his Recovery (after the proof of the Crime) there
be a Communion of the Church in the Lords Supper, Let the Pastor require him
to forbear and not suffer him to partake of the Lords Table.

If yet the offender remain impenitent, let the Pastor openly declare him
^^meet for the Communion of the Church, and require him to abstain from it, and
require the Church to avoid Communion with him. And let him bind him by the
denounciations of the threatings of God, against the impenitent.

But before this is done, let no necessary consultation, with other Pastors, or
concurrence, of the Church be neglected, And after let there be place for due
appeals, and let Ministers consent to give account when they are accused of
Mal-administration.

But if after private Admonition (while the offense is such, as requires not
public confession) the Sinner be penitent, let the Minister privately apply
to his Consolation the promises of the Gospel, with such cautelous prudence as
is most suitable to his condition.

And if he repent not till after public admonition, or that the scandal be
so great and notorious, as that a public confession is necessary, let him at a
seasonable time appointed by the Pastor, with remorse of conscience, and true
contrition, confels his sin before the Congregation, and heartily lament it,
and clear the honor of his Christian profession, which he had stained, and
crave the prayers of the Church to God for pardon, and reconciliation through
Christ, and also crave the Ministerial Absolution and restoration, to the
Communion of the Church, and profess his resolution to do so no more; but to
live in new obedience to God, desiring also their prayers for Corroborating and
preserving grace.

It is only a credible profession of repentance, that is to be accepted by the
Church.

The foregoing Cautious must be carefully observed in such confessions, that
they be not made to the injuring of the Magistrate, or of the Church, or of
the reputation of others, or of the Life, Estate, or Liberty of the offender,
or to any other shame than is necessary to the manifesting of his repentance,
and the clearing of his Profession, and the Righting of any that he has
wronged, and the honor, and preservation of the Church.

When he has made a credible profession of repentance, It is the Pastors
duty, Ministerially to declare him pardoned by Christ, but in conditional terms
[If his repentance be sincere] And to absolve him from the censureof non
Communion with the Church, if he was under such a censure before his penitence,
and to declare him meet for their Communion, and to encourage him to come, and
require the Church to entertain him into their Communion with gladness, and not
upbraid him with his fall, but rejoice in his recovery, and endeavor his
confirmation and preservation for the time to come: And it is his duty
accordingly to admit him to Communion, and theirs to have loving Communion with
him: All which the penitent person, must beleevingly, lovingly, and joyfully
receive. But if any, by Notorious perfidiousness, or frequent Covenant breaking
have forfeited the Credit of their words, or have long continued in the sin
which they do confess, so that their forsaking it has no proof; The Church
then must have testimony of the Actual Reformation of such as these, before
they may take their Professions and promises as credible; Yet here the
difference of persons and offenses is so great; that this is to be much left
to the Prudence of Pastors, that are present, and acquainted with the persons,
and Circumstances of the Case. In the transacting of all this, these following
Forms, to be varied as the variety of Cases do require, may be made use of.

A Form of Public Admonition to the Impenitent.
A. B. you are convict of gross and scandalous sin, you have The sin may be
named and aggravated when it is Convenient.
been admonished and entreated, to repent. The promises of mercies to the
Penitent; and the threatenings of God against the Impenitent, have not been
concealed from you; we have waited in hope for your repentance, as having
Compassion on your soul; and desiring your Salvation; But we must say with
grief, you have hitherto disappointed us; We are certain from the Word of God,
that you must be penitent, if ever you will be pardoned, and that except you
repent, you shall everlastingly perish. Luke. 13. 3, 5. Act. 5. 31. Luke 12.
47. To acquaint you publicly with this, and yet here to offer you mercy from
the Lord, is the next duty laid upon us for your recovery. O! blame us not, if
knowing the terrors of the Lord, we thus persuade you, and are loath to leave
you in the power of Satan, and loath to see you cast out into perdition, and
that your blood should be required at our hands, as not having discharged our
duty to prevent it.

Be it known unto you therefore, that it is the God of Heaven and Earth, the
great, the jealous, and the terrible God, whose Laws you have broken, and
whose Authority you despise; you refuse his government, who is coming with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly of their ungodly Deeds, and speeches, who has told us that
[evil shall not dwell with him] The Foolish shall not stand in his sight; He
hates all workers of Iniquity (Jude 14, 15. Psalm. 5. 4, 5.) The ungodly shall
not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous
(Psalm. 1. 5, 6.) God has not made his Laws in vain. Though the wicked
contemn God, and say in their hearts, he will not require it. (Psalm. 10. 13.)
Yet their damnation slumbereth not, they are reserved to the day of judgment,
to be punnished (2 Pet. 2. 3, 9.) And he sees that their day is coming;
(Psalm. 37. 13.) If men cut off the lives of those that break their laws, will
God be out-faced by the pride, and stubborness of sinners? He will not; you
shall know he will not; He threatens not in jest. Who has hardened himself
against him and has prospered (Job. 9. 4.) Are you not as chafe and stubble,
and is not our God a consuming Fire (Psalm. 1. 4. Isa. 5. 24. Heb. 12. 19.) If
Briers and Thorns be set against him in Battle, will he not go through them,
and burn them up together (Isa. 27. 4.) Can your heart endure, or your hands
be strong in the day when God shall deal with you? It is the Lord that has
spoken it, and he will do it. Ezekiel. 22. 14. What will you do, when you must
bear which the pains of Hell from God, that now, can scarce endure to be thus
openly and plainly warned of it; If we to please you should be silent and
betray you, do you think the God of Heaven, will fear, or flatter you, or be
unjust to please a worm. Do you provoke the Lord to Jealousy, are you stronger
than he. (1 Cor. 10. 22.) O man! for your souls sake, let not Satan abuse your
understanding, and sin befool you, must you not die? And does not Judgment
follow, when all secrets shall be opened, and God will no more entreat you to
confess. (Heb. 9. 7. Matthew. 10. 26.) Behold the Judge stands at the door;
(Jam. 5. 9.) will sin go then with you for as light a matter as it does now?
Will you then deny it, or will you stand to all the reasonings, or excuses, by
which you would now extenuate or cover it? Will you defend it as your friend?
and be angry with Ministers and Reprovers, as your Enemies. Or will you not
mourn at last (with weeping and gnashing of teeth) And say; How have I hated
Instruction, and my heart despised Reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my
Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear to them that Instructed me. (Pro. 5. 11, 12,
13. Mat. 13. 4^. 50.) O that you were wise, that you understood this, and that
you would consider your latter End. (Deuteronomy. 32. 29.) believe Gods wrath before
you feel it: be convinced by the word and servants of the Lord, before you are
confounded by the dreadfulness of his Majesty; yet there is hope, but shortly
there will be none, if you now neglect it; yet if you consess and forsake your
sins, you shall have mercy, but if you cover them, you shall not prosper.
(Prove. 28. 13.) And if being often reproved, you harden your Neck: you shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. (Pro. 29. 1.) Be not
deceived, God is not mocked: whatsoever you sow, that shall you also reap.
(Gal. 6. 7.) O man! you know not what it is to deal with an offended, and
revenging God. Nor what it is to hear. Christ say, depart from me ye workers
of Iniquity; I never knew you, depart from me ye wicked into everlasting fire
(Matthew. 7. 23. and 25. 41.) You know not what it is to be shut out of Heaven,
and concluded under utter desperation, and in Hell to look back upon this
obstinate Impenitence; and rejecting of the mercy that would have saved you;
And there to have Conscience telling you for ever, what it is that you have
done; Did you not know what this is, could you think a Penitent confessing, and
forsaking your sin, to be a condition too hard for the preventing of such a
Doleful state? O No! you know not what a case you are casting your immortal
soul into. The Lord give you repentance. that you may never know it by
experience. To prevent this, is our business with you: We delight not to
displease or shame you. But God has told us, [that if any do err from the
truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he which converteth the sinner
from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins. Jam. 5. 20.] I do therefore by the Command, and in the name
of Jesus Christ, require, and beseech you, that you do without any more delay,
confess your sins and heartily bewail them; and beg pardon of them, and resolve
and promise by the help of God to do so no more, And bless God that you have an
advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous, whose blood will cleanse
you from your sins; if you penitently confess them (1 John 1. 7, 9. and 2. 1,
2.) and that mercy may be yet had on so easy terms. If you had any sense of
your sin and misery, or any sense of the dishonor done to God, or of the wrong
that you have done to others, and of the usefulness of your Penitent
confession, and amendment, to the reparation of all these, you would cast your
self in the dust in shame and grief before the Lord, and before the Church: To
day therefore, if you will hear his voice, harden not your heart, least God
forsake you, and give you over unto your own hearts lust, to walk in your own
counsels, and resolve in his wrath, you shall never enter into his rest;
(Psalm. 95. 8. 12. and 81. 11. 12.) And then God and this Congregation will be
Witnesses that you were warned, and your blood will be upon your own head. But
if in Penitent confession, you fly to Christ, and loath your self for your
iniquities, and heartily forsake them, I have Authority to promise you free
Forgiveness, and that your Iniquity shall not be your Ruin (Luke 24. 4. 7.
Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31, 32.)

A Form of Confession, to be made beeore the Congregation
I do confess before God, and this Congregation, that I have Jos. 7. 19. Pro.
28. 13. Psalm. 32. 5. Exo. 10. 16. Gal. 1. 13. 2 Chro. 15. 2. Genesis 4. 16. Psa.
51. 11. Mat. 27. 5. Luke 15. 21. Mat. 22. 8. Psalm. 38 18. 4 and 40. 12. Luke
13. 13. 1 Timothy 1. 1. Heb. 9. 26. Luke 19. 10. Romans 5. 10. Jam. 5. 16. Psa. 51.
2 1. 9. Heb. 8. 12. (...). 51. 11, 27. and 9. and 103. 10. Psalm. 51. 10, 12. 2
Cor. 2, 7, 10. John 8. 11. Mat. 13 37. Psalm. 73. 1, 15 Eccle. 8. 12. 2 Chronicles.
20. 20. Jam. 1. 13, 14. Psalm. 5. 5. 1 John 3. 4. Gal. 6. 1.
greatly Sinned, Here the sin must be Named and aggravated, when by the Pastor
it is judged requisite.
I have offended, and dishonored God, wronged the Church, and the Souls of
others, I have deserved to be forsaken of the Lord, and cast out of his
presence and the communion of Saints, into desperation, and remediless misery
in Hell, I am no more worthy to be called thy Son, or to have a name or place
among thy Servants: I do here declare mine Iniquitys, and am sorry for my sins;
They are gone over my head as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me, they
take hold upon me, I am ashamed, as unworthy to look up toward heaven, but my
hope is in the blood and grace of Christ, who made his life a Sacrifice for
sin, and came to seek and save that which was lost; whose grace abounds,
where sin has abounded. The Lord be merciful to me a sinner: I humbly beg of
the Congregation, that they will earnestly pray, that God will wash me
thoroughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, that he will
forgive them, and blot them out, and hide his Face from them, and remember them
no more, that he will not cast me away from his presence, nor forsake me as
I have forsaken him, nor deal with me according to my deserts: But that he
will create in me a Clean heart, and renew a right spirit in me, and grant
me the joy of his Salvation; and I beg pardon of the Church, and all that I
have wronged: and resolve by the grace of God to do so no more; but to walk
more watchfully as before the Lord, and I desire all that are ungodly, that
they think never the worse of the Laws, or ways, or servants of the Lord, for
my misdoings; For if I had been ruled by God, and by his servants, I had never
done, as I have done? There is nothing 1 Cor. 10. 11. 12. 2 Samuel 11. 2. Genesis 3.
6. Mat. 26. 41 75. Heb. 12. 28. 1 Cor. 9. 25, 26, 27. 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. Ephesians. 3.
16. John 5. 14.
in Religion that befriendeth sin, there is nothing so contrary to it, as God
and his Holy Laws, which I should have obeyed. Rather let all take warning by
me, and avoid temptations, and live not carelessly, and hearken not to the
Inclinatious, or Reasonings of the Flesh, nor trust not their weak and sinful
hearts, but live in godly fear, and watchfulness, and keep under the Flesh, and
keep close to God, and hearken to the faithful Counsel of his servants, and
Entreat your Prayers to God, that I may be strengthened by his grace, that I
may sin thus no more, least worse befall me.

A Form of Prayer for a Sinner Impenitent, after Public Admonition.
MOst Gracious God, According to thy Command we 2 Cor. 5. 11.
have warned this sinner, and told him of thy threatenings, and foretold him of
thy certain terrible Judgments, Mat. 3. 7.
that he might sly from the wrath to come, but, alas, we perceive not that
he repents, or resenteth, but Prove. ^9. 1.
hardens his heart against reproof, as if he were able to contend with thee,
and overcome thy power; O let us prevail with thee 1 Cor. 10. 22.
for grace, that we may prevail with him for Penitent confession Luke 23. 24.
and reformation, O Pity a miserable sinner! miserable, as that he lays not
to heart his misery, nor Pittieth himself. O save Act. 8. 22. 23.
him from the Gall of Bitterness, and from the Bonds of his Iniquity? give him
^tance unto life; that he may recover Act. 11. 18.
himself out of the snare of the Devil, who is taken Captive by him at his
Will. Give him not up to a blind mind, to a seared conscience, 2 Timothy 2. 25,
26.
a heart that is past feeling, nor to walk in his own counsels, and after his
own lusts; Let him no longer despise the riches Joh. 12. 40.
of thy Goodness, and forbearance and long-suffering, nor with a hardened
impenitent heart, treasure up wrath, against the day ^ Tim. 4. 2.
of wrath and revelation of thy righteous Judgment, who wist render to every
man according to his Deeds, even to them that are Ephesians. 4. 19. Psalm. 81. 12.
Romans 2. 4, and 5, 6.
contentious and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation, and
wrath, Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil. Let him
be sure that the judgment 8, 9. 2, 3.
of God is according to truth, against them that commit such things, and let
him not think in his impenitency to escape thy judgment; O suffer him not,
when he hears the threatenings of thy Word, to Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
bless himself in his heart, and say, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
Imaginations of my heart, and add sin to sin, lest thy 20 21. Mark 9. 44.
Anger and Jealousy smoke against him, and thou will not spare him, but blot
out his name from under Heaven, and all thy curses lie upon him, and thou
separate him to Evil, even to the worm Math. 1. 21. Deuteronomy 9. 17.
that dies not, and to the fire that is not quenched. O save him from his
sins, from his Impenitency, and the Pride and stubborn. ness of his heart; O
save him from the Everlasting Flames, 2 Cor. 6. 2.
and from thy wrath, which he is the more in danger off; because he feels
not, and fears not his danger; Let him know how hard it Luke 19. 41. 42.
Prove. 28. 14. Act. 9 5. Isa. 45. 9.
is for him to kick against the Pricks, and how woeful to strive against his
maker, lay him at thy footstool in sackcloath, and ashes, in tears, and
lamentation, crying out, Woe unto me that I have sinned, and humbling his soul
in true contrition, and loathing himself, and begging thy pardoning and healing
grace, and begging the Joel. 2 1. 2. 3 Lam. 5. 16.
Prayers and Communion of thy Church, and resolving to sin wilfully no more,
but to live before thee in uprightness, and obedience Psalm. 51. Jam. 5. 20.
Luke 32. 10
all his days; O let us prevail with thee for the Conversion of this
Impenitent sinner, and so for the saving of his soul from death, and the
hiding, and pardoning of his sins; that he that Gal 6. 1.
is lost may be found, and he that is dead may be alive, and the Angels of
Heaven, and we thy unworthy servants here on Earth Luke 15. 27.
may rejoice at his repenting, let us see him restored by thy grace, Ezekiel. 33.
14, 16
that we may joyfully receive him into our Communion, and thou may receive
him at last into thy Heavenly Kingdom, and Satan 2 Timothy 2. 26.
may be disappointed of his Prey; for thy mercy sake, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and only Savior,

Amen.
A Form of Rejection from the Communion, of the Church
Jesus Christ, the King and Law giver of the Church has commanded Luke 19. 37.
Mic. 4. 2.
that [If a Brother trespass against us, we go and tell him his fault between
him and us alone, and if he will not hear us, we Mat. 18. 15, 16.
shall then take with us, one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
Witnesses, every word may be Established; And if he shall 1 Cor. 5. 11.
neglect to hear them, that he tell it to the Church, and if he neglect to
Tit 3. 10.
hear the Church, that he be to us a Heathen Man, and a Publican. Matthew. 18.
15, 16, 17.] And that we keep not company; if any that 2 These. 3. 6,
is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covaious, or an Idolater, or a
Raylor, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one, no not 14, 15.
to eat. 1 Cor 5. 11. And that we withdraw our selves from every Brother, that
walks disorderly, and note him, and have no company 2 Samuel 12. 14.
with him, that he may be ashamed: 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 14. According Act. 8. 24.
to these Laws of Christ, we have admonished this offending Brother, who has
greatly sinned against God; and grieved and injured 2 Timothy 2. 25
the Church, we have earnestly prayed, and patiently waited for his
repentance, but we have not prevailed. But after all, 26.
he continues impenitent, and will not be persuaded to confess and forsake
his sin: We do therefore according to these Laws of Christ 1 Cor. 5. 13.
Declare him unmeet, for the Communion of the Church, and reject him Matthew. 18.
18.
from it; Requiring him to forbear it, and requiring you to avoid him, and we
leave him bound to the Judgment of the Lord, unless his true Repentance shall
prevent it.

A Form of Absolution, and Reception of the Penitent.
THough you have greatly sinned against the Lord, and against 2 Samuel 12. 13.
his Church, and your own Soul, yet seeing you humble your self before him, and
Penitently fly to Christ 2 Ch 10. 33.
for mercy, resolving to do so no more: hear now the 12, 13.
glad tidings of Salvation, which I am commanded to declare unto Romans 10. 15.
you? 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man Sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous; And he is the Propitiation for our 1 John 2. 1. 2.
sins. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, to forgive us our
1. John 1. ^. Isa. 55. 6, 7.
sin, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Isa. 55, 6, 7. Seek the Lord
while he may be found, Call upon him while he is near: Let the Wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and Pro. 28 13.
to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Prove. 28. 13. He that covers
his sin shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them Gal. 6. 1.
shall have mercy. Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a Mat. 18. ^8.
fault, restore such a one in the spirit of meckness, considering thy self
least thou also be tempted. According to this word of Grace This must be
omitted if the person was not first Rejected.
do Luke 15. 2 Cor. 2. 7. 10. Act. 13. 38.
loose the bonds here laid upon you, and receive you again into the Communion
of the Church] requiring them to receive you, and not upbraid you with Act. 8.
8. Luke 15. 25. 27.
your sin, but rejoice in your recovery. And I do declare to you the pardon of
all your sins Mat. 26. 41 Psalm 85. 8.
in the Blood of Christ, if your Repentance be sincere. And I exhort and
charge you, that you beleevingly and thankfully accept this Great, unspeakable
mercy, and that you watch more carefully for the time 1 Cor. 9. 25, 26, 27.
Psalm. 141. (...). 2 Pet. 2. 22.
to come, and avoid temptations, and subdue the Flesh, and accept reproves,
and see that you return not to your vomit, or to wallow again in the mire, when
you are washed, but obey the spirit and keep close to God in the means of your
preservation.

A Form of Thanksgiving, and Prayer, for the Restored Penitent.
OMost merciful Father, We thank thee, that thou Rom 3. 25.
have brought us under so gracious a Covenant, as not only to pardon the suis
of our unregenerate state, but 1 John. 1. 9. and 2. 1. 2.
also upon our Penitent confession, and return, to cleanse us, from all our
unrighteousness, and pardon our falls by Psalm. 23. and 103. 3.
the blood of Christ, and to restore our souls, and lead us again in the Paths
of Righteousness, and command thy Servants to receive us. We thank thee that
thou have thus restored this thy Mal 9. 3.
Servant, giving him repentance and remissian of sin Leave out this if he was
not Rejected.
and returning him to the Communion, of thy Church! Romans 5. 1, 2, 3,
We beseech thee comfort him, with the believing Apprehensions of thy
forgiveness and reconciliation Psa. 51. 12.
through Jesus Christ. Restore unto him the joy 1 Pet. 5. 10.
of thy salvation, and uphold him by thy free spirit, stablish, strengththen,
settle him, that with full purpose of heart, he may cleave unto Act. 11. 23.
thee, and now thou have spoken peace to him, he may not return again to
Folly, as he names the Name of Christ, let him depart Psa. 85. 8.
from Iniquity, and never more dishonor Thee, thy Church or 2 Timothy, 2.
truth, nor his holy profession, but save him from Temptation, Let him watch
and stand fast, and sin no more, least Worse befall 19
him. Let him not receive this grace in vain, nor turn it into Wantonness, nor
continue in sin, that grace may abound. But Romans 2. 23.
let this old man be crucified with Christ, and the Body of sin be destroyed;
that henceforth he may no more serve sin, remembering Mar. 6. 13.
what fruit he had in those things, whereof he is now ashamed, 2 Cor. 16. 13.
and that the Eud and ways of sin is death, and let us all take warning by the
falls of others, and be not high minded but John 5. 14.
fear; And let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he 2 Cor. 6. 1.
fall. Let us watch and pray that we enter not into Temptation remembering that
the flesh is weak; And our Adversary the Devil, Jude 4.
walks about seeking whom he may devour. And let none of us hate our Brother
in our hearts, but in any wise rebuke our neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him, and confirm us unto the end, that we may be blameless, in the Day of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, O Father! and thy Holy Spirit, be
Kingdom, and Power, and Glory for ever.

Amen.
APPENDIX A Larger Letany, or General Prayer, to be used at Discretion.
O Most Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, Father Mat. 28. 19. 1 John 5. 7. 1
Cor. 8. 4. 6. 1 Tin 1. 17. Ps. 139. 7, 8, 9. and 14. 7. 4 Isa. 40. 17. Nehe. 9.
^. Rev. 4. 8. and 15. (...) Eze. 18. 4. Psa. ^7. 7. and 119. 68. and 147. 9
Mal. 2. 10. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Luke 11, 2. (...)
Son, and Holy Ghost, three persons, and one God, Infinite in Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness, our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; our Owner, Governor, and
Father; hear our Prayers, and have mercy upon us, Miserable sinners.

O Lord our Savior, whose Jucarnation, Nativity, Subjection, Fasting,
Temptation, Poverty, Reproaches, Agony, Act. 7. 59, 60. Heb. 2. 11. Phi. 2. 7,
8, 9. Luke 2. 51. Mat. 41, 2. 2 Cor. 8. 9. Mat 12 24. Luke 22. 44. Mat. 27. 26,
28. 30. Mark 14. 50. and 15. 34. 1 Cor. 15 3, 4 Ioh. 1. 29. Heb. 1. 3. and 2.
9. and 3. 1. and 4. 14. Act. 3 22. 23. Heb. 7. 25. Ioh. 12. 32. Mat. 28. 19,
10. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4 and 5. 26. 17. Ioh. 17 4. 1 The. 4. 14, 15, 16 Ioh. 5.
22. Act. 17 31 Ioh. 6. 37. 2 Pet. 1. 10 1 Timothy 1. 5. Act. 5. 31 Ioh. 1. 12. Romans
5. 10 2 Cor. 6. 18. Psa. 78. 37. Mar. 8. 34. 1 Cor. 8. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20,
and Bloody sweat, Scourging, Desertion, Crucifying, Death, and Burial, were
all undergone to take away the sins of the World? Who being risen, ascended,
and glorified, art the great Priest, and Prophet, and King of thy Universal
Church, for which thou make Intercession, which thou do gather, teach, and
guide by thy Spirit, Word, and Ministers, which thou do justify and wilt
glorify with thyself, who wilt come again, and raise the Dead, and judge the
world in righteousness; We beseech thee hear us Miserable sinners: Cast us not
out that come unto thee: Make sure to us our Calling, and Election, our
unfeigned faith and repentance, that being justified, and made the Sons of God,
we may have peace with him as our Reconciled God and Father.

Let our hearts be right with thee our God, and steadfast in thy Covenant,
cause us to deny our selves, and give up our selves entirely unto thee, our
Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, as being not our own but thine.

Let thy Holy spirit dwell in us, and sanctify us throughout, Romans 8. 9. 1
These. 5. 23. 1 Cor. 5 17. 1 Pet. 1. 16. Romans 8. 15. Zech. 12. 10. Ephesians. 1. 13,
14. 1 Ioh. 3 24.
that we may be new creatures, and holy as thou art Holy, let it be in us
the spirit of Adoption, and supplication, and the seal and earnest of our
Glorious Inheritance, and let us know that we are thine, and thou abidest in
us by the spirit which thou have given us.

As thy name O Lord is Holy, and thy glory covers the Luke 1. 49. Hab. 3.
Luke 1. 46. Psa 66. 17 and 145. 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12. etc. 21.
Heavens, so let the Earth be filled with thy praises: Let our souls ever
Magnify thee, O Lord, and our Tongues extol thee. Let us speak of the
glorious honor of thy Majesty, of thy Greatness, thy Power, thy glorious
Kingdom, thy Wisdom, Holiness, Truth and Righteousness, thy Goodness, thy
Mercy, and thy wondrous Works? Let all Flesh, bless thy Holy Name.

Let the desire of our Souls be to thy Name: Cause us to Isa. 26. 8. Deuteronomy. 11.
22. and 10 12, 20, 21. Psa. 4. 5. and 37. 4. and 16. 5. and 63. 5, 1 Cor. 10.
31. 2 Timothy 3. 2. 4. Phi. 2. 3. 21. Romans 2. 23, 24 Mat. 5. 16.
love thee with all our hearts, to fear thee, trust in thee, and to delight in
thee, and be satisfied in thee as our Portion, and what ever we do, to do it
to thy glory.

Keep us from Inordinate self love, from Pride, and vain Glory, and self
seeking, and from dishonouring thee, thy Word, or service in the World.

Let the world acknowledge thee, the Universal King. Give Psa. 47. 2. 7. and 2.
8. 12. Rev. 11. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 1. 4. Joh. 11. 52. 12. 32. Phil. 2. 10. 11.
thy Son the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for
his Possession: Let the Kingdoms of the world become his Kingdoms: Convert
the Atheistical, Idolatrous, Infidel, Mahomitan, and ungodly Nations of the
Earth, that every knee may bow to Christ, and every tongue confess him, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; To the Glory of God the Father.

Let the Word of thy Kingdom and Salvation be preached Matthew. ^4. 14. 2 These.
3. 1. Dan. 12. 3. Isa. 49. 6. Matthew. 9. 38. Ephesians. 6. 19. 2 These. 3. 2. 1 These.
2. 16.
to all the World, let it have free course and be glorified; and by the Power
of thy Spirit, convert many unto Christ, and let him be thy Salvation to the
Ends of the Earth. Send forth more Laborers into the Harvest, which is great,
and fit them for so great a work; and deliver them from unreasonable and wicked
men, that (to fill up their sins) forbid them to speak to the People, that they
might be saved.

Deliver the Churches that are oppressed by Idolaters, Mahomitans, Luke 18. 7.
Matthew. 10. 16. Luke 21. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 15. and 3. 14 17. and 4. 15 16, 19. Micah
7. 7. Mat. 5. 11, 12.
or other Infidels and Enemies. Give all thy Servants, Prudence, Patience and
Innocence, that suffering as Christians, and not as Evildoers, they may not be
ashamed, but may glorify thee, and wait for thy Salvation, committing the
keeping of their souls unto thee, in hope of a Reward in Heaven.

Deliver the Church from the Roman Papal Usurpations Psa. 119. 1^4. Mat 15. 9
1. R v. 12. and 19. 3. John 9. 10. Luke 22. 25. 6. 2 Pet. 2. Jude 2 Timothy 3. 9.
Ephesians 4. 15, 16. and 3. 5. Romans 14 1. and 15. 1. Jer. 32. 39. 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Phil. 2. 3. John 13. 35.
and Corruptions, dispel the deceits of Heresies, and false Worship, by the
light of thy prevailing Truth; Unite all Christians in Christ Jesus, the true
and only Universal Head: that by the true Christian Catholic Faith and Love,
they may grow up in him, and may keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace; the strong receiving and bearing the Infirmities of the weak; Heal the
divisions that are among Believers; Let nothing be done through strife or
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind; let each esteem other better than
himself, and let all men know that we are Christ's Disciples, by our fervent
love to one another.

Let us be heartily and entirely thy Subjects, believing that Ephesians. 5. 2, 4.
Romans 3. 26. Heb. 11. 6. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. 2 These. 2. 1^. Romans 8. 13. Psa. 19. 13.
Romans 8. 24.
thou art just, and the Rewarder of them that diligently seek thee, keep us
from Atheism, Idolatry, and Disobedience, from Infidelity, Ungodliness, and
Sensuality, from Security, Presumption and Despair.

Let us study to please thee in all things: Let thy Law be Col. 1. 10. Heb. 8.
10. Psalm. 40. 8. Isa. 8. 20. Act. 28. 32. 2 Timothy 3. 15. 2 These. 2. 10. Joh. 5.
39. Lu. 24, 25. Ps. 1. 2
written in our hearts, and let us delight to do thy Will; Let our Faith and
Lives be ruled by thy Word, which is able to make us wise unto Salvation; let
us love it, search it, and understand it, and meditate in it day and night.

Let us not please our selves or other men against thee, nor Romans 15. 1, 2.
Gal. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 3. 19. 2 Cor. 1 12. Romans 8. 13. Joh. 2. 8. (...) 19. 11, 12,
13. Romans 2. 16. Micah 4. 1. Matthew. 1. (...). 6, 9, 12. Deuteronomy. 3^.
be led by the wisdom or desires of the World and Flesh, nor regard lying
vanities, nor through carelessness, rashness, or presumption, offend thee.

As all Nations must be judged by thee; let them be ruled by thy Laws, and not
make them void by men's traditions, nor worship thee in vain, teaching for
Doctrine the Commandments of men. But what ever thou command, let them take
heed to do it! Let them add nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom.

Let us not take thy holy Name in vain, but use it in truth Exodus 20. 7. Psalm.
89. 7. Ier. 4. 2. Mat. 15. 19. James 5. 12. Rev. 22. 15, Ier. 5. 12 Act. 5. 3.
and 8. 20. Mal. 1. 6, 7 12. and 2. 2, 7, 8, 9.
and reverence. Keep us from all Blasphemy, Perjury, Profane swearing, from
lying before the God of Truth, and from contempt and forgetfulness of thy
presence, from false, unworthy, unreverent thoughts or speeches of God, and
holy things, and from neglecting, or abusing thy holy Word and Worship.

Help us to keep holy thy Day, in remembrance of the blessed Rev. 1. 10. Act.
20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Isa. 58. 13. Heb. 10. 25. 1 Cor. 14. Act. 3. 42. 46. Psa.
98, etc. 149. 1. Josh. 24 15. Exodus 20. 10.
work of our Redemption, and reverently to attend thee in Public Worship; and
obediently to receive thy Word, and fervently to call upon thy Name; and to
delight our selves in Thanksgiving, and joyful Praises to thy Holiness in the
Communion of thy Saints; and let us carefully see that our households, and all
within our gates do serve thee, and not abuse thy holy Day.

Have mercy on the Kings and Rulers of the Earth, that 1 Timothy 2. 2. Psa. 2.
Ier. 5. 5, 6. Luke 18. 24, 25. 1 Cor. (...). 26. Luke 21. 12. Ioh. 7. 48. Ezra
4. 12, etc. Romans 13. 2, 4. Isa. 49. 23. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
they may escape the Temptations of Worldly Greatness, Honors, and Prosperity,
which would captivate them to the flesh, and draw their hearts from thee, thy
Laws and Ways, and would engage them against thee, and thy Servants; And as
they are thy Ministers, and Magistracy is thine Ordinance, sanctify and
dispose them to be Nursing Fathers to thy Church, to own thy Interest, and Rule
for thee.

Especially have mercy on thy Servant Charles our King, illuminate Lam. 4. 20. 1
King. 3. 19. 1^.
and sanctify him by thy holy Spirit, that above all things he may seek thy
Glory, the increase of Faith and Obedience Psa. 51. 10. 1 Samuel 10. 9. 2 Kings
18. 3, 4. 6. Romans 13. 4, 5. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
to thy Laws, and may rule us as being thy Minister for good, not to be a
terror to good Works, but to Evil; that under him we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

Have mercy upon all the Royal Family, the Lords of the Psalm. 72. 1. Prove. 8.
16. Exodus 18. 17. Job 29. Isa. 1. 17. 23. Luke 1. 51, 52, 53.
Counsel, and all the Nobility, the Judges and Magistrates of these Lands.
Cause them to fear thee, and to be Eminent in Sobriety, Righteousness and
Godliness, to protect the Innocent, and be a terror to the Wicked, hating
Injustice, Covetousness and Pride.

Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, and not resist. Romans 13. 1. 6.
1 Pet. 2. 13. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
Let them obey the King, and all that are in Authority under him, not only for
wrath, but for conscience sake, as knowing, that they rule by thee, and for
thee.

Give all the Churches able, holy, faithful Pastors, and cause 1 Cor. 3. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Ier. 3. 15. 2 Timothy 4. 2. and 2. 22. and 1. 13. Heb.
13. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
them laboriously to preach, and rightly to divide the Word of truth, to feed
thy People with Knowledge, and lead them in the way of Faith and Love, of
Holiness and Peace, and to watch for their souls as those that must give
account; over-seeing and ruling them, not by constraint, but willingly, not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as being Lords over thy Heritage, but as
the Servants of all, and Ensamples to the Flock: That when the chief Pastor
shall appear, they may receive a Crown of Glory.

Let the Congregations know those that have the ruling of 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
Heb. 13. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
them, and are over them in the Lord, that labor among them, preaching to them
the Word of God. Let them submissively, and obediently hear and esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake, and account them worthy of double
honor.

Let Parents bring up their Children in the Nurture and Ephesians. 6. 4.
Admonition of the Lord, diligently teaching them thy Word, talking of it when
they are in their house, and when they walk Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7.
by the way, when they lie down, and when they rise up, that Eccles. 12. 1.
they may know their Creator. Redeemer, and Sanctifier in the days of their
youth: And cause Children to hear, love, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3.
honor, and obey their Parents, that they may have the blessing of thine
especial Promise unto such.

Let Husbands love their Wives, and prudently guide them Ephesians. 5. 25. 22.
in knowledge and holiness; And let Wives love, honor, and 1 Pet. 3. 1. 7.
Genesis 2. 22. Ephesians. 6. 9. 5.
obey their Husbands, as meet helpers to them.

Let Masters rule their Servants in Holiness, and mercy, remembering they have a
Master in Heaven, and let Servants reverently, singly, and willingly be
obedient, and do service to their Masters. as to the Lord; from him expecting
their reward.

Keep us from Murder, Uiolence and all injury to our neighbors 1 John 3. 15.
Luke 3. 14. 2 Cor. 7 2. Mat. 5. 23, 39. Romans 12. 17. Ephesians. 4. 2. Romans 12. 19.
life, or health, from malice, cursing, reviling, and unadvised Anger: Let us
not resist evil with evil, but forbear one another, and not give place to wrath.

Keep us from Adultery, Fornication and all uncleanness, Mat. 5. 27, 28. 1 Cor.
6. 9. Romans 13. 13. 1 Th. 5. 22. Ephesians. 5. 3. and 4. 29. 1 Pet. 3. 2, 3. Job 31. 1.
and the occasions and appearances thereof. Let us take care as becomes
saints, that they be not immodestly named among us; and that no Corrupt
Communication, proceed out of our Mouths, Keep us from Chambering and
wantonness, from lustful thoughts, and all immodest attire, behavior, looks,
and actions.

Keep us from Theft, and Oppression, and any way wronging Ephesians. 4. 28. Psa. 61.
10. and 73 8. 1 These. 4. 6. Pro. 19. 5. and 12. 17. and 10. 10. Mat. 7. ^, 1.
Psa. 15. 3. and 82. 2. Lev. 19. 17. Prove. 23
our Nieghbour in his Propriety and Estate.

Keep us from False witness-bearing, lying, and deceiving from slandering,
backbiting, unjust, uncharitable censuring or reproaching, from all perverting
of justice, and wronging the reputation of our Neighbor, and from all consent
or desire of such wrongs,

Keep us from Envy, and from coveting any thing that is our Gal. 5. 21. 26.
Exo. 20. 17. Phi. 2. 21. Mat. 22 39. and 7. 12.
Neighbors, to his wrong, and from seeking our own, or drawing to our selves,
to the Injury of his welfare; but let us love our Neighbors, as our selves,
and do to others as we would they should do to us.

Teach us to love Christ and his holy Image in his Members, Mat. 15. 40. 1 Pet.
1. 22. Mat. 5. 44, 45. (...) 46. Gal. 6. 10.
with a dear and special love, and to love our Enemies, and pray for them that
hate and persecute us, and to do good to all as we are able, but Especially to
them of the Household of faith.

Cause us with patience to submit to all the Disposals of thy Psalm 39. 9. Mat.
26. 30. Act. 21. 14. Jam. 5. 7, 8, 11. 2 King 20. 10. Mal. 3. 13, 14.
Will, and wait thy End, and to love the demonstrations of thy Holiness, and
justice though grievous to the Flesh, and keep us from Impatient Murmurings,
and discontent, and Arrogant reasoning against thy Will.

Give us our daily bread, our necessary sustentation, and provision Luke ^1.
13. Deuteronomy. 28. 45. Romans 13. 14. Luke 12. 20. Ephe. 5. 16. Joh. 9. 4.
for thy service, and let us use it for thee, and not to satisfy the flesh;
Let us depend on thee, and trust thee for it in the lawful use of means; And
bless thou our labors, and give us the fruits of the Earth in season, and such
temperate weather as tends thereunto.

Deliver us and all thy Servants from such wants, distresses, Deuteronomy. 28. 6, 8.
etc. Phi. 2. 27. Psa. 102. 24. Luke 12. 20. Ephesians. 5. 16. Joh. 9. 4.
griefs, and sicknesses, as will unseasonably take us off thy service, and
from untimely death: And teach us to value and redeem our time, and work while
it is day.

Keep us from Gluttony, Drunkenness, and all intemperance; Romans 13. 13. 1 Cor.
9. 25. and 1. Iam. 5. 6, 13. Ephesians. 4. 28. (...). 21. 17. and 13. 4 1 Timothy 6. 8
9. Psa. 51. 1. 1 John 1. 2 P^. 8. 12. Dan. 9. 6. 16. Jer 14. 7 Psa. 3^. 16.
Psa. 51. 11, 11. 19. Romans 18. 1.
from sloth and idleness, from inordinate desires of pleasures, or abundance;
but having food, and Raiment let us be therewith contented.

Of thy abundant mercy, through the sacrifice and merits of thy Son according
to thy promise, forgive us all our sins, and save us from thy deserved wrath,
and condemnation. Remember not O Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our
Forefathers, but though our Iniquities testify against us; spare us and save
us for thy mercy sake* O Let not our sin deprive us of thy spirit, or of access
unto thee, or Communion with thee, or of thy favor or comfort, or the light of
thy Countenance, or of everlasting life.

Cause us to forgive from our hearts, the Injuries done against us, Mat. 6. 12.
14. 15. Romans 12. 19. Luke 6. 28, 29. Luke 34. Act. 7. 60.
as we expect to be forgiven by thee the greatest debt. Keep us from all
revengfull desires and attempts. And do thou convert and pardon our Enemies,
slanderers, oppressors, persecutors and others that have done us wrong.

Keep us from running upon Temptations, suffer not the Mat ^6. 41. Jam. 4. 7.
P^o. 4. 23. Job 31. 1. Mat. 12. 36. Heb. 2. 10. 2 Timothy ^. 3. 1 John 2. 13. and
5. 4. Romans 8. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 8.
tempter by subtilty or importunity to corrupt our judgments, Wills,
Affections, or Conversations. Cause us to maintain a diligent and constant
watch over our thoughts and hearts our senses and Appetites, our words and
actions, and as faithful Soldiers by the conduct, and strength of the Captain
of our Salvation with the whole Armor of God, to resist and overcome the
world, the Devil, and the Flesh unto the End.

Save us from the Temptations of Prosperity, and adversity, Pro. 30 8, 9. 1
John 2. 15, 16. Romans 8. 17 Mat. 13. 21. 22. Mat. 8. 24. Romans 8. 18.
let us not be drawn from thee to sin by the pleasures, profits or honors, of
the world, strengthen us for sufferings, let us not forsake thee or fall in
time of trial, help us to deny our selves, and take up our Cross and follow
Christ, Accounting the sufferings of this present time, unworthy to be
compared with the glory to be revealed.

Deliver us from the Enmity and Rage of Satan, and his Mat 6. 13. Romans 16. 20.
Psa. 140. 1, 2, 3. and 3^. 8. and 17. 2, 12. 2 Timothy 4. 18.
Instruments and give not up thy Servants, their Souls or Bodies; their Peace
or Liberties, Estates or Names to their Malicious Wills: but save us and
preserve us to thy Heavenly Kingdom.

We ask all this of thee, O Lord! for thou art the Universal 1 Timothy 1. 17. Ps.
145. 17. Act. 17. 31. Psalm. 72. 4. 13. Jude 14, 15. 2 These. 1. 10. Psa. 62. ^1.
and 147. 5. Job. 9. 4. Romans 11. 36.
King, Holy and just, to whom it belongs in righteousness to judge the World,
and save thy people; All power is thine to execute wrath upon thine Enemies,
and to deliver and Glorify thy Flock; and none is able to resist thee: Of Thee
and through Thee, and to Thee, are all things, and the Glory shall be Thine,
For Ever.

Amen.
The Churches Praise, For our Redemption, to be used at Discretion.
OUr Souls do magnify thee O Lord! Our spirits rejoice Luke 1. 46. Psa. 136.
23. Romans 5. 12. Psa. 78. 10. Romans 3. 23. and 5. 18. Luke 1. 68. 69. 70. Isa. 7
14. Luke 1. 35. Mat. 1. 21. Luke 2. 12.
in God our Savior, who remembered us in our Low, and lost Estates, for his
mercy endures for ever. By one man sin entered into the World, and death by
sin: We kept not the Covenant of God, and refused to walk in his Law: For all
have Sinned and come short of the Glory of God, and Judgment came upon all men
to Condemnation. But Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that has visited and
redeemed his people, and has raised up a mighty Salvation for us in the House
of his servant David: As he spoke by the Mouth of his Holy Prophets: which
have been since the World began: A Uirgin has conceived and brought forth: The
Holy Ghost did come upon her; the power of the Highest did over-shadow her,
therefore the Holy one that is born of her, is called; the Son of God: ^
His name is called Jesus, for he saves his people from their sins: Col. 1.
15,
To us is born a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. He is the Image of the
Invisible God: The first born of every Creature, 16. 17.
for by him All things are created that are in Heaven and in Earth, 2 Cor. 1,
24.
visible and invisible; whether Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities or
Powers; All things were Created by him and for him, and he is before all
things, and by him all things do consist. He is the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God: The true light that lights every man that comes into the
world; The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and men beheld his Glory,
Joh. 1. 9. 14,
as the Glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace Col. 1. 19.
and Truth: For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent his Gal. 4. 4.
Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that are under the
Law. This is the beloved Son, in whom the Mat. 17. 5.
Father is well pleased. For such a high Priest became us, who is Holy,
Harmless, Undefiled, separate from sinners, he did Heb 7. 26.
no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth, when he 1 Pet. 2. 22,
23,
was reviled, he reviled not again, leaving us an Ensample; Who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the Tree. For 24.
God laid on him the Iniquity of us all, and by his stripes we are Isa. 53.
5, 6.
healed. When we were without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly, the just for the unjust, In this was manifest the Love of God toward
us, that God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live by
him. Forasmuch as the Children were Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he Romans 5. 6
1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 John 4. 4. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Col 2. 15. 1 Cor. 15. 4. Act. 2. 24
2 Timothy 1. 10.
himself likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death,
him that had the Power of death, that is the Devil, and might deliver them, who
through fear of Death, were all their life time subject to Bondage. Having
spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made show of them openly triumphing over
them in his Cross. He was Buried and rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures. For God raised him having loosed the pains of death, because it was
not possible that he should be holden of it, he has abolished death, and
brought life and Immortality to light by the Gospel. O Death! where is thy
Sting; O Grave! where is thy Uictory. 1 Cor. 15. 55. Mat. 28. 18.


All Power is given him in Heaven and Earth; when he asscended up on high, he
led Captivity Captive, and gave gifts Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. 12, 13.
to men: And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors, and some Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come
in the unity of the Faith of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man;
he is set at Gods right hand in the Celestials, far above all Principalities,
and Powers, and Might, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21 22, 23.
and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this World, but in
that to come: God has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head
over all things, to the Church which is his Body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all.

Without Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness; 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
to the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into glory. This is the
Record, that God has 1 John. 5. 10.
given us Eternal life, and this Life is in his Son; He that has the Son has
life, and he that has not the Son has John. 1. 10. 11. 11, 12,
not life. He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the world
knew him not; He came to his own and his own received him not; This is the
Condemnation that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness Romans 8.
1.
rather than light, because their Deeds are Evil. But as many as receive him,
to them gives he Power to become Heb. 8. 12.
the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name; There is therefore now
no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh
but after the spirit. He forgiveth our Iniquities, and will remember our sins
no more; Psa. 103. 3.
who shall lay any thing to Charge of Gods elect? It is God that Justifies,
who is he that Condemns? It is Christ that Romans 8 33, 34.
died; Yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God;
who also makes intercession for us. Who Tit. 2. 13, 14.
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity; and purify
to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Romans 8. 9.
If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. He that
names the name of Christ must depart from Iniquity. If we regard Iniquity in
our hearts, God will 2 Timothy 2. 19. Psalm. 66. 18
not hear our Prayers. But we are washed, we are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
we are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the spirit of our God.
Not by works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
Titus 3. 5.
And being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ; by whom also we have Access by Romans 5. 1, 2, 5.
Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of
God; And hope makes not ashamed, because 10.
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given
to us. For if when we were Enemies Romans 8. 32.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being
Reconciled, we shall be saved by his life? He John 14. 2, 3.
that spared not his own Son, but gave him up for us All, John 17. 24.
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? he that is gone to
prepare a place for us, will come again and John 14. 19.
receive us to himself, that where he is, there we may be also. It is his
will that they that, the Father has given him be with him where he is, that
they may behold the Glory Collos. 3. 3, 4.
that is given him, Because he lives we shall live also; For we are dead,
and our life is hid with Christ in God: 2 These. 1. 10.
When Christ who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with him
in Glory; when he shall come to be glorified Mal. 3. 18.
in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that do believe. Then shall men
discern between the Righteous and Matthew. 13. 43.
the Wicked, between those that serve God, and those that Rev. 21. 7. Matthew.
25. 21. Rev. 3. 12.
serve him not. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom
of their Father, He that overcomes shall inherit all things. He shall enter
into the Joy of his 21.
Lord: He shall be a Pillar in the Temple of God; and shall go out no more.
Christ will grant him to fit with him Zeph. 8. 17.
in his Throne, even as he overcame, and is set down with his Father in his
Throne, he will rejoice ever as with joy, Rev. 21. 2.
he will test in his love: Even in the Holy City, the new Jerusalem, prepared
as a Bride adorned for her (...), 3.
where the Tabernacle of God will be with men, and he will dwell with them,
and they shall be his people, and God 4. 23.
himself shall be with them, their God, and shall wipe away all tears from
their Eyes, and there shall be no more death, Rev. 22. 3.
nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, for the former things are passed away. And
the City needs not the Sun, or the 4.
Moon to shine in it, for the Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the
Light thereof. The Throne of God and of 1 Timothy 6. 15.
the Lamb shall be in it, and his Servants shall serve him, Romans 11. 36.
and shall see his face, who is the Blessed and only Potentate the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; Of him, Through him, and To him are all things: To
him be Glory for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

