Nos qu^que floruimus, sed flos fuit ille (...)
Fl^mmaque de stipula nostra brepusque fui^ O^:
VERA EFFIGIES RICHARDI BAXTERI MIN: IES: CH: IN OP^ ET PAT^ FIDEI SPEI ET
CHARITATIS. ANO 168^ AETAT SUAE ^8
Farewell Vain World: as thou have bin to me
Dust and a Shadow: those I leave with thee:
The unseen Vital Substance I committ.
To him that is Substance Life-Light-Love to it.
The Leaves and Fruit are dropped for soil and Seed.
Heavens heirs to generate to heal and feed:
Them also thou will flatter and molest:
But shall not keep from Everlasting R^st.
portrait of Richard Baxter

RICHARD BAXTER'S DYING THOUGHTS UPON PHIL. 1. 23. Written for his own Use in
the latter Times of his corporal Pains and Weakness.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Snowden, for B. Simmons at the Three golden Cocks, at
the West end of St. Paul's, 1683.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Have no other use for a Preface to this Book, but to give you a true excuse
for its Publication. I wrote it for my self, unresolved whether any one should
ever see it, but at last inclined to leave that to the will of my Executors, to
publish or suppress it when I am dead, as they saw cause. But my Person being
seized on, and my Library, and all my Goods distrained on by Constables, and
sold, and I constrained to relinquish my House (for preaching and being in
London:) I knew not what to do with multitudes of Manuscrip^^ that had long
lain by me; having no House to go to, but a narrow hired Lodging with
strangers: Wherefore I cast away whole Volumes; which I could not carry away,
both Controversies and Letters practical, and Cases of Conscience, but having
newly lain diverse Weeks, Night and Day, in waking torments Nephritick, and
Colic, after other long pains and languor, I took this Book with me in my
removal, for my own use in my further sickness. Three Weeks after falling into
another extreme fit, and expecting Death, where I had no Friend with me to
commit my Papers to, merely lest it should be lost, I thought best to give it
to the Printer: I think it is so much of the work of all men's lives to prepare
to die with safety and comfort, that the same Thoughts may be needful for
others that are so for me: If any mislike the Title as if it imported that the
Author is Dead, let him know that I die daily, and that which quickly will be,
almost is: It Is suited to my own use: They that it is unsuible to, may pass it
by. If those men's lives were spent in serious preparing Thoughts of Death, who
are now studying to destroy each other, and tear in pieces a distressed Land,
they would prevent much dolorous Repentance.

R. B.

THE CONTENTS.
Doct. 1. THat the Souls of Believers when departed hence shall be with Christ.
I. The necessity of believing this, proved, page 1, etc. II. Whether it be best
believing it without consideration of the difficulties or proofs? p. 7. III.
The certainty of it manifested; 1. From the Immortality of the Soul: which is
proved, p. 11. 1. The Soul is a substance. 2. It is a substance formally
differenced from lower substance by the Virtue of special Vital Activity,
Intellect, and free will, p. 14 3. It is not Annihilated at Death. 4. Nor
destroyed by dissolution of parts. 5. Nor loses its formal Power or Virtue, p.
15. 6. Nor does sleep or cease to act, p. 16. 7. To cease to be Individuate by
Union with any other common Spirit, is not to be feared, were it true, p. 19.
But it is not like to be true, p. 31, etc. II. The second proof: It is a
natural notice, p. 33. III. From the duty of all men to seek a future
happinessm p. 34. IV. From Man's capacity of knowing God, etc. as differenced
from Bruits. p. 37. V. From God^s governing Justice, p. 38. VI. From Revelation
supernatural, p. 39. VII. From God's answering Prayers, p. 42. VIII. From our
present communion with Angels. p. 44. IX. From Satan's temptations, Witches,
Apparitions, etc. p. 45. X. Specially from the Operations of God's Spirit on
our Souls, preparing them for Glory, p. 47. Faith excited, and Objections
answered in the Application. The proofs summed up in Order, p. 65.
Why this Happiness is described by our being with Christ. 1. What is included
in our Being with Christ: 1. Presence with Christ's glorified Body and Soul,
and Godhead, p. 66. 2. Union with him, in each, p. 73. Too near Union not to
be feared, as destroying individuation. 3. Communion with him in each; active
and passive opened, p. 74, etc.
We must DEPART that we may be with Christ. I. From what, p. 75. 1. From this
Body and Life: Yet it is far better so to do, p. 76. 2. From all the fleshly
Pleasures of this Life, p. 83. Yet best. 3. From the more manly delights of
Study, Books, Friends, etc. considered: 1. Of Knowledge, and Books: the vanity,
2. Of Sermons, p. 87. 3. Of Friends and Converse, p. 95. 4. Of God's Word and
Worship, p. 98. Of Theology, p. 99. Of my own labors herein, p. 103. 6. Notice
of the Affairs of the World, p. 109. 7. From our Service to the Living, p. 112.
The Application to my self, p. 115. To DEPART and to BE WITH CHRIST IS FAR
BETTER, or rather to be chosen, p. 120. I. Simply better and properly, at it is
the fulfilling of God's will, p. 122. II. Analogically better, as it tends to
the Perfection of the Universe and the Church. III. Better to my self as to my
own felicity, p. 124. proved, 1. By general Reasons from the efficients and
means. 2. The final Reasons. 3. The constitutive Reasons from the state of my
Intellect: as to the Iu^uitive manner of knowledge, and as to the matter: Both
opened: 1. I shall know God better, p 144. 2. And God's Works; the Universe. 3.
And Jesus Christ. 4. And the Church. 5. And the Church triumphant, the heavenly
Jerusalem. 6. And all God's Word; for Matter and Method. 7. God's present Works
of Providence. 8. The nature and worth of Mercies. 9. And my self; Body and
Soul. 10. And my fellow Creatures. 11. And what the evil was from which I was
delivered, enemies, dangers, sins, etc. 4. The Constitutive Reasons from the
state of my will. I. Negatively, p. 163. 1. Freed from Temptations of the
Flesh, World, and Devil, 2. There will nothing be in it that is against God, my
Neighbors, or my self. II. Positively, 1. It will be conform to God's will:
The benefits of this, p. 165. Fruition: A fixed will. The Object, 1. God. To
love him and beloved of him, is our end, p. 169. He is a suitable, full, near,
Object. II. The next Object; God's golorius Image in the Perfection of the
Universe, p. 171. III. The Church Triumphant, p. 174. 1. Jesus Christ. 2.
Angels, 3. Holy Souls. The Wills Reception in Glory, p. 175. 1. What it is to
be loved of God. Excitations, 179. 2. How blessed to be under the Love of
Christ, p. 881. Excitations, Desires, p. 182. 3. Communion with Angels and
Saints by reception. p. 188 More of the good of Union and Communion as distinct
from singular Propriety, p. 190. 5. The constitutive Reasons from our heavenly
Practice, p. 195. Better works for us there than here, proved. What they are in
general: What particularly: I. Concordant praising God. Excitations and
Petitions, p. 169. II. The blessed probably used for the good of men and things
below, p. 198. Their Opinion rejected, that assert, the cessation of sense;
proof. Objection from Bruits answered The concluding Application, p. 202. A
Breviate of the helps of Faith, Hope, and Love for a dying Man. I. The Gospel
Evidence on 1 Timothy 3. 16. p. 260. II. A Breviate of the proof of supernatural
Revelation, and the Truth of Christianity, p. 262. III. The difference between
the World which I am leaving, and the World which I am going to: With Reasons
of my comfortable hope. p. 283. IV. More Reasons and Helps of my Faith and
Hope, p. 289. V. A discourse of the sensible manifestation of the Kingdom of
Christ, at his Transfiguration, which is expounded and applied for the help of
Faith and Patience, p. 300. VI. Short Meditations on Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Of
the shedding abroad of God's Love on the Heart, that we may rejoice in hope of
the Glory of God, p. 360.

THe exercise of Three sorts of LOVE, to God, to Others, and to my Self, afford
me a Threefold satisfaction (conjunct) to be vvilling to depart.

I. I am sure my departure will be the fulfilling of that Will which is Love
it self, which I am bound above all things to Love, and Please, and vvh^^^ is
the beginning, rule, and end of all: Antonine ^ould hence fetch good Thoughts
of Death.

II. The World dies not with me when I die; nor the Church, nor the Praise
and Glory of God which he will have in and from this World unto the end: And
if I love others as my self, their Lives and Comforts will now be to my
Thoughts, as if I were to live my self in them. God will be praised, and
honored by Posterity, when I am dead and gone. Were I to be annihilated this
would comfort me now, if I lived and died in perfect Love.

III. But a better and glorious World is before me, into which I hope by Death
to be translated, vvhither all these Three sorts of Love should rap up the
desires of my ascending Soul; even the Love of my self, that I may be fully
happy; the Love of the triumphant Church, Christ, Angels, and glorified Man,
and the Glory of all the Universe which I shall see; and above all the Love of
the most Glorious God, Infinite Life, and Light, and Love, the ultimate Amiable
Object of Man's Love; in whom to beperfectly pleased, and delighted, and to
whom to be perfectly pleasing for ever, is the chief and ultimate end of me,
and of the highest, vvisest, and best of Creatures; Amen.

THE INTRODUCTION.
PHIL. 1. 23. For I am in a straight between two, etc.
I Write for my self, and therefore supposing the sense of the Text, shall only
observe what is useful to my Heart and Practice.

It was a happy state into which Grace had brought this Apostle, who saw so
much not only tolerable but greatly desirable, both in living and dying. To
live to him was Christ, that is, Christ's interest, or work: To die would be
gain, that is, His own interest and reward: His straight was not whether it
would be good to live or good to depart: Both were good: But which was more
desirable was the doubt.

I. Quest. But was there any doubt to be made between Christ's interest and his
own? Ans. No, if it had been a full and fixed competition: But by Christ or
Christ's interest, he means his work for his Churches interest in this World:
But he knew that Christ also had an interest in his Saints above; and that he
could raise up more to serve him here: Yet because he was to judge by what
appeared, and he saw a defect of such on Earth, this did turn the Scales in his
Choice; and for the work of of Christ and his Churches good, he more inclined
to the delay of his reward, by self-denial: Yet knowing that the delay would
tend to its increase. It Is useful to me here to note:

That even in this World, short of Death, there is some good so much to be
regarded, as may justly prevail with Believers to prefer it before the present
hastening of their reward.

I the rather note this, that no temptation carry me into that extreme, of
taking nothing but Heaven to be worthy of our minding or regard; and so to cast
off the World in a sinful sort, on pretense of mortification, and a heavenly
mind and life.

I. As to the sense, the meaning is not that any thing on Earth is better than
Heaven, or simply, and in itself to be preferred before it: The end is better
than the means as such: And perfection better than imperfection.

But the present use of the means may be preferred sometimes before the present
possession of the end: And the use of means for a higher end, may be preferred
before the present possession of a lower end: And every thing has its season:
Planting, and Sowing, and Building are not so good as Reaping; and Fruit
gathering, and Dwelling: But in their season they must be first done.

II. Quest. But what is there so desirable in this Life?

Ans. 1. While it continues it is the fulfilling of the will of God who will
have us here: And that is best which God wills.

II. The life to come depends upon this: As the life of Man in the World,
upon his Generation in the Womb; Or as the reward upon the work; or the Runners
or Soldiers Prize upon his Race or Fighting: Or as the Merchants gain upon his
Voyage. Heaven is won or lost on Earth: The possession is there, but the
preparation is here: Christ will judge all men according to their works on
Earth: [ Well done good and faithful Servant, must go before [ Enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord: I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course]
goes before the Crown of Righteousness which God the righteous Judge will
give: All that ever must be done for Salvation by us, must here be donc: It
waron Earth that Christ himself, wrought the work of (...) Redemption,
fulfilled all Righteousness, became our Ransom: And paid the Price of our
Salvation: And it is here that our part is to be done.

And the bestowing of the reward of God's work, who we are sure will never
fail: There is no place for the least suspicion or fear of his misdoing or
failing in any of his undertaken work, But the danger and fear is of our own
miscarrying; lest we be not found capable of receiving what God will certainly
give to all that are disposed Receivers. To distrust God is heinous sin and
folly: But to distrust our selves we have great cause. So that if we will make
sure of Heaven, it must be by giving all diligence to make firm our Title, our
Calling, and our Election here on Earth. If we fear Hell, we must fear being
prepared for it.

And it is great and difficult work that must be here done: It Is here that we
must be cured of all damning sin: That we must be Regenerate and new Born; that
we must be pardoned and justified by Faith; It Is here that we must be united to
Christ, made wise to Salvation, renewed by his Spirit, and conformed to his
likeness: It Is here that we must overcome all the temptations of the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, and perform all the duties toward God and Man, that must
be rewarded: It Is here that Christ must be believed in with the Heart to
Righteousness, and with the Mouth confessed to Salvation: It Is here that we
must suffer with him, that we may reign with him, and be faithful to the Death,
that we may receive the Crown of Life. Here we must so run that we may obtain.

III. Yea, we have greater work here to do than mere securing our own
Salvation. We are (...) of the World and Church, and we must labor to do good
to many: We are trusted with our Masters Talents for his Service; in our places
to do our best to propaga^e his Truth, and Grace and Church; and to bring home
Souls, and Honor his cause, and edify his Flock, and further the Salvation of
as many as we can. All this is to be done on Earth, if we will secure the end
of all in Heaven.

Use. I. It is then an error (though it is but few I think that are guilty of
it) to think that all Religion lies in minding only the Life to come, and
disregarding all things in this present life: All true Christians must
seriously mind, both the End, and the Means, or way: If they mind not
believingly the End, they will never be faithful in the use of means: If they
mind not and use not diligently the Means, they will never obtain the End. None
can use Earth well that prefer not Heaven: And none come to Heaven (at Age)
that are not prepared by well using Earth. Heaven must have the deepest esteem
and habituated love, and desire, and joy: But Earth must have more of our daily
thoughts for present practice. A Man that travelleth to the most desirable
home, has a habit of desire to it all the way: But his present business is his
travel: And Horse and Company, and Inns, and Ways, and Weariness, etc. may
take up more of his sensible Thoughts, and of his Talk, and Action, than his
Home.

Use. II. I have often marvelled to find David in the Psalms, and other Saints
before Christ's coming, to have expressed so great a sense of the things of
this present life, and to have said so little of another. To have made so great
a matter of Prosperity, Dominions, and Victories on one Hand, and of Enemies,
Success, and Persecution on the other, But I consider that it was not for mere
Personal, Carnal interest, but for the Church of God, and for his Honor, Word,
and Worship: And they knew that if things go well with us on Earth, they will
be sure to go well in Heaven: If the militant Church prosper in Holiness, there
is no doubt but it will triumph in Glory: God will be sure to do his part in
receiving Souls, if they be here prepared for his receipt. And Satan does much
of his damning work by men: If we escape their temptations we escape much of
our danger. If Idolaters prospered, Israel was tempted to Idolatry: The Greek
Church is almost swallowed up by Turkish Prosperity and Dominion. Most follow
the powerful and Prosperous side. And therefore for God's cause, and for
heavenly everlasting interest, our own state, but much more the Churches must
be greatly regarded here on Earth.

Indeed if earth be desired only for Earth; and Prospirity loved but for the
present welfare of the Flesh; it is the certain Mark of damning carnality, and
an earthly mind. But to desire Peace and Prosperity, and Power to be in the
hands of wise and faithful men, for the sake of Souls, and the increase of the
Church, and the Honor of God, that his Name may be hallowed, his Kingdom come,
and his Will done on Earth, as it is in Heaven, this is to be the chief of our
Prayers to God.

Use. III. Be not unthankful then, O my Soul, for the Mercies of this present
life, for those to thy Body to thy Friends, to the Land of thy Nativity, and
specially to the Church of God.

I. This Body is so nearly united to thee, that it, must needs be a great help
or hinderance: Had it been more afflicted, it might have been a discouraging
clog; like a tired Horse in a Journey, or an ill Tool to a Workman, or an
untuned Instrument in Music: A sick or bad Servant in an House is a great
trouble: And a bad Wife much more. But thy Body is nearer thee than either, and
will be more of thy concern.

And yet if it had been more Strong and Healthful, Sense, and Appetite would
have been strong; and Lust would have been strong; and therefore danger would
have been greater, and Victory and Salvation much more difficult. Even weak
Senses and Temptations have too often prevailed: How know thou then what
stronger might have done: When I see a thirsty Man in a Fever or Dropsy, and
specially when I see strong and healthful youths, bred up in fullness, and among
temptations, how mad they are in sin, and how violently they are carried to it,
bearing down God's rebukes, and Conscience, and Parents, and Friends, and all
regard to their Salvation, it tells me how great a Mercy I had, even in a Body
not liable to their case.

And many a bodily deliverance, has been of great use to my Soul, renewing my
time and opportunity and strength for Service, and bringing frequent and fresh
reports of the Love of God.

If bodily Mercies were not of great use to the Soul, Christ would not so much
have showed his saving love, by healing all manner of diseases as he did. Nor
would God promise us a Resurrection of the Body, if a congruous Body did not
further the welfare of the Soul.

2. And I am obliged to great thankfulness to God for the Mercies of this life
which he has showed to my Friends; that which furthers their joy, should
increase mine: I ought to rejoice with them that rejoice: Nature and Grace
teach us to be glad when our Friends are well and prosper: Though all in order
to better things than bodily welfare.

3. And such Mercies of this life to the Land of our Habitation must not be
undervalued. The want of them are parts of God's threatened Curse; and godliness
has the Promise of this life, and of that which is to come; and so is
profitable to all things. And when God sends on a Land the Plagues of Famine,
Pestilence, War, Persecution, especially a Famine of the Word of God, it is a
great sin to be insensible of it: If any shall say, while Heaven is sure we
have no cause to accuse God, or to cast away comfort, hope or duty, they say
well: But if they say, Because Heaven is all we must make light of all that
befalls us on Earth, They say amiss.

Good Princes, Magistrates and public Spirited men that promote the safety,
Peace and true Prosperity of the Commonwealth, do thereby very much befriend
Religion, and men's Salvation; and are greatly to be loved and honored by all.
If the Civil State called the Commonwealth, do miscarry or fall into ruin and
calamity, the Church will fare the worse for it, as the Soul does by the ruins
of the Body. The Turkish, Muscovite, and such other Empires tell us, how the
Church consumes and dwindles away into contempt or withered Ceremony and
Formality, where Tyranny brings Slavery, Beggary, or long Persecution on the
Subjects. Doubtless diverse passages in the Revelations contain the Churches
glorifying of God, for their Power and Prosperity on Earth, when Emperors
became Christians: What else can be meant well by Rev. 9. 10. [ Has made us
Kings and Priests to God, and we shall Reign on the Earth;] but that Christians
shall be brought from under Heathen Persecution, and have Rule and Sacred
Honor in the World, some of them being Princes, some honored Church Guides,
and all a peculiar honored People. And had not Satan found out that cursed way
of getting wicked men that hate true godliness and peace, into the Sacred
places of Princes and Pastors, to do his work against Christ as in Christ's
Name, surely no good Christians would have grudged at the Power of Rulers of
State or Church: Sure I am that many called Fifth Monarchy men, seem to make
this their great Hope that Rule shall be in the Hands of Righteous men: And I
think most Religious Parties would rejoice if those had very great Power, whom
they take to be the best and trustiest men: Which shows that it is not the
greatness of Power in most Princes, or sound Bishops that they dislike, but the
badness (real or supposed) of those whose Power they mislike: Who will blame
Power to do good.

Sure the three first and great Petitions of the Lord's Prayer include some
temporal welfare of the World and Church, without which the Spiritual rarely
prospers extensively (though intensively in a few it may) since Miracles
ceased.

4. Be thankful therefore for all the Churches Mercies here on Earth: For all
the protection of Magistracy, the Plenty of Preachers, the perservation from
Enemies, the restraint of Persecution, the Concord of Christians, and increase
of Godliness, which in this Land it has had in our Ages, notwithstanding all
Satan's malignant rage, and all the bloody Wars that have interrupted our
tranquillity. How many Psalms of joyful thanksgiving be there for Israel's
deliverances, and the perservation of Zion, and God's Worship in his Sanctuary:
Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love it: specially
that the Gospel is continued, while so many rage against it, is a Mercy not to
be made light of.

Use IV. Be specially thankful, O my Soul, that God has made any use of thee
for the Service of his Church on Earth. My God, my Soul for this does magnify
thee, and my Spirit rejoiceth in the review of thy great undeserved Mercy! O
what am I whom thou took'st up from the Dunghill, or low obscurity, that I
should live my self in the constant relish of thy Sweet and Sacred Truth, and
with such encoucouraging success communicate it to others? That I must say now
my public work seems ended, that these Forty three or Forty four years I have
no reason to think that ever I labored in vain! O with what gratitude must I
look upon all places where I lived and labored, but above all that place that
had my strength. I bless thee for the great numbers gone to Heaven, and for the
continuance of Piety, Humiliation, Concord and Peace among them.

And for all that by my Writings have received any saving Light and Grace. O my
God, let not my own Heart be barren while I labor in thy Husbandry, to bring
others unto Holy fruit. Let me not be a stranger to the Life and Power of that
saving Truth which I have done so much to communicate to others: O let not my
own Words and Writings condemn me as void of that Divine and Heavenly Nature,
and Life, which I have said so much for to the World.

Use V. Stir up then, O my Soul, thy sincere desires and all thy Faculties, to
do the remnant of the work of Christ appointed thee on Earth, and then joyfully
wait for the heavenly Perfection in God's own time.

Thou can truly say, To live to me is Christ: It is his work for which thou
live: Thou have no other business in the World: But thou do his work with
the mixture of many oversights and imperfections, and too much troublest thy
Thoughts distrustfully about God's part, who never fails: If thy work be
done, be thankful for what is past, and that thou art come so near the Port of
rest: If God will add any more to thy days, serve him with double alacrity,
now thou art so near the end: The Prize is almost within sight: Time is swift
and short: Thou have told others that there is no working in the Grave, and
that it must be now or never: Though the conceit of meriting of commutative
Justice, be no better than madness, dream not that God will save the wicked, no
nor equally reward the slothful and the diligent, because Christ's
Righteousness was perfect. Paternal Justice makes difference according to that
worthiness which is so denominated by the Law of Grace: And as sin is its own
punishment; Holiness and Obedience is much of its own reward: Whatever God
appoints thee to do, see that thou do it sincerely, and with all thy might:
If sin dispose men to be angry because it is detected, disgraced and resisted,
if God be pleased, their wrath should be patiently born, who will shortly be
far more angry with themselves. If slander and obloquy survive, so will the
better effects on those that are converted: And there is no comparison between
these. I shall not be hurt when I am with Christ, by the Calumnies of men on
Earth: But the saving benefit will by converted Sinners be enjoyed
everlastingly. Words and actions are transient things, and being once past are
nothing: But the effect of them on an immortal Soul, may be endless. All the
Sermons that I have preached are nothing now: But the Grace of God on
Sanctified Souls is the beginning of Eternal life. It is unspeakable Mercy to
be sincerely thus employed with success; therefore I had reason all this while
to be in Paul's straight, and make no have in my desires to depart. The Crown
will come in its due time: And Eternity is long enough to enjoy it, how long
soever it be delayed: But if I will do that which must obtain it for my self
and others, it must be quickly done before my declining sun be set.

O that I had no worse causes of my unwillingness yet to die, than my desire to
do the work of life for my own and other men's Salvation? And to finish my
course with joy, and the Ministry committed to me by the Lord.

Use VI. And as it is on Earth that I must do good to others, so it must be in
a manner suited to their state on Earth. Souls are here closely united to
Bodies, by which they must receive much good or hurt: Do good to men's Bodies if
thou would do good to their Souls: Say not, Things corporeal are worthless
Trifles, for which the receivers will be never the better: They are things that
nature is easily sensible of: And sense is the passage to the mind and will.
Do not thou find what a help it is to thy self, to have at any time, any ease
and al^crity of Body: And what a burden and hinderance, pains, and cares are?
Labor then to free others from such burdens and temptations, and be not
regardless of them. If thou must rejoice, with them that rejoice, and mourn
with them that mourn, further thy own joy in furthering theirs; and avoid thy
own sorrows in avoiding or curing theirs.

But, alas, what power has selfishness in most? How easily do we bear our
Brethrens pains, reproaches, wants and afflictions, in comparison of our own:
How few thoughts, and how little cost or labor do we use for their supply, in
comparison of what we do for our selves. Nature indeed teaches us to be most
sensible of our own case: But Grace tells us that we should not make so great a
difference as we do, but should love our Neighbors as our selves.

Use VII. And now, O my Soul, consider how mercifully God has dealt with thee,
that thy straight should be between two conditions so desirable? I shall either
die speedily, or stay yet longer upon Earth: Which ever it be, it will be a
Merciful and Comfortable state. That it is desirable to depart and be with
Christ, I must not doubt, and shall anon more copiously consider. And if my
abode on Earth yet longer be so great a Mercy as to be put in the Balance
against my present possession of Heaven, surely it must be a state which
obliges me to great thankfulness to God, and comfortable acknowledgment: And
surely it is not my pain, or sickness, my suffering^ from malicious men, that
should make this Life on Earth unacceptable, while God will continue it: Paul
had his Prick or Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to Buffet him, and
suffered more from men (though less in his Health) than I have done: And yet he
gloried in such Infirmities, and rejoiced in his Tribulation^, and was in a
straight between living and dying* yea, rather chose to live yet longer.

Alas, it is another kind of straight that most of the World are in: The
straight of most is between the desire of Life for fleshly interest, and the
fear of Death as ending their felicity: The straight of many is, between a
tiring World and Body which makes them aweary of living, and the dreadful
prospect of future danger which makes them afraid of dying: If they live, it is
in misery; if they must die they are afraid of greater misery: which way ever
they Look, behind or before them, to this World, or the next, fear and trouble
is their Lot; yea, many an upright Christian, through the weakness of their
Trust in God; does live in this perplexed straight; aweary of living and afraid
of dying; between grief and fear, they are pressed continually: But Paul's
straight was between two Joys; which of them he should desire most: And if that
be my case, what should much interrupt my Peace or Pleasure. If I live, it is
for Christ; for his Work, and for his Church, for Preparation, for my own and
others everasting felicity: And should any suffering which makes me not
unserviceable, make me impatient with such a work, and such a life? If I die
presently it is my gain: God who appoints me my work, does limit my time, and
sure his glorious reward can never be unseasonable or come too soon, if it be
the time that he appoints. When I first engaged my self to preach the Gospel,
I reckoned (as probable) but upon one or two years: And God has continued me
it above Forty four: (with such interruptions as others in these times have
had.) And what reason have I now to be unwilling either to live or die? God's
Service has been so sweet to me, that it has overcome the trouble of constant
pains or weakness of the Flesh, and all that men have said or done against me.

But the following Crown exceeds this pleasure, more than I am here capable to
conceive. There is some trouble in all this pleasant work, from which the Soul
and Flesh would rest: And blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: Even so
says the Spirit; for they rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them.

But, O my Soul, what need'st thou be troubled in this kind of straight? It is
not left to thee to choose whether or when thou will live or die. It is God
that will determine it, who is infinitely fitter to choose than thou: Leave
therefore his own work to himself, and mind that which is thine; whilst thou
live, live to Christ, and when thou die, thou shall die to Christ; even
into his blessed Hands; So live, that thou may say, It is Christ lives in
me, and the life that I live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me: And then as thou have lived in the
comfort of hope, thou shall die unto the comfort of Vision and Fruition: And
when thou can say, he is the God whose I am, and whom I serve, thou may
boldly add, and whom I trust; and to whom I commend my departing Soul* And I
know whom I have trusted.

Richard Baxter's Dying Thoughts.
Philippians 1. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better (or, for this is much rather
to be preferred, or better.)
1. MAN that is born of a Woman, is of few days, and full of trouble; He
comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down: He flees also as a shadow, and
continues not: And do thou open thine Eyes upon such a one, and bring me
into Judgment with thee? says Job, chapter 14. v. 1, 2, 3. As a Watch when it is
wound up, or as a Candle newly lighted; so Man newly conceived or born,
begins a motion, which incessantly hastes to its appointed period. And an
Action, and its Time, that is past, is Nothing: So vain a thing would Man be,
and so vain his Life, were it not for the hopes of a more durable Life, which
this refers to. But those Hopes, and the Means, do not only difference a
Believer from an Infidel, but a Man from a Beast. When Solomon describes the
difference in respect to the Time and Things of this Life only, he truly tells
us, that one end here befalling both, does show that both are here but Vanity,
but Man's Vexation is greater than the Beasts. And Paul truly says of
Christians that if our hope were only in this life (that is, in the Time and
Things of this life and world) we were of all men most miserable. Though even
in this life, as related to a better, and as we are exercised about things of a
higher nature, than the concerns of temporal life, we are far happier than any
worldlings.

2. Being to speak to my self, I shall pass by all the rest of the matter of
this Text, and suppose its due Explication, and spread before my Soul only the
Doctrine and Uses of these two Propositions contained in it. I. That the Souls
of Believers when departed hence, shall be with Christ. II. That so to be with
Christ is far better for them, than to be here in the body.

3. I. Concerning the first, my Thoughts shall keep this order. I. I shall
consider the Necessity of Believing it. II. Whether it be best believing it,
without consideration of the Proofs or Difficulties. III. The certainty of it
manifested for the exercise of Faith.

4. I. Whether the words signify that we shall be in the same place with
Christ (which Grotius groundlesly denies) or only in his Hand, and Care, and
Love, I will not stay to dispute: Many other Texts concurring do assure us,
that we shall be with him where he is, Joh. 12. 26. Joh. 17. 24, etc. At least
[ with him] can mean no less than a state of communion, and a participation of
felicity. And to believe such a state of happiness for departed Souls, is of
manifold necessity or use.

5. I. If this be not soundly believed, a man must live besides, or below the
End of Life: He must have a false End, or be uncertain what should be his End.

I know, it may be objected, that if I make it my End to please God, by obeying
him, and doing all the good I can, and trust him with my Soul and future
Estate, as one that is utterly uncertain what he will do with me, I have an End
intended, which will make me godly, charitable, and just, and happy, so far as
I am made for happiness: For the pleasing of God is the right End of all.

But, 1. Must I desire to please him no better than I do in this imperfect
state, in which I have, and do so much which is displeasing to him? He that
must desire to please him, must desire to please him perfectly: And our desires
of our ultimate End must have no bounds, or check. Am I capable of pleasing God
no better, than by such a sinful life as this?

2. God has made the desire of our own felicity so necessary to the Soul of
Man, that it cannot be expected that our desire to please him, should be
separated from this. 3. Therefore both in respect of God as the End, and of our
felicity as our second End, we must believe that he is the beatifying rewarder
of them that diligently seek him.

For, 1. If we make such an ill description of God, as that he will turn our
pleasing him to our loss, or will not turn it to our gain, and welfare, or that
we know not whether he will do so or not, it will hinder our Love, and Trust,
and Joy in him, by which we must please him, and consequently hinder the
alacrity, and soundness, and constancy of our obedience.

2. And it will much dismiss that self-love which must excite us, and it will
take off part of our necessary End: And I think the Objecters will confess,
that if they have no certainty what God will do with them, they must have some
Probability and Hope, before they can be sincerely devoted here to please him.

6. And 1. If a man be but uncertain what he should make the End of his Life,
or what he should live for, how can he pitch upon an uncertain End? And if he
waver so as to have no End, he can use no Means: And if End and Means be all
laid by, the Man lives not as a Man, but as a Brute. And what a torment must
it be to a considering mind, to be uncertain what to Intend and Do in all the
tenor and actions of his life? Like a man going out at his door, not knowing
whither, or what to do, or which way to go: Either he will stand still, or move
as Brutes do by present sense, or a Windmill or Weathercok, as he is moved.

7. 2. But if he pitch upon a wrong End, it may yet be worse than none; for he
will but do hurt, or make work for Repentance: And all the actions of his life
must be formally wrong, (how good soever materially) if the End of them be
wrong.

8. 2. And if I fetch them not from this End, and believe not in God as a
Rewarder of his Servants, in a better Life, what Motives shall I have which in
our present difficulties, will be sufficient to cause me to live a holy, yea or
a truly honest life? All piety and honesty indeed is good, and Goodness is
desirable for it self: But the goodness of a Means is its aptitude for the End;
and we have here abundance of impediments, competitors, diversions and
temptations, and difficulties of many sorts; and all these must be overcome by
him that will live in piety or honesty. And our Natures (we find) are diseased,
and greatly indisposed to unquestionable duties; and will they ever discharge
them, and conquer all these difficulties and temptations, if the necessary
Motive be not believed? Duty to God and Man is accidentally hard and costly to
the flesh, though amiable in it self: It may cost us our Estates, our
Liberties, our Lives. The world is not so happy as commonly to know good men
from bad, nor to encourage Piety and Virtue, or to forbear opposing them. And
who will let go his present welfare, without some hope of better as a reward?
Men use not to serve God for naught; nor that think it will be their loss to
serve him.

9. A life of sin will not be avoided upon lower Ends and Motives: Nay, those
lower Ends when alone, will be a constant sin themselves: A preferring Vanity
to Glory, the Creature to God, and a setting our heart on that which will never
make us happy: And when lust and appetite incline men strongly and constantly
to their several objects, what shall sufficiently restrain them, except the
greater and more durable delights or motives fetched from preponderating things?
Lust and Appetite distinguish not between lawful and unlawful. We may see in
the brutish Politics of Benedictus Spinosa, in his Tractat. Theolog. Polit.
whither the Principles of Infidelity tend. If sin so overspread the Earth, that
the whole world is as drowned in wickedness, notwithstanding all the hopes and
fears of a life to come, what would it do were there no such hopes and fears?

10. 3. And no Mercy can be truly known and estimated, nor rightly used and
improved by him that sees not its tendency to the End, and perceives not that
it leads to a better Life, and uses it not thereunto. God deals more
bountifully with us than worldlings understand: He gives us all the mercies of
this life, as helps to an immortal state of Glory, and as earnests of it.
Sensualists know not what a Soul is, nor what Soul-mercies are, and therefore
not what the Soul of all bodily mercies are; but take up only with the carcass,
shell, or shadow. If the King would give me a Lordship, and send me a Horse or
Coach to carry me to it, and I should only ride about the fields for my
pleasure, and make no other use of it, should I not undervalue and lose the
principal benefit of my Horse or Coach? No wonder if unbelievers be unthankful,
when they know not at all that part of God's mercies, which is the life, and
real excellency of them.

11. 4. And alas! how should I bear with comfort the sufferings of this
wretched life, without the hopes of a life with Christ? What should support and
comfort me under my bodily languishings and pains? my weary hours, and my daily
experience of the Vanity and Vexation of all things under the Sun, had I not a
prospect of a comfortable end of all? I that have lived in the midst of great
and precious mercies, have all my life had something to do, to overcome the
temptation of wishing that I had never been born, and had never overcome it,
but by the belief of a blessed Life hereafter. Solomon's sense of Vanity and
Vexation, has long made all the business, and wealth, and honor, and pleasure
of this world (as such) appear such a dream and shadow to me, that were it not
for the End, I could not have much differenced men's sleeping and their waking
thoughts, nor have much more valued the waking than the sleeping part of life,
but should have thought it a kind of happiness to have slept from the birth
unto the death. Children cry when they come into the world; and I am often
sorry when I am wakened out of a quiet sleep, especially to the business of an
unquiet day. We should be strongly tempted in our considering state, to murmr
at our Creator, as dealing much hardlier by us than by the Brutes; if we must
have had all those cares, and griefs, and fears, by the knowledge of what we
want, and the prospect of death, and future evils, which they are exempted
from, and had not withal had the hopes of a future felicity to support us.
Seneca and his Stoics had no better Argument to silence such murmurers who
believed not a better life, than to tell them, that if this life had more evil
than good, and they thought God did them wrong, they might remedy themselves by
ending it when they would: But that would not cure the repinings of a Nature,
who found it self necessarily aweary of the miseries of life, and yet afraid of
dying. And it is no great wonder that many thought that preexistent Souls were
put into these bodies as a punishment of something done in a former life, while
they foresaw not the hoped End of all our fears and sorrows. O how contemptible
a thing is man! says the same Seneca, unless he lift up himself above humane
things? Therefore, says Solomon, Eccles. 2. 17. (when he had glutted himself
with all temporal pleasures) I hated life, because the work that is wrought
under the Sun, is grievous to me: For all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

12. II. I have often thought whether an Implicit belief of a future happiness,
without any search into its nature, and thinking of any thing that can be said
against it, or the searching, trying way be better. On the one side, I have
known many godly women that never disputed the matter, but served God
comfortably to a very old Age, (between 80 and 100) to have lived many years in
a cheerful readiness and desire of death, and such as few Learned, studious men
do never attain to in that degree; who, no doubt, had this as a Divine Reward
of their long and faithful service of God, and trusting in him. On the other
side, a studious man can hardly keep off all Objections, or secure his mind
against the suggestions of difficulties and doubts; and if they come in, they
must be answered; seeing we give them half a victory, if we cast them off
before we can answer them. And a Faith that is not upheld by such evidence of
Truth, as Reason can discern and justify, is often joined with much secret
doubting, which men dare not open, but do not therefore overcome: And its
weakness may have a weakening deficiency, as to all the graces and duties which
should be strengthened by it. And who knows how soon a temptation from Satan,
or Infidels, or our own dark hearts, may assault us, which will not, without
such evidence and resolving Light be overcome? And yet many that try, and
reason, and dispute most, have not the strongest, or most powerful Faith.

13. And my thoughts of this have had this issue. 1. There is a great
difference between that Light which shows us the Thing it self, and that
artificial skill by which we have right Notions, Names, Definitions, and formed
Arguments, and Answers to Objections. This Artificial, Logical, Organical kind
of Knowledge is good and useful in its kind, if right; like Speech it self: But
he that has much of this, may have little of the former: This is the true mean
between George Keith the Quakers Doctrine of Continued Inspiration and
Intuition, and that on the other extreme.
And unlearned persons that have little of this, may have more of the former,
and may have those inward perceptions of the verity of the Promises and Rewards
of God, which they cannot bring forth into artificial reasonings to themselves
or others; who are taught of God by the effective sort of Teaching, which
reaches the Heart o^ Will, as well as the Understanding, and is a Giving of
what is taught, and a Making us such as we are told we must be. And who finds
not need to pray hard for this effective Teaching of God, when he has got all
Organical Knowledge, and Words and Arguments in themselves most apt, at his
fingers ends (as we say?) When I can prove the Truth of the Word of God, and
the Life to come, with the most convincing undeniable Reasons, I feel need to
cry and pray daily to God, to increase my Faith, and to give me that Light
which may satisfy the Soul, and reach the end.

14. 2. Yet man being a Rational wight, is not taught by mere Instinct and
Inspiration: And therefore this Effective Teaching of God does ordinarily
suppose a Rational, Objective, Organical Teaching and Knowledge. And the
foresaid unlearned Christians are convinced by good evidence, that God's Word
is true, and his Rewards are sure, though they have but a confused conception
of this evidence, and cannot word it, nor reduce it to fit notions. And to
drive these that have fundamental evidence, unseasonably and hastily to dispute
their Faith, and so to puzzle them by words and artificial Objections, is but
to hurt them, by setting the Artificial Organical lower part (which is the body
of Knowledge) against the real Light and Perception of the Thing (which is as
the Soul) even as carnal men set the Creatures against God, that should lead us
to God; so do they by Logical Artificial Knowledge.

15. But they that are prepared for such Disputes, and furnished with all
artificial helps, may make good use of them for defending and clearing up the
Truth to themselves and others; so be it they use them as a means to the due
end, and in a right manner, and set them not up against, or instead of the real
and effective Light.

16. But the Revealed and Necessary part must here be distinguished from the
unrevealed and unnecessary. To study till we as clearly as may be understand
the certainty of a future happiness, and wherein it consists; (in the sight
of God's Glory, and in perfect, holy, mutual Love, in Union with Christ, and
all the blessed) this is of great use to our Holiness and Peace. But when we
will know more than God would have us, it does but tend (as gazing on the Sun)
to make us blind, and to doubt of certainties, because we cannot be resolved of
uncertainties. To trouble our heads too much in thinking, how Souls out of the
body do subs^s^ and act, sensitively or not, by Organs, or without; how far
they are one, and how far still individuate, in what place they shall remain,
and where is their Paradise or Heaven; how they shall be again united to the
body; whether by their own emission, as the Sun beams touch their Objects here,
and whether the body shall be restored, as the consumed flesh of restored sick
men, aliunde, or only from the old materials: A hundred of these Questions are
better left to the knowledge of Christ, lest we do but foolishly make snares
for our selves. Had all these been needful to us, they had been revealed. In
respect to all such curiosities and needless knowledge, it is a Believer's
wisdom implicitly to Trust his Soul to Christ, and to be satisfied that he
knows what we know not, and to fear that vain, vexatious knowledge, or
inquisitiveness into good and evil, which is selfish, and savoureth of a
distrust of God, and is that sin, and fruit of sin, which the Learned world too
little fears.

17. III. That God is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and that
holy Souls shall be in blessedness with Christ, these following Evidences
conjoined do evince; on which my Soul does raise its Hopes.

18. I. The Soul which is an Immortal Spirit, must be immortally in a Good or
Bad condition: But Man's Soul is an Immortal Spirit, and the good are not in a
bad condition: Its Immortality is proved thus: A spiritual, or most pure
invisible substance naturally endowed with the Power, Virtue, or Faculty of
Vital-Action, Intellection and Volition, which is not annihilated, nor
destroyed by separation of Parts, nor cease or loses either its Power,
Species, Individuation or Action, is an Immortal Spirit. But such is the Soul
of Man, as shall be manifest by parts.

19. I. The Soul is a substance: For that which is Nothing, can do Nothing; but
it does move, understand and will. No man will deny that this is done by
something in us, and by some substance; and that substance is it which we call
the Soul: It is not Nothing, and it is within us.

20. As to them that say, It is the Temperament of several parts conjunct, I
have elsewhere fully confuted them, and proved, 1. That it is some one part
that is the Agent on the rest, which all they confess that think it to be the
material spirits, or fiery part: It is not bones and flesh that understand, but
a purer substance, as all acknowledge. 2. What part soever it be, it can do no
more than it is Able to do: And a conjunction of many parts, of which no one
has the power of Vitality, Intellection, or Volition, formally or eminently
(somewhat as excellent) can never by contemperation do those acts: For there
can be no more in the effect than is in the cause; otherwise it were no effect.

The vanity of their Objections, that tell us, a Lute, a Watch, a Book, perform
that by cooperation, which no one part can do, I have elsewhere manifested. 1.
Many strings indeed have many motions, and so have many effects on the Ear and
Fantasy, which in us are sound, and harmony: But all is but a percussion of
the Air by the strings, and were not that motion received by a sensitive Soul,
it would be no Music or Melody; so that there is nothing done but what each
part had power to do. But Intellection and Volition are not the conjunct
motions of all parts of the body, receiving their form in a nobler Intellective
nature, as the sound of the strings makes melody in man: If it were so, that
Receptive Nature still would be as excellent as the Effect imports. 2. And
the Watch or Clock does but move according to the action of the spring or
poise; but that it moves in such an order as becomes to man a sign and
measure of Time, this is from Man who orders it to that use. But there is
nothing in the motion, but what the parts have their power to cause: And that
it signifies the hour of the days to us, is no Action, but an object used by
a rational Soul as it can use the shadow of a Tree or House, that yet does
nothing. 3. And so a Book does nothing at all, but is a mere objective
ordination of passive signs, by which Man's active Intellect can understand
what the Writer or Orderer did intend; so that here is nothing done beyond the
power of the Agent, nor any thing in the effect which was not in the cause,
either formally or eminently. But for a company of Atoms, of which no one has
sense or reason, to become sensitive and rational by mere conjunct motion, is
an ^ffect beyond the power of the supposed cause.

21. But as some think so basely of our noblest Acts, as to think that
contempered agitated Atoms can perform them, that have no natural intellective
or sensitive virtue or power in themselves, so others think so highly of them,
as to take them to be the Acts only of God (or some universal Soul) in the body
of Man; and so that there is no Life, Sense or Reason in the World, but God
himself (or such an universal Soul;) And so that either every man is God, (as
to his Soul) or that it is the Body only that is to be called Man as distinct
from God. But this is the Self-ensnaring and self-perplexing temerity of busy,
bold and arrogant heads, that know not their own capacity and measure. And on
the like reasons they must at last come (with others) to say, that all passive
matter also is God, and that God is the Universe, consisting of an Active Soul,
and Passive Body. As if God were no cause, and could make nothing, or nothing
with Life, or Sense, or Reason.

22. But why depart we from things certain, by such presumptions as these? Is
it not certain, that there are baser creatures in the World, than Men or
Angels? Is it not certain that one Man is not another? Is it not certain, that
some men are in torment of body and mind? And will it be a comfort to a man in
such torment to tell him, that he is God? or that he is part of an universal
Soul? Would not a man on the Rack, or in the Stone, or other misery say, [Call
me by what name you please, that caseth not my pain: If I be part of God, or an
universal Soul, I am sure I am a tormented miserable part! And if you could not
make me believe that God has some parts which are Serpents, Toads, Devils, or
wicked or tormented men, you must give me other senses, and perceptive powers,
before it will comfort me, to hear that I am such a part. And if God had wicked
and tormented parts on Earth, why may he not have such, and I be one of them
hereafter? And if I be a holy and happy part of God, or of an universal Soul on
Earth, why may not I hope to be such hereafter?

23. We deny not but that God is the continued first cause of all Being
whatsoever; and that the branches and fruit depend not as effects so much on
the causality of the Stock and Roots, as the creature does on God; and that it
is an impious conceit to think that the World, or any part of it, is a Being
independent, and separated totally from God, or subsisting without his
continued causation. But cannot God cause as a Creator, by making that which is
not himself? This yields the self-deceiver no other honor, nor happiness,
but what equally belongs to a Devil, to a Fly or Worm, to a Dunghill, or to
the worst and miserablest man!

24. II. As Man's Soul is a SUBSTANCE, so is it a Substance differenced
formally from all inferior Substances, by an Innate (indeed Essential) Power,
Virtue, or Faculty of Vital-Action, Intellection, and Free Will: For we find
all these Acts performed by it, as Motion, Light and Heat are by the Fire or
Sun. And if any should think that these Actions are like those of a Musician,
compounded of the Agents (principal and organical several) parts, could he
prove it, no more would follow, but that the lower powers (the Sensitive or
Spirits) are to the higher as a Passive Organ, receiving its operations; and
that the Intellectual Soul has the power of causing Intellection and Volition
by its Action on the inferior parts, as a man can cause such motions of his
Lute, as shall be melody (not to it, but) to himself: And consequently, that as
Music is but a lower operation of man (whose proper acts of Intellection and
Volition are above it) so Intellection and Volition in the Body are not the
noblest Acts of the Soul, but it performs them by an Eminent Power, which can
do greater things. And if this could be proved, what would it tend to the
unbelievers ends, or to the disadvantage of our hopes and comforts?

25. III. That man's Soul at death is not annibilated; even the Atomists and
Epicurians will grant, who think that no Atom in the Universe is annihilated:
And we that see not only the Sun and Heavens continued, but every grain of
matter, and that compounds are changed by dissolution of parts, and
rarefaction, or migration, etc. and not by Annihilation, have no reason to
dream that God will annihilate one Soul (though he can do it if he please, yea
and annihilate all the World:) It is a thing beyond a rational expectation.

26. IV. And a destruction by the dissolution of the parts of the Soul, we need
not fear. For, 1. Either an Intellectual Spirit is divisible and partible, or
not; if not, we need not fear it; if it be, either it is a thing that Nature
tends to, or not: But that Nature does not tend to it, is evident. For, 1.
There is naturally so strange and strong an inclination to unity, and
averseness to separation in all things, that even Earth and Stones, that have
no other (known) natural motion, have yet an aggregative motion in their
gravitation: But if you will separate the parts from the rest, it must be by
force. And Water is yet more averse from partition without force, and more
inclined to union than Earth, and Air than Water, and Fire than Air; so that he
that will cut a Sunbeam into pieces, and make many of one, must be an
extraordinary Agent. And surely Spirits, even Intellectual Spirits, will be no
less averse from partition, and inclined to keep their Unity, than Fire, or a
Sunbeam is; so that naturally it is not a thing to be feared, that it should
fall into pieces.

2. And he that will say, that the God of Nature will change, and overcome the
Nature that he has made, must give us good proofs of it, or it is not to be
feared. And if he should do it as a punishment, we must find such a punishment
somewhere threatened, either in his Natural, or Supernatural Law, which we do
not; and therefore need not fear it.

27. 3. But if it were to be feared, that Souls were partible, and would be
broken into parts, this would be no destruction of them, either as to their
substance, powers, form or action, but only a breaking of one Soul into many:
For being not compounded of Heterogeneal parts, but as simple Elements of
Homogeneal only, as every Atom of Earth is Earth, and every drop of Water in
the Sea is Water, and every particle of Air and Fire, is Air and Fire, and have
all the properties of Earth, Water, Air and Fire; so would it be with every
particle of an Intellectual Spirit. But who can see cause to dream of such a
partition, never threatened by God?

28. V. And that Souls lose not their formal Powers or Virtues, we have great
reason to conceive; because they are their Natural Essence, not as mixed, but
simple substances: And though some imagine that the Passive Elements may be
attenuation, or incrassation, be transmuted one into another, yet we see that
Earth is still Earth, and Water is Water, and Air is Air; and their conceit
has no proof: And, were it proved, it would but prove that none of these are a
first or proper Element: But what should an Intellectual Spirit be changed
into? How should it lose its formal Power? not by Nature; for its Nature has
nothing that tends to deterioration, or decay, or self-destruction? The Sun
does not decay by its wonderful Motion, Light and Heat: And why should Spirits?
Not by God's destroying them, or changing their Nature: For, though all things
are in constant motion or revolution, he continues the Natures of the simple
Beings, and shows us, that he delights in a constancy of operations,
insomuch that hence Aristotle thought the world Eternal. And God has made no
Law that threateneth to do it as a penalty. Therefore to dream that
Intellectual Spirits shall be turned into other things and lose their Essential
formal Powers, which specify them, is without and against all sober reason. Let
them first but prove that the Sun loses Motion, Light and Heat, and is turned
into Air, or Water or Earth. Such changes are beyond a rational fear.

29. VI. But some men dream that Souls shall sleep, and cease their Acts,
though they do not their powers. But this is more unreasonable than the
former. For it must be remembered that it is not a mere obediential Passive
power that we speak of; but an Active Power consisting in a great an
Inclination to Act, as Passive natures have to forbear action. So that if such
a nature Act not, it must be because its natural Inclination is hindered by a
stronger; And who shall hinder it?

1. God would not continue an Active Power, Force and Inclination in nature,
and forcibly hinder the operation of that nature which he himself continues;
unless penally for some special cause; Which he never gave us any notice of by
any threatening, but the contrary.

2. Objects will not be wanting, for all the world will be still at hand, and
God above all. It is therefore an unreasonable conceit to think that God will
continue an Active Vital Intellective Volitive Nature, Form, Power, Force,
Inclination, in a noble substance, which shall use none of these for many
hundred or thousand years, and so continue them in vain.

Nay, 3. It is rather to be thought that some Action is their constant state
without which the cessation of their very form, would be inferred.

30. But all that can be said with reason is that separated Souls, and Souls
hereafter in Spiritual Bodies, will have Actions of another mode, and very
different from these that we now perceive in flesh. And be it so. They will yet
be radically, of the same Kind, and they will be formally or eminently such as
we now call, Vitality, Intellection and Volition; And they will be no lower nor
less excellent if not far more; And then what the difference will be, Christ
knows whom I trust, and in season I shall know. But to talk of a Dead Life,
an unactive activity, or a Sleeping Soul, is fitter for a sleeping than a
waking man.

31. It Is true that Diseases or Hurts do now hinder the Souls Intellectual
perceptions in the body, and in Infancy and Sleep they are imperfect. Which
proves indeed that the Acts commonly called Intellection and Volition, have
now something in them also of sensation, and that sensitive operations are
diversifyed by the Organs of the several senses. And that bare Intellection and
Volition without any sensation is now scarce to be observed in us, though the
Soul may have such acts intrinsecally and in its profundity. For it is now so
united to this body, that it acts on it as our form; And indeed the Act,
observed by us cannot be denied to be such as are specified or modified at
least, by the Agents, and the Recipients, and Sub-Agents parts conjunct. But,
1. As the Sun would do the same thing ex part sui if in vacuo only it sent
forth its beams, though this were no Illumination or Calefaction, because there
were no Recipient, to be Illuminated and Heated by it. And it would lose
nothing by the want of objects; so the Soul, had it no Body to act on, would
have its profound Immanent Acts of selfliving, self-perceiving, and self
loving, (and all its external acts on other objects, which need not Organs of
sense for their approximation.) And 2. Its sensitive faculty is it self, or
such as it is not separated from, though the Particular sorts of sensation may
be altered with their uses: And therefore it may still act on or with the
sense: And if one way of sensation be hindered, it has another. 3. And how far
this Lanthorn of flesh does help or hinder its operations, we know not yet, but
shall know hereafter. Sondi^s de Orig. Animae (though an heretical Writer) has
said much to prove that the Body is a hinderance, and not a help to the Soul's
Intuition. And if Ratiocination be a compound act yet Intuition may be done for
ever by the Soul alone. 4. But as we are not to judge what Powers the Soul has
when the Acts are hindered, but when they are done; nor what Souls were made by
God for, by their state in the Womb or Infancy, or Diseases, but by our
ordinary mature state of life; so we have little reason to think that the same
God who made them for Life, Intellection and Volitions here, will not continue
the same Powers o^ the same, or as noble uses hereafter, whether with Organs,
or without, as pleases him. If in this flesh our Spirits were not unactive and
useless, we have no reason to think that they will be so hereafter, (and that
for ever.)

32. This greatest and hardest of all Objections, does make us confess (with
Contarenus, contra Pomponatium de Anim. Immortalit.) that though by the Light
of Nature we may know the Immortality of Souls, (and that they lose not their
Powers, or Activity) yet without supernatural Light, we know not what manner of
Action they will have in their separated state, or in another world, because
here they act according to objective Termination, and the Receptivity of the
Sense and Fantasy, and Recipitur ad modum recipientis; and in the Womb we
perceive not that it acts intellectually at all.

But we know, That, 1. If even then it differed not in its formal ^ower from
the Souls of Brutes, it would not so much afterward differ in Act: And it would
never be raised to that which was not virtually in its Nature at the first. 2.
And we find, that even very little Children have quick and strong knowledge of
such Objects as ^^e brought within their reach: And that their Ignorance is not
for want of an Intellectual Power, but for want of Objects, or Images of things
which time, and use, and conversation among Objects, must furnish their
Fantasies and Memories with. And so a Soul in the Womb, or in an Apoplexy,
has not Objects of Intellection within its reach to act upon; but is as the
Sun to a Room that has no windows to let in its light. 3. And what if its
profound Vitality, Self perception, and Self-love be by a kind of Sensation and
Intuition, rather than by Discursive Reason? I doubt not but some late
Philosophers make snares to themselves and others, by too much vilifying sense
and sensitive Souls, as if sense were but some loseable Accident of contempered
Atoms: But Sensation (though diversified by Organs and Uses, and so far
mutable) is the Act of a noble Spiritual Form and Virtue. And as Chamber and
some others make Brutes a lower rank of Rationals, and Man another higher
species, as having his nobler Reason for higher Ends; so for Man to be the
noblest Order (here) of Sensitives, and to have an Intellect to Order and
Govern Sensations, and connex them and improve them, were a noble work, if we
had no higher. And if Intellection and Volition were but a higher species of
Internal Sensation, than Imagination, and the Fantasy and Memory are, it
might yet be a height that should set Man specifically above the Brutes. And I
am daily more and more persuaded, that Intellectual Souls are essentially
sensitive and more, and that their Sensation never cease. 4. And still I say,
that it is to Nature it self a thing unlikely that the God of Nature will long
continue a Soul that has formally or naturally an Intellective Power, in a
state in which it shall have no use of it. Let others that will enquire whether
it shall have a Vehicle or none to act in, and whether aereal, or igneous, and
ethereal, and whether it be really an Intellectual sort of Fire, as material as
the solar Fire, whose (not compounding, but) inadequate-conceptus objectivi
are, an Igneous substance, and a Formal Virtue of Life, Sense, and
Intellection, with other such puzzling doubts; it satisfies me, that God will
not continue its noblest Powers in vain; and how they shall be exercised, is
known to him: And that God's Word tells us more than Nature. And withal, LIFE,
INTUITION and LOVE (or Volition) are Acts so natural to the Soul (as Motion,
Light and Heat, quoad actum to Fire) that I cannot conceive how its Separation
should hinder them, but rather that its Incorporation hinders the two latter
by hiding Objects, whatever be said of abstractive knowledge and memory.

33. VII. But the greatest difficulty to Natural Knowledge is, Whether Souls
shall continue their individuation, or rather fall into one common Soul, or
return so to God that gave them, as to be no more diverse (or many) individuals
as now; as extinguished Candles are united to the illuminated Air, or to the
Sun beams. But of this I have elsewhere said much for others; and for my self I
find I need but this: 1. That as I said before, either Souls are partible
substances, or not: If not partible. how are they unible? If Many may be made
One by conjunction of substances, then that One may (by God) be made Many again
by partition. Either All (or Many) Souls are now but One (individuate only by
Matter, as many gulfs in the Sea, or many Candles lighted by the Sun) or not:
If they are not One now in several bodies, what reason have we to think that
they will be One hereafter, any more than now? Augustine (de Anim.) was put on
the question, 1. Whether Souls are One, and not Many: (and that he utterly
denies.) 2. Whether they are Many, and not One; (and that it seems he could
not digest.) 3. Whether they were at once both One and Many (which he thought
would seem to some ridiculous, but he seems most to incline to:) And as God
is the God of Nature, so Nature (even of the Devils themselves) depends on
him, as I said, more than the Leaves or Fruit do on the Tree: And we are all
his Offspring, and Live, and Move, and Are in Him, Acts 17. But we are certain
for all this, 1. That we are not God; 2. That we are yet many Individuals, and
not all One Soul or Man. I^ our Union should be as near as the Leaves and Fruit
on the same Tree, yet those Leaves and Fruit are numerous and individual Leaves
and Fruits, though parts of the Tree. And were this proved of our present, or
our future state, it would not alter our Hopes or Fears: For as Now, though we
all Live, Move, and Be in God, (and, as some dream, are parts of a common Soul)
yet it is certain that some are Better and Happier than others; some wise and
good, and some foolish and evil; some in pain and misery, and some at ease and
in pleasure; and (as I said) it is now no ease to the miserable to be told that
radically all Souls are One; no more will it be hereafter, nor can men
reasonably hope for, or fear such an Union, as shall make their state the same.
We see in Nature (as I have elsewhere said) that if you graff many sorts of
Sciens (some sweet, some bitter, some Crabs) on the same Stock, they will be
One Tree, and yet have diversity of fruit. If Souls be not Unible, nor Partible
substances, there is no place for this doubt: If they be, they will be still
what they are, notwithstanding any such Union with a common Soul. As a drop of
Water in the Sea is a separable part, and still it self; and as a Crab upon the
foresaid Stock or Tree. And the good or bad quality cease not by any Union
with others.

Sure we are, that all Creatures are in God, by close dependence, and yet that
the good are good, and the bad are bad, and that God is Good, and has no Evil;
and that when Man is tormented or miserable, God suffers nothing by it (as
the whole Man does when but a Tooth does ache.) (For he would not hurt himself
were he passive.) Therefore to dream of any such cessation of our Individuation
by any Union with a Creature, as shall make the Good less Good, or happy, or
the Bad less Bad or miserable, is a groundless folly.

34. Yet it is very probable that there will be a Nearer Union of holy Souls
with God and Christ, and one another, than we can here conceive of: But this
(...) so far from being to be feared, that it is the highest of our hopes. 1.
God himself (though equally every where in his Essence) does operate very
variously on his Creatures. On the wicked he operateth as the first Cause of
Nature (as his Sun shines on them:) On some he operateth by common Grace: To
some he gives Faith to prepare them for the Indwelling of his Spirit: In
Believers he dwells by Love, and they in him: And if we may use such a
comparison as Satan acts on some only by suggestions, but on others so
despotically as that it is called His Possessing them; so God's Spirit works
on holy Souls so powerfully and constantly, as is called his Possessing them.
And yet on the Humane Nature of Christ, the Divine Nature of the Second Person
has such a further extraordinary Operation, as is justly called a Personal
Union; which is not by a more Essential Presence (for that is every where) but
by a peculiar operation and relation: And so holy Souls being under a more
felicitating operation of God, may well be said to have a Nearer Union with him
than now they have.

35. (...). And I observe, that (as is aforesaid) all things have naturally a
strong inclination to Union and Communion with their like: Every clod and stone
inclines to the Earth: Water would go to Water; Air to Air, Fire to Fire;
Birds and Beasts associate with their like. And the noblest natures are most
strongly thus inclined; And therefore I have natural reason to think that it
will be so with holy Souls.

36. 3. And I find that the inordinate Contraction of Man to himself, and to
the interest of this Individual-Person, with the defect of Love to all about
us, according to every creatures goodness, and specially to God the Infinite
good, whom we should love above our selves, is the very sum of all the pravity
of man. And all the injustice and injury to others, and all the neglect of good
works in the world, and all our daily terrors, and self-distracting
self-tormenting cares, and griefs, and fears, proceed from this inordinate Love
and Adhesion to our selves: Therefore I have reason to think that in our better
state, we shall perfectly Love others as our selves, and the selfish Love will
turn into a common and a Divine Love, which must be by our preferring the
common and the Divine Good, and Interest.

37. And I am so sensible of the power and Plague of selfishness, and how it
now corrupts, tempts and disquieteth me, that when I feel any fears lest
individuation cease, and my Soul fall into one common Soul (as the Stoics
thought all Souls did at death) I find great cause to suspect that this arises
from the power of this corrupting selfishness: For Reason sees no cause at all
to fear it were it so.

38. 4. For I find also that the nature of Love is to desire as near a Union as
is possible; And the strongest Love does strongliest desire it. Fervent Lovers
think they can scarce be too much One. And Love is our Perfection, and
therefore so is Union.

39. 5. And I find that when Christians had the first and full pourings out of
the Spirit they had the ferventest Love, and the nearest Union, and the least
desire of propriety and distance.

40. 6. And I find that Christ's prayer for the felicity of his disciples is a
prayer for their Unity, Joh. 17. 22, 23. And in this he places much of their
Persection.

41. 7. And I find also that man is a sociable nature and that all men find by
experience that conjunction in societies, is needful to their Safety, strength
and Pleasure.

42. 8. And I find that my Soul would fain be nearer God, and that darkness and
distance is my misery and near communion is it that would answer all the
tendencies of my Soul: Why then should I fear too near a Union.

43. I think it utterly improbable, that my Soul should become more nearly
united to any creature, than to God: (though it be of the same kind with other
Souls, and infinitely below God): For God is as near me as I am to my self: I
still depend on him as the effect upon its total constant cause; And that not
as the fruit upon the Tree, which borrows all from the Earth, Water, Air, and
Fire which it communicates to its fruit; but as a creature on its Creator, who
has no Being but what it receives totally from God, by constant
communication. Hence Autonine, Seneca, and the rest of the Stoics thought that
all the World was God, or one Great Animal consisting of Divine Spirit and
Matter, as Man of Soul and body; Sometime calling the supposed Soul of the
World, GOD, and sometime calling the whole World, God; But still meaning that
the Universe was but one Spirit and Body united and that we all are parts of
God, or of the Body of God, or Accidents at least.

44. And even the Popish Mystical Divines in their pretensions to the highest
Perfection say the same in sense; such as Benedict. Anglus in his Regula
Perfectionis, (approved by many Doctors,) who places much of his Supereminent
Life, in our Believing verily that there is nothing but God, and Living
accordingly; Maintaining that all creatures are nothing distinct from God, but
are to God, as the Beams are to the Sun, and as the Heat is to the Fire, (which
really is it self;) And so teaching us to rest in all things as Good, as being
nothing but Gods essential will, which is himself (resolving even our sins and
Imperfections, accordingly into God, so that they are Gods or None.)

45. And all these men have as fair a pretense for their conceits of such a
Union with God now, as for such an Union after death: For their Reason is, 1.
That God being Infinite, there can be no more Beings than his own But God and
the smallest Being distinct, would be more Entity than God alone: But Infinity
can have no addition. 2. Because Ens and Bonum Convertuntur; But God only is
good.

And if we are notwithstanding all this, distinct Beings from God now, we shall
be so then. For we shall not be Annihilated, and we shall not be so advanced as
to be deified, and of creatures or distinct Beings, turned into a Being
infinitely above us. If we be not Parts of God now, we shall not be so then.

But if they could prove that we are so now, we should quickly prove to them,
1. That then God has material divisible parts (as the Stoics thought.) 2. And
that we are no such parts, as are not distinct from one another; but some are
tormented, and some happy. And 3. That (as is said) it will be no abatement of
the misery of the tormented, nor of the felicity of the blessed, to tell them
that they are all parts of God: For, though the manner of our Union with him,
and dependence on him, be past our comprehension, yet that we are distinct and
distant from each other, and have each one a joy or misery of his own, is past
all doubt. Therefore there is no Union with God to be feared by holy Souls, but
the utmost possible to be highliest desired.

46. And if our Union with God shall not cease our Individuation, or resolve us
into a Principle to be feared, we may say so also of our Union with any common
Soul, or many: If we be Unible, we are Partible, and so have a distinct, though
not a divided substance, which will have its proper Accidents. All Plants are
parts of the Earth, really united to it, and radicated in it, and live, and are
nourished by it: And yet a Vine is a Vine, and an Apple is an Apple, and a Rose
is a Rose, and a Nettle is a Nettle. And few men would be toiled Horses or
Toads, if it were proved that they are animated by a common Soul.

47. But God lets us see, that though the World be One, yet he delights in
a wonderful diversity and multiplicity of Individuals. How various and numerous
are they in the Sea, and on the Land, and in the Air? And are there none in the
other World? How come the Stars therein to be so numerous, which are of the
same Element? And though perhaps Saturn, or some other Planets, or many Stars,
may send forth their radiant Effluvia, or parts, into the same Air, which the
Sun Beams seem totally to fill and illuminate, yet the Rays of the Sun, and of
other Stars, are not the same, how near soever in the same Air.

48. Were there now no more Contraction by Egoity or Propriety among men, nor
Mine and Thine did signify no more, nor the distance were greater than that of
the several drops of Water in the Sea, or particles of of Light in the
illuminated Air, but I had all my part in such a perfect unity and Communion
with all others, and knew that all were as happy as I, so that there were no
divisions by cross interests or minds, but all were One, certainly it would
make my own comforts greater by far than they are now? Are not an hundred
Candles set together and united as splendid a flame as if they were all set
asunder. To one Soul, one Love, one Joy would be.

49. Object. But it is only the fomes that individuateth Lights; As when the
same Sun by a burning Glass lights a thousand Candles, they are individuate
only by the matter contracting, being still all united parts of the same Sun
Beams. And when they are extinct, they are nothing, or all one again.

Ans. They were before they were extinct, both One and many, none but fools
think that extinction annihilateth them, or any part of them: They are after,
as much Substance and as much solar Fire though diffused, and as much and no
more one than before, but not indeed Many as before, but Parts of one. Nature
has made the equal diffused Sun Beams to be to the Air and surface of the
Earth, as the blood equally moving in the Body: And our Candles and Fires seem
to be like the same blood contracted in a bile or Inflammation, which indeed is
more felt than the equally diffused blood, but it is as the pain of a disease.
And so when our Fires go out they are but like a healed Scattered Inflammation,
and the same substance is more naturally and equally diffused. And if the
Individuation of Souls were only by Corporeal matter and the Union thus as
great at their departure, it would not diminish, if it did not too much
increase their perfection and felicity: For there would be no diminution of any
Substance, or Power, or Activity, or Perfection whatsoever.

50. And this would confute their fond Opinion, who think that separated Souls
sleep in nuda potentia, for want of an organized body to operate in: For, no
doubt but if all holy Souls were One, this World, either in Heaven or Earth,
has a common Body, enough for such a Soul to operate in. Even those Stoics
that think departed Souls are One, do think that that One Soul has a nobler
operation than ours, in our narrow Bodies, and that when our Souls cease
animating this Body, they have the nobler and sweeter work in part, of
animating the whole World: And those that thought several Orbs had their
several Souls, of which the particular wights participated, said the like of
separated Souls, as animating the bodies of their Globes or Orbs. And though
all these men trouble their heads with their own vain imaginations, yet this
much the Nature of the Matter tells us, which is considerable, that whereas the
utmost fear of the Infidel, is, that Souls departed lose their Individuation or
Activity, and are resolved into one common Soul, or continue in a sleepy
Potentiality, for want of a Body to operate in, they do but contradict
themselves, seeing it is a notorious Truth, 1. That if all holy Souls were One,
no one would be a Loser by the Union, but it would be a greater Gain than we
must hope for: For a part of One is as much and as noble, and as active a
Substance, as if it were a separated Person: (And Annihilation, or loss of
specifique Powers, is not to be rationally feared.) 2. And that one Soul is now
either self-subsisting without a Body, or animateth a suitable Body (as some
Ancients thought the Angels Stars.) If that One Soul can act without a Body, so
may Ours, whether as parts of it, or not: If that One Soul animate a suitable
Body, ours were they united parts of it, would have part of that Employment; so
that hereby they confute themselves.

51. Obj. But this would equalize the Good and Bad, or at least those that were
good in several degrees; And where then were the Reward and Punishment?

Ans. It would not equal them at all, any more than distinct Personality would
do: For, 1. The Souls of all holy Persons may be so united, as that the Souls
of the wicked shall have no part in that Union. Whether the Souls of the wicked
shall be united in one sinful miserable Soul, or rather but in one sinful
Society, or be greatlier separate disunited, contrary to each other, and
militant, as part of their sin and misery, is nothing to this case. 2. Yet
Natural and Moral Union must be differenced. God is the Root of Nature to the
worst, and however in one sense it is said, that There is nothing in God but
God, yet it is true, that, In Him all Live, and Move, and have their Being. But
yet the wickeds Inbeing in God, does afford them no Sanctifying and Beatifying
communion with him, as experience shows us in this life; which yet holy Souls
have, as being made capable Recipients of it. As I said, different Plants,
Briars and Cedars, the stinking and the sweet are implanted parts (or
Accidents) of the same World or Earth. 3. And the godly themselves may have as
different a share of happiness in one common Soul, as they have now of
Holiness, and so as different Rewards (even as Roses, and Rosemary, and other
Herbs differ in the same Garden, and several Fruits in the same Orchard, or on
the same Tree.) For, if Souls are Unible, and so Partible Substances, they have
neither more nor less of Substance or Holiness for their Union; and so will
each have his proper measure. As a Tun of Water cast into the Sea, will there
still be the same, and more than a spoonful cast into it.

52. Obj. But Spirits are not as Bodies extensive and quantitative, and so not
partible or divisible, and therefore your supposition is vain.

Ans. 1. My supposition is but the objectors: For if they confess that Spirits
are Substances (as cannot with reason be denied; For they that Specify their
operations by Motion only yet suppose a pure proper substance to be the subject
or thing Moved) then when they talk of Many Souls becoming One, it must be by
conjunction and increase of the Substance of that one. Or when they say that
they were always One, they will confess withal that they now differ in number,
as individuate in the body: And who will say that Millions of Millios are no
more than one of all those Millions* Number is a sort of Quantity: And all
Souls in the world are more than Cain's or Abel's only. One feels not what
another feels. One knows not what another knows. And indeed, though Souls
have not such corporeal extension, as passive gross bodily Matter has, yet as
they are more noble, they have a more noble sort of Extension, Quantity or
Degrees; according to which all Mankind conceive of all the Spiritual Substance
of the Universe, yea all the Angels, or all the Souls on Earth, as being more,
and having more Substance than one man's Soul alone. 2. And the Fathers for the
most part, especially the Greeks (yea and the Second Council of Nice) thought
that Spirits created, had a purer sort of Material Being, which Tertullian
called a Body; and doubtless all created Spirits have somewhat of Passiveness;
for they do Recipere vel pati from the Divine Influx: Only God is wholly
impassive. We are moved when we move; and acted when we act: And it is hard to
conceive that (when Matter is commonly called Passive) that which is Passive
should have no sort of Matter in a large sense taken: And if it have any parts
distinguishable, they are by God divisible. 3. But if the contrary be supposed,
that all Souls are no more than One, and so that there is no place for uniting
or partition, there is no place then for the Objection of all Souls becoming
One; and of losing Individuation, unless they mean by Annihilation.

53. But that God who (as is said) delights both in the Union, and yet in the
wonderful multiplicity of Creatures, and will not make all Stars to be only
One; though Fire have a most uniting or aggregative inclination, has further
given experimental notice that there is Individuation in the other world as
well as here, even innumerable Angels and Devils, and not one only, as
Apparitions and Witches, and many other evidences prove, of which more anon. So
that all things considered, there is no reason to fear that Souls shall lose
their Individuation or Activity (though they change their manner of action) any
more than their Being or formal Power: And so it is naturally certain that they
are Immortal.

54. And if Holy Souls are so far Immortal, I need not prove that they will be
Immortally Happy: For their Holiness will infer it; And few will ever dream
that it shall there go ill with them that are good, and that the most just and
holy God will not use those well whom he makes holy.

1. II. That holy Souls shall be hereafter happy seems to be one of the
common notices of Nature planted in the consciences of mankind; And it is
therefore acknowledged by the generality of the world that freely use their
understandings. Most, yea almost all the Heathen Nations at this day believe
it, besides the Mahometans; And it is the most barbarous Cannibals and
Brasilians that do not, whose understandings have had the least improvement,
and who have rather an inconsiderate Nescience of it, than a denying
opposition. And though some Philosophers denied it, they were a small and
contemned party: And though many of the rest were somewhat dubious, it was only
a certainty which they professed to want, and not a probability or opinion that
it was true. And both the Vulgar and the deep studied men believed it, and
those that questioned it were the half studied Philosophers, who not resting in
the Natural notice, nor yet reaching full intellectual Evidence of it by
discourse, had found out matter of difficulty to puzzle them, and came not to
that degree of wisdom as would have resolved them.

2. And even among Apostates from Christianity most or many still acknowledge
the Souls Immortality, and the Felicity and Reward of holy Souls, to be of the
common Notices, known by nature to mankind: Julian was so much persuaded of it,
that on that account he exhorts his Priests and Subjects to great strictness
and holiness of life, and to see that the Christians did not exceed them. And
among us the Lord Herbert de Veritate, and many others that seem not to believe
our supernatural Revelations of Christianity, do fully acknowledge it. Besides
those Philosophers who most opposed Christianity, as Porphyrius, Maximus
Tyrius, and such others.

3. And we find that this notice has so deep a root in Nature, that few of
those that study and labor themselves into Bestiality (or Sadduceism) are able
to excuss the fears of future misery but Conscience overcomes or troubles
them much at least, when they have done the worst they can against it. And
whence should all this be in man and not in Beasts, if man had no further
reason of hopes and fears then they? Are a few Sadduces wiser by their forced
or crude conceits, than all the World that are taught by Nature itself.

1. III. If the God of Nature have made it every man's certain duty to make it
his Chief care and work in this life, to seek for happiness hereafter, then
such a happiness there is for them that truly seek it. But the antecedent is
certain, as I have elsewhere proved. Ergo, etc.

2. As to the antecedent, The world is made up of three sorts of men, as to the
belief of future retribution. 1. Such as take it for a certain Truth (such are
Christians; Mahometans, and most Heathens.) 2. Such as take it for Uncertain,
but most probable or likeliest to be true. 3. Such as take it for Uncertain,
but rather think it Untrue. (For as none can be certain that it is false (which
indeed is true) so I never yet met with one that would say he was certain it
was false.) So that I need not trouble you with the mention of any other party
or opinion. But if any should say so; it is easy to prove that he speaks
falsely of himself.

3. And that it is the Duty of all these, but especially of the two former
sorts, to make it their Chief care and work to seek for happiness in the life
to come, is easily proved thus: Natural reason requires every man to seek that
which is Best for himself with the greatest diligence: But Natural reason says
that a Probability or Possibility of the future everlasting happiness is better
and more worthy to be sought, than any thing attainable in this present life
(which does not suppose it.) Ergo, etc.

4. The Major is past doubt. Good and Felicity being necessarily desired by the
will of man, that which is Best and known so to be, must be Most desired.

And the Minor should be as far past doubt, to men that use not their sense
against their reason. For 1. In this life there is nothing certain to be
continued one hour. 2. It is certain that all will quickly end; and that the
longest life is short. 3. It is certain that time and pleasure past are
nothing, properly nothing; And so no better to us than if they had never been.
4. And it is certain that while we possess them, they are poor, unsatisfactory
things, the pleasure of the flesh being no sweeter to a man than to a beast;
And the trouble that accompanies it much more. Beasts have not the cares,
fears and sorrows upon foresight which man has: They fear not death upon
foreknowledge of it, nor fear any misery after death, nor are put upon any
labor, sufferings or Trials, to obtain a future happiness, or avoid a future
misery: All which considered, he speaks not by reason, who says this vain
vexatious life is better than the Possibility or Probability of the everlasting
Glory.

5. Now as to the consequence (or Major) of the first Argument, it is evident
of itself, from Gods perfection, and the Nature of his works. God makes it not
man's natural Duty to lay out his chief care and labor of all his life, on that
which is not, or to seek that which man was never made to attain; For then, 1.
All his Duty should result from mere Deceit and falsehood, and God should Govern
all the World by a Lie which cannot be his part who wants neither Power,
wisdom, or Love to Rule them by Truth and righteousness; And who has Printed
his Image both on his Laws and on his Servants; In which Laws Lying is
condemned; And the better any man is, the more he hates it; And Liars are
loathed by all mankind. 2. And then the better any man is, and the more he does
his duty, the more deluded, erroneous and miserable should he be. For he should
spend that care and labor of his life, upon deceit, for that which he shall
never have, and so should lose his time and labor. And he should deny his
flesh those temporal Pleasures which bad men take, and suffer Persecutions and
injuries from the wicked, and all for nothing, and on mistake: And the wickeder
or more unbelieving any Man is, the wiser and happier should he be, as being in
the right, when he denies the life to come, and all duty and labor in seeking
it, or in avoiding future punishment; and while he takes his utmost pleasure
here, he has all that Man was made for. But all this is utterly unsuitable to
God's Perfection, and to his other works: For he makes nothing in vain; nor
can he Lie: much less will he make Holiness itself, and all that duty and work
of Life which Reason itself obliges all men to, to be not only vain, but
hurtful to them. But of this argument I have been elsewhere larger.

1. IV. Man differs so much from Bruits in the Knowledge of God, and of his
future possibilities, that it proves that he differs as much in his capacity
and certain hopes. 1. As to the Antecedent, Man knows that there is a God by
his works: He knows that this God is our absolute Lord, our Ruler, and our
End: He knows that naturally we owe him all our Love and Obedience: He
knows that Good men use not to let their faithfullest Servants be losers by
their Fidelity; nor do they use to set them to labor in vain: He knows that
Man's Soul is Immortal, (or at least that it is far most probable that it is
so); and therefore that it must accordingly be well or ill for ever; and that
this should be most cared for. 2. And why should God give him all this
Knowledge more than to the Bruits, if he were made for no more enjoyment than
the Bruits, of what he knows: Every wise Man makes his work fit for the use
that he intends it to: And will not God? So that the consequence also is
proved from the Divine Perfection: And if God were not Perfect, he were not
God: The denial of a God therefore is the result of the denial of Man's future
hopes.

2. And indeed, though it be but an Analogical Reason that Bruits have, those
men seem to be in the right, who place the difference between Man and Bruits,
more in the Objects, tend ency and work of our Reason, than in our Reason
itself as such, and so make Animal Religiosum to be more of his description
than Animal Rationale. About their own low concerns, a Fox, a Dog, yea, an Ass,
and a Goose have such actions, as we know not well how to ascribe to any thing
below some kind of Reasoning, or a perception of the same importance. But they
think not of God, and his Government and Laws, nor of obeying, trusting or
loving him, nor of the hopes or fears of another life, nor of the joyful
prospect of it: These are that work that Man was made for, which is the chief
difference from the Bruits. And shall we unman our selves?

1. V. The Justice of God as Governor of the World, infers different
Rewards hereafter, as I have largely elsewhere proved. 1. God is not only a
Mover of all that Moves, but a Moral Ruler of Man by Laws, and Judgment, and
Executions. Else there were no proper Law of Nature, which few are so unnatural
as to deny: And Man should have no proper Duty, but only Motion, as he is
moved: And then how comes a Government by Laws to be set up under God by Men?
And then there were no sin or fault in any; for if there were no Law and Duty,
but only necessitated Motion, all would be moved as the Mover pleased, and
there could be no sin: And then there would be no Moral Good, but forced or
necessary motion: But all this is most absurd: And experience tells us that
God does de facto, Morally Govern the World; and his Right is unquestionable.

2. And if God were not the Ruler of the World, by Laws and Judgment, the World
would have no universal Laws; for there is no Man that is the universal Ruler:
And then Kings, and other Supreme Powers, would be utterly Lawless and
ungoverned, as having none above them to give them Laws, and so they would be
capable of no sin or fault, and of no punishment; which yet neither their
Subjects interest, nor their own Consciences will grant, or allow them
thoroughly to believe,

3. And if God be a Ruler, he is Just: or else he were not Perfect, nor so Good
as he requires Princes and Judges on Earth to be. An unjust Ruler or Judge is
abominable to all Mankind. Righteousness is the great Attribute of the
Universal King.

4. But how were he a Righteous Ruler. 1. If he drew all men to obey him by
deceit: 2. If he obliged them to seek and expect a felicity or reward which he
will never give them. 3. If he make Man's duty his misery. 4. If he require him
to labor in vain. 5. If he suffer the wicked to prosecure his Servants to the
Death, and make duty costly, and give no after recompense. 6. If he let the
most wicked on the Earth pass unpunished, or to escape as well hereafter as the
best, and to live in greater pleasure here. The Objections fetched from the
intrinsecal good of Duty, I have elsewhere answered.

1. VI. But God has not left us to the Light of mere Nature, as being too dark
for men so blind as we: The Gospel Revelation is the clear Foundation of our
Faith and Hopes. Christ has brought Life and Immortality to Light: One from
Heaven that is greater than an Angel was sent to tell us what is there, and
which is the way, and to secure our hopes. He has risen and conquered death,
and entered before us as our Captain and Forerunner into the Everlasting
habitations. And he has all power in Heaven and Earth, and all Judgment is
committed to him; that he might give Eternal life to his Elect: he has
frequently and expressly promised it them, that they shall live because he
lives, Matthew. 28. 18.
and shall not perish, Joh. 5. 22.
but have Everlasting life. Joh. 17. 2.
And how fully he has proved and sealed the Truth of his Word* Joh. 12. 26.
and Office to us, Joh. 3. 16.
I have so largely opened in my Reasons of the Christian Religion, Romans 8. 35,
36, 37, 30.
and unreasonableness of Infidelity, and in my Life of Faith, etc. and since in
my Household Catechizing, that I will not here repeat it.

2. And as all his Word is full of promises of our future Glory at the
Resurrection, so we are not without assurance that at Death the departing Soul
1 Pet. 4. 6. They that died to (or in) the Flesh according to Men, do live in
the Spirit according to God.
does enter upon a State of Joy and Blessedness: For, 1. He expressly promised
the penitent crucified Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke
23.

2. He gave us the Narrative or Parable of the damned sensualist, and of
Lazarus, Luke 16. to instruct us, and not to deceive us.

3. He tells the Sadduces that God is not the God of the Dead (as his Subjects
and Beneficiaries) but of the Living, Mat. 22. 32.

4. Henoch and Elias were taken up to Heaven, and Moses that died appeared with
Elias on the Mount Mat. 17.

5. He tells us, Luke 12. 4. that they that kill the Body, are not able to
kill the Indeed if the Soul were not Immortal, the Resurrection were
impossible: It might be a new Creation of another Soul, but not a Resurrection
of the same, if the same be annihilated. It Is certain that the Jews believed
the Immortality of the Soul in that they believed the Resurrection, and future
life of the same Man.
Soul.

6. And Christ's own Soul was commended into his Father's hands, Luke 23. 46.
and was in Paradise, when his Body was in the Grave, to show us what shall
become of ours.

7. And he has promised that, Where he is, there shall his Servant be also,
Joh. 12. 26. And that the life here begun in us is Eternal life, and that he
that believes in him shall not die, but shall live by him, as he lives by the
Father; for he dwells in God, and God in him, and in Christ, and Christ in
him, Joh. 17. 3. and 6. 54. and 3. 16, 36. and 6. 47, 56, 57, 50. 1 John 4. and
5. 13. Luke 17. 21. Romans 14. 17.

8. And accordingly Stephen that saw Heaven opened, prayed the Lord Jesus to
receive his Spirit, Act. 7. 5. 59.

9. And we are come to Mount Sion, etc. to an innumerable Company of Angels,
and to the Spirits of the Just made perfect, Heb. 12. 22, 23.

10. And Paul here desires to depart and be with Christ as far better. And to
be absent from the Body, and be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8.

11. And the dead that die in the Lord are blessed, from henceforth, that they
may rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

12. And if the disobedient Spirits be in Prison, and the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah, suffer the vengeance of eternal Fire, 1 Pet. 3. 19. Jude 7. then the
Just have eternal Life. (And if the Jews had not thought the Soul immortal Saul
had not desired the Witch to call up Samuel to speak with him:) The rest I now
pass by. We have many great, and precious promises on which a departed Soul may
trust.

13. And Luke 16. 9. Christ expressly says, that when we fail, (that is, must
leave this World) we shall be received into the Everlasting habitations.

1. VII. And it is not nothing to encourage us to hope in him that has made
all these Promises, when we find how he hears Prayers in this life, and
thereby assures his Servants that he is their true and faithful Savior. We
are apt in our distress to cry loud for Mercy and deliverances; and when humane
help fails to promise God, that if he now will save us, we will thankfully
acknowledge it his work; and yet when we are delivered, to return not only to
security, but to ingratitude; and think that our deliverance came but in the
course of common Providence, and not indeed as an answer to our Prayers. And
therefore God in Mercy renews both our distresses and our deliverances, that
what once or twice will not convince us of, many and great deliverances may.
This is my own case. O how often have I cried to him when men and means were
nothing, and when no help in second Causes did appear, and how often and suddenly
and mercifully has he delivered me? What sudden ease, what removal of long
afflictions have I had! such extraordinary changes, and beyond my own and
others expectations, when many plain-hearted upright Christians have by Fasting
and Prayer sought God on my behalf, as have over and over convinced me of
Special Providence, and that God is indeed a hearer of Prayers. And wonders I
have seen done for others also, upon such Prayer, more than for my self: Yea,
and wonders for the Church and public Societies. Though I and others are too
like those Israelites, Psalm. 78. who cried to God in their troubles, and he often
delivered them out of their distress, but they quickly for got this Mercies,
and their Convictions, Purposes and Promises, when they should have praised the
Lord for his Goodness, and declared his works with thanksgiving to the Sons of
Men.

And what were all these Answers and Mercies but the fruits of Christ's Power,
Fidelity, and Love, the fulfilling of his Promises, and the earnest of the
greater blessings of Immortality, which the same Promises give me Title to.

I know that no Promise of hearing Prayer, sets up our wills in
absoluteness, or above God's, as if every will of our; must be fulfilled if we
do but put it into a fervent or confident Prayer: But if we ask any thing
through Christ, according to his will, expressed in his Promise, he will hear
us. If a sinful love of this present life, or of Ease, or Wealth, or Honor
should cause me to pray to God against Death, or against all sickness, want,
reproach or other Trials, as if I must live here in Prosperity for ever if I
ask it, this sinful desire and expectation is not the work of Faith, but of
Presumption: What if God will not abate me my last (or daily) pains? What if he
will continue my life no longer, who ever pray for it, and how earnestly
soever? Shall I ^^^refore forget how often he has heard Prayers for me! (...)
how wonderfully he has helped both me and others? My Faith has often been helped
by such experiences, and shall I forget them? or question them without cause at
last?

1. VIII. And it is a subordinate help to my belief of Immortality with Christ,
to find so much evidence that Psalm. 34. 7. and 91. 11, 12. Luke 15. 10. 1 Cor.
11. 10. Heb. 1. 14. and 12. 22. and 13. 2. Mat. 18. 10. and 25. 31. and 13. 39,
49. Act. 5. 19. and 8. 26. and 12. 7. 23.
Angels have friendly communion with us here, and therefore we shall have
communion with them hereafter. They have charge of us, and pitch their Tents
about us; they bear us up; they rejoice at our Repentance: they are the
regardful Witnesses of our behavior; they are Ministering Spirits for our Good;
they are Our Angels beholding the Face of our heavenly Father: They will come
with Christ in glorious attendance at the great and joyful Day: And as his
Executioners, they will separate the Just from the Unjust.

And it is not only the Testimony of Scripture, by which we know their
communion with us, but also some degree of experience: Not only of Old did they
appear to the Faithful as Messengers from God, but of late times, there have
been Testimonies of their Ministration for us: Of which see Zanchy de Angelis,
and Mr. I. Ambrose of our communion with Angels. Many a Mercy does God give us
by their Ministry: And they that are now so friendly to us, and suitable to our
communion and help, and make up one Society with us, do he^^^ greatly encourage
us to hope, that we are made for the same Region, work and company, with these
our blessed loving Friends. They were once in a life of trial (it seems) as we
are now (though not on Earth) Jude 6. 2 Pet. 2. 4. And they that overcame and
are confirmed rejoice in our victory and confirmation. It is not an uninhabited
World which is above us: nor such as is beyond our capacity and hope: we are
come to an innumerable Company of Angels, and to the Spirits of the perfected
Just: who together have discrete quantity, or numerical difference,
notwithstanding their happy Union and communion.

1. IX. And Satan himself, though unwillingly, has many ways helped my belief
of our Immortality and Future hopes: 1. I have had many convincing proofs of
Witches, the Contracts they have made with Devils, and the Power which they
have received from them Of this see the Second Edition by Dr. More, of Mr.
Glanvile's Book of Apparitions called Atheismus Triumphatus.
: Beside the Volums of Remegius, and Bodin, and the Mallei Maleficorum,
Danaeus, and others, we had many score of them detected, and many executed in
one Year in Suffolk and Essex For the truth of this, read Mr. Fairclough's Life.
(about 1644.) And I have at this present a Flint Stone which was one of about
160. which were voided by the Urinary passage by a bewitched Child in Evesham
(yet living); some of near an Ounce weight; which was fully proved, the Witch
Executed, and the Child upon her imprisonment, freed: To pass by many others.

2. And I have had convincing Testimony of Apparitions, besides that famous
one, The Devil of Mascon, and that in the shape of Lieutenant Colonel Bowen in
Wales, mentioned elsewhere: And besides, many See what I have said of
particular Testimonies in my Saints Rest, and unreasonableness of Infidelity.
Testimonies of haunted Houses (however many, or most such reports are but
deceits.)

3. From both these I gather, 1. that there are Individual Inhabitants of the
Invisible World, and that Spirits have their numerical differences, whatever
Unity is among them: and therefore we have reason to judge the same of
separated Souls. 2. That our Souls are designed to future happiness or misery;
which is implied in the foresaid contracts and endeavors of Devils for our
ruin: 3. That Faith and Holiness are the way of Life, and Unbelief and Sin the
way to misery; which also is in these implied.

3. 3. And I have both read and partly seen convincing evidence, that there is
such an exercise of diabolical power, as we commonly call Possession: Whether
all or most mad men are under such a Power as some think, I determine not: But
that some are under it is evident: The motions of the Body, which I have seen,
seem beyond Man's Natural power: The telling of secrets and things absent, the
speaking Languages never learnt, the vomiting of Nails, Glass, Hairs, etc. and
other such effects, which the most learned, sober, impartial Physicians profess
to have seen, are credible Testimonies.

4. 4. And I have felt, and heard, and known from others, of such a sort of
Temptations, as show themselves to be the acts of malicious Spirits, Enemies to
Mankind. The advantages that Satan takes of a corrupted Fantasy, which has
once taken in such an Image as may be his matter to Work upon, is very
remarkable. I have known a worthy, learned, Pious Person, who from his youth to
old Age, upon such an advantage, has been so tempted with Pleasure to torment
himself, even his own Flesh, as that for many years together in a partial
melancholy at diverse fits he was not able (though Conscience also tormented him
for it) to forbear. Many by animmodest look or touch, have given Satan such a
power upon their Fantasies, as no Reason, Conscience, or resolution could of a
long time overcome. Few men, I think that observe themselves, have not at
sometime had experience of such inward temptations, as show that the Author of
them is an invincible Enemy. All which tell us, 1. That there are Individual
Spirits. 2. Yea, Devils that seek Man's misery. 3. And that by the way of sin,
and consequently that a future happiness or misery must be expected by us all.

1. X. But the great and sure Pregnosticks of our Immortal Happiness is from
the Renewing Operations of the Spirit of Holiness on the Soul. 1. That such a
Renewing work there is, all true Believers in some measure feel. 2. And that it
is the earnest of Heaven is proved thus.

2. 1. If it be a Change of greatest Benefit to Man. 2. And if Heaven be the
very Sum and End of it. 3. And if it overcome all fleshly worldly Opposition.
4. And can be wrought by none but God. 5. And was before promised by Jesus
Christ to all sound believers. 6. And is universally wrought in them all,
either only, or eminently above all others. 7. And was promised them, as a
Pledge and Earnest of Glory; then it can be no less than such a Pledge and
Earnest. But the former are all true, etc.

3. 1. That the Change is of grand importance unto Man appears in that it is
the Renovation of his Mind, and Will, and Life: It repaireth his depraved
faculties: It causes Man to live as Man, who is degenerated to a life too like
to Bruits: By God's permitting many to live in Blindness, Wickedness, and
Confusion, and to be tormentors of themselves and one another, by Temptations,
Injuries, Wars, and Cruelty, we the fullier see what it is that Grace does save
men from, and what a difference it makes in the World. Those that have lived
unholily in their youth, do easily find the difference in themselves when they
are renewed: But to them that have been piously inclined from their Childhood,
it is harder to discern the difference, unless they mark the Case of others. If
Man be worth any thing, it is for the use that his Faculties were made: And if
he be not good for the Knowledge, Love and Service of his Creator, what is he
good for? And certainly the generality of ungodly Worldlings: are undisposed to
all such works as this, till the Spirit of Christ effectually change them. Men
are Slaves to sin till Christ thus make them free, Joh. 8. 32, 33, 36. Romans 6.
18. Act. 26. 18. Romans 8. 2. But where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
Liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. If the Divine Nature and Image, and the Love of God shed
abroad on the Heart, be not our Excellency, Health, and Beauty, what is? And
that which is Born of the Flesh, is Flesh, but that which is born of the Spirit
is, Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. Without Christ and his Spirit, we can do nothing: Our
dead Notions and Reason when we see the Truth, have not power to overcome
Temptations, nor to raise up Man's Soul to its Original and End, nor to possess
us with the love and joyful hopes of future Blessedness. It were better for us
to have no Souls, than that those Souls should be void of the Spirit of God.

4. 2. And that HEAVEN is the Sum and End of all the Spirits Operations,
appears in all that ^^e truly Conscious of them in themselves; and to them
and others by all God's Precepts, which the Spirit causes us to obey, and the
Doctrine which it causes us to believe, and by the description of all God's
graces which he works in us; What is our Knowledge and Faith, but our
knowledge and belief of Heaven, as consisting in the Glory and Love of God
there manifested, and as purchased by Christ, and given by his Covenant? What
is our Hope but the Hope of Glory? See Heb. 11. 1. and throughout. 1 Pet. 1. 3.
21. Heb. 6, 11, 18, 19. and 3. 6, Tit. 2 13. and 3. 7. Col. 1. 5, 23, 27. And
through the Spirit we wait for all this Hope, Gal. 5. 5. What is our Love but a
desire of Communion with the blessed God initially here and perfectly
hereafter. As the Sum of Christ's Gospel was, [ Take up the Cross, forsake all
here, and follow me, and thou shall have a Reward in Heaven,] Luke 14. 26, 33.
and 18. 22, 23. and the Consolation of his Gospel is [ Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, Matt. 5. 11, 12. So the
same is the Sum of his Spirits Operations: For what he teaches and commands
that he works: For he works by that Word: and the impress must be like the
Signet what arm soever set it on. He sends not his Spirit to make men
craftier than others for this World; but to make them wiser for Salvation; and
to make them more Heavenly and Holy: For the Children of this World are wiser
in their Generation, than the Children of Light: Heavenliness is the Spirits
special work.

5. 3. And in working this it conquereth the inward undisposedness and
aversness of a fleshly, worldly mind, and will, and the customs of a Carnal
life; and the outward Temptations of Satan, and all the allurements of the
World. Christ first overcame the World, and teaches and causes us to overcome
it; even its flatteries and its frowns: Our Faith is our V^ctory: Whether this
Victory be easy, and any honor to the Spirit of Christ, let our experience of
the wickedness of the ungodly World, and of our own weakness, and of our falls
when the Spirit of God forsakes us, be our informer.

6. 4. And that None but God can do this work on the Soul of Man, both the
knowledge of Causes and Experience prove. The most learned, wise, and holy
Teachers cannot (as they confess, and show:) The wisest, and most loving
Parents cannot: and therefore must pray to him that can: The greatest Princes
cannot; Evil Angels neither can nor will. What Good Angels can do on the Heart
we know not; but we know that they do nothing, but as the obedient Ministers of
God. And (though we have some power on our selves; yet) that we our selves
cannot do it: that we cannot Quicken, Illuminate, or Sanctify our selves, and
that we have nothing but what we have received, Conscience and Experience fully
tell us?

7. 5. And that Christ promised this Spirit in a special measure, to all true
Believers, that it should be in them his Advocate, Agent, Seal, and Mark, is
yet visible in the Gospel; yea, and in the former Prophets, Isa. 44. 34. Ezekiel.
36. 26. and 37. 14. Joel 2. 28, 29. Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 18. 31. Ephesians. 1. 13. Joh.
3. 5. and 4. 23, 24. and 6. 63. and 7. 39. Joh. 1. 33. and 14. 16, 26. Act. 1.
5, 8. Joh. 15. 26. and 16. 7, 8, 9, etc. Indeed the Spirit here, and Heaven
hereafter, are the chief of all the Promises of Christ.

8. 6. And that this Spirit is given (not to Hypocrites that abuse Christ, and
do not seriously believe him, nor to mere pretending nominal Christians, but)
to all that sincerely believe the Gospel, is evident not only to themselves in
certainty (if they are in a condition to know themselves,) but to others in
part by the effects: They have other Ends, other affections, other lives, than
the rest of Mankind have; Though their heavenly Nature and Design be the less
discerned and honored in the World, because their chiefest difference is out
of the sight of Man, in the Heart, and in their secret actions, and because
their imperfections blemish them, and because the Malignant World is by
Strangeness and Enmity an incompetent judge, yet it is discernable to others,
that they live upon the hopes of a better life, and their heavenly Interest is
it that overruleth all the adverse Interests of this World, and that in order
thereunto they live under the conduct of Divine Authority, and that God's will
is highest and most prevalent with them, and that to obey and please him so far
as they know it, is the greatest business of their lives, though ignorance and
adverse Flesh, do make their Holiness and Obedience imperfect. The universal
noise and opposition of the World against them, does show that men discern a
very great difference, which Error and cross Interests, and Carnal
inclinations, render displeasing to those who find themselves condemned by
their heavenly Designs and Conversations.

9. But whether others discern it, or deny it, or detest it, the true Believer
is conscious of it in himself: Even when he groaneth to be better, to believe,
and trust, and love God more, and to have more of the heavenly life and
comforts, those very desires signify another Appetite, and Mind, than
Worldlings have; and even when his frailties and weaknesses make him doubt of
his own sincerity, he would not change his Governor, Rule or Hopes, for all
that the World can offer him. He has the Witness in himself, that there is in
Believers a sanctifying Spirit, calling up their Minds to God and Glory, and
warring victoriously against the Flesh; so that to 1 John 5. 9, 10, 11. Gal. 5.
17. Romans 7. Phil. 3. 7. to the 15.
will is present with them; and they love and delight in a Holy conformity to
their Rule, and it is never so well and pleasant with them, as when they can
trust, and love God most; and in their worst and weakest condition, they would
fain be Perfect. This Spirit, and its renewing work, so greatly different from
the temper and desires of worldly men, is given by Christ to all sound
believers.

10. It is true, that some that know not of an Incarnate Savior, have much in
them that is very laudable; whether it be real saying Holiness, and whether
Abraham were erroneous in thinking that even the Sodom's of the World were
likely to have had fifty righteous Persens in them, I am not now to enquire:
But it is sure, 1. That the World had really a Savior, about Four thousand
Years before Christ's Incarnation; even the God of pardoning Mercy, who
promised and undertook what after was performed, and shall be to the end. 2.
And that the Spirit of this Savior did Sanctify God's Elect from the
beginning: and gave them the same holy and heavenly dispositions (in some
degree) before Christ's Incarnation, as is given since: yea it is called, The
Spirit of Christ, which was before given, 1 Pet. 1. 11. 3. That this Spirit was
then given to more than the Jews. 4. That Christ has put that part of the
World that hear not of his Incarnation, into no worse a Condition than he found
them in: That as the Jews Covenant of Peculiarity was no repeal of the
Universal Law of Grace, made by God with fallen Mankind in Adam and Noah; so
the Covenant of Grace of the Second Edition made with Christ's peculiar People,
is no repeal of the foresaid Law in the first Edition, to them, that hear not
of the second. 5. That all that wisdom and Goodness, that is in any without the
Christian Church, is the work of the Spirit of the Redeemer; as the light which
goes before Sun rising, and after Sun setting, and in a cloudy day, is of the
same Sun which others see, even to them that see not the Sun itself. 6. That
the liker any without the Church are to the Sanctified Believers* the better
they are; and the more unlike the worse; so that all these six things being
undeniable, it appears, that it is the same Spirit of Christ, which now
gives all men what real goodness is any where to be found. But it is notorious
that no part of the World, is in Heavenliness and Virtue comparable to true and
serious Christians.

11. 7. And let it be added, that Ephesians. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5. Romans 8.
23. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30. 1 John 5. 9, 10. Heb. 10. 15.
Christ who promised the greatest measures of the Spirit (which he accordingly
has given) did expressly promise this, as a Means and Pledge, First Fruits and
Earnest of the Heavenly Glory: And therefore it is a certain proof, that such a
Glory we shall have. He that can and does give us a Spiritual change or
renovation, which in its Nature and tendency is Heavenly, and sets our Hopes
and Hearts on Heaven, and turns the endeavors of our lives to the seeking of
a future Blessedness, and told us before hand that he would give us this
preparatory Grace, as the Earnest of that felicity, may well be trusted to
perform his Word in our actual glorification.

12. And now O weak and fearful Soul! Why should thou draw back, as if the
case were yet left doubtful? Is not thy Foundation firm? Is not the way of
Life, through the Valley of Death, made safe by him that conquered Death? Art
thou not yet delivered from the Bondage of thy fears, when the Jailer and
Executioner who had the power of Death, has by Christ been put out of his
power as to thee? Is not all this Evidence true and sure? Have thou not the
Witness in thy self? Have thou not found the motions, the effectual Operations,
the renewing changes of this Spirit in thee long ago; and is he not still the
Agent and Witness of Christ, residing and Operating in thee? Whence else are
thy groanings after God? Thy desires to be nearer to his glory? To know him
better? To Love him more? Whence came all the pleasure thou have had in his
Sacred Truth, and Ways, and Service? Who else overcame thy Folly, and Pride,
and vain desires, so far as they are overcome? Who made it thy choice to sit at
the Feet of Christ, and hear his Word, as the better part, and to despise the
Honors, and Preferments of the World, and to account them all as Dung and
Dross? Who breathed in thee all those Requests that thou have sent up to God?
Overvalue not corrupted Nature; it brings not forth such Fruits as these: If
thou doubt of that, remember what thou wast in the Hour of Temptation; even of
poor and weak Temptations: And how small a matter has drawn thee to sin, when
God did but leave thee to thy self: Forget not the Days of youthful Vanity:
Overlook not the case of the miserable World? Even of thy sinful Neighbors,
who in the midst of Light still live in darkness? And hear not the loudest
Calls of God? Look about on Thousands that in the same Land, and under the same
teaching, and after the greatest judgments and deliverance, run on to all
excess of riot, and as past feeling are greedily vicious and unclean: Is it no
work of Christ's Spirit that has made thee to differ? Thou have nothing to
boast of, and much to be humbled for; but thou have also much to be thankful
for. Thy Holy desires are alas, too weak: but they are Holy: Thy Love has been
too cold: but it is Holiness, and the Most Holy God that thou have loved: Thy
Hopes in God have been too low: but it is God thou have hoped in, and his Love
and Glory that thou have hoped for: Thy prayers have been too dull and
interrupted: but it is Holiness and Heaven that thou have most prayed for: Thy
labors and endeavors have been too sloathful: but it is God and Glory, and
the Good of Mankind that thou have labored for. Though thy motion were too
weak and slow, it has been Godward; and therefore it was from God. O bless the
Lord that has not only given thee a Word, that bears the Image of God, and
is sealed by uncontrolled Miracles to be the matter of thy Belief, but has
also fulfilled his Promises so often and notably to thee, in the answer of
Prayers, and in great and convincing deliverances of thy self and many others!
And has by wonders often assisted thy Faith; bless that God of Light and Love,
who besides the universal attestations of his Word, long ago given to all the
Church, has given thee the internal Seal, the nearer indwelling attestation,
the effects of Power, Light, and Love, imprinted on thy Nature, Mind, and Will,
the Witness in thy self that the Word of God is not a humane Dream, or lifeless
thing; that by Regeneration has been here preparing thee for the Light of
Glory, as by Generation he prepared thee to see this Light, and converse with
men: And will thou yet doubt and fear against all this Evidence, Experience,
and Foretast?

13. I think it not needless labor to confirm my Soul in the full persuasion
of the truth of its own Immortal Nature, and of a future Life of Joy or Misery
to Mankind, and of the certain Truth of the Christian Faith: The Being of God,
and his Perfection has so great Evidence that I find no great Temptation to
doubt of it, any more than whether there be an Earth or a Sun; and the Atheist
seems to me to be in that no better than Mad; the Christian Verity is known
only by Supernatural Revelation; but by such Revelation it is so attested
externally to the World, and internally to Holy Souls, as makes Faith the
Ruling, victorious, consolatory Principle, by which we must live, and not by
sight: But the Souls Immortality and Reward hereafter is of a middle Nature;
viz. Of Natural Revelation, but incomparably less clear than the Being of a
God; and therefore by the addition of Evangelical (Supernatural) Revelation, is
made to us much more clear and sure. And I find among the Infidels of this Age,
that most who deny the Christian Verity, do almost as much deny or question the
Retribution of a future Life: And they that are fully satisfied of this, do
find Christianity so excellently Congruous to it, as greatly facilitateth the
work of Faith. Therefore I think that there is scarce any verity more needful
to be thoroughly digested into a full assurance, than this of the Souls
Immortality and hope of future happiness.

14. And when I consider the great unlikeness of men's Hearts and Lives to such
a Belief as we all profess, I cannot but fear that not only the ungodly, but
most that truly hope for Glory have a far weaker belief (in habit and act) of
the Souls Immortality and the Truth of the Gospel, than they seem to take
notice of in themselves. Can I be certain or fully persuaded (in habit and act)
of the future Rewards, and Punishments of Souls, and that we shall be all
shortly judged as we have lived here, and yet not despise all the Vanities of
this World, and set my heart with resolution and diligence to the preparation
which must be made by a holy, heavenly, fruitful Life, as one whose Soul is
taken up with the hopes and fears of things of such unspeakable importance. Who
could stand dallying as most men do, at the Door of Eternity, that did verily
believe his Immortal Soul must be shortly there? Though such a one had no
certainty of his own particular Title to Salvation, the certainty of such a
grand concernment (that Joy or misery is at hand) would surely awaken him to
try, to cry, to search; to beg, to strive, to watch, to spare no care, or cost,
or labor to make all sure, in a matter of such weight: It could not be but he
would do it with speed, and do it with a full resolved Soul, and do it with
earnest zeal and diligence. What Man that once saw the things which we hear of,
even Heaven and Hell, would not afterward (at least in deep regard and
seriousness) exceed the most resolved Believer that you know: One would think
in Reason it should be so thought: I confess a wicked Heart is very senseless.

15. I do confess that there is much weakness of the Belief of things unseen
where yet there is sincerity: But surely there will be some proportion between
our Belief and its Effects. And where there is little Regard, or Fear, or
Hopes, or Sorrow, or Joy, or resolved Diligence for the World to come, I must
think that there is, (in act at least) but little belief of it, and that such
Persons little know themselves how much they secretly doubt whether it be true.
I know that most complain almost altogether of the uncertainty of their Title
to Salvation, and little of their uncertainty of a Heaven and Hell: But were
they more certain of this, and truly persuaded of it at the Heart, it would do
more to bring them to that serious resolved faithfulness in Religion, which
would help them more easily to be sure of their Sincerity, than long
examinations, and many marks talked of, without this will do.

16. And I confess that the great Wisdom of God has not thought meet that in
the Body we should have as clear, and sensible, and lively apprehensions of
Heaven, and Hell, as sight would cause. For that would be to have too much of
Heaven or Hell on Earth; for the gust would follow the perception, and so full
a sense would be some sort of a possession, which we are not fit for in this
World. And therefore it must be a darker Revelation than sight would be, that
it may be a lower Perception, lest this World, and the next should be
confounded; and Faith, and Reason should be put out of Office, and not duly
tried, exercised, and fitted for reward. But yet Faith is Faith, and Knowledge
is Knowledge; and he that verily believes such great transcendent things,
though he see them not, will have some proportionable affections and endeavors.

17. I confess also that Man's Soul in Flesh is not fit to bear so deep a sense
of Heaven, and Hell, as sight would cause; because it here operateth on and
with the Body, and according to its capacity, which cannot bear so deep a
sense, without distraction, by screwing up the Organs too high, till they
break, and so over doing would undo all: But yet there is an overruling
Seriousness, which a certain belief of future things must needs bring the Soul
to, that truly has it. And he that is careful and serious for this World, and
looks after a better, but with a slight, unwilling, half-regard, and in the
second place, must give me leave to think that he believes, but as he lives,
and that his doubting or unbelief of the reality of a Heaven and Hell, is
greater than his Belief.

18. O then, for what should my Soul more pray, than for a clearer and a
stronger Faith? I believe, Lord help my unbelief! I have many a Thousand times
groaned to thee under the burden of this remnant of darkness and unbelief: I
have many Thousand times thought of the Evidences of the Christian verity, and
of the great necessity of a lively, powerful, active Faith. I have begged it: I
have cried to thee Night and Day, Lord increase my Faith: I have written and
spoken that to others, which might be most useful to my self, to raise the
apprehensions of Faith, yet higher, and make them liker those of sense: But
yet, yet Lord, how dark is this World? What a Dungeon is this Flesh? How little
clearer is my sight, and little quicker are my perceptions, of unseen things,
than long ago? Am I at the highest (...) Man on Earth can reach? and that when
I am so dark and low? Is there no growth of these apprehensions more to be
expected? Does the Soul cease its increase in vigorous Perception, when the
Body cease its increase or vigor of sensation? Must I sit down in so low a
measure, while I am drawing nearer to the things believed? and am almost there
where belief must pass into sight and love? or must I take up with the passive
silence and inactivity, which some Friars persuade us is nearer to Perfection?
and under pretense of Annihilation and Receptivity, let my fluggish Heart
alone, and say that in this neglect I wait for thy Operations: O let not a Soul
that is driven from this World, and weary of Vanity, and can think of little
else but immortality, that seeks and cries both Night and Day, for the heavenly
Light, and fain would have some foretast of Glory, and some more of the first
Fruits of the promised joys, let not such a Soul either long, or cry, or strive
in vain? Punish not my former grieving of thy Spirit, by deserting a Soul that
cries for thy Grace, so near its great and unconceivable change: Let me not
languish in vain desires, at the Door of Hope; nor pass with doubtful Thoughts,
and Fears from this Vale of Misery? Which should be the Season of Triumphant
Faith, and Hope, and Joy, if not when I am entering on the World of Joy? O thou
that have left us so many consolatory words of Promise, that our joy may be
full, send, O send the promised Comforter, without whose approaches and
heavenly Beams, when all is said, and a thousand Thoughts, and strivings have
been assayed, it will still be Night and Winter with the Soul.

19. But have I not expected more particular and more sensitive Conceptions of
Heaven, and the State of blessed Souls, than I should have done, and ^emained
less satisfied, because I expected such distinct Perceptions to my satisfaction
which God does not ordinarily give, to Souls in Flesh? I fear it has been too
much so: A distrust of God, and a distrustful desire to know much (Good and
Evil) for our selves, as necessary to our quiet and satisfaction, was that sin
which has deeply corrupted Man's Nature, and is more of our common pravity
than is commonly observed: I find that this Distrust of God, and my Redeemer,
has had too great a hand in my desires of a distincter and more sensible
Knowledge: I know that I should implicitly, and absolutely, and quietly, trust
my Soul into my Redeemers Hands; (of which I must speak more anon:) And it is
not only for the Body, but also for the Soul, that a distrustful care is our
great sin and Misery. But yet we must desire that our Knowledge and Belief may
be as distinct and particular as God's Revelations are; and we can Love no
further than we know; and the more we know of God and Glory, the more we shall
love, desire and trust him: It is a known and not merely an unknown God, and
happiness that the Soul does joyfully desire. And if I may not be ambitious of
too sensible and distinct Perceptions here, of the things unseen; yet must I
desire and beg the most fervent and sensible Love to them that I am capable of.
I am willing (in part) to take up with that unavoidable ignorance, and that low
degree of such Knowledge, which God confineth us to in the Flesh, so be it he
will give me but such Consolatory foretasts in Love and Joy, which such a
General imperfect Knowledge may consist with, that my Soul may not pass with
distrust and terror, but with suitable triumphant Hopes, to the Everlasting
pleasures.

O Father of Lights, who give Wisdom to them that ask it of thee, shut not up
this sinful Soul in darkness! Leave me not to grope in unsatisfied doubts, at
the Door of the Celestial Light! Or if my Knowledge must be General, let it be
clear and powerful; and deny me not now the lively exercise of FAITH, HOPE, and
LOVE which are the stirrings of the New Creature, and the dawnings of the
everlasting Light, and the Earnest of the promised Inheritance.

20. But we are often ready to say with Cicero, when he had been reading such as
Plato, that while the Book is in our Hands, we seem confident of our
Immortality, and when we lay it by our doubts return; so our Arguments seem
clear and cogent, and yet when we think not of them with the best advantage, we
are often surprised with Fear, lest we should be mistaken, and our Hopes be vain;
and hereupon) and from the common fear of Death, that even good men too often
manifest) the Infidels gather that we do but force our Selves into such a Hope
as we desire to be true, against the tendency of man's Nature and that we were
not made for a better World.

21. But this fallacy arises from men's not distinguishing, 1. sensitive fears
from Rational uncertainty, or doubts. 2. And the mind that is in the darkness
of unbelief, from that which has the Light of Faith.

I find in my self too much of fear, when I look into Eternity, interrupting
and weakening my Desires and Joy. But I find that it is very much an irrational
sensitive Fear, which the Darkness of Man's mind, the Greatness of the Change,
the dreadful Majesty of God, and Man's Natural aversness to die, do in some
degree necessitate, even when Reason is fully satisfied that such fears are
consistent with certain safety. If I were bound with the strongest Chains, or
stood on the surest Battlements, on the top of a Castle or Steeple, I could not
possibly look down without fear, and such as would go near to overcome me; and
yet I should be rationally sure, that I am there fast and safe and cannot fall.
So is it with our Prospect into the Life to come: Fear is often a necessitated
Passion: When a Man is certain of his safe Foundation, it will violently rob
him of the comfort of that Certainty: Yea it is a passion that irrationally
does much to corrupt our Reason it self, and would make us doubt because we
fear, though we know not why: And a fearful Man does hardly trust his own
apprehensions of his safety, but among other Fears, is still ready to fear lest
he be deceived: Like timorous Melancholy Persons about their Bodies, who are
ready still to think that every little Distemper is a mortal Symptom, and that
worse is still near them than they feel, and they hardly believe any words of
hope.

22. And Satan knowing the power of these passions, and having easier access to
the Sensitive, than to the Intellective Faculties, does labor to get in at
this back Door, and to frighten poor Souls into doubts and unbelief: and in
timorous Natures he does it with too great success, as to the Consolatory acts
of Faith. Though yet God's Mercy is wonderfully seen in preserving many honest
tender Souls, from the damning part of unbelief, and by their fears preserves
them from being bold with sin: When many bold and impudent Sinners turn
Infidels or Atheists, by forfeiting the helps of Grace.

23. And indeed Irrational fears have so much power to raise Doubts, that they
are seldom separated; insomuch that many scarce know or observe the difference
between Doubts and Fears: And many say they not only fear but doubt when they
can scarce tell why, as if it were no intellectual act which they meant, but an
irrational Passion.

24. If therefore my Soul see undeniable Evidence of Immortality; and if it be
able by irrefragable Argument, to prove the future blessedness expected, and if
it be convinced that God's promises are true, and sufficiently sealed and
attested by him, to warrant the most confident belief, and if I trust my Soul
and all my hopes upon this word, and evidences of Truth, it is not then our
aversness to die, nor the sensible fears of a Soul that looks into Eternity,
that invalidate any of the Reasons of my Hope, nor prove the unsoundness of my
Faith.

25. But yet these Fears do prove its weakness, and were they prevalent against
the Choice, Obedience, Resolutions, and Endeavors of Faith, they would be
prevalent against the Truth of Faith, or prove its nullity; for Faith is Trust;
and Trust is a securing, quieting thing: Why are ye fearful, O ye of little
Faith? was a just reproof of Christ to his Disciples, when sensible dangers
raised up their fears. For the established will has a political or imperfect,
though not a despotical and absolute Power over our Passions. And therefore our
fears do show us our unbelief, and stronger Faith is the best means of
conquering even irrational fears; Why art thou cast down O my Soul; and why art
thou so disquieted in me? Trust in God, etc. Psalm. 42. is a needful way of
chiding a timorous Heart.

26. And though many say that Faith has not evidence, and think that it is an
Assent of the Mind, merely commanded by the Empire of the Will, without a
knowledge of the Verity of the Testimony; yet certainly the same Assent is
ordinarily in the Scriptures called indifferently, Knowing and Believing: And
as a bare Command, will not cause Love, unless we perceive an Amiableness in
the Object, so a bare Command of the Law or of the Will, cannot alone cause
Belief, unless we perceive a truth in the Testimony believed: For it is a
Contradiction; or an act without its Object. And Truth is perceived only so far
as it is some way Evident: For Evidence is nothing but the objective
perceptibility of Truth; or that which is Metaphorically called Light. So that
we must say that Faith has not sensible Evidence of the invisible things
believed; but Faith is nothing else but the willing Perception of the Evidence
of Truth in the word of the Assertor, and a Trust therein. We have and must
have Evidence that Scripture is God's Word, and that his Word is true, before
by any Command of the Word or Will, we can believe it.

27. I do therefore neither despise Evidence as unnecessary, nor trust to it
alone as the sufficient total cause of my belief: For if God's Grace do not
open mine Eyes, and come down in power upon my Will, and insinuate into it a
sweet acquaintance with the things unseen, and a taste of their Goodness to
delight my Soul, no Reasons will serve to stablish and comfort me, how
undeniable soever: Reason is fain first to make use of notions, words or signs:
and to know Terms, Propositions, and Arguments, which are but Means to the
knowledge of Things, is its first employment, and that alas which Multitudes of
Learned men do take up with: But it is the Illumination of God that must give us
an effectual acquaintance with the Things Spiritual and Invisible, which these
Notions signify, and to which our Organical Knowledge is but a Means.

28. To sum up all, That our Hopes of Heaven have a certain ground appears,
I. From Nature, II. From Grace, III. From other works of Gracious Providence.

1. From the Nature of Man: 1. Made capable of it. 2. Obliged even by the Law
of Nature to seek it before all. 3. Naturally desiring Perfection, 1. Habitual.
2. Active. 3. And Objective.

2. And from the Nature of God. 1. As Good and Communicative. 2. As Holy and
Righteous. 3. As Wise: making none of his works in vain.

29. II. From Grace, 1. Purchasing it. 2. Declaring it by a Messenger from
Heaven, both by Word and by Christ's own (and others) Resurrection. 3.
Promising it. 4. Sealing that Promise by Miracles there. 5. And by the work of
Sanctification to the end of the World.

30. III. By subordinate Providence, 1. God's actual Governing the World by the
hopes and fears of another Life. 2. The many helps which he gives us for a
heavenly Life, and for attaining it (which are not vain.) 3. Specially the
Ministration of Angels, and their Love to us, and Communion with us, 4. And by
accident, Devils themselves convince us, 1. By the Nature of their Temptations.
2. By Apparitions and haunting Houses. 3. By Witches. 4. By Possessions: Which
though it be but a Satanical Operation on the Body, yet is so Extraordinary an
Operation, that it differs from the more usual, as (if I may so compare them)
God's Spirit so operateth on the Saints that it is called his dwelling in them,
or possessing them, as different from his lower Operations on others.

1. II. Having proved that Faith and Hope have a certain future Happiness to
expect, the Text directs me next to consider, why it is described by [ being
with Christ;] viz. I. What is included in our [ being with Christ.] II. That we
shall be with him: III. Why we shall be with him.

2. To be with Christ includes, 1. Presence: 2. Union. 3. Communion, or
participation of Felicity with him.

3. 1. Quest. Is it Christ's Godhead, or his Humane Soul, or his Humane Body,
that we shall be Present with, and united to, or All? Answ. It is all, but
variously.

4. 1. We shall be Present with the Divine Nature of Christ: Quest. But are we
not always so? And are not all Creatures so? Answ. Yes, as his Essence
comprehends all Place and Beings: But not, as it is Operative and Manifested
in and by his Glory. Christ directs our Hearts and Tongues to pray [ Our
Father which art in Heaven:] And yet he knew that all Place is in and with God:
Because it is in Heaven that he Gloriously operateth and shines forth to holy
Souls: Even as Man's Soul is eminently said to be in the Head, because it
understands, and reasons in the Head, and not in the Foot or Hand, though
it be also there. And as we look a Man in the Face when we talk to him, so we
look up to Heaven when we pray to God. God who is and operateth as the Root of.
Nature in all the works of Creation (for in Him, we Live, and Move, and Are,)
and by the way of Grace in all the Gracious, does Operate and Is by the works
and splendor of his Glory eminently in Heaven: By which Glory therefore we
must mean some Created Glory: For his Essence has no inequality.

5. 2. We shall be present with the Humane Nature of Christ both Soul and Body:
But here our present narrow Thoughts must not too boldly presume to resolve the
difficulties, which to a distinct understanding of this should be overcome: For
we must not here expect any more than a dark and general Knowledge of them: As,
1. What is the formal difference between Christ's glorified Body, and his Flesh
on Earth. 2. Where Christ's glorified Body is, and how far it extends: 3.
Wherein the Soul and the Glorified Body differ, seeing it is called A
Spiritual Body: These things are beyond our present reach.

6. 1. For what conceptions can we have of a Spiritual Body? save that it is
Pure, incorruptible, invisible to mortal Eyes, and fitted to the most perfect
state of the Soul: How near the Nature of it is to a Spirit (and so to the
Soul) and how far they agree or differ in substance, extensiveness,
divisibility, or activity, little do we know.

7. 2. Nor do we know where and how far Christ's Body is present by extent. The
Sun is commonly taken for a Body, and its Motive, Illuminative, and Calefactive
Beams are by the most probable Philosophy taken to be a real emanant part of
its substance, and so that it is Essentially as extensive as those Beams; that
is, It at once fills all our Air, and touches the surface of the Earth, and
how much further it extends we cannot tell: And what difference there is
between Christ's glorified Body, and the Sun, in Purity, Splendor, Extent, or
Excellency of Nature, little do poor Mortals know. And so of the rest.

8. Let no Man therefore cavil, and say, How can a whole World of glorified
Bodies be all present with the One Body of Christ, when each must possess its
proper room? For as the Body of the solar Beams, and the extensive Air, are so
compresent, as that none can discern the difference of the places which they
possess, and a World of Bodies are present with them both, so may all our
Bodies be with Christ's Body, and that without any true confusion.

9. 2. Besides Presence with Christ, there will be such an Union as we cannot
now distinctly know. A political Relative Union is past doubt, such as Subjects
have in one Kingdom with their King: But little know we how much more. We see
that there is a wonderful Corporeal continuity or contact among the material
works of God: And the more Spiritual, pure and noble, the more inclination each
Nature has to Union. Every Plant on Earth has a Union with the whole Earth in
which it lives; they are real parts of it. And what Natural Conjunction our
Bodies shall have to Christ's and what influence from it, is past our
Knowledge: Though his similitudes in Joh. ^5. and Joh. 6. and Ephesians. 5. and 1
Cor. 12. seem to extend far, yet being but similitudes, we cannot fully know
how far.

10. The same ( variatis variandis) we may say of our Union with Christ's
humane Soul. Seeing Souls are more inclinable to union than Bodies, when we see
all Vegetables to be united parts of one Earth, and yet to have each one its
proper individuating form and matter, we cannot (though Animals seem to walk
more disjunct) imagine that there is no kind of Union or Conjunction of
invisible Souls; though they retain their several substances and forms. Nor yet
that our Bodies shall have a nearer Union with Christ's Body, than our Souls
with his Soul: But the nature, manner, and measure of it, we know not.

11. Far be it from us to think that Christ's glorified Spiritual Body is such
in form, parts, and dimensions, as his earthly Body was: That it has Hands,
Feet, Brains, Heart, Stomach, Liver, Intestines, as on Earth: Or that it is
such a Compound of Earth, Water, and Air, as here it was, and of such confined
extent; for then as his Disciples and a few Jews only were present with him,
and all the World besides were absent, and had none of his Company, so it would
be in Heaven. But it is not such only as Paul, but all true Believers in the
World, from the Creation to the end, shall be with Christ, and see his Glory.
And though inequality of Fitness (or Degrees of Holiness) will make an
inequality of Glory, no Man can prove an inequality by local distance from
Christ; Or if such there be (for it is beyond our reach) yet none in Heaven are
at such a distance from him, as not to enjoy the Felicity of his Presence.

12. Therefore when we dispute against them that hold Transubstantiation, and
the ubiquity of Christ's Body, we do assuredly conclude that Sense is Judge,
whether there be real Bread and Wine present, or not: But it is no Judge,
whether Christ's Spiritual Body be present or not, no more than whether an
Angel be present: And we conclude that Christ's Body is not Infinite or Immense
as is his Godhead; but what are its dimensions, Limits or extent, and where it
is absent, far be it from us to determine, when we cannot tell how far the Sun
extends its secondary substance, or emanant Beams; nor well what Locality is
as to Christ's Soul or any Spirit, if to a Spiritual Body.

13. Their fear is vain and carnal, who are afraid lest their Union with Christ
or one another will be too near; even lest thereby they lose their
individuation, as Rivers that fall into the Sea, or extinguished Candles whose
Fire is after but a Sunbeam, or part of the common Element of Fire in the Air;
or as the Vegetative Spirits which in Autumn, retire from the Leaves into the
Branches and Trunk of the Tree: I have proved before, that our Individuation or
numerical Existence cease not: And that no Union is to be feared, were it
never so sure, which destroys not the Being, or formal Powers or Action of
the Soul; and that it is the great radical disease of SELFISHNESS and want of
Holy LOVE to God and our Savior, and one another, which causes these
unreasonable Fears; Even that Selfishness which now makes men so partially
desirous of their own wills and pleasure in comparison of God's, and their own
Felicity in comparison of other, and which makes them so easily bear God's
injuries, and the Sufferings of a Thousand others, in comparison of their own.
But he that put a great desire of the Bodies preservation into the Soul while
it is its form, will abate that desire when the time of separation is come,
because there is then no use for it till the Resurrection: Else it would be a
torment to the Soul.

14. 3. And as we shall have UNION, so also COMMUNION with the Divine and
Humane Nature of Christ, respectively. Both as they will be the Objects of our
Souls most noble and Constant acts, and as they will be the Fountain or
Communicative cause of our receptions.

15. 1. We find now that our various Faculties have various Objects suitable to
their Natures: The Objects of Sense are things sensible; and the Objects of
Imagination things Imaginable, and the Objects of Intellection things
Intelligible, and the Objects of the Will things amiable: The Eye that is a
nobler Sense than some others, has Light for its Object, which to other Senses
is none: and so of the rest. Therefore we have cause to suppose, that as far as
our Glorified Souls, and our Spiritual Glorified Bodies, will differ, so far
Christ's Glorified Soul and Body will respectively be their several Objects:
And beholding the Glory of both will be part of our Glory.

16. Yet is it not hence to be gathered that the separated Soul before the
Resurrection shall not have Christ's Glorified Body for its Object: For the
Objects of the Body are also the Objects of the Soul, or to speak more
properly, the Objects of Sense are also the Objects of Intellection and Will,
though all the Objects of the Intellect and Will are not Objects of Sense. The
Separated Soul can know Christ's Glorified Body, though our present Bodies
cannot see a Soul. But how much our Spiritual Bodies will excel in Capacity and
Activity these passive Bodies, that have so much Earth and Water we cannot tell.

17. And though now our Souls are as a Candle in a Lanthorn, and must have
extrinsick Objects admitted by the Senses before they can be understood, yet it
follows not that therefore a separated Soul cannot know such Objects: 1.
Because it now knows them Abstractively per species, because its act of
Ratiocination is Compound as to the Cause ( Soul and Body.) But it will then
know such things Intuitively (as now it can do it self) when the Lanthorn is
cast by. 2. And (what ever many of late, that have given themselves the title
of Ingenious have said to the contrary) we have little reason to think that the
sensitive faculty is not an Essential, inseparable power of the same Soul that
is Intellectual, and that sensation cease to separated Souls, (however the
modes of it may cease with their several Uses and Organs:) To Feel
Intellectually, or to understand, and will feelingly, we have cause to think
will be the Action of separated Souls: And if so, why may they not have
communion with Christ's Body and Soul as their Objects in their separated
State? 3. Besides that we are uncertain whether the separated Soul have no
Vehicle or Body at all: Things unknown to us must not be supposed True or
False: Some think that the sensitive Soul is Material, and as a Body to the
Intellectual, never separated: I am not of their Opinion that make them two
substances; but I cannot say, I am certain that they err: Some think that the
Soul is Material, of a purer substance than things visible, and that the common
Notion of its substantiality means nothing else but a pure (as they call it
Spiritual) Materiality: Thus thought not only Tertullian, but almost all the
old Greek Doctors of the Church that write of it, and most of the Latin, or
very many, as I have elsewhere showed; and as Faustus recites them in the
Treatise answered by Mammertus: Some think that the Soul ( as Vegetative) is an
Igneous Body, such as we call Ether or Solar Fire, or rather of a higher purer
kind, and that Sensation and Intellection are those formal Faculties which
Specifically difference it from inferior mere Fire or Ether. There were few of
the Old Doctors that thought it not some of these ways Material: And
consequently extensive and divisible per potentiam Divin (...), though not
Naturally or of its own inclination, because most strongly inclined to Unity.
And if any of all these uncertain Opinions should prove true, the Objections in
hand will find no place. (To say nothing of their conceit who say, that as the
Spirit that retireth from the falling Leaves in Autumn* continues to animate
the Tree, so Man's Soul may do when departed, with that to which it is United,
to animate some more Noble universal Body:) But as all these are the too bold
Cogitations of men that had better let unknown things alone, so yet they may be
mentioned to refel that more perilous boldness, which denies the Souls Action
which is certain, upon (at best) uncertain Reasons.

18. I may boldly conclude notwithstanding such Objections, that Christ's
Divine and Humane Nature, Soul and Body, shall be the felicitating Objects of
Intuition and holy Love to the separated Soul before the Resurrection; and that
to be with Christ, is to have such communion with him, and not only to be
present where he is.

19. 2. And the chief part of this communion will be that in which we are
Receptive; even Christ's Communications to the Soul. And as the Infinite
Incomprehensible Deity is the Root or first Cause of all Communication,
Natural, Gracious and Glorious, to Being, Motion, Life, Rule, Reason, Holiness
and Happiness; and the whole Creation is more dependant on God, than the Fruit
on the Tree, or the Plants on the Earth, or the Members on the Body, (though
yet they are not parts of the Deity, nor Deified, because the Communication is
Creative;) so God uses Second Causes in his Communications to inferior
Natures: and it is more than probable, that the Humane Soul of Christ primarily
and his Body secondarily are the chief second cause of Influence and
Communication both of Grace and Glory, both to Man in the Body, and to the
separated Soul. And as the Sun is first an Efficient communicative second Cause
of seeing to the Eye, and then is also the Object of our sight; so Christ is to
the Soul This one Truth will give great Light into the Controversies, about
God's gracious Operations on the Soul: For when he uses second Causes, we see
he Operateth according to their limited aptitude: And Christ's humane Nature,
and all other second Causes are limited, and operate variously and resistibly,
according to the Recipients capacity.
For as God, so the Lamb is the Light and Glory of the heavenly Jerusalem: and
in his light we shall have light. Though he give up the Kingdom to the Father,
so far as that God shall be all in all, and his Creature be fully restored to
his favor, and there shall be need of a healing Government no more, for the
recovering of lapsed Souls to God; yet sure he will not cease to be our
Mediator, and to be the Churches Head, and to be the conveying cause of
Everlasting Life, and Light, and Love to all his Members: As now we live
because he lives, even as the Branches in the Vine, and the Spirit that
quickneth, enlightneth, and sanctifies us, is first the Spirit of Christ
before it is ours, and is communicated from God by him to us; so will it be in
the state of Glory: For we shall have our Union and Communion with him
perfected, and not destroyed or diminished. And unless I could be so proud as
to think that I am or shall be the most excellent of all the Creatures of God,
and therefore nearest him, and above all others, how could I think that I am
under the Influence of no second Cause, but have either Grace or Glory from God
alone?

20. So far am I from such arrogance as to think that I shall be so near to
God, as to be above the need and use of Christ and his Communications, as that
I dare not say that I shall be above the need and help of other subordinate
Causes: As I am now lower than Angels, and need their help, and as I am under
the Government of my Superiors, and as a poor weak Member am little worth in
comparison of the whole Body, the Church of Christ, and receive continual help
from the whole: So how far it will be thus in Glory I know not; but that God
will still use second Causes for our Joy, I doubt not; and also that there will
not be an equality: and that it will be consistent with God's Allsufficiency to
us and our felicity in Him, that we shall for ever have use for one another,
and that to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and
to be in Abraham's Bosom, and sit at Christ's Right, and Left hand in his
Kingdom, and to be Ruler over ten Cities, and to join with the heavenly Host or
Chore in the joyful Love and Praise of God, and of the Lamb, and many such
like, are not false, nor useless notes, and notions of our Celestial Glory.

21. And certainly if I be with Christ, I shall be with all that are with
Christ: Even with all the heavenly Society: Though these Bodies of gross
passive Matter must have so much room, that the Earth is little enough for all
its Inhabitants; and those at the Antipodes are almost as strange to us, as if
they were in another World, and those of another Kingdom, another Province or
County, and often another Parish, yea another House, are Strangers to us; so
narrow is our Capacity of Communion here. Yet w^ ^ave great cause to think by
many Scripture expressions, that our heavenly Union and Communion will be
nearer and more extensive; and that all the Glorified shall know each other, or
at least be far less distant, and less strange, than now we are. As I said
before, when I see, how far the Sun beams do extend, how they penetrate our
closest Glass, and puzzle them that say that all Bodies are impenetrable; when
I see how little they hinder the placing or presence of other Creatures, and
how intimately they mix themselves with all; and seem to possess the whole
Region of the Air, when yet the Air seems it self to fill it, etc. I dare not
think that glorified Spirits, (no nor Spiritual Bodies) will be such Strangers
to one another as we are here on Earth.

22. And I must needs say that it is a pleasant Thought to me, and greatly
helps my willingness to die, to think that I shall go to all the Holy ones,
both Christ and Angels, and departed blessed Souls. For 1. God has convinced
me, that they are better than I, (each singly) and therefore more amiable than
my self: 2. And that many are better than one, and the whole than a poor sinful
part, and the New Jerusalem is the Glory of the Creation. 3. God has given me
a Love to all his Holy Ones as such. 4. And a Love to the work of Love and
Praise which they continually and perfectly perform to God. 5. And a Love to
the Celestial Jerusalem as it is complete, and to his Glory shining in them. 6.
And my old acquaintance with many a holy Person* gone to Christ, does make my
Thoughts of Heaven the more familiar to me. O how many of them could I name. 7.
And it is no small encouragement to one that is to enter upon an unseen World,
to think that he goes not an^ ^^trodden Path, nor enters into a solitary or
singular state; but follows all from the Creation to this day, that have
passed by death to endless life. And is it not an emboldening consideration to
think that I am to go no other way* nor to no other place or state, than all
the Believers and Saints have gone to before me, from the beginning to this
time. (Of this more anon.)

[TO DEPART.]

1. But I must be Loosed or Depart before I can thus be with Christ. And I must
here consider, I. From what I must depart. II. And How, or in what Manner: And
I must not refuse to know the worst.

2. I. And, 1. I know that I must Depart from this Body itself, and the Life
which consists in the animating of it. These Eyes must here see no more; this
Hand must move no more; these Feet must go no more; this Tongue must speak no
more, As much as I have loved and overloved this Body, I must leave it to the
Grave. There must it lie and rot in darkness, as a neglected and a loathed
thing.

3. This is the Fruit of Sin, and Nature would not have it so: I mean the
Nature of this compound MAN: But what though it be so? 1. It is but my Shell or
Tabernacle, and the clothing of my Soul, and not it self. 2. It is but an
elementary Composition dissolved; and Earth going to Earth, and Water to Water,
and Air to Air, and Fire to Fire, into that Union which the elementary Nature
does incline to.

3. It is but an Instrument laid by when all its work is done, and a Servant
dismissed when his Service is at an end. And what should I do with a Horse when
I shall need to ride or travel no more, or with a Pen when I must write no
more? It is but the laying by the Passive receiver of my Souls Operations, when
the Soul has no more to do upon it: As I cast by my Lute or other instrument
when I have better employment than Music to take up my time!

4. Or at most it is but as Flowers die in the fall, and Plants in Winter, when
the retiring Spirits have done their work, and are undisposed to dwell in so
cold and unmeet a Habitation, as the Season makes their former matter then to
be. And its retirement is not its annihilation, but its taking up a fitter
place.

5. It is but a separation from a troublesome Companion, and putting off a Shoe
that pinched me; many a sad and painful Hour I have had in this frail and
faltring flesh. Many a weary Night and Day: What cares, what fears, what
griefs, what groans has this Body cost me? Alas, how many Hours of my precious
time, have been spent to maintain it, please it, or repair it? How considerable
a part of all my life has been spent in necessary sleep and rest! And how much
in eating, drinking, dressing, physic? And how much in laboring or using
means to procure these and other necessaries? Many a hundred times I have
thought, that it costeth me so dear to live, yea to live a painful weary life,
that were it not for the work and higher ends of life, I had little Reason to
be much in love with it, or to be loath to leave it. And had not God put into
our Nature itself a necessary, unavoidable, sensitive Love of the Body, and of
Life, (as he puts into the Mother, and into every Bruit, a love of their young
Ones, how unclean, and impotent, and troublesome soever) for the propagation
and continuance of Man on Earth? Had God but left it to mere Reason, without
this necessary pre-engagement of our Natures, it would have been a matter of
more doubt and difficulty than it is, whether this life should be loved and
desired, and no small number would daily wish that they had never been Born! A
wish which I have had much a do to forbear, even when I have known that it is
sinful, and when the work and pleasure of my life have been such to overcome
the evils of it, as few have had.

6. Yea, to depart from such a Body is but to be removed from a very foul,
uncleanly and sordid Habitation. I know that the Body of Man and Bruits is the
curious wonderful work of God, and not to be despised, nor injuriously
dishonored, but admired and well used: But yet it is a wonder to our Reason
that so noble a Spirit should be so meanly housed: And we may call it, Our vile
Body, as the Apostle does, Phil. 3. 21. It is made up of the Airy, Watery, and
Earthly parts of our daily food, subacted and actuated by the fiery part, as
the instrument of the Soul. The greater part of the same food (which with great
cost, and pomp, and pleasure, is first upon our Tables, and then in our Mouths
to day) is to morrow a fetid loathsome excrement, and cast out into the draught,
that the sight and smell of that annoy us not, which yesterday was the
sumptuous fruit of our abundance, and the glory of that which is called great
housekeeping, and the pleasure of our Eyes and Taste. And is not the rest that
turns into Blood and Flesh, of the same general kind with that which is
turned into loathsome filth? The difference is, that it is fitter for the Soul
by the fiery Spirits, yet longer to operate on and keep from corruption: Our
blood, and flesh, are as stinking and loathsome a substance as our filthiest
excrements, save that they are longer kept from putrefaction. Why then should
it more grieve me that one part of my food which turned into flesh, should rot
and stink in the Grave, than that all the rest should daily stink in the
draught? Yea while it is within me, were it not covered from my sight, what a
loathsome mass would my Intestines appear? If I saw what is in the Guts, the
Mesentery, the Ventricles of the Brain, what filth, what bilious or mucous
matter, and perhaps crawling Worms there are in the most proud or comely
Person, I should think that the cover of a cleaner Skin, and the borrowed
Ornaments of Apparel, make no great difference between such a Body and a
Carcass (which may be also covered with an adorned Coffin and Monument, to
deceive such Spectators that see but outsides:) the change is not so great of
corruptible Flesh, repleat with such fetid Excrements into corrupted Flesh, as
some Fools imagine.

7. Yet more, to Depart from such a Body, is but to be loosed from the Bondage
of Corruption, and from a Clog and Prison of the Soul. I say not that God put a
preexistent Soul into this Prison Penally, for former faults: I must say no
more than I can prove, or than I know: But that Body which was an apt Servant
to innocent Man's Soul, is become as a Prison to him now: What alteration sin
made upon the Nature of the Body, as whether it be more terrene and gross than
else it would have been, I have no reason to assert: Of Earth, or Dust, it was
at first, and to Dust it is sentenced to return. But no doubt but it has its
part in that dispositive depravation which is the fruit of sin. we find that
the Soul as sensitive, is so imprisoned or shut up in Flesh, that sometimes it
is more than one Door that must be opened before the Object and the Faculty can
meet: In the Eye indeed, the Soul seems to have a Window to look out at, and
to be almost itself vi^ible to others: And yet there are many interposing
tunicles, and a suffusion, or winking, can make the clearest sight* to be as
useless for the time as if it were none: And if sense be thus shut up from its
Object, no wonder if Reason also be under difficulties from coporeal
impediments; and if the Soul that is yoaked with such a Body, can go no faster
than its heavy pace.

8. Yet further, To Depart from such a Body is but to be separated from an
accidental Enemy, and one of our greatest and most hurtful Enemies: Though
still we say, That it is not by any default in the work of our Creator, but by
the effects of sin, that it is such: What could Satan or any other Enemy of our
Souls, have done against us without our flesh? What is it but the Interest of
this Body, that stands in competition against the Interest of our Souls and
God? What else do the profane sell their heavenly Inheritance for, as Esau his
Birthright? No Man loves evil, as evil, but as some way a real or seeming
good? And what good is it but that which seems good for the Body? What else
is the Bait of Ambition, Covetousness and Sensuality, but the Interest and
Pleasure of this Flesh. What takes up the Thoughts, and Care which we should
lay out upon things Spiritual and Heavenly, but this Body and its Life? What
Pleasures be they that steal away men's Hearts from the heavenly Pleasures of
Faith, Hope, and Love, but the Pleasures of this Flesh? This draws us to sin:
This hinders us from and in our duty. This Body has its interest which must
be minded, and its inordinate Appetite which must be pleased; or else what
murmurings and disquiet must we expect? Were it not for Bodily Interest, and
its Temptations, how much more innocently and holily might I live? I should
have nothing to care for, but to please God and to be pleased in him, were it
not for the care of this Bodily life? What Employment should my Will and Love
have, but to Delight in God and Love Him, and his Interest, were it not for the
Love of the Body, and its concerns? By this the mind is darkened, and the
Thoughts diverted; By this our wills are perverted and corrupted, and by Loving
things Corporeal, contract a strang^ness and aversation from things Spiritual:
By this Hea^^ and Time are alienated from God; our Guilt is increased, and our
heavenly desire and hopes destroyed; Life made unholy and uncomfortable, and
Death made terrible, God and our Souls separated, and Life eternal set by, and
in danger of being utterly lost. I know that it is the sinful Soul, that is in
all this the chief cause and agent: But what is it but Bodily Interest that is
its temptation, bait and end? What but the Body and its Life, and Pleasure is
the chief Objective alluring cause of all this sin and misery? And shall I take
such a Body to be better than Heaven, or be loath to be loosed from so
troublesome a Yoak-fellow, on to be separated from so burdensome, and dangerous a
Companion?

3. Obj. But I know this Habitation, but the next I know not; I have long been
acquainted with this Body, and this World, but the next I am unacquainted with.

Ans. 1. If you know it, you know all that of it which I have mentioned before:
you know it to be a burden and snare: I am sure I know by long experience, that
this Flesh has been a painful lodging to my Soul, and this World as a
tumultuous Ocean, or like the uncertain and stormy Region of the Air. And well
he deserves bondage, pain, and enmity, who will love them because he is
acquainted with them, and is loath to leave them because he has had them long,
and is afraid of being well, because he has been long sick.

2. And do you not know the next and better Habitation? Is Faith no knowledge?
If you believe God's Promise you know that such a state there is: And you know
in general that it is Better than this World: And you know that we shall be in
Holiness and Glorious happiness with Christ: And is this no knowledge? 3. And
what we know not, Christ, that prepares and promises it, does know: And is
that nothing to us, if really we Trust our Souls to him? He that knows not
more Good by Heaven than by Earth, is yet so earthly and unbelieving, that it
is no wonder if he be afraid and unwilling to depart.

4. II. In Departing from this Body and Life, I must depart from all its
ancient Pleasures: I must taste no more sweetness in meat or drink, or rest, or
sport, or any such thing that now delights me; House and Lands, and Goods and
Wealth must all be left; and the place where I live must know me no more. All
my possessions must be no more to me, nor all that I labored for or took
delight in than if they had never been at all.

And what though it must be so? Consider O my Soul, 1. Thy ancient Pleasures
are all past already: Thou losest none of them by Death, for they are all lost
before, (if immortal Grace have not by sanctifying them, made the benefits of
them to become immortal.) All the sweet draughts, and morsels, and sports, and
laughters, all the sweet Thoughts of thy worldly Possessions, or thy Hopes,
that ever thou had till this present Hour, are past by, dead, and gone
already. All that Death does to such as these is to prevent such, that on Earth
thou shall have no more.

2. And is not that the Case of every Bruit, that has no comfort from the
prospect of another Life, to repair his loss: And yet as our dominion
diminishes their pleasure while they live, by our keeping them under fear and
labor, so at our will their lives must end: To please a Gentleman's Appetite
for half an hour or less, Birds, Beasts, and Fishes must lose life itself, and
all the pleasure which life might have afforded them for many Years; yea
perhaps many of these (Birds and Fishes at least) must die to become but one
Feast to a rich Man, if not one ordinary Meal. And is not their sensual
pleasure of the same Nature as ours? Meat is as sweet to them, and ease as
welcome, and lust as strong (in season;) And the pleasure that Death depriveth
our Flesh of, is such as is common to Man with Bruits: Why then should it seem
hard to us to lose that in the Course of Nature, which our Wills deprive them
of at our Pleasure? When if we are Believers we can say that we do but exchange
these delights of Life, for the greater delights of a Life with Christ, which
is a comfort which our fellow Creatures (the Bruits) have not!

3. And indeed the Pleasures of Life are usually embittered with so much pain,
that to a great part of the World does seem to exceed them: The Vanity and
Vexation is so great and grievous, as the pleasure seldom countervaileth. It Is
true that Nature desires Life even under Sufferings that are but tolerable,
rather than to die: But that is not so much from the sensible Pleasure of life,
as from mere Natural Inclination; which God has laid so deep that free will
has not full power against it. As before I said, that the Body of Man is such
a thing, that could we see through the Skin (as men may look through a Glass
Hive upon the Bees) and see all the parts and motion, the filth and excrements
that are in it, the Soul would hardly be willing to actuate, love and cherish
such a mass of unclean matter, and to dwell in such a loathsome place, unless
God had necessitated it by Nature (deeper than Reason or sense) to such a Love,
and such a labor by the Pondus or Spring of Inclination: Even as the Cow would
not else lick the unclean Calf, nor Women themselves be at so much labor and
trouble with their Children, while there is little of them to be pleasant, but
uncleanness, and crying, and helpless impatiency to make them wearisom, had not
necessitating Inclination done more hereto than any other sense or reason: Even
so I now say of the pleasure of Living, that the sorrows are so much greater to
Multitudes than the sensible delight, that life would not be so commonly chosen
and endured under so much trouble, were not men determined thereto by Natural
necessitating Inclination; (or deterred from Death by the fears of misery to
the separated Soul;) And yet all this kept not some counted the best and wisest
of the Heathens, from taking it for the Valor and Wisdom of a Man to make away
his life in time of extremity, and from making this the great answer to them
that grudge at God, for making their lives so miserable [ If the misery be
greater than the good of life, Why do thou not end it? Thou may do that
when thou will.]

Our Meat and Drink is pleasant to the healthful; but it costeth poor men so
much toil, and labor, and care, and trouble to procure a poor Diet for
themselves and their families, that I think, could they live without eating,
and drinking, they would thankfully exchange the pleasure of it all, to be
eased of their care and toil in getting it: And when sickness comes, even the
pleasantest Food is loathsome.

4. And do we not willingly interrupt and lay by these Pleasures, every Night
when we betake our selves to sleep? It Is possible indeed a Man may then have
pleasant Dreams: But I think few go to sleep for the pleasure of Dreaming:
Either no Dreams, or vain, or troublesome Dreams are much more common. And to
say that Rest and Ease is my pleasure, is but to say that my daily labor and
cares are so much greater than my waking pleasure, that I am glad to lay by
both together: For what is Ease but deliverance from weariness and pain? For in
deep and dreamless sleep there is little positive sense of the Pleasure of Rest
itself. But indeed it is more from Natures necessitated inclination to this
self-easing and repairing means, than from the positive pleasure of it, that we
desire sleep. And if we can thus be contented every Night to die as it were to
all our waking pleasures, why should we be unwilling to die to them at once.

5. If it be the inordinate pleasures forbidden of God, which you are loath to
leave, those must be left before you die, or else it had been better for you
never to have been born? Yea every wise and godly Man does cast them off with
detestation: You must be against Holiness on that account as well as against
Death? And indeed the same Cause which makes men unwilling to live a Holy
life, has a great hand in making them unwilling to die; even because they are
loath to leave the pleasure of sin: If the wicked be converted, he must be
gluttonous and drunken no more, he must live in Pride, Vainglory, Worldliness
and sensual pleasures no more; and therefore he draws back from a Holy life,
as if it were from Death itself. And so he is the lother to die, because he
must have no more of the pleasures of his Riches, Pomp, and Honors, his
Sports, and Lust, and pleased Appetite; no more for ever; but what is this to
them that have mortified the Flesh with the affections and lusts thereof?

6. Yea it is these forbidden pleasures which are the great impediments both of
our Holiness and our truest pleasures: And one of the Reasons why God
forbids them, is because they hinder us from better. And if for our own good
we must forsake them when we turn to God, it must be supposed that they should
be no reason against our willingness to die, but rather that to be free from
the danger of them, we should be the more willing.

7. But the great satisfying Answer of this Objection is, that Death will pass
us to far greater pleasures with which all these are not worthy to be compared.
But of this more in due place.

5. III. When I die, I must depart not only from sensual delights, but from the
more manly Pleasures of my Studies, knowledge and converse with many wise and
godly men, and from all my pleasure in Reading, Hearing, public and private
Exercises of Religion, etc. I must leave my Library, and turn over those
pleasant Books no more: I must no more come among the Living, nor see the faces
of my faithful Friends, nor be seen of Man, Houses and Cities and Fields: and
Countries, Gardens and Walks, will be nothing as to me. I shall no more hear of
the Affairs of the World, of Man or Wars, or other News, nor see what becomes
of that beloved Interest of Wisdom, Piety, and Peace, which I desire may
prosper, etc.

Answ. 1. Though these delights are far above those of sensual S^^ners, yet
alas, how low and little are they? How small is our knowledge in comparison of
our Ignorance? And how little does the knowledge of Learned Doctors differ from
the thoughts of a silly Child? For from our Childhood we take it in but by
drops; and as trifles are the Matter of childish knowledge, so Words, and
Notions, and artificial Forms do make up more of the Learning of the World,
than is commonly understood; and many such Learned men know little more of any
Great and excellent Things themselves, than Rusticks that are contemned by them
for their ignorance. God and the Life to come are little better known by them,
if not much less, than by many of the unlearned. What is it but a Child-game
that many Logicians, Rhetoricians, Grammarians, yea Metaphysicians, and other
Philosophers in their eagerest Studies and Disputes are exercised in? Of how
little use is it to know what is contained in many Hundred of the Volumes that
fill our Libraries? Yea, or to know many of the most glorious Speculations in
Physics, Mathematics, etc. Which have given some the Title of Virtuosi and
Ingeniosi in these times, who have little the more Wit or Virtue to Live to
God, or overcome Temptations from the Flesh and World, and to secure their
everlasting Hopes: What pleasure or quiet does it give to a dying Man, to know
almost any of their Trifles.

2. Yea, it were well if much of our Reading and Learning did us no harm, and
more than good: I fear lest Books are to some but a more honorable kind of
temptation than Cards and Dice: Lest many a precious Hour be lost in them, that
should be employed on much higher matters: And lest many make such knowledge
but an unholy, natural, yea carnal Pleasure, as Worldings do the Thoughts of
their Lands and Honors; and lest they be the more dangerous by how much the
less suspected: But the best is, it is a pleasure so fe^^ed from the sloathful
with Thorny labor of hard and long Studies, that laziness saves more from it
than Grace, and holy Wisdom does. But doubtless Fancy and the Natural Intellect
may with as little Sanctity live in the pleasure of Reading* Knowing,
Disputing, and Writing, as others spend their time at a Game at Chess, or other
ingenious sport.

For my own part, I know that the Knowledge of Natural things is valuable, and
may be Sanctified; much more Theological Theory: And when it is so, it is of
good use; and I have little knowledge which I find not some way useful to my
highest ends. And if Wishing or Money would procure more, I would wish and
empty my Purse for it; but yet if many score or hundred Books which I have
read, had been all unread, and I had that time now to lay out upon higher
thing, I should think my self much richer than now I am. And I must earnestly
pray, The Lord forgive me the Hours that I have spent in reading Things less
profitable, for the pleasing of a Mind that would fain know all, which I should
have spent for the increase of Holiness in my self and others: And yet I must
thankfully acknowledge to God, that from my youth he taught me, to begin with
things of greatest weight, and to refer most of my other Studies thereto, and
to spend my days under the Motives of Necessity and Profit to my self, and
those with whom I had to do. And I now think better of the Course of Paul that
determined to know nothing but a Crucified Christ among the Corinthians, that
is, so to converse with them as to Use, and Glorying as if he knew nothing
else: And so of the the rest of the Apostles and Primitive Ages: And though I
still love and honor the fullest Knowledge (and am not of Dr. Collets mind,
who as Erasmus says most slighted Augustine) yet I less censure even that
Carthage Council which forbad the reading of the Heathens Books of Learning and
Arts, than formerly I have done. And I would have men savor most that Learning
in their Health which they will or should savor most in Sickness, and near to
Death.

3. And alas how dear a Vanity is this Knowledge! That which is but Theorical
and Notional is but a tickling delectation of the Fantasy or Mind, little
differing from a pleasant dream: But how many Hours, what gazing of the wearied
Eye, what stretching Thoughts of the impatient Brain* must it cost us, if we
will attain to any Excellency. Well says Solomon, Much reading is a weariness
to the Flesh, and He that increases Knowledge increases sorrow. How many
hundred studious Days and Weeks, and how many hard and tearing Thoughts, has
my little, very little knowledge cost me? And how much infirmity and painfulness
to my Flesh, increase of painful Diseases, and loss of Bodily ease and health?
How much pleasure to my self of other kinds, and how much acceptance with men,
have I lost by it, which I might easily have had in a more Conversant and
plausible way of life? And when all is done, if I reach to know any more than
others, of my place and order, I must differ so much (usually) from them: And
if I manifest not that difference, but keep all that knowledge to my self, I
sin against Conscience and Nature it self: The Love of Man, and the Love of
Truth oblige me to be soberly Communicative: Were I so indifferent to Truth and
Knowledge, as easily to forbear their propagation, I must also be so indifferent
to them, as not to think them worth so dear a Price as they have cost me
(Though they are the free Gifts of God:) As Nature is universally inclined to
the propagation of the kind by Generation; so is the Intellectual Nature to the
Communication of Knowledge (which yet has its Lust, and inordinacy in proud
ignorant hasty Teachers, and Disputers, as the Generating faculty has in
Fornicators and Adulterers.)

But if I obey Nature and Conscience in Communicating that Knowledge which
contains my difference aforesaid, the Dissenters too often take themselves
disparaged by it, how peaceably soever I manage it: And as bad men take the
Piety of the godly to be an accusation of their impiety, so many Teachers take
themselves to be accused of Ignorance, by such as condemn their Errors by the
light of Truth? And if you meddle not with any Person, yet take they their
Opinions to be so much their Interest, as that all that is said against them,
they take as said against themselves. And then alas what envyings, what
whispering disparagements, and what backbitings. if not malicious slanders and
underminings do we meet with from the Carnal Clergy: And O that it were all
from them alone, and that among the Zealous and Suffering Party of faithful
Preachers, there were not much of such iniquity, and that none of them preached
Christ in strife and envy: It is sad that Error should find so much shelter
under the selfishness, and pride of pious men; and that the Friends of Truth
should be tempted to reject and abuse so much of it in their ignorance as they
do: But the matter of fact is too evident to be hid.

But especially, if we meet with a Clergy that are high, and have a great deal
of Worldly interest at the stake: Or if they be in Councils and Synods, and
have got the Major Vote, they too easily believe that either their Grandeur,
Reverence, Names, or Numbers must give them the reputation of being Orthodox
and in the right, and will Warrant them to account and defame him as Erroneous,
Heretical, Schismatical, Singular, Factious, or Proud, that presumes to
contradict them, and to know more than they: Of which not only the case of
Nazianzene, Martin, Chrysostom are sad proofs, but also the proceedings of too
many General and Provincial Councils. And so our hard studies and darling Truth
must make us as Owls or reproached Persons among those Reverend Brethren, who
are ignorant at easier rates, and who find it a far softer kind of life to
think and say as the most or best esteemed do, than to purchase reproach and
obloquy so dearly.

And the religious People of the several parts, will say as they hear their
Teachers do, and be the Militant followers of their too Militant Leaders: And
it will be their House talk, their Shop talk, their Street talk, if not their
Church talk, that such a one is an Erroneous, dangerous Man, because he is not
as Ignorant and Erroneous as they, especially if they be the followers of a
Teacher much exasperated by confutation, and engaged in the Controversy; and
also if it should be suffering* Confessors that are contradicted, or men most
highly esteemed for extraordinary degrees of Piety: Then what cruel censures
must he expect who never so tenderly would suppress their Errors.

O what sad Instances of this are, 1. The Case of the Confessors in Cyprians
Days, who as many of his Epistles show, became the great disturbers of that
Church. 2. And the Egyptian Monks at Alexandria, in the Days of Theophilus, who
turned Anthropomorphites, and raised abominable Tumults, with woeful scandal and
odious bloodshed. 3. And O that this Age had not yet greater Instances to prove
the matter, than any of these.

And now should a Man be loath to die, for fears of leaving such troublesome
costly Learning and Knowledge, as the wisest men can here attain?

4. But the chief Answer is yet behind. No Knowledge is lost, but perfected,
and changed for much nobler, sweeter, greater Knowledge: Let men be never so
uncertain in particular de modo, Whether acquired Habits of Intellect and
Memory die with us, as being dependant on the Body: Yet (by what Manner soever)
that a far clearer Knowledge we shall have, than is here attainable, is not to
be doubted of. And the cessation of our present Mode of knowing, is but the
cessation of our ignorance and imperfection: As our wakening ends a dreaming
Knowledge, and our Maturity ends the trifling Knowledge of a Child: For so
says the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 13. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Love never fails, (and we
can Love no more than we know:) But whether there be Prophesies they shall
fail: (that is, Cease:) Whether there be Tongues they shall cease: Whether
there be Knowledge (Notional and Abstractive such as we have now) it shall
vanish away: When I was a Child I spoke as a Child, understood as a Child, I
thought as a Child; but when I became a Man, I put away childish things: For
now we see through a Glass (per species) darkly (as men understand a thing by a
Metaphor, Parable or Riddle) but then Face to Face (even Creatures intuitively
as in themselves naked and open to our sight:) Now I know in part (not Rem sed
aliquid Rei; in which sense Sanchez truly says, Nihil scitur:) But then shall
I know, even as I am known: (Not a God knows us; for our knowledge and his
must not be so comparatively likened: but as Holy Spirits know us both now and
for ever: we shall both know and be known by immediate intuition)

If a Physician be to describe the parts of Man, and the latent Diseases of his
Patient, he is fain to search hard, and bestow many Thoughts of it, besides his
long reading and converse to make him capable of knowing: and when all is done,
he goes much upon Conjectures, and his knowledge is mixed with many
uncertainties, yea and mistakes; but when he opens the Corpse, he sees all,
and his knowledge is more full, more true, and more certain, besides that it is
easily, and quickly attained, even by a present look: A Country Man knows
the Town, the Fields, and Rivers where he dwells (yea, and the Plants and
Animals) with ease and certain clearness; when he that must know the same
things by the study of Geographical Writings and Tables, must know them but
with a General, an unsatisfactory, and often a much mistaking kind of knowledge:
Alas, when our present knowledge has cost a Man the study of Forty, or Fifty,
or Sixty Years, how lean and poor, how doubtful and unsatisfactory is it after
all? But when God will show us himself and all things, and when Heaven is known
as the Sun by its own Light, this will be the clear, su^^ and satisfactory
knowledge: Blessed are the Pure in Heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. And
without Holiness, none can see him, Heb. 12. 14.) This sight will be worthy the
Name of Wisdom, when our present glympse is but Philosophy, a love and desire
of Wisdom: So far should we be from fearing Death through the fear of losing
our knowledge, or any of the means of knowledge, that it should make us rather
long for the World of Glorious Light, that we might get out of this darkness,
and know all that with an easy look, to our joy and satisfaction, which here
we know with troublesome doubtings, or not at all. Shall we be afraid of
darkness in the Heavenly Light, or of Ignorance when we see the Lord of Glory.

6. And as for the loss of Sermons, Books, and other means, surely it is no
loss to cease the means when we have attained the end: Cannot we spare our
Winter Clothes as troublesome in the heat of Summer, and sit by the hot Fire
without our Glores. Cannot we sit at home without a Horse or Coach? Or set them
by at our Journeys end? Cannot we lie in Bed without Boots and Spurs? Is it
grievous to us to cease our Physic when we are well: Even here, he is happier
that has least of the Creature, and needs least, than he that has much and
needs much: Because all Creature commodities and helps have also their
discommodities and troublesomness: And the very applying and using so many
remedies of our want; is tedious of itself. And as God only needs nothing,
but is self-sufficient, and therefore only perfectly and essentially happy, so
those are likest God that need least from without, and have the greatest
plenitude of internal goodness. What need we to preach, hear, read, pray, to
bring us to Heaven when we are there?

7. And as for our Friends and our converse with them, as Relations, or as
wise, religious, and faithful to us, he that believes not that there are far
More and far Better in Heaven than are on Earth, does not believe as he ought
that there is a Heaven: Our Friends here are wise, but they are unwise also:
They are Faithful, but partly unfaithful; they are holy, but also alas too
sinful: They have the Image of God, but blotted and dishonored by their
faults: They do God and his Church much service; but they also do too much
against him, and too much for Satan, even when they intend the Honor of God:
They promote the the Gospel; but they also hinder it: Their weakness,
ignorance, error, selfishness, pride, passion, division, contention, scandals
and remisness, do often so much hurt, that it is hard to discern whether it be
not greater than their good to the Church or to their Neigbours. Our Friends
are our helpers and comforters; but how often also are they our hinderers,
troubles and grief? But in Heaven they are altogether wise, and holy, and
faithful and concordant, and have nothing in them, nor there done by them, but
what is amiable to God and Man.

And with our faithful Friends, we have here a mixture, partly of useless and
burdensome Persons, and partly of unfaithful Hypocrites, and partly of
self-conceited factious Wranglers, and partly of malicious envious underminers*
and partly of implacable Enemies: And how many of all these set together is
there for one worthy faithful Friend? And how great a number i^ there to
trouble you? For one that will indeed comfort you? But in Heaven there are none
but the Wise, and Holy: No Hypocrites, no burdensome Neighbors, no treacherous,
or oppressing or persecuting Enemies are there? And is not all good and amiable
better than a little good with so troublesome a mixture of noisome Evils?

Christ loved his Disciples, his Kindred; yea, and all Mankind, and took
pleasure in doing good to all; and so did his Apostles: But how poor a requital
had he or they from any but from God? Christ's own Brethren believed not in
him, but wrangled with him; almost like those that said to him on the Cross, If
thou be the Son of God, come down and we will believe. Peter himself was once a
Satan to him, Matthew. 16. and after with Cursing and Swearing denied him: And
all his Disciples forsook him and fled: And what then from others could be
expected?

No Friends have a perfect suitableness to each other: and roughness and
inequalities that are nearest us are most troublesome. The wonderful variety and
contrariety of apprehensions, interest, educations, temperaments, and
occasions, and temptations, etc. are such that whilst we are scandalized at
the discord and confusions of the World, we must recall our selves and admire
that all ruling Providence, which keeps up so much order and concord as there
is: We are indeed like People in crowded Streets, who going several ways molest
each other with their jostling oppositions: Or like Boys at Football striving
to overthrow each other for the Ball: But it is a wonder of Divine Power and
Wisdom that all the World is not continually in mortal War.

If I do men no harm, yet if I do but cross their Wills, it goes for a
provoking injury: And when there are as many Wills as Persons, who is it that
can please them all: Who has Money enough to please all the Poor that need it,
or the Covetous that desire it. Or who can live with displeased men, and not
feel some of the fruits of their displeasure? What day goes over my Head in
which abundance desire not or expect not impossibilities from me? And how great
is the number of them that expect unrighteous things? By nothing do I displease
so many as by not displeasing God and my Conscience. And for nothing am so
deeply accused of sin as for not sinning: And the World will not think well of
any thing that crosses their Opinion and Carnal interest, be it never so
conform to God's Commands: I must confess that while I suffer from all sides,
few men have more common and open Praises from their Persecutors than I: But
while they praise me in the general, and for other particulars, they aggravate
my Nonconformity to their Opinions and Wills, and take me to be so much the
more hurtful to them. The greatest Crimes that have been charged on me, have
been for the things which I thought to be my greatest duties; and for those
parts of my obedience to my Conscience and God, which cost me dearest: And
where I pleased my Flesh least, I pleased the World least. At how cheap a rate
to my Flesh could I have got the Applause of factious men, if that had been my
end and business? Would I have conformed to their Wills, and taken a
Bishopric, and the Honor and Riches of the World, how good a Man had I been
called by the Diocesan party? And O what praise I should have with the Papists,
could I turn Papist! And all the backbitings and bitter Censures of the
Antinomians, Anabaptists and Separatists, had been turned into praise, could I
have said as they, or not contradicted them. But otherwise there is no escaping
their accusations. And is this tumultuous, militant, yea, malignant World, a
place that I should be loath to leave?

Alas, our darkness, and weakness, and passions are such, that it is hard for a
Family or a few faithful Friends, to live so evenly in the exercise of Love, as
not to have often unpleasant Jars! What then is to be expected from Strangers and
from Enemies? Ten thousand Persons will judge of abundance of my Words and
Actions, who never knew the Reasons of them: Every ones conceptions are as the
report and conveyance of the matter to them is: And while they have a various
Light, and false Reports (and defectiveness will make them false) what can be
expected but false injurious Censures?

8. And though no outward thing on Earth is more precious than the Holy Word,
and Worship, and Ordinances of God, yet even here I see that which points me
up higher, and tells me it is much better to be with Christ. 1. Shall I love
the Name of Heaven, better than Heaven itself? The Holy Scriptures are
precious, because I have there the Promise of Glory; but is not the Possession
better than the Promise? If a Light and Guide thither through this Wilderness
be good, surely the End must needs be better! And it has pleased God that all
things on Earth, and therefore even the Sacred Scriptures, should bear the
Marks of our state of imperfection: Imperfect Persons were the Penmen; and
imperfect humane Language is the conveying, signal, organical part of the
matter. And the Method and Phrase (though true and blameless) are far short of
the heavenly Perfection. Else so many Commentators had not found so hard a task
of it to expound innumerable difficulties, and reconcile so many seeming
contradictions, nor would Infidels find matter of so strong temptation, and so
much cavil as they do; nor would Peter have told us of the difficulties of
Paul's Epistles, and such occasions of men's wresting them to their own
destruction. Heaven will not be made to perfect Spirits, the occasion of so
many Errors, and Controversies, and quarrels as the Scriptures are to us
imperfect men on Earth. Yea Heaven is the more desirable, because there I shall
better understand the Scriptures, than here I can ever hope to do. All the hard
passages now misunderstood, will there be made plain, and all the seeming
contradictions reconciled; and which is much more, that God, that Christ, that
New Jerusalem, that Glory, and that Felicity of Souls, which are now known but*
darkly and enigmatically in the Glass, will then be known intuitively as we see
the Face itself, whose Image only the Glass first showed us. To leave my Bible,
and go to the God, and the Heaven that is revealed, will be no otherwise a loss
to me, than to lay by my Crutches or Spectacles when I need them not, or to
leave his Image for the presence of my Friend.

2. Much less do I need to fear the loss of all other Books, or Sermons, or
other Verbal informations. Much reading has often been a weariness to my Flesh;
and the pleasure of my Mind is much abated by the great imperfection of the
means. Many Books must be partly read, that I may know that they are scarce
worth the reading: And many must be read to enable us to satisfy other men's
expectations, and to confute those who abuse the authority of the Authors
against the Truth: And many good Books must be read, that have little to add,
to what we have read in many others before; and many that are blotted with
ensnaring Errors: Which if we detect not, we leave snares for such as see them
not: And if we detect them (never so tenderly, if truly) we are taken to be
injurious to the Honor of the Learned godly Authors, and proudly to overvalue
our own conceits. And so lamentable is the Case of all Mankind, by the
imperfections of humane Language, that those Words which are invented for
communication of conceptions, are so little fitted to their use, as rather to
occasion misunderstandings and contentions: There being scarce a Word that has
not many significations, and that needs not many more words to bring us to
the true notice of the speakers Mind: And when every word is a Signum that has
three relations, 1. To the Matter spoken of. 2. To the Mind of the Speaker as
signifying his conceptions of that matter. 3. And to the Mind of the Hearer or
Reader which is to be informed by it, it is so hard to find and use words that
are fitted indeed to all these uses, and to have store of such, and mix no
other, that few if any in the World were ever so happy as to attain it. 1. And
if words be not fitted to the Matter or Things, they are false as to their
first and proper use: And yet the penury of apt words, and the redundancy of
others, and the Authority of the Masters of Sciences imposing Arbitrary Terms
and Notions on their Disciples, and the Custom of the Vulgar who have the
Empire as to the fense of Words, have all conspired to make words inept, and of
very uncertain signification. So that when Students have learnt words by long
and hard Studies, they are often little the nearer the true knowledge of the
Things; and too often by their ineptitude misled to false conceptions. And so
their saying is too often true, that a great Book is a great Evil, while it
contains so great a number of uncertain words, which become the matter of
great contentions.

2. And when the Mind of the Speaker or Writer is no better informed by such
Notions, but his conceptions of Things are some false, some confused and
undigested, what wonder if his words do no otherwise express his mind to
others: When even men of clearest understanding find it difficult to have words
still ready to communicate their conceptions with truth and clearness. To form
true sentiments of Things into apt significant words, is a matter of mere Art,
and requires an apt Teacher, and a serious Learner, and long use: (And too
many take their Art of Speaking in Prayer, Conference, or Preaching, to have
more in it of Wisdom, and Piety, than it has; and some too much Condemn the
unaccustomed that want it.)

3. And if we could fit our words well to the Matter and to our Minds (with
that double verity) yet still it is hard to fit them to the Reader or Hearer:
For want of which they are lost as to him: And his information being our End,
they are therefore so far lost to us. And that which is spoken most congruously
to the Matter, is seldom fitted to the capacity of the receiver. And recipitur
ad modum recipient is, and pro captu Lectoris, etc. Some Readers or Hearers
(yea, almost all) are so used to unapt Words and Notions, obtruded on Mankind
by the Masters of Words, that they cannot understand us if we change their
terms and offer them fitter, and yet least understand those which they think
that they best understand: And all men must have long time to learn the Art of
Words, before they can understand them, as well as before they can readily use
them. And the duller any Man is, and of less understanding, the more Words are
necessary to make him understand: And yet his Memory is the less capable of
retaining many. This is our difficulty not only in Catechizing, but in all our
Writings and Teaching, a short Catechism, or a short Style, the ignorant
understand not; and a long one they remember not. And he that will accommodate
one judicious Reader or Hearer, with profound matter or an accurate Style, must
incommodate Multitudes that are incapable of it. And therefore such must be
content with few approvers, and leave the Applause of the Multitude to the more
popular, unless he be one that can seasonably suit himself to both.

A Man that resolves not to be deceived by ambiguous words, and makes it his
first work in all his Reading and disputings to difference between Words, and
Sense, and Things, and strictly to examine each disputed term, till the
Speakers meaning be distinctly known, will see the lamentable case of the
Church, and all Mankind, and what shaddows of knowledge deceive the World, and
in what useless dreams the greatest part of men, yea of Learned men do spend
their days: Much of that which some men unweariedly study, and take to be the
honor of their understandings, and their lives, and much of that which
Multitudes place their Piety and Hopes of Salvation in, being a mere game at
words, and useless Notions; and as truly to be called Vanity and Vexation as is
the rest of the Vain show that most men walk in. My sad and bitter Thoughts of
the Heathen, Infidel, Mahomet World, and of the common corruptions of Rulers
and Teachers, Cities and Countries, Senates and Councils, I will not here open
to others, lest they offend; nor cry out as Seneca, Omnes mali sumus, or
stultorum plena sunt omnia, nor describe the furious Spirits of the Clergy, and
their ignorance, and unrighteous Calumnies and Schisms, as Gregory Nazianzene
and others do, nor voluminously lament the seeming hopeless case of Earth, by
the boldness, blindness, and fury of men that make use of such sad
considerations, to loosen my love from such a World, and make me willing to be
with Christ.

9. And if other men's Words and Writings are ble mished with so much
imperfection, why should think that my own are blameless? I must for ever be
thankful for the holy Instructions and Writings of others, notwithstanding
humane frailty, and contentious men's abuse of words: And so I must be thankful
that God has made any use of my own, for the good of Souls, and his Churches
Edification. But with how many allays are such comforts here mixed? We are not
the Teachers of a well ruled School, where Learners are ranked into several
Forms, that every one may have the teaching which is agreeable to his capacity:
But we must set open the Door to all that will crowd in, and publish our
Writings to all sorts of Readers: And there being as various degrees of
Capacity as there are Men, and Women, and consequently great variety and
contrariety of apprehensions, it is easy ab antecedente to know what various
reception we must expect: We cast out our Doctrine almost as a Football is
turned out among Boys in the Street, in some Congregations: Few understand it,
but every one censureth it. Few come as Learners or teachable Disciples, but
most come to sit as Judges on their Teachers words: and yet have neither the
Skill, or the Patience, or the diligence which is necessary in a just Trial, to
a righteous judgment. But as our words agree or disagree with the former
conceptions of every Hearer, so are they judged to be wise or foolish, sound or
unsound, true or false, fit or unfit. Few Sermons that I preach but one
extolleth them, and wishes they were printed, and another accuses them of
some heinous fault: Some men are pleased with clearness and accuratness of
Doctrine* and others account it too high, and say we shoot over the hearers
Heads, and like nothing but the fervent Application of what they knew before
most Hearers are displeased with that which they most need: If they err, they
reproach that Doctrine as erroneous that would cure them: If they are guilty of
any prevailing Distemper and sin, they take that Application to be injurious to
them, which would convince them, and save them from that guilt. Most are much
pleased with plain and zealous reproof of sin; but it must be other men's sins,
and not their own. The poor love to hear of the evil of oppression and
unmercifulness, of Pride, Fullness and Idleness, and all the sins of the Rich:
Subjects love to hear of their Rulers faults, and say, O this Man is no
flatterer; he dares tell the greatest of their sins: But if they hear of their
own, they take for it an injury. Rulers like a Sermon for submission and
obedience but how few love to hear of the evil of injustice and oppression, or
pride, and sensuality, or to read, Luke 16. or 12. or James 5. or to hear of
the necessity of Holiness, Justice and temperance, and of Death, and Judgment
and the Life to come. Every Sectary and Dogmatist delights to have his own
Opinion cried up, and his Party praised as the chiefest Saints: But all that
tends to the praise of those that he dissenteth from, and accounts
adversaries to the Truth, is distastful to him, as a complying with iniquity,
and a strengthening of the Enemies of Christ: And all that uncharitableness
which he expects from us against others, is as much expected by others, as
against him and such as he.

This Day while I am writing these words, my Pockets are too full of Letters
sent me, on one side importunately charging it on me as my duty to conform (to
the Oaths, Declarations, Covenants and Practices, now imposed) or else to give
over preaching (which would please them;) and on the other side vehemently
censuring me as guilty of grievous sin, for declaring my judgment for so much
of Conformity as I have done; and charging me by Predictions as guilty of the
Sufferings of all that are otherwise minded, for communicating in the
Sacrament, and the common Prayers of the Church; and others in the mid way,
persuading me equally to bear my Testimony against unjust Separation and
Persecution, and to endeavor still if possible to save a self destroying
People, from the tearing fury of these two extremes: And how should I answer
these contrary expectations, or escape the Censures of such expectants?

And it has pleased God, who Thirty Years and more has tried me by humane
Applause, of late in this City (where multitudes of Persons of contrary Minds
are like Passengers in crowded Streets, still jostling and offending one
another) to exercise me with men's daily backbitings and cavils: And so many
have chosen me for the subject of their Discourse, that I may say as Paul, 1
Cor. 4. 9, 10, etc. [We are made a Spectacle (or Theater) to the World, and to
Angels, and to men: We are Fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ,
etc.] Did I not live out of the noise in retirement, and taken up with pain and
expectations of my change, what an annoyance to me would it be to hear
Religious Persons that have a God, a Christ, a Heaven to talk of, to abuse
their Time and Tongues in so much talking of one so inconsiderable, and that
has so little to do with them, or they with him; while with some overvaluing
me and others still quarrelling, I am the matter of their idle sinful talk. The
Persecutors for diverse Years after first silencing (if not still) and the
Separatists for two or three Years last past, have been possessed with so
strange a jealousy and quarrelsom a disposition against me, that they seem to
take it for their Interest to promote my defamation? and for much of their work
to search what may afford them any matter of accusation in every Sermon that I
preach, and every Book that I write. And though the fury of the Persecutors be
such as makes them much incapable of such converse and sober consideration as
is needful to their true information and satisfaction; yet most of the more
Religious Cavillers are satisfied as soon as I have spoken with them, and all
ends in a putarem or non putarem: For want of accurateness and patience, they
judge rashly before they understand, and when they understand confess their
error; and yet many go on and take no warning after many times conviction of
their mistake. Even in Books that are still before their Eyes (as well as in
transient words in Sermons) they heedlesly leave out, or put in, or alter, and
misreport plain words, and with confidence affirm those things to have been
said that never were said, but perhaps the contrary. And when all People will
judge of the good or evil of our words as they think we have Reason to use them
or forbear them, how can we satisfy men that are out of our hearing, and to
whom we cannot tell our Reasons: Most men are of private narrow observation,
and judge of the good or hurt that our words do, by those that they themselves
converse with: And when I convince them that my decisions of many questions
(which they are offended at) are true, they say, It is an unseasonable and a
hurtful truth: and when I have called them to look further abroad in the World,
and told them my Reasons; they say, Had these been all set down, men would have
been satisfied.] And on how hard terms do we instruct such Persons whose narrow
understandings cannot know obvious Reasons of what we say till they are
particularly told them? And so to tell men the Reasons of all that such can
quarrel with, will make every Book to swell with Commentaries to such a bigness
as they can neither buy nor read: And they come not to us to know our Reasons;
nor have we leisure to open them to every single Person: And thus suspicious
men, when their understandings want the humbling acquaintance with their
ignorance and their Consciences that tenderness which should restrain them from
rash judging, go on to accuse such needful Truths of which they know not the
use and reason. And what Man living has the leisure and opportunity to
acquaint all the ignorant Persons in City and Country with all the Reasons of
all that he shall say, write or do? Or who that writes not a Page instead of a
Sentence, can so write that every unprepared Reader shall understand him: And
what hopes has that Tutor or Schoolmaster of preserving his reputation, who
shall be accounted erroneous and accused of unsound or injurious Doctrine, by
every Scholar that understands not his words, and all the reasons of them?

But God in great Mercy to me has made this my Lot (not causing but permitting
the sins of the contentious) that I might before death be better weaned from
all below: Had my temptations from inordinate Applause had no allay, they might
have been more dangerously strong. Even yet while Church-Dividers on both
extremes do make me the Object of their daily obloquy, the continued respects
of the sober and peaceable, are so great as to be a temptation strong enough,
to so weak a Person, to give a check to my desires to leave the World. It is
long since Riches and worldly Honor appeared to me as they are, as not
rendering the World much lovely or desirable. But the Love and Concord of
Religious Persons has a more amiable Aspect: There is so much Holiness in
these, that I was loath to call them Vanity and Vexation: But yet as Flesh and
Blood would refer them to selfish Ends, and any way value them as a Carnal
interest, I must so call them, and number them with the things that are Loss
and Dung, Phil. 3. 7, 8. Selfishness can serve itself upon things good and
holy: And if good men, and good Books, and good Sermons would make the World
seem overlovely to us, it will be a Mercy of God to abate the temptation: And
if my Soul looking toward the heavenly Jerusalem, be hindered as Paul was in his
Journey to Jerusalem, Act. 20. and 21. by the Love of ancient Friends and
Hearers, I must say, What mean you to weep and break my Heart! I am ready to
leave the dearest Friends on Earth, and life, and all the pleasures of life,
for the presence of far better Friends with Christ, and the sweeter pleasures
of a better life. That little amiableness which is in things below, is in godly
men as life in the Heart, which dies last: When that is all gone, when we are
dead to the Love of the godly themselves, and to Learning, Books, and mediate
Ordinances, so far as they serve a selfish interest, and tempt down our Hearts
from heavenly aspirings, the World then is Crucified to us indeed, and we to
it: I rejoice to tread in the Footsteps of my Lord, who had some indeed weeping
about his cross, but was forsaken by all his Disciples, while in the Hour of
Temptation they all fled* But my desertion is far less, for it is less that I
am fit to bear. If God will justify, who shall condemn? If he be for me, who
shall be against me? O may I not be put to that dreadful case, to cry out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And may nothing separate me from his
Love! And then were I forsaken of the sober and peaceable, as I am in part of
some quarrelsom Dividers, how tolerable a trial would it be? Man is as dust in
the Balance, that adds little to it, and signifies nothing when God is in
the other end. But I suspect still that I make too much account of Man, when
this case has taken up too much of my observation.

1. And of all things surely a departing Soul has least cause to fear, the
losing of its notice of the Affairs of the World? Of Peace or Wars, or Church,
or Kingdoms. For, 1. If the Sun can send forth its material Beams, and operate
by motion, light, and heat, at such a distance as this Earth, why should I
think that blessed Spirits are such local, confined and impotent substances, as
not to have notice of the things of Earth? Had I but bodily Eyes I could see
more from the top of a Tower or Hill, than any one that is below can do. And
shall I know less of Earth from Heaven than I do now? It Is unlike that my
Capacity will be so little: And if it were, it is unlike that Christ's and all
the Angels will be so strange to me, as to give me no notice of things that so
much concern my God and my Redeemer (to whom I am united) and the Holy Society
of which I am a part, and my self as a Member of Christ and that Society! I do
not think that the Communion of the Celestial Inhabitants is so narrow and
slow, as it is of walking Clods of Earth, and of Souls that are confined to
such dark Lanthorns as this Body is? Stars can shine one to another. And we on
Earth can see them so far off in their Heaven: And sure then if they have a
seeing faculty each of them can see many of us; even the Kingdoms of the World.
Spirits are most active, and of powerful and quick communication. They need not
send Letters, or write Books to one another, nor lift up a voice to make each
other hear: Nor is there any unkindness, division, or unsociable selfishness
among them, which may cause them to conceal their notices or their joys: But as
Activity, so Unity is Greatest, where there is most Perfection: They will so be
Many, as yet to be One; and their Knowledge will be One Knowledge, and their
Love One Love, and their Joy One Joy: Not by so perfect a Unity as in God
himself, who is One and but One; but such as is suitable to created
imperfection, which participate of the Perfection of the Creator, as the Effect
does of the virtue of the Cause, and therefore has some participation of his
Unity. (O foolish Soul! if I shall fear this Unity with God, Christ, and all
the Holy Spirits, lest I should lose my present separate Individuation, when
Perfection and Union are so near akin.) In a word I have no cause to think that
my Celestial advancement will be a diminution of any desirable Knowledge even
of things on Earth; but contrarily that it will be unconceivably increased.

2. But if indeed I shall know less of things below, it will be because that
the knowledge of them is a part of Vanity and Vexation, which has no place in
Heaven. So much knowledge of good and evil in lower matters, as came to us by
sin, is unworthy of our fond tenaciousness, and fear of losing it? Surely the
sad tidings which we have Weekly in our News Books, our lamentable notices of
Heathen and Infidel Kingdoms of the overspreading prevalency of Barbarousness,
Idolatry, Ignorance and Infidelity; of the rage and success of cruel Tyrants;
of the bloody Wars of proud, unquiet worldly men, of the misery of the
oppressed desolate Countries, the dissipated Churches, the persecuted innocent
Christians, are no such pleasing things as that we should be afraid to hear of
such no more. To know or hear of the poor in Famine, the rich in Folly, the
Church distracted, the Kingdom discontented; the godly scandalous by the
effects of their Errors, imperfections and divisions, the wicked outrageous
and waxing worse, the falseness or miscarriages or sufferings of Friends, the
fury or success of Enemies, is this an intelligence which I cannot spare? What
is the daily tidings that I hear but of bloody Wars, the undone Countries, the
persecuted Churches, the silenced, banished, or imprisoned Preachers, of the
best removed in judgment from an unworthy World by Death, and worse succeeding
in their rooms, of the renewed designs and endeavors of the Churches Enemies;
the implacable rage of the worldly and unquiet Clergy, and the new divisions of
self-conceited Sectaries, and the obloquy and backbitings of each Party against
the other? How often hear I the sad tidings of this Friends sickness or Death,
and that Friends discontent, and of another fall, and of many, very many's
Sufferings? My Ears are daily filled with the cries of the poor whom I cannot
relieve, with the endless complaints of fearful Melancholy despairing Persons;
with the wranglings of the ignorant and proud Professors, and contentious
Divines, who censure most boldly where they are most Erroneous or dark: Or with
the troublesome discontents of those that I converse with: And should I be
afraid of the ending of so sad a Tragedy, or of awaking out of such an
unpleasant dream. Have I not many times thought of the Privilege of the deaf,
that hear not these troublesome and provoking things; and of the Blind that see
not the Vanities and Temptations of this World: It is one part of the benefit
of solitude, or a private life and habitation, to free me from many of these
unpleasing Objects; and a great part of the benefit of sleep, that with my
Clothes I may lay by these troubleous Thoughts.

11. But other men tell me, The Church cannot yet spare you: There is yet this
and that necessary work to be done: There is this and that need, etc.

But, 1. Is it we or God that must choose his Servants, and cut out their work?
Whose work am I doing? Is it my own, or his? If his, is it not he that must
tell me what, and when, and how long? And will not his will and choice be best?
If I be^^eve not this, how do I take him for my God? Does God or I know better
what he has yet to do? And who is fittest to do it? The Churches Service and
benefits must be measured out by our Master and Benefactor, and not by our
selves.

2. What am I to those more excellent Persons whom in all Ages he has taken
out of the World? And would men's Thoughts of the Churches needs detain them?
The poor Heathen, Infidel, Mahometane Nations have no Preachers of the Gospel?
And if their need prove not that God will send them such, no Countries need
will prove that God will continue them such. Many more useful Servants of
Christ have died in their youth: John Janeway preached but one Sermon: Joseph
Allen (and many another excellent Men) died young in the midst of his vigorous
successful labors: Both of them far more fit for God's work and likely to win
Souls, and glorify God, than I am or ever was (However their greater Light was
partly kindled from my lesser.) Yet did both these under painful consuming
languishings of the Flesh, die as they had long lived in the lively triumphant
Praises of their Redeemer, and joyful desires and hopes of Glory? And shall I
at Sixty seven Years of Age, after such a life of unspeakable Mercies, and
after almost Forty four Years of comfortable help in the Service of my Lord, be
now afraid of my reward, and shrink at the Sentence of Death, and still be
desiring to stay here, upon pretense of further service: We know not what is
best for the Church as God does: The Church and the World are not Ours, but
his: not our desires, but his will, must measure out its Mercies: We are not so
Merciful as he is: It is not unmeet for us to desire many things which God will
not give, nor sees it meet to grant the particulars of such desires. Nothing
ever lay so heavy on my Heart as the sin and misery of Mankind, and to think
how much of the World lies in folly and wickedness? And for what can I pray so
heartily as for the Worlds recovery: And it is his will that I should show a
Holy and Universal Love by praying, Let thy Name be hallowed, Thy Kingdom come,
and Thy will be done on Earth as it is done in Heaven: And yet alas, how unlike
is Earth to Heaven, and what Ignorance, Sin, Confusions and Cruelties here
reign and prosper? And unless there be a wonderful change to be expected, even
as by a general Miracle, how little hope appears that ever these Prayers
should be granted in the things? It makes us better to desire that others may
be better: But God is the free disposer of his own gifts: And it seems to be
his will, that the permitted Ignorance and Confusions of this World, should
help us the more to value, and desire that World of Light, Love and Order,
which he calls us to prefer and hope for.

And if I am any way useful to the World, it is undeserved Mercy that has made
me so; for which I must be thankful: But How long I shall be so is not my
business to determine, but my Lords. My many sweet and beautiful Flowers arise
and appear in their beauty and sweetness, but for one Summers time, and they
murmur not that they flourish for so short a space. The Beasts, and Birds, and
Fishes, which I feed on, do live till I will have them die: And as God will be
served and pleased by wonderful variety at once (of Animals, and Vegetables,
etc.) So will he by many successive* Generations: If one Flower fall or die, it
suffices that others shall Summer after Summer arise from the same root: And
if my Pears, Apples, Plums, etc. fall or serve me when they are ripe, it
suffices that (not they, but) others the next Year shall do the same; God will
have other Generations to succeed us: Let us think him that we have had our
time: And could we overcome the Grand (too little observed) Crime of
SELFISHNESS, and could Love others as our selves, and God as God above all the
World, it would comfort us at Death, that others shall survive us, and the
World shall continue, and God will be still God, and be glorified in his works:
And Love will say, I shall live in my successors, and I shall more than Live in
the Life of the World; and yet most of all in the eternal Life and Glory of God.

And God, (who made us not gods but poor Creatures as it pleased him) does know
best our measures: And he will not try us with too long a Life of Temptations,
lest we should grow too familiar where we should be Strangers, and utterly
Strangers to our home: No wonder if that World was ready for a deluge, by a
deluge of sin, in which men lived to Six, Seven, Eight and Nine hundred Years
of Age: Had our Great Sensualists any hope of so long a life, they were like to
be like incarnate Devils, and there would be no dwelling near them for the Holy
Seed? If Angels were among them, they would like the Sod^mites seek furiously
to abuse them.

Nor will God tire us out with too long a life of earthly sufferings: We think
short cares, and fears, and sorrows, persecutions, sickness, and crosses to be
long: And shall we grudge at the Wisdom and Love which shortneth them. Yea,
though holy duty it self be excellent and sweet, yet the weakness of the Flesh
makes us liable to weariness, and abateth the willingness of the Spirit: And
our wise and merciful God will not make our warfare or our race too long, lest
we be wearied and faint, and fall short of the prize. By our weariness, and
complaints, and fears and groans, one would think that we thought this life too
long, and yet when we should yield to the call of God, we draw back as if we
would have it everlasting.

12. Willingly submit then O my Soul: It is not thou, but this Flesh that must
be dissolved; this troublesome, vile and corruptible Flesh: It is but the other
half thy meat and drink, which thy presence kept longer uncorrupted, going
after the excremental part. Thou die not when Man (the compositum) dies, by
thy departure. And as thou live not to thy self, I die not to my self;
whether I live or die, I am the Lords: He that set up the Candle, knows how
long he has use for the light of it. Study thy duty, and work while it is Day,
and let God choose thy time, and willingly stand to his disposal. The Gospel
dies not when I die: The Church dies not: The Praises of God die not; the
World dies not: And perhaps it shall grow better, and those Prayers shall be
answered which seemed lost: Yea, and it may be some of the Seed that I have
sown, shall spring up to some benefit of the dark unpeaceable World when I am
dead. And is not this much of the end of life? and is not that Life good, which
attaineth its End? If my End was to do Good and Glorify God, if Good be done,
and God be Glorified, when I am dead, yea though I were annihilated, is not my
End attained: Feign not thy self to be God, whose Interest (that is, the
pleasing of his Will) is the End of all things: And whose will is the measure
of all Created good: Feign not thy self to be All the World: God has not lost
his work; the World is not dissolved, when I am dissolved! O how strong and
unreasonable a Disease is this inordinate SELFISHNESS! Is not God's Will
Infinitely better than mine? And fitter to be fulfilled: Choose the fulfilling
of his Will, and thou shall always have thy choice: If a Man be well that can
always have his will, let this always be thy Will, that God's Will may be done,
and thou shall always have it.

Lord, let thy Servant Depart in Peace: even in Thy Peace, which passes
understanding, and which Christ the Prince of Peace does give, and nothing in
the World can take away! O give me that Peace which beseems a Soul, which is
so near the Harbor, even the World of endless PEACE and LOVE! where perfect
UNION (such as I am capable of) will free me from all the sins and troubles,
which are caused by the convulsions, divulsions, and confusions of this divided
SELFISH World. Call home this Soul by the encouraging Voice of Love, that it
may joyfully hear, and say, It is my Fathers Voice: Invite it to thee by the
heavenly Messenger: Attract it by the tokens and the foretasts of Love: The
Messengers that invited me to the Feast of Grace, compelled me to come in
without constraint: Thy effectual call did make me willing: And is not Glory
better than preparing Grace? Shall I not come more willingly to the Celestial
Feast? What was thy Grace for, but to make me willing of Glory, and the way to
it? Why did thou dart down thy Beams of Love, but to make me Love thee, and
to call me up to the everlasting Center! Was not the Feast of of Grace, as a
Sacrament of the Feast of Glory: Did I not take it in remembrance of my Lord
until he come? Did not he that told me, All things are ready, tell me also that
He is gone to prepare a place for us, and it is his will that we shall be with
him and see his Glory. They that are Given him, and Drawn to him by the Father
on Earth, do come to Christ: Give now and Draw my Departing Soul to my
Glorified Head: And as I have Glorified thee on Earth in the measure that thy
Grace has prevailed in me, pardon the sins by which I have offended thee, and
Glorify me in the beholding and participation of the Glory of my Redeemer;
come Lord Jesus, come quickly with fuller Life, and Light, and Love, into this
too Dead, and Dark, and Disaffected Soul, that it may come with joyful
willingness unto thee.

13. Willingly Depart O lingering Soul! It is from a Sodom, though in it there
be righteous Lots, who yet are not without their woeful blemishes! Have thou so
often groaned for the general blindness and wickedness of the World, and art thou
loath to leave it for a better? How often would thou have rejoiced to have seen
but the dawning of a Day of Universal Peace and Reformation? And would thou
not see it, where it shines forth in fullest Glory? Would a light at Midnight
have pleased thee so well: Have thou prayed and labored for it so hard? And
would thou not see the Sun? Will the things of Heaven please thee no where but
on Earth, where they come in the least and weakest influences, and are
terminated in gross, terrene, obscure, and unkind recipients? Away, away, the
vindictive Flames are ready to consume this sinful World? Sinners that blindly
rage in sin, must quickly rage in the effects of sin, and of God's Justice: The
pangs of Lust, prepared for these pangs! They are treasuring up wrath against
this Day: Look not then behind thee: Away from this unhappy World! Press on
unto the Mark, Phil. 3. Looking toward, and hastening to the coming of the Day
of God, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12.

As this World has used thee, it would use thee still, and it will use others?
If thou have sped well in it, no thanks to it, but unto God! If thou have had
manifold deliverances, and mavelous preservations, and have been sed with
Angels food, love not this Wilderness for it, but God and his Angel which was
thy Guide, Protector and Deliverer.

And has this troublesome Flesh been so comfortable a companion to thee, that
thou should be so loath to leave it? Have thy pains, thy weariness, thy
languishings, thy labors, thy cares and fears about this Body, been pleasing
to thee? And art thou loath that they should have an end? Did thou not find a
need of patience to undergo them? And of greater Patience than m^^r Nature gave
thee? And can thou hope now for better, when Nature fails, and that an
aged, consumed, more diseased Body, should be a pleasanter habitation to thee,
than it was heretofore? If from thy youth up it has been both a tempting and a
troubling thing to thee, surely though it be less tempting, it will not be less
troubling, when it is falling to the Dust, and above ground savoureth of the
Grave! Had things sensible been never so pleasant in thy youth, and had thou
glutted thy self in health with that sort of delight, in Age thou art to say by
Nature, I have no pleasure in them. Does God in great Mercy make pain and
feebleness the Harbingers of Death, and will thou not understand their
business? Does he mercifully before hand take away the pleasure of all fleshly
things, and worldly vanities, that there may be nothing to relieve a departing
Soul, (as the shell breaks when the Bird is hatched, and the Womb relaxed
when the Infant must be Born;) and yet shall we stay when nothing holds us,
and still be loath to come away? Would thou dwell with thy beloved Body in the
Grave, where it will rot and stink in loathsome darkness? If not, why should it
now in its painful languor, seem to thee a more pleasant habitation than the
glorious presence of thy Lord? In the Grave it will be at rest, and not
tormented as now it is, nor wish at Night, O that it were Morning; nor say at
Morning, when will it be Night? And is this a dwelling fit for thy delight?
Patience in it while God will so try thee, is thy duty? But is such Patience a
better and sweeter life, than rest and joy?

14. But alas, how deaf is Flesh to Reason? Faith has the Reason which easily
may shame all contrary Reasoning; but sense is unreasonable, and especially
this inordinate tenacious Love of present Life. I have Reason enough to be
willing to depart, even much more willing than I am: O that I could be as
willing as I am convinced, that I have Reason to be? Could I Love God as much
as I know that I should Love him, then I should desire to depart and to be with
Christ, as much as I know that I should desire it: But God in Nature has here
laid upon me some necessity of aversation, (though the inordinateness came from
sin:) Else Christ had not so feared, and deprecated the Cup: Death must be a
penalty, even where it is a gain! and therefore it must meet with some
unwillingness: Because we willingly sinned, we must unwillingly suffer! The
Gain is not the pain or dissolution in itself, but the happy consequents of it.
All the Faith and Reason in the World, will not make Death to be no penalty,
and therefore will not take away all unwillingness. No Man ever yet Reasoned or
Believed himself into a Love of Pain and Death as such: But seeing that the
gain is unspeakably Greater than the Pain and Loss, Faith and Holy Reason may
make our willingness to be Greater than our unwillingness, and our Hope and
Joy, than our Fear and Sorrow: And it is the deep and effectual notice of
Goodness which is God's way in Nature and Grace, to change and draw the Will of
Man: Come then my Soul, and Think believingly what is BEST for thee: And will thou not Love and Desire most, that which is certainly the BEST?

To Depart and to be with Christ is far better (or rather to be chosen.)
1. TO say and hear that it is far better to be with Christ, is not enough to
make us willing; Words and Notions are such instruments as God uses to work on
Souls, but the convincing, satisfying, powerful Light, and the inclining Love
are other things. The Soul now operateth ut forma hominis, on and with the
Corporeal Spirit and Organs; and it perceives now its own perceptions; but it
is a stranger to the Mode of its future Action, when it is separated from the
Body, and can have no formal conception of such conceptions as yet it never
had. And therefore its Thoughts of its future ^^ate, must be Analogical and
General, and partly ^range. But General notices when certain may be very
powerful, and satisfy us in so much as is needful to our ^onsent, and to such
a measure of Joy as is suitable to this earthly state. And such notices we have
from the Nature of the Soul, with the Nature of God, the course of Providence,
and Government of Mankind, the internal and external conflicts which we
perceive about Men's Souls, the Testimony and Promises of the Word of God, the
Testimony of Conscience, with the Witness of the sanctifying Spirit of Christ,
and in it the Earnest and the foretast of Glory, and the beginnings of Life
eternal here; of all which I have before considered.

2. The Socinians who would interpret this of the state of Resurrection only,
against plain evidence violate the Text: Seeing Paul expressly speaks of his
Gain by Death, which will be his abode with Christ, and this upon his departure
hence: which in 2 Cor. 5. 7, 8. he calls, his being absent from the Body, and
present with Lord: And Christ to the penitent Thief calls his being with him
in Paradise: And Luke 16. in the Parable of the Steward, Christ intimates to
us, that wise preparers when they go hence are received into the Everlasting
habitations; as he there further tells us Lazarus was in Abraham's bosom.

3. Goodness is primaria and mensurans vel secundaria and mensurata: The first
is God's perfect Essence and Will. The second is either properly and simply
Good, or Analogical. The former is the Creatures conformity to the Will of God,
or its Pleasingness to his will: The later is, 1. The Greater, which is the
welfare or perfection of the Universe. 2. The Lesser, which is the Perfection
of the several parts of the Universe, either 1. In the nobler respect, as they
are Parts contributing to the Perfection of the whole; or 2. In the lower
respect, as they are Perfect or Happy in themselves; or 3. In the lowest
respect of all, as they are good to their fellow Creatures which are below
themselves.

4. Accordingly, It is far better to be with Christ, I. Properly and simply, as
it is the fulfilling of God's will. II. Analogically, as it tends to the
Perfection of the Universe and the Church? III. And as it will be our own good
or felicity. IV. And as it will be Good to our inferior fellow Creatures;
though this last be most questionable, and seems not included in the meaning
of this Text: Somewhat of these in order.

5. I. It is an odious effect of Idolatrous SELFISHNESS, to acknowledge no
Goodness above our own FELICITY, and accordingly to make the Goodness of God to
be but formally his Usefulness, Benovolence and Beneficence to his Creatures,
which is by making the Creature the ultimate End, and God but the Means, to
make the Creature to be God, and deny God indeed, while we honor his Name: As
also it is, to acknowledge no higher goodness formally in the Creature, than
its own felicity as such: As if neither the pleasing of God's will, nor the
Perfection of the Church and World, were better than we are: We are not of our
selves, and therefore we are not chiefly for our selves, and therefore we have
a higher Good to Love.

That is simply Best which God wills. Therefore to Live here is Best whilst
I do live here: and to depart is best when the time of my departure comes:
That is Best which is, (which is the work of God:) The World cannot be Better
at this Instant than it is, nor any thing Better (which is of God:) because it
is as he wills it to be: But when God has changed them, it will then be Best
that they are changed. Were there no other Good in my departure hence, but this
simple Good, the fulfilling of God's will, my Reason tells me that I should
be fully satisfied in it: But there is also a subordinate sort of Good.

6. II. For my change will tend to the perfection of the Universe: even that
Material Good or Perfection, which is its Aptitude for the use to which God
has created and does preserve it. As all the parts, the modes, the situation,
the motions of a Clock, a Watch, or other such Engine do to the ends of the
Artificer. Though God has not told me particularly, Why every Thing, and Mode
and Motion is as it is, I know it is all done in perfect Wisdom, and suited to
its proper use and end: If the Hen or Bird knows how to make her nest, to lay
her Eggs secretly together, when and how to sit on them till they are hatched,
and how to feed them and preserve them, and when to forsake them, as sufficient
for themselves without her help, etc. If the B^c know when, and whence, and how
to gather her Honey and Wax, and how to form the repository Combs, and how to
lay it up, and all the rest of her mavelous Economy, shall I think that God
does he knows not what, or what is not absolutely the best? Does he want
either Shill, or Will, or Power?

And should the Stone grudge to be hewed, the Brick to be burnt, the Trees to
be cut down, and sawed and framed, the Lead and Iron to be melted, etc. when it
is but to form an useful Edifice, and to adapt and compose every part to the
perfecting of the whole.

Shall the Waters grudge that they must glide away, and the Plants that they
must die, and half die every Winter, and the Fruit and Flowers that they must
fall, or the Moon that it must have its changing motions, or the Sun that it
must set and rise so often, etc. when all is but the action and order which
makes up that harmony and perfection which was designed by the Creator, and is
pleasing to his will.

7. III. But lawful self-love is yet further herein gratified: The Goodness
expressed in the Text, is that Analogical subordinate Good, which is mihi
Bonum, my own Felicity, and that which tends thereunto: It is most Reasonable
to Love God best, and that next which is likest him (if known:) And why should
it not be the easiest and the sweetest: But experience finds it so easy to
Love our selves, that certainly if I firmly Believe that it is best for me, I
shall Desire to depart and be with Christ. And have I not reason to believe it?

8. The Reasons of it I will consider in this order: I. The general Reason from
the Efficients and the Means. II. The Final Reasons. III. The constitutive
Reasons from the state of my Intellect; and its Action and Fruition there. IV.
The constitutive Reasons from the state of my Will. V. The constitutive Reasons
from my practice there, leaving out those which the Resurrection will give me,
because I am speaking but of my present departure unto Christ.

9. And 1. That is best for me, which Love itself, my heavenly Father designeth
and chooses for my good: I hope I shall never dare to think or say, that he is
mistaken, or that he wanted Skill or Love: Or that I could have chosen better
for my self than he does, if he had left all to my choice. Many a time the wise
and good will of God, has crossed my foolish rebellious will on Earth: And
afterward I have still perceived that it was best; usually for my self, but
always for a higher good than mine. It is not an Enemy, nor a Tyrant that made
me, that has preserved me, and that calls me hence. He has not used me as an
Enemy: The more I have tried him, the better I have found him: Had I better
obeyed his Ruling will, how happy had I been: And is not his disposing and
rewarding will as good? Man's work is like Man, and evil corrupts it; but
God's work is like God, and uncorrupted: If I should not die till my dearest
Friend would have it, much more till I my self would choose it (not constrained
by misery) I should rejoice, and think my life were safe! O foolish sinful
Soul, if I take it not to be far better to be at God's choice than at my own or
any Man's! And if I had not rather that he choose the time than I.

Be of good cheer then O my Soul; it is thy Fathers voice that calls thee
hence: His voice that called thee into the World, and bid thee live, that
called thee out of a state of sin and death, and bid thee live hereafter unto
him: That called thee so often from the Grave, and forgiving thy sins, renewed
thy strength, restored thee to the comforts of his House and Service; and has
so graciously led thee through this howling Wilderness, and brought thee almost
to the sight of the promised Land. And will thou not willingly go, when
infinite fatherly Love does call thee? Art thou not desirous of his presence?
Art thou afraid to go to him who is the only cure of thy fears? What was it but
this Glory to which he did (finally) Elect thee? Where do thou read that he
Elected thee to the Riches and Honors of this World: or to the pleasures of
the Flesh? But he Elected us in Christ to the heavenly Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 3,
4, etc. Indeed he Elected thee also to bear the Cross, and to manifold
sufferings here: But is it that which thou preferrest before the Crown? That
was but as a Means unto the Kingdom, that thou might be conformed to Christ,
and reign with him when thou have suffered with him. If God choose thee to
blessedness, refuse it not thy self, nor behave thy self like a refuser.

10. 2. And surely that state is my Best which my Savior purchased and
promised me as best: As he bought me not with Silver and Gold, so neither to
Silver and Gold? Did he live and die to make me Rich or advanced in the World?
Surely his Incarnation, Merits, Sacrifice and Intercession had a low design if
that were all! And who has more of these than they that have least of Christ:
But he purchased us to an incorruptible Crown; to an Inheritance undefiled,
that fades notaway, reserved in Heaven for us, that are kept by God's Power
through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. And is it Heaven that cost so dear a
price for me, and is the End of so wonderful a design of Grace, and shall I be
unwilling now to receive the gift?

11. 3. That sure is Best for me, for which God's Holy Spirit is preparing me:
That for which he is given to believers: And that which is the End of all his
holy Operations on my Soul. But it is not to Love this World that he is
persuading me from Day to Day; but to come off from such Love, and to set my
Heart on the things above. Is it to love this life and fleshly interest, this
Vanity and Vexation, or rather to love the invisible Perfection, that this
blessed Spirit has done so much to work my Heart? And would I now undo all, or
Cross and frustrate all his Operations? Has Grace been so long preparing me
for Glory, and shall I be loath to take possession of it? If I am not willing I
am not yet sufficiently prepared?

12. 4. If Heaven be not better for me than Earth, God's Word and Ordinances
have been all in vain? Surely that is my Best, which is the Gift of the Better
Covenant, and which is secured to me by so many sealed Promises, and which I am
directed to by so many sacred Precepts, Doctrines, and Examples; and for which
I have been called to hear, and read, and meditate, and pray, and Watch so
long: Was it the interest of the Flesh on Earth, or a longer life of worldly
Prosperity, which the Gospel Covenant secured to me; which the Sacraments and
Spirit Sealed to me: Which the Bible was written to direct me to, which
Ministers preached to me: Which my Books were written for: Which I prayed for,
and for which I served God: Or was it not for his Grace on Earth, and Glory in
Heaven: And is it not better for me to have the End of all these means, than
lose them all, and lose my hopes: Why have I used them, if I would not attain
their End?

13. 5. That is my Best state, which all the Course of God's Fatherly
Providence tend to: All his sweeter Mercies, and all his sharper corrections
are to make me partaker of his Holiness, and to Lead me to glory in the way
that my Savior and all his Saints have gone before me: All things work
together for the best to me, by preparing me for that which is best indeed.
Both calms and storms are to bring me to this Harbor: If I take them but for
themselves, and this present life, I mistake them, and understand them not, but
unthankfully vilify them, and lose their End, and life and sweetness: Every
word and work of God, every Days mercies, and changes, and Usages, do look at
Heaven, and intend Eternity: God leads me no other way: If I follow him not,
I forsake my hope in forsaking him: If I follow him, shall I be unwilling to be
at home, and come to the End of all this way?

14. 6. Surely that is Best for me, which God has required me principally to
value, love, and seek, and that as the business of all my life, referring all
things else thereto: That this is my Duty, I am fully certain, as is proved
elsewhere and before, Is my business in the World only for the things of this
World? How vain a Creature then were Man; and how little were the difference
between waking and sleeping? Life and Death: No wonder if he that believes
that there is no Life but this, to seek or hope for, do live in uncomfortable
despair, and only seek to palliate his misery with the brutish pleasures of a
wicked life, and if he stick at no villainy which hisfleshly Lusts incline him
to! Especially Tyrants and Multitudes who have none but God to fear. And it is
my certain duty to seek Heaven with all the fervor of my Soul, and diligence
of my life: And is it not Best to find it?

15. 7. That must needs be Best for me, which all other things must be forsaken
for: It is folly to forsake the Better for the worse: But Scripture, Reason,
and Conscience tell me, that all this World, when it stands in competition or
opposition, should be forsaken for Heaven; yea, for the least hopes of it: A
possible everlasting Glory should be preferred before a certainly perishing
Vanity: I am sure this life will shortly be nothing to me; and therefore it is
next to nothing now. And must I forsake all for my everlasting Hopes, and yet
be unwilling to pass unto the possession of them.

16. 8. That is like to be our Best, which is our Maturest state: Nature
carries all things toward their perfection: Our Apples, Pears, Grapes and
every Fruit is best when it is ripe: And though they then hasten to corruption,
that is, through the incapacity of the corporeal materials, any longer to
retain the Vegetative Spirit, which is not annihilated at its separation; and
being not made for its own felicity, but for Man's, its ripeness is the state in
which Man uses it, before it does corrupt of itself, that its corruption may
be for his nutriment; and the Spirits and best matter of his said food does
become his very substance. And does God cause Saints to grow up unto ripeness,
only to perish and drop down unto useless rottenness? It is not credible.
Though our Bodies become but like our filthiest excrements, our Souls return to
God that gave them: And though he need them not, he uses them in their
separated state; and that to such heavenly uses, as their heavenly Maturity and
Mellowness has disposed them to. Seeing then Love has ripened me for itself,
shall I not willingly drop into its hand?

17. 9. That is like to be the Best which the Wisest and Holiest in all Ages of
the World have preferred before all, and have most desired: And which also
almost all Mankind do acknowledge to be best at last. It is not like that all
the Best men in the World should be most deceived, and be put upon fruitless
labor and sufferings by this deceit, and be undone by their duty; and that God
should by such deceits rule all or almost all Mankin? And also that the common
notices of humane Nature, and Consciences last and closest documents, should be
all in vain. But it is past all doubt, that no men usually are worse, than
those that have no Belief or Hopes of any Life but this: And that none are so
Holy, Just, and Sober, so charitable to others, and so useful to Mankind, as
those that firmliest believe and hope for the state of immortality: And shall I
fear that state which all that were wise and holy, in All Ages, have preferred
and desired?

18. 10. And it is not unlike that my Best state is that which my greatest
Enemies are m^st against. And how much Satan does to keep me and other men from
Heaven, and how much worldly Honor, and Pleasure, and Wealth he could afford
us to accomplish it, I need not here again be copious in reciting, having said
so much of it elsewhere Treat. of Infidelity.
. And shall I be toward my self, so much of Satan's mind: He would not have me
come to Heaven: And shall I also be unwilling? All these things tell me, that.
It is Best to be with Christ.

II. The Final Reasons.
1. II 1. Is it not far better to dwell with GOD in Glory, than with sinful men
in such a World as this? Though he be every where his Glory, which we must
behold to our Felicity, and the perfecting Operations and Communications of his
Love, are in the glorious World, and not on Earth. As the Eye is made to see
the Light, and then to see other things by the Light, so is man's mind made to
see God, and to Love him; and other things as in, by, and for him. He that is
our beginning is our end: And our End is the first Motive of all Moralaction,
and for It, it is that all means are used. And the End attained is the Rest of
Souls! How often has my Soul groaned under the sense of Distance, and Darkness,
and Estrangeness from God! How often has it looked up, and gasped after him, and
said, O when shall I be nearer and better acquianted with my God? As the Heart
pants after the water Brooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God: My Soul
thirsts for God, for the living God: When shall I come and appear before God?
Psa. 40. 12. And would I not have my Prayers heard, and my desires granted?
What else is the sum of lawful Prayers, but God himself? If I desire any thing
more than God, what sinfulness is in those desires, and how sad is their
signification? How often have I said, Whom have I in Heaven but Thee, and there
is none on Earth I desire besides Thee? It is good for me to draw near to God,
Psalm. 73. 25: 28. Woe to me, if I did dissemble: If not, Why should my Soul
draw back? Is it because that Death stands in the way? Do not my fellow
Creatures die for my daily Food? And is not my passage secured by the Love of
my Father, and the Resurrection and Intercession of my Lord? Can I see the
Light of heavenly Glory, in this darksome shell and womb of Flesh?

2. All Creatures are more or less excellent and glorious, as God is more or
less Operative and refulgent in them, and by that Operation communicates most
of himself unto them: Though he be immense and indivisible, his Operations and
Communications are not equal: And that is said to be Nearest to Him, which has
most of those Operations on it, and that without the intervenient causality of
any second created Cause; and so all those are in their Order Near unto him, as
they have Noblest Natures, and fewest intervenient Causes; far am I from
presuming to think that I am or shall be the Best and Noblest of God's
Creatures, and so that I shall be so near him, as to be under the influx of no
second or created Causes; (of which more anon.) But to be as Near as my Nature
was ordained to approach, is but to attain the End and Perfection of my Nature.

3. And as I must not look to be the Nearest to Him, as he is the first
Efficient, no more must I as he is the first Dirigent or governing Cause: As
now I am under the government of his Officers on Earth, I look for ever to be
under subgovernours in Heaven: My glorified Savior must be my Lord and Ruler;
and Who else under him I know not: If Angels are not equal in Perfection, nor
as is commonly supposed equal in Power, nor without some regimental order among
themselves, I must not conclude that no created Angel or Spirit, shall have any
government over me: But it will be so Pure and Divine, as that the blessed
Effects of God's own Government will besweetly powerful therein. If the Law was
given by Angles, and the Angel of God was in the burning Bush, and the Angel
conducted the People through the Wilderness, and yet all these things are
ascribed to God, much more near and glorious will the Divine Regiment there be,
whoever are the Administrators.

4. And as I must expect to be under some created Efficient and Dirigent Causes
there, so must I expect to have some subordinate Ends: Else there would not be
a proportion and harmony in causalities; whatever nobler Creatures are above
me, and have their Causalities upon me, I must look to be finally for those
nobler Creatures. When I look up and think what a world of glorious Beings are
now over me, I dare not presume to think that I shall finally any more than
Receptively; be the Nearest unto God, and that I am made for None but Him. I
find here that I am made, and ruled, and sanctified, for the Public or Common
Good of many as above my own (of which I am past doubt:) And I am sure that I
must be finally for my glorified Redeemer; and for what other Spiritual Beings
or Intelligences that are above me, little do I know: And God has so ordered
all his creatures, as that they are mutually Ends and Means for and to one
another, though not in an Equality, nor in the same respects. But whatever
nearer Ends there will be, I am sure that he who is the first Efficient and
Dirigent, will be the ultimate final Cause And I shall be in this respect as
near him, as is due to he rank and order of my Nature. I shall be useful to he
Ends which are answerable to my Perfection.

5. And if it be the honor of a Servant to have an honorable Master, and to
be appointed to the most honorable work: If it be some honor to a Horse above
a Swine, or a Worm, or Fly, that he serves more nearly for the use of Man, yea
for a Prince, will it not be also my advancement to be ultimately for God, and
subordinately for the highest created Natures, and this in such Services as are
suitable to my Spiritual and Heavenly State?

6. For I am far from thinking that I shall be above Service, and have none to
do! For Activity will be my Perfection and my Rest: And all such Activity must
be Regular in harmony and order of Causes, and for its proper use. And what
though I know not now fully what service it is that I must do? I know it will
be good, and suitable to the blessed state which I shall be in: And it is
enough that God and my Redeemer know it; and that I shall know it in due time,
when I come to practice it: (of which more afterward.)

7. The inordinate Love of this Body and present composition seduceth Souls to
think that all their use and work is for its maintenance and prosperity, and
when the Soul has done that, and is separated from Flesh, it has nothing to
do* but must lie idle, or be as nothing, or have no considerable work or
pleasure: As if there were nothing in the whole World, but this little fluid
mass of matter, for a Soul to work upon? As if itself, and all the Creatures,
and God were nothing, or no fit Objects for a Soul? And why not hereafter as
well as now? Or as if that which in our compounded state, does Operate on and
by its Organs, had no other way of Operation without them? As if the Musician
lost all his power, or were dead, when his Instrument is out of tune or broken,
and could do nothing else but play on that! As if the fiery part of the Candle
were annihilated or transmutate (as some following-Philosphers imagine) when
the Candle goes out; and were not fire, and in action still: Or as if that Sun
beam which I shut out, or which passes from our Horizon, were annihilated, or
did nothing, when it shines not with us? Had it no other individual to
illuminate or to terminate its beams or action, were it nothing to illuminate
the common Air? Though I shall not always have a Body to Operate in and upon, I
shall always have God, and a Savior, and a world of Fellow Creatures; and when
I shine not in this Lanthorn, and see not by these Spectacles, nor imaginarily
in a Glass, I shall yet see things suitable intuitively and as Face to Face.
That which is essentially Life (as a Living Principle) will Live: And that
which is essentially an Active, Intellective, Volitive principle, force and
Virtue, will still be such while it is itself, and is not annihilated or
changed into another thing? (which is not to be feared:) And that which is such
can never want an Object, till all things be annihilated.

8. Reason assures me, that were my will now what it should be, and fully
obsequious herein to my understanding, to fulfill Gods will would be the
fulfilling my own will (for my will should perfectly comply with His) and to
please him perfectly would be my perfect pleasure: And it is the unreasonable
adhesion to this Body, and sinful selfishness, which makes any one think
otherwise now. I am sure that my Soul shall Live (for it is Life itself) and I
am sure that I shall live to God, and that I shall fulfill and please his
blessed will; and this is (as such) incomparably better than my Felicity (as
such:) And yet so far as I am pleased in so doing, it will be my Felicity.

9. I begin now to think, that the strange Love which the Soul has to this
Body (so far as it is not inordinate) is put into us of God, partly to signify
to us the great Love which Christ has to his Mystical Political Body, and to
every member of it, even the least: He will gather all his Elect out of the
World, and none that come to him shall be shut out, and none that are given him
shall be lost: As his Flesh is to them Meat indeed, and his Blood is to them
Drink indeed, and he nourishes them for Life eternal: (His Spirit in them,
turning the Sacrament, the Word, and Christ himself in esse objectivo as
Believed in, into Spirit and Life to us, as the Soul and our Natural. Spirits
turn our food into Flesh, and Blood, and Spirits, which in a dead Body, or any
lifeless repository, it would never be;) so as we delight in the ease and
prosperity of our Body and each Member, and have pleasure in the pleasant food
that nourishes it, and other pleasant Objects which accommodate it; Christ
also delights in the welfare of his Church and of all the Faithful, and is
pleased when they are fed with good and pleasant Food, and when hereby they
prosper: Christ Loves the Church, not only as a Man must love his Wife, but as
we Love our Bodies; And no Man ever hated his own Flesh, Ephesians. 5. 27, etc. And
herein I must allow my Savior the preeminence, to overgo me in powerful
faithful Love! He will save me better from pain and death, than I can save my
Body; and will more inseparably hold me to himself: If it please my Soul to
dwell in such a House of Clay, and to operate on so mean a thing as Flesh, how
greatly will it please my glorified Lord, to dwell with his glorified Body, the
triumphant Church, and to cherish and bless each Member of it? It would be a
kind of death to Christ to be separated from his Body, and to have it die:
Whether Augustine and the rest of the Fathers were in the right or no, who
thought that as our Bodies do not only shed their Hairs, but by sicknesses and
wast lose much of their very Flesh, so Christ's Militant Body does not only
lose Hypocrites, but also, some living justified Members, yet certain it is
that confirmed Members, and more certain that glorified Members shall not be
lost! Heaven is not a place for Christ or us to suffer such loss in. And will
Christ love me better than I love my Body? Will he be lother to lose me than I
am to lose a Member or to die? Will he not take incomparably greater pleasure
in animating and actuating me for ever, than my Soul does in animating and
actuating this Body? O then let me long to be with him? And though I am
naturally loath to be absent from the Body, let me be by his Spirit more
unwilling to be absent from the Lord? And though I would not be unclothed had
not sin made it necessary, let me groan to be clothed upon with my heavenly
Habitation, and to become the delight of my Redeemer, and to be perfectly
loved, by Love itself.

10. And even this blessed Receptivity of my Soul, in terminating the Love and
Delight of my glorified Head, must needs be a felicity to me! The insensible
Creatures are but Beautified by the Suns communication of its Light and Heat;
but the sensitives, have also the Pleasure of it? Shall my Soul be senseless?
will it be a Clod or Stone? Shall that which is now the form of be then more
Lifeless, Senseless, or incapable than the form of Bruits is now? Doubtless it
will be a living, perceiving, sensible Recipient, of the felicitating Love of
God and my Redeemer? I shall be loved as a living Spirit, and not as a dead and
senseless thing, that does not comfortably perceive it.

11. And if I must rejoice with my fellow Servants that rejoice, shall I not be
glad to think that my blessed Lord will rejoice in me, and in all his glorified
Ones? Union will make his pleasure to be much mine? And it will be aptly said
by him to the faithful Soul, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25. 21.
His own active Joy, will objectively be Ours, as Ours will be Efficiently His
(or from Him.) Can that be an ill condition to me, in which my Lord will most
rejoice: It is Best to Him, and therefore Best to me.

12. And the heavenly Society will joyfully welcome a Holy Soul. Luke 15. 10.
If there be now Joy in Heaven among the Angels for one Sinner that Repents
(who has yet so little Holiness and so much Sin:) What joy will there be over
a perfected glorified Soul! Surely if Our Angels there behold our Fathers Face,
they will be glad in Season of our Company: The Angels that carried Lazarus to
Abraham's Bosom, no doubt rejoiced in their work and their success. And is the
Joy of Angels and the heavenly Host as nothing to me? Will not Love and Union
make their Joy to be my own: if Love here must make all my Friends and
Neighbors comforts to become my own? And as their Joy according to their
Perfection, is greater than any that I am now capable of, so the participation
of so great a Joy of theirs, will be far better than to have my little
separated apartment. Surely that will be my best condition which Angels and
blessed Spirits will be best pleased in, and I shall rejoice most in that which
they most rejoice in.

III. The Constitutive Reasons from the Intellective state.
III. 1. Though the Tempter would persuade men, because of the case of Infants
in the Womb, Apoplectick's, etc. that the understanding will be but an unactive
Power when separated from these corporeal Organs, I have seen before sufficient
Reasons to repel this temptation. I will suppose that it will not have such a
mode of Conception as it has now by these Organs: But, 1. The Soul will be
still essentially a Vital Intellective substance, disposed to act naturally,
and that is, to those acts which it is formally inclined to (as fire to
illuminate and heat.) And as it cannot die (while it is what it is in Essence)
because it is Life itself, that is, The Vital substance; so it cannot but be
Intellective (as to an Inclined Power,) because it is such Essentially (though
God can change or annihilate any thing if he would.) 2. And it will be among a
world of Objects. 3. And it will still have its dependence on the first cause,
and receive his continual actuating influx. 4. And no Man can give the least
show of true Reason, to prove that it shall cease sensation, (whether the
sensitive Faculties be in the same substance which is Intellective, which is
most probable, or in one conjunct as some imagine) though the Species and Modes
of Sensation cease which are denominated from the various Organs. 5. Yea, no
Man can prove that the departing Soul does not carry with it its igneous
Spirits, which in the Body it did immediately actuate: (If it were never so
certain that those Greek Fathers were mistaken (as well as Hippocrates) who
took the Soul itself to be a sublime Intellectual Fire.

And as to the Objection, some hold that the Soul preexisted before it was in
the Body; others and most that it then received its first being. If the first
were true, it would be true that the Soul had its Intellectual Activity before,
though the Soul itself incorporate remember it not, because it Operateth but ut
forma hominis, (and its Oblivion they take to be part of its penalty:) And they
that think it a radius of the Anima mundi vel systematis must think that then
it did Intellectually animate hunc mundum, vel mundi partem: And to do so
again, is the worst they can conjecture of it: As the rays of the Sun which
heat a burning Glass, and by it set a Candle on fire, are the same rays still
diffused in the Air, and illuminating, heating and moving it, and terminated on
some other Body, and not annihilated or debilitated when their contracted
Operation cease by breaking the Glass or putting out the Candle: And as the
Spirit of a Tree still animateth the Tree, when it retireth from the Leaves and
lets them fall. But this being an unproved imagination of men's own Brains, we
have no further use of it, than to confute themselves. But if the Soul existed
not till its incorporation, what wonder if it Operate but ut forma, when it is
united to the Body for that use? What wonder if its initial Operations like a
spark of Fire in Tinder, or the first lighting of a Candle, be weak and scarce
by us perceptible? What wonder if it operate but to the uses that the Creation
did appoint it; and first as vegetative fabricate its own Body as the Makers
instrument, and then feel, and then understand? And what wonder if it Operate
no further than Objects are admitted? And therefore what wonder if in
Apoplexies, etc. such Operations are intercepted? But the departing Soul is, 1.
in its Maturity. 2. No more united to this Body, and so not confined to sense
and imagination in its Operations, and the admission of its Objects. 3. And it
is sub ratione meriti, and as a governed subject is ordinate to its reward;
which it was not capable of receiving in the Womb or in an Apoplexy. And as we
have the Reasons before alleged to hold, 1. That it shall not be annihilated.
2. Nor dissolved. 3. Nor lose its essential Faculties or Powers. 4. Nor those
essential Powers be continued useless by the wise and merciful Creator, though
by Natural revelation we know not in what manner they shall act; whether on any
other Body, and by what conjunction, and how far; so by Supernatural Revelation
we are assured, that there is a reward for the Righteous, and that holy Souls
are still members of Christ, and live because he lives, and that in the Day of
their departure they shall be with him in Paradise, and being absent from the
Body, shall be present with the Lord; and that Christ therefore died, rose and
revived that he might be Lord both of the Dead and of the Living, that is, of
those that being Dead, hence do Live with him, and of those that yet live in
the Body: For he that said, God is not the God of the dead but of the Living,
that is, stands not related to them as his People as a King to Subjects, is not
himself the Lord of the absolute Dead, but of the Living.

Therefore (as Contarenus against Pomponatius de Immortal. Anim: says) the
Immortality of the Soul is provable by the Light of Nature, but the manner of
its future Operation must be known by Faith. And blessed be the Father of
Spirits, and our Redeemer, who has sent and set up this excellent Light, by
which we see further than purblind Infidels can do.

2. But I deny not but even the Scripture itself, does tell us but little of
the Manner of our Intellection when we are out of the Body; and it is not
improbable that there is more Imperfection in this Mode of Notional, Organical,
Abstractive knowledge which the Soul exercises in the Body, than most consider
of: And that as the Eye has the visive Faculty in sleep, and when we wink, and
an internal action of the visive Spirits (no doubt,) and yet sees not any
thing without, till the Eyelids are opened, (and was not made to see its own
sight;) so the Soul in the Body is as a winking Eye, to all things that are not
by the Sense and Imagination intromitted or brought within its reach: And
whether ( sicut non video visum, neque facultatem, neque substantiam videntem,
videndo tamen certo percipio me videre, so it may be said, Non intelligo
immediate ipsam intellectionem, neque facultatem, aut substantiam
intelligentem; Intelligendo tamen certo percipio me intelligere, quia actus
Intellectus in Spiritus sensitivos operans sentitur; or whether we must further
say with Ockam, that Intellectus tum intuitive tum abstractive se intelligit; I
leave to wiser men to judge: But I am very suspicious that the Body is more a
Lanthorn to the Soul, than some will admit; and that this Lusus notionum
secundarum, or abstractive knowledge of Things by Organical Images, Names, and
Notions, is occasioned by the Union of the Soul with the Body ut formae; and is
that Childish knowledge which the Apostle says shall be done away: And how
much of Man's fall might consist in such a knowing of good and evil I cannot
tell (or in the overvaluing such a knowledge:) And I I think that when vain
Philosophy at Athens had called the thoughts and desires of Mankind from great
Realities to the Logical and Philological game at Words and Notions, it was
Socrates his wisdom to call them to more concerning Studies, and Paul's greater
Wisdom to warn men to take heed of such vain Philosophy, and to labor to know
God and Jesus Christ, and the things of the Spirit, and not to overvalue this
ludicrous dreaming worldly Wisdom. And if I have none of this kind of Notional
childish knowledge when I am absent from the Body, the Glass and Spectacles may
then be spared, when I come to see with open Face, (or as face to Face.) Our
future knowledge is usually in Scripture called SEEING, Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God, 1 Cor. 13. 12. We shall see Face to
Face, 1 John 3. 2. We shall see him as he is, Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that
those which thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
Glory which thou have given me, etc. An Intuitive knowledge of all things as in
themselves immediately is a more excellent sort of knowledge than this by
similitudes, Names and Notions, which our Learning now consists in, and is
but an Art acquired by many acts and use.

3. If the Sun were, as the Heathens thought it, an Intellective Animal, and
its emitted rays were vitally visive, and when one of those rays were
received by prepared seminal matter (as in Insects) it became the Soul of an
inferior Animal, in this case the said ray would operate in that Insect or
Animal but according to the Capacity of the recipient matter; whereas the Sun
itself by all its emitted rays would see all things Intellectually and with
delight, and when that Insect were dead, that Ray would be what it was, an
Intellective Intuitive emanation: And though the Soul in Flesh do not know
itself, how it shall be united to Christ and to all other holy Souls and to God
himself, nor how near, or just of what sort that union will be, yet united it
will be; and therefore will participate accordingly of the the universal Light
or understanding to which it is united. The Soul now as it is or operateth in
the Foot or Hand does not understand, but only as it is and operateth in the
Head: And yet the same Soul which is in the Hand understands in the Head; and
the Soul operateth not so selfishly or dividedly in the Hand, as to repine
there because it understands not there; but it is quiet in that it
understands in the Head, and performs its due Operation in the Hand. But
this diversity of Operations seems to be from the Organs and the Bodies use
or need: But Souls dismissed from the Body seem to be as all Eye, or Intuitive
Light. Therefore though it might content us to say that our Head sees all
things, and we are united to him, yet we may say further that we our selves
shall see God, and all things that are meet for us to see.

4. And seeing it is most certain that the Superior glorious Regions are full
of blessed Spirits who do see God and one another, having much more perfect
Operations than we have (whose effects we Mortals find here below) why should I
that find an Intellective Nature in my self, make any doubt of my more perfect
Operations when I am dismissed hence (being satisfied that a Soul will not lose
its simple Essence.) Either those superior Spirits have ethereal Bodies to act
in (or are such themselves) or not: If they are or have such, why should I
doubt of the like; and think that my Substance or Vehicle will not be according
to the Region of my abode. If not, why should I think that my departed Soul may
not know or see without an igneous or ethereal Body or Vehicle, as well as all
those worlds of Spirits. And the certainty of Apparitions, Possessions, and
Witches do tell us, not only that there are such Inhabitants of other Regions,
Ordinarily invisible to us, but also that we are in the way to that Happiness
or Misery which is in our invisible state.

5. These things reviewed (being partly mentioned before) assuring me that I
shall have actual Intellection in my separated state, the Region, with the
Objects, but above all the Holy Scriptures, will tell me as much as it is meet
that I should here know, what it is that I shall intuitively understand. The
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 11, 12. does distinguish our knowing in part and
knowing Perfectly, knowing as a Child, and as a Man, knowing darkly and
enigmatically as in a Glass, and knowing Face to Face as we are known: The
great Question is, When this Time of Perfection is? Whether he mean at Death,
or at the Resurrection. If Dr. Hammonds observation hold that (...) in
Scripture, And Mr. Beverly in his Great Soul of Man.
when [ The Flesh or Body] is not joined with it, signifies that Life which the
Soul does enter upon immediately after our Death, and so that the Soul has
that [after living] which is sinified by the very word which we Translate
Resurrection] then it will lead men to think that there is less difference
between Mansstate at his first departure and at his last Resurrection than most
think (even than Calvin himself thought:) But the difference between our first
and last state of after life (or Resurrection) cannot be now distinctly known.
What difference there is now between Henoch, Elias, and those who rose at
Christ's Resurrection, and the rest of the Saints, even the Spirits of the
perfected Just, and whether the first have as much greater Glory than the rest,
as it is conceived that we shall have at the Resurrection above that which
immediately follows Death, what mortal Man can tell? I am past doubt that
Flesh and Blood (formally so called, and not only ab accidente, as sinful)
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God (vid. Hammond in loc.) but that our
Natural Bodies shall be made Spiritual Bodies: And how a Spiritual Body
differs from a Spirit or Soul, I pretend not well to understand, but must
stay till God by experience or fuller Light inform me. But surely the
difference is not like to be so great, as that a Soul in Flesh shall know in
part, and a Soul in a Spiritual Body shall know perfectly, and a Soul between
both shall not know at all. If it be Perfection which we shall have in our
Spiritual Body, it is like that we are nearer to that Perfection (in Knowledge
and Felicity) while we are between both, than we are in the Flesh.

6. And sure a Soul, that even Solomon says goes upward, and to God that gave
it, is liker to know God, than that which is terminated in Flesh, and operateth
ut forma according to its capacity and state: And a Soul that is with Christ,
is liker to know Christ, and the Father in him, than that which is present with
the Body, and absent from the Lord. What less can the Promise of being with him
signify?

7. And, 1. as to the Kind of Knowledge, how excellent and more satisfactory a
way will that of Intuition or Intellective-Sense be than is our present way of
abstraction, Similitudes and Signs: What abundance of Time, Thoughts and Labor
does it cost us now, to learn our Grammar, our Rhetoric, and our Logic? Our
Arts loquendi, dicendi, and disserendi? To learn our Wordy Rules and Axioms,
in Metaphysics, Physics, etc. And when we have learnt them all (if all can be
learned) how little the nearer are many to the knowing of the signified
Realities? We often get but a Set of Words to play with, to take up our time, and
divert us from the Matter: Even as Carnal men use the Creatures which signify
God, and are made to lead them up to him, to entangle them and be the greatest
and most pernicious diversion of their Souls from God; so do too many Learned
men do by their Organical signal Knowledge They use it as men do Cards, and
Romances, and Plays, to delight their Fantasies; but they know less of the
Things that are worth their knowing, than many unlearned Persons do, as I said
before. Had not much of the Athenian Learning been then a mere Game, for men to
play away their precious time at, and to grow proud of, while they were
ignorant of saving Realities, Christ and his Apostles had not so much neglected
it as they did, nor Paul so much warned men to take heed of being deceived by
that vain kind of Philosophy; in which he seems to me to have greater respect
to the universally esteemed Athenian Arts, than, as Dr. Hammond Thought, to the
mere Gnostick pretensions.

This poor dreaming signal Artificial Knowledge is, 1. Costly, 2. Uncertain. 3.
Contentious. 4. Unsatisfactory, in comparison of Intuitive Knowledge.

1. It is costly, as to the hard labor and precious time, which must be laid
out for it, as aforesaid; we grow old in getting us Horses, and Boots, and
Spurs for our Journey, and it is well if we begin it at the last: Like a Man
that would study the new found Planets, and the shape of Saturn, and Jupiter's
Satellites, and the Viam Lacteam, etc, and he spends his whole life in getting
him the best Tubes or Telescopes, and never uses them to his ends: Or like one
that instead of learning to write does spend his life in getting the best Ink,
Paper and Pens: Or rather like one that learneth to Write and Print exactly,
and not to understand what any of his words do signify. Men take their
Spectacles in stead of Eyes.

2. And when this Learning is got, how uncertain are we whether the words have
no ambiguity? Whether they give us the true notice of the Speakers (...), and
of the Matter spoken of? As I said before, what a penury, and yet redundancy of
words have we? Of how various and uncertain signification? Changed by Custom,
or Arbitrary design? Sometime by the Vulgar use, and sometime by Learned men,
that being conscious of the defectiveness of the speaking-Art, are still
tampering and attempting to amend it. And some men speak obscurely on purpose,
to raise in their Readers a conceit of their subtle and sublime conceptions.
And he that understands Things most clearly, and speaks them most plainly
(which are the parts of true Learning) shall have much a do to get the Matter
out of dark and bewildring uncertainties, and to make others understand both it
and him.

3. And hence come the greatest part of the Contentions of the World, which are
hottest among men that most pretend to wordy knowledge: As in Traffic and
converse, the more men and business we have to do with, usually the more
quarrels and differences we have; so the more of this wordy Learning, instead
of Realities, me^ ^pretend to, the more Disputes and Controversies they make;
and the Instruments of Knowledge, prove the Instruments of Error and
Contention: And alas how many applauded Volumes are the snares and troublers of
the World! And how great a part of our Libraries are vain janglings, and strife
of words, and traps for the more ingenuous sort, that will not be taken with
Cards and Dice robbing us of our time, destroying our Love, depressing our
minds that should ascend to God, and diverting them from the great and holy
Things, which should be the matter of our Thoughts and Joys; and filling the
Church with Sects and Strife, while every one striveth for the preeminence of
his Wit and Notio^s, and few strive for holy Love, and Unity, and good works.

4. And all this while, alas, too many Learned men do but lick the outside of
the Glass, and leave the Wine within untasted: To know God, and Christ, and
Heaven and Holiness, do give the Soul a nourishing and strengthening kind of
pleasure, like that of the Appetite in its food: But this game at Words is but
a knowing of Images, Signs, and Shadows, and so is but an image and shadow of
true Knowledge: It is not that Grace which Austine's definition says, Nemo
male utitur; but it is that which the Sanctified use well, and the Unsanctified
are puffed up by, and use to the opposition of Truth, the Ostentation of a
Foolish Wit, and the deceit of their own Souls: And if it be sanctified
knowledge, it is but Mediate in order to our knowledge of the Things thus
signified: And it is the real Good which contenteth and beatifieth, though the
Notions may be a subordinate recreation. And Intuition feasteth on these
Realities.

9. II. And as to the Objects of this Intuition, their excellency will be the
excellency of our Knowledge. I. I shall know God better. II. I shall know the
Universe better. III. I shall know Christ better. IV. I shall know the Church
his Body better, with the holy Angels. V. I shall better know the Methods and
Perfection of the Scripture and all God's Dirigent Word, and Will. VI. I shall
know the Methods and Sense of Disposing Providence better. VII. I shall know
the Divine Benefits which are the Fruits of Love better. VIII. I shall know my
Self better. IX. I shall better know every fellow Creature which I am concerned
to know. X. And I shall better know all that Evil, Sin, Satan, and Misery, from
which I am delivered.

10. I. Aquinas, and many others took it for the chief Natural proof of the
Souls Immortality, that Man by Nature desires not only to know Effects, and
second Causes, but to rise up to the Knowledge of the first Cause; and
therefore was made for such Knowledge in the state of his Perfection: But Grace
has much more of this desire than Nature: Not that we must not be content to
be without a great deal of Knowledge, which would be unmeet for us, useless,
troublesome or dangerous to us; nor must we aspire to that which is above our
capacity; and to know the unsearchable things of God: But not to know God is to
know nothing; and to have an understanding worse than none. I presume not to
pry into the secrets of the Almighty, nor to pretend to know more of God than
indeed I know; but O that I might know more of his glorious Perfections, of his
Will, and Love, and Ways, with that knowledge which is Eternal Life! Blessed be
that Love that sent the Son of God from Heaven to reveal him to us in the
Gospel as he has done: But all that hear the same Words and Believe them, have
not the same degree of Light or Faith? If an Angel from Heaven came down on
Earth to tell us all of God that we would know, and might lawfully desire and
ask him, who would not turn his Back on Libraries and Universities, and the
Learned men, to go and discourse with such a Messenger? What travel should I
think too far? What cost too great for one Hours talk with such a Messenger?
But we must have here but such intimations as will exercise Faith and excite
desire, and try us under the Temptations of the World and Flesh: The glorious
Light is the reward of the Victory obtained by the conduct of the Light of
Grace. God in great Mercy even here begins the reward: They that are true to
the initial Light, and faithfully follow on to know the Lord, do find usually
such increase of Light, (not of vain Notions, but of quickening and comforting
knowledge of God) as greatly encourages them, and draws them still on to
seek for more: It is very pleasant here to increase in holy Knowledge, though
it usually bring an increase of malignant opposition, and so of sorrows to the
Flesh. The pleasure that the mind has in common knowledge brings men through a
great deal of labor to attain it: How many Years travel over Land and Sea do
some men take, to see and know more of this lower World? Though it is little
that they bring home, but more acquaintance with Sin, and Vanity, and Vexation.
How many more Years do Thousands spend in the reading of multitudes of tedious
Volumes, that they may know what others knew before them. Printers and
Booksellors live by our desire of Knowledge. What Soul then on Earth can
possibly conceive how great a pleasure it will be for a glorified Soul to see
the Lord? Though I cannot now conceive what that intuition of God himself will
be, and whether it will not be a glorious kind of concluding or abstractive
knolwedge; whether the Glory which we shall see be only a created appearance of
God, or be his very Essence, it satisfies me that it will be as perfect a
knowledge as is fit for me to desire; and I shall then desire no more than is
fit: And what it is I shall then know by itself, for it is not otherwise to be
clearly known. And all the pleasure that I shall have in Heaven in knowing any
of the works of God, will be in my beholding God himself, his Being, his Vital
power and action, his Wisdom, and his Love, and Goodness, in those works: For
he is the Life, and Glory of them all. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they
shall see God.

II. And doubtless it will be no small part of my delight, to see and know
God's perfect works, I mean, the Universe itself; I cannot say that I shall
have so large a Capacity as to comprehend all the World, or know it perfectly
and with an adequate knowledge: But I shall know it in such Perfection as is
suitable to my capacity: It is exceeding pleasant to know the least Particles
of the works of God: With what diligence and delight have men endeavored to
Anatomize a Body, yea a small part of a Carcass, and to know and describe poor
Worms and Insects, Plants and Minerals? And no Man ever yet perfectly knew the
least of them all; no Herbalist or Physician ever yet knew the Nature, and uses
of any one Herb with an adequate knowledge! With what delight and diligence are
Physical searches carried on in the World, though still we are all but groaping
in the dark, and ignorant of many things for one that we know (and therefore
know no one perfectly because we are ignorant of rest.) But if indeed we were
above our dreaming erroneous Hypotheses, and saw the Nature of every Creature,
even in Sea and Land (this little Spot of God's Creation,) and the compages of
all, Oh, what a delightful Spectacle would it be? How much more to see the
whole Creation, yea or one Vortex or Systeme of the Globes, and to know their
union and communion, and to behold their beauteous Symmetry, and hear them in
concord and melodious Harmony praising the the Glory of their Great, Wise,
Amiable Creator, this were a delectable sight indeed: I shall have as much of
this as I shall be capable of: And the wonders and glory of the Works of God,
shall wrap up my Soul in admiring joyful praise for ever: And though here it be
but little of God's Works that we know, I have great reason to think that it
will be far otherwise there. 1. Because the state of Perfection must far excel
our dark and infant state of imperfection: We have now desires after such a
knowledge: His Works are great, sought out of them that have pleasure therein.
And these desires being of God, shall not be frustrate. 2. Because there will
be a proportionableness of the parts of our Perfection; and therefore as our
Love to God and his works will be there perfected, so will be our knowledge. 3.
Because we shall know God himself as much as we are capable, and therefore we
shall know his works, in him, or by a subordinate knowledge, the less being in
the greater, 4. Because God has made his works to be known to his glory: But
it is little that is here known of them by Mortals; therefore they are known by
them in Heaven, who are fitted to improve that knowledge to his praise.

If Christ who is the wisdom of God, will teach me the true Philosophy, how to
love God, and live here in all well pleasing unto him, I shall quickly in
Heaven be a perfect Philosopher; and experience will tell me, that the surest
way to be truly Learned, and know the wonderful works of God, was to know,
love, and serve the Great Creator, and in Him we shall have all, and without
him we know nothing, and have nothing at all.

Satan tempted Christ by showing him the Kingdoms and glory of the World, and
promising them all to him if he would have worshipped him: But God will show me
more than Satan could show, and give me more of that which is best, than Satan
could give.

III. And that in Heaven I shall better know Jesus Christ, and all the Mystery
of our Redemption by him, will not be the least of my felicity! For in him are
hid all the Treasures of Wisdom: And to know the Mystery of his Eternal
Godhead, in the second Person, and his created Nature, and the Union of these,
and to see God's wonderful design and work of grace in him laid open to our
clearest view; O what beatifying knowledge will this be? All dark Texts
concerning his Person, his Office, and his Works will be then expounded and
fully understood: All those strange and difficult things which were the great
exercise and honor of Faith, will then be plain: Difficulties will no more be
Satan's advantage to tempt us to unbelief or doubting. The sight of the Glory of
my Lord will be my Glory, Joh. 17. 24. If Paul had not then attained to
Perfection in the knowledge of Christ, and the power of his Resurrection, but
was pressing forward to reach that Crown in the life to come (which he calls
The Resurrection of the dead,) Phil. 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. Such as I must not
expect here to attain it; but when that which is Perfect is come, this
imperfect knowledge of Faith will be done away, as childish knowledge is in
manly: And the Glass and Riddle shall be laid aside, when we shall see Face to
Face, and shall know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 11, 12. (as to our sight
and knowledge of Christ and his Triumphant Body: For I dare not apply that
Phrase to the sight and knowledge of the Divine essence; nor yet deny it.)

If now though we see not Christ, yet believing we love him, and rejoice in him
with unspeakable glorying joy: What love, and joy will the Everlasting sight of
our blessed head, excite there in the Souls of all the glorified?

IV. I shall better (O much better) know the heavenly Jerusalem, the Triumphant
Church, the Blessed Angels and glorified Saints: And as my love to them, so my
knowledge of them will not be the least part of my heavenly delight. As
strangely as I now look upward to that World, because I cannot see it with
these Eyes, it shall be my well known Everlasting habitation! O what a sight,
what a joyful sight will Death show me by drawing aside the vail? Or rather the
Lord of Life by turning Death to my advantage! When I am there at home, I shall
no more think with confusion, fear or doubting of that blessed place or state.
My fears which now come from the smalness of my Faith, will end when Faith is
turned into Vision. As I now know the several Rooms in my House, and Houses in
the Street, and Streets in the City, so shall I then know the many Mansions,
which Christ has said are in his Fathers House. Words now give me so poor
imperfect a conception of the World and things which I never saw, as that
sometimes I can scarcely tell, whether the Joy of my Faith, or the trouble of my
dark apprehensions, be the greater: But when I shall see the Place, the
Persons, the Glory which I heard of, that will be the delightful satisfying,
and possessing kind of knowledge. If Nehemiah and the godly Jews, made so great
a matter of seeing the Walls of Jerusalem repaired, and others of the imperfect
reedifying of the Temple, O what a joyful sight to me, will the heavenly
Jerusalem then be: The most glorious sight will be at the great Marriage day of
the Lamb, when Christ shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in
all them that now believe: But the next to that will be the Day of my
particular deliverance, when I shall come to Christ, and see the Saints
admiring him in Glory.

If I were of the Opinion of those Greek Fathers, who thought that Stars were
Angels or had intellectual Souls (matters unknown to us) I should love them as
my Guardians, and take it to be yet more of my concernment to be advanced to
the fuller knowledge of them. But seeing I know that Angels love us, and by
Office do attend and keep us, and rejoice at our good, and at our repentance,
and (which is far more) are more holy and excellent Creatures than we are, it
is therefore my comfort to think that I shall better know them, and live in
near and perpetual acquaintance and communion with them, a more sensible and
sweet communion than we can have with them here. Devils are aereal and near to
this dark and sinful World, and ofter appear to men than Angels: But the Angels
affect not such descending appearances, till Love and Obedience to their Lord,
make it pleasing to them. And therefore we have but little knowledge, even of
those that know, and love, and keep us: But when we come home to their nearest
society and converse, to know them will be sweet and joyful knowledge: For they
are more excellent Creatures than the most glorious that are below the
Intellective Nature: They are full of Light, and full of Love to God and Man!
Had God bid me pray to them I would not have refused it, but taken it for my
honor: But seeing he has not, I will do that which he has bid me, even Love
them, and rejoice in my relation to the innumerable Company of them, in the
City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22. and long to know
and love them more; expecting long to bear my part in the Praises of God and of
the Lamb, in the same Chore where they are the Precentors.

And that I shall know the Spirits of the perfected Just, and be of their
communion, will be no small addition to my joy. How sweet has one wise and
holy (though weak and blemished) companion been to me here on Earth? And how
lovely have God's Graces in such (though smutted) appeared to me. O then what a
sight will it be when we shall see the Millions of Souls that shine in perfect
Wisdom and Holiness with Christ: To see a Garden that has some beautiful
Flowers in it, is something: But if you saw whole Fields and Countries shining
with them, it would be a glory (though fading) to the Earth. A well built City
is a pleasanter sight, than a single House; and a Navy than a Ship; and an Army
than one Man: And if this poor low World did all consist of Wise, and Just, and
Holy Persons, O what an orderly, lovely World would it be! If one Kingdom
consisted (Prince, Magistrates, Pastors, and People) all of such, what a
blessed Kingdom would that be: The plague of wicked men's deceits, and
falsehoods, oppressions and iniquities, may help to make us sensible of this: It
would be a great temptation to us to be loath to die, and leave such a Country,
were it not that the more the beauty of goodness appears, the more the state
of Perfection is desired: It is pleasant to me to pray in hope as Christ has
commanded me, that Earth may be made liker unto Heaven, which now is become so
like to Hell: But when I shall see the Society perfected, in Number, in
Holiness, in Glory, in heavenly Employment, the joyful Praises of Jehovah, the
Glory of God and the Lamb shining on them, and God rejoicing over them as his
delight, and my self partaking of the same, that will be the truly blessed day!
And why does my Soul imprisoned in Flesh no more desire it?

V. I shall better understand all the World of God! The Matter, and the Method
of it! Though I shall shall not have that use for it as I have now in this Life
of Faith, yet I shall see more of God's Wisdom and his Goodness, his Love,
Mercy, and Justice appearing in it, than ever Man on Earth could do! As the
Creatures, so the Scriptures are perfectly known only by perfect Spirits. I
shall then know how to solve all doubts, and reconcile all seeming
contradictions, and to expound the hardest Prophesies: That light will show me
the admirable Methods of those Sacred words, where dark minds now suspect
confusion! How evident and clear then will every thing appear to me? Like a
small print when the light comes in, which I could not read in the glimmering
twilight. How easily shall I then confute the cavils of all our present
Unbelievers? And how joyfully shall I praise that God and Savior, that gave
his Church so clear a light to guide them through this darksom World, and so
sure a promise to support them till they came to life Eternal? How joyfully
shall I bless him that by that immortal Seed did regenerate me to the hopes of
Glory? And that ruled me by so Holy and Just a Law?

VI. In that World of Light I shall better understand God's present and past
works of Providence, by which he orders the matters of this World: The Wisdom
and Goodness of them is little understood in little parcels; It is the union
and harmony of all the parts which shows the beauty of them; when the single
Parcels seem deformed, or are not understood. And no one can see the whole
together but God, and they that see it in the light of his Celestial Glory: It
is a prospect of that End, by which we have here any true understanding of such
Parcels as we see. Then I shall know clearly why (or to what use) God prospered
the wicked, and tried the Righteous by so many afflictions? I shall know why he
set up the ungodly, and put the humble under their Feet: Why he permitted so
much ignorance, ungodliness, pride, lust, oppression, persecution, falsehood,
deceit, and other sins in the World: I shall know why the faithful are so few:
And why so many Kingdoms of the World, are left in Heathenism, Mahometanism and
Infidelity. The strange permissions which now so puzzle me, and are the matter
of my astonishment, shall all be then as clear as day: I shall know why God
disposed of me as he did through all my life; and why I suffered what I did;
and how many great deliverances I had, which I understood not here; and how
they were accomplished. All our misinterpretations of God's works and
permissions, will be then rectified: And all our Controversies about them,
which Satan has made so great advantage of (by a pretended zeal for some
Truths of God) will then be reconciled, and at an end: And all the works of
Divine Providence from the beginning of the World, will then appear, a most
delectable beauteous frame.

VII. And among all these works, I shall specially know more, the nature and
excellency of Gods mercies and gifts of Love, which here we too unthankfully
undervalued and and made light of! The special works of Love, should be the
matter of our most constant, sweet and serious Thoughts, and the fuel of our
constant Love and Gratitude! The lively sense of Love and Mercy, makes lively
Christians, abounding in Love to God, and Mercy to others: But the Enemy of God
and Man most labors to obscure, diminish, and disgrace God's Love and Mercys
to us, or to put us out of relish to them, that they be unfruitful as to their
excellent ends and uses. Little do most Christians know how much they wrong God
and themselves, and how much they lose, by the diminutive poor Thoughts which
they have of God's Mercies: Ingratitude is a grievous misery to the Sinner, as
gratitude is a very pleasant work. Many a Thousand Mercies we now receive,
which we greatly undervalue. But when I come to the state and work of perfect
gratitude, I shall have a more perfect knowledge of all the Mercies which ever
I received in my Life, and which my Neighbors and Friends, and God's Church
and the World did ever receive: For though the thing be past, the use of it is
not past: Mercies remembered must be the matter of our everlasting thanks: And
we cannot be perfectly thankful for them, without a perfect knowledge of them:
The worth of a Christ, and all his grace, the work of the Gospel, the worth of
our Church Priviledges, and all God's Ordinances, the worth of our Books, and
Friends, and Helps of our Life and Health, and all conveniences will be better
understood in Heaven, than the most holy and thankful Christian here
understands them.

VIII. And it will be some addition to my future happiness that I shall then be
much better acquainted with my self: Both with my Nature, and with my Sin and
Grace. I shall then better know the Nature of a Soul, and its formal Faculties
(Three in One:) I shall know the nature and way of its Operations, and how far
its acts are simple or compound, or organical! I shall know how far Memory,
Fantasy, and Sense internal and external belong to the rational Soul, and
whether the sensitive and rational are two or one; and what Senses will perish
and what not? I shall know how the Soul does act upon it self, and what acts it
has that are not felt, in sleep in Apoplexies, and in the Womb? I shall know
whether the vegetative nature be any thing else than Fire; and whether it be of
the same Essence with the Soul (sensitive, or rational:) (and whether Fire
eminenter be a common fundamental substance of all Spirits, diversely specified
by the Forms, (mental, sensitive and vegetative:) or whether it be as a Body or
Vehicle to Spirits, or rather a nature made for the Copulation of Spirits and
Bodies, and the Operation of the former on the latter, as between both: And
whether Fire (and of what sort) be the active forma telluris, and of other
Globes: I shall know how far Souls are One and yet Many, and how they are
Individuate? And whether their Quantitas discreta in being numerically many, do
prove that they have any Quantitatem continuam, and whether they are a purer
sort of Bodies as the Greek Fathers, Tertullian and others Thought, and what
Immateriality signifies; and what substantiality of Spirits; and how
substantia and materia differ; and how far they are penetrable and indivisible;
and whether a Soul be properly pars; and whether individual Souls are parts of
any common Soul: and how far the individuation does continue? And whether
separated from the Body, they operate in and by any other Vehicle, or without,
and how? and whether they take with them any of the fiery Nature as a Vehicle
or as a constitutive part? I shall know how God produces Souls? And how his
production by Emanation or Creation, does consist with Generation? And how
forms are multiplied? And what Causality the Parents Soul has to the
production of the Child's? Whether by communication of substance, or only by
disposing the recipient matter? I shall know whether all Souls came from Adam's
one substantiality, and whether there be more substance in the All than in that
One, and whether one substance cause more by generation? Or whether it be so as
to the Souls of Bruits; or whether any Anima communis inform many Organical
Bodies of the Bruits, as the Sun lights many Candles which are individuate by
matter to which (as parts of one) they variously are contracted, and on which
they operate, and whether they were individuate in pre-existence, or shall be
individuate after separation? I shall know how far the semen in generation is
animated: And how the animated semina of two make one? And if animated, what
becomes of the anima seminis perditi? and of an Abortive? And whether the Body
be animated as Vegetative or Sensitive before the entrance of the rational
Soul? Or rather the same Soul which in its Faculty is Rational being one with
the Sensitive and Vegetative, be the constitutive form of the first animated
Body, and the Fabricator of its own domicilium? I shall know how far the Soul
is receptive? And what the Causa finalis does to it? And what each Object is to
the Constitution or production of the act? Yea and what an Act is, and what a
Habit? And how a Soul acting or habited differs from itself not acting or
habited? And how its acts are many and yet but One: Or its Faculties at least:
Many other such difficulties will all be solved; which now Philosophers contend
about in the dark, and pass but under doubtful conjectures? Or at least are
known to very few.

And I shall know how God's Spirit operateth on Souls: And how it is sent from
Christ's humane Nature to work on Man? And whether Grace be properly or only
Metaphorically called a Nature (a New Nature, a Divine Nature) in us: I shall
know what Freewill is, and how Man's will can be the first determiner of any
act of its own in specie morali (good or evil) without being such a Causa
prima, as none but God can be: And so how far free acts are necessitated or
not: I shall know what power the Intellect has on the will, and the will on
the Intellect, and what power the Sense and Fantasy has on either: And what
any Intellectus agens does? Whether it be to our Intellection, as the Sun is to
our sight? I shall know what is meant by the Degrees of Acts and Habits in the
Soul: And whether there be diverse Degrees of Substantiality, or of the virtus
vel facultas formalis of several Souls: I shall know better the difference of
the Habits called Acquired and Infused: And what common Grace is, and what it
does: And what Nature can do of itself or by common Grace, without that which
is proper to the justified: And how far any Degrees of Grace are lost.

I shall know what measure of Grace I had my self: and how far I was mistaken
in my self: And what acts were sincere, and how much that was not sound was
mixed: and what was of my self and sin.

I shall know much more of my sin than here I ever knew; the number, and the
greatness of them: That so I may know with greatest thankfulness and love, how
much I am beholden to pardoning and healing Grace.

Yea I shall know more of my Body, as it was the Habitation of my Soul, or the
organical matter on which unitedly it workt. I shall know how far it helped or
hindered me: And what were all the obscure Diseases that puzzled all the
Physicians and my self: And how marvellously God sustained, preserved, and often
delivered me: And what of my actions, was to be imputed to the Body, and what
of them to the Soul?

IX. And every fellow Creature, which I am concerned to know, I shall know far
better than now I do, both Things and Persons: The Good and Bad, the Sincere
and the Hypocrites will be there discerned: And many an action that here (...)
for honorable, covered or colored with wit or worldly advantages, or false
pretenses, will then be found to be odious and unjust: and wickedness will be
flattered or extenuated no more: And many a good and holy Work which false men
through wickedness and worldly Interest, reproached as some odious Crime, will
there be justified, honored and rewarded: All Sciences are there perfect,
without our ambiguous Terms, or imperfect Axioms and Rules of Art.

X. And lastly, I shall better know, from what Enemies, what Sins, what Dangers
I was here delivered. What contrivances and malicious endeavors of Satan and
his Instruments God defeated: How many Snares I escaped: And I shall better
know how great my deliverance is by Christ from the Wrath to come. Though we
shall not know Hell, by painful Sense, we shall know it so far as is necessary
to fill us with gratitude to our Redeemer: Yea we shall know much of it far
better than the damned Spirits that feel it. For we shall know by sweet and
full fruition what the Joy and Blessedness is which they have lost; when they
have no such kind of knowledge of it.

All this knowledge will be thus advanced to my glorified Soul beyond what I
can here conceive in Flesh: And is it not then far better to be with Christ?

IV. The Constitutive Reasons from the state of my will.
1. But it is the WILL that is to the Soul, what the Heart is to the Body: As
it is the prime ^eat of Morality, so is it the chief seat of Felicity. My
greatest Evil (...) there; and my greatest subjective Good will be there. Satan
did most against it, and God will do most for it. And will it not be better
with Christ than here?

1. It will not there by tied to a body of cross interests and inclinations,
which is now the greatest snare and enemy to my Soul? Which is still drawing my
love, and care, and fears, and sorrows, to and for it self, and turning them
from my highest interest. How great a deliverance will it be, to be freed from
the temptations, and the inordinate love, and cares, and fears for this
corruptible Flesh?

2. My will shall not there be tempted by a world of inferior good, which is
the bait and provision for the Flesh, where Meat, and Sleep, and Possessions,
House, Lands, and Friends, are all become my snares and danger: Gods mercies
will not be made there the Tempters instruments: I shall not there have the
Flatteries or frowns, promises or threatenings of the Tyrants of the World to
tempt me: Bad company will not infect me, nor divert me: The errors of good
men will not seduce me; nor reputation or reverence of the Wise, Learned, or
Religious draw me to imitate them in any sin.

3. I shall there have none of Satan's solicitations, to pervert my will: He
will not have that advantage by my Sense and Fantasy, nor that access unto me
as now he has. But of this I spoke before.

2. My WILL shall there be better than here, I. Negatively, because, 1. There
will be nothing in it that is displeasing to God: No sinful inclination, habit
or act: Nothing to strive against God's Spirit: Nor grudge at any word or work
of God: No Principles of Enmity or Rebellion left. 2. There will be nothing
that is against the good of others: No inclinations to injury, or any thing
that is against my Neighbors or the common good. 3. There will be nothing in
it that is cross to itself; no more war or striving in me; not a Law in my
Mind, and a Law in my Members that are contrary to each other: No crossness
between Sense and Reason, nor between the sensitive Appetite and the rational:
All will be at unity and peace within.

3. II. Positively; Christ will have finished his cure on my will: The work of
Sanctification will be perfect: And I. My will shall there by union and
communion be made conformable to the will of Christ, and so unto the Fathers
will. This must needs be meant (whatever more) in the Prayer of Christ, Joh.
17. 21, 22. Where he prays [that they may be One as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, that they may be one in us, that they may be one, even as we are
one.] The will of Christ and of the Father will be my will, that is, I shall
love and will (dispositively and actually) the same that God loves and wills
(in the measure of a Creature, infinitely below him:) And if so, 1. How can the
will of Man have greater honor, than to be the same with the will of God?
Assimilation to a King among us poor Mortals goes for Honor: Assimilation to
Angels is much more: That we shall be like or equal to the Angels, is a high
part of the Blesseds praise: But how much more is it, to be thus far like to
God! Indeed God's Image and the Divine in us here, can be no less, than this
similitude to God's will in the degree that we have it: But, alas, that degree
is so very low, as that we can hardly tell whether our similitude or our
dissimilitude be the more; I mean, whether our wills are for more that God
wills, or against more. O how many Thousand wishes and desires have we had,
which are against the will of God! But there we shall have the full impression
of God's will upon our wills, as Face answers Face in a Glass* or as the Wax
answers the Seal: As the Finger on the outside, answers the motion of the
Clock within, so in all things which belong to our duty and perfection, we
shall answer the will of God. As the Echo answers the Voice, defectively,
but truly, without contradiction or discord, so will our wills be as the Echo
of God's will.

2. And then I am sure that there will be nothing in my will but good! For God
wills no evil.

3 And this will be virtually all obedience! For all sin is voluntary, and all
Moral good is primarily in the will.

4. And then there can be no matter of disquiet in me, but all will be in
perfect Peace; for all that is like God will be pleasing both to God and me: No
troubling crossness will remain.

5. And how easy and sweet then will all my obedience be, when I shall
perfectly will it, without any reluctance or aversness? All will be my very
pleasure, that I do.

4. II. And seeing my will shall be the same with the will of God, it follows
that it shall never be frustrate, but I shall have all whatsoever I would have,
and shall be and do whatsoever I would be and do? For I shall desire nothing
but what God wills; and God's will shall certainly be done: I shall have as
much Love and Joy as I would have: I shall be as happy as I would be: I shall
desire nothing for others but it shall be done: Indeed if God's will were there
unknown to me, I might ignorantly go against it, as I do here: But there before
I will or desire any thing, I shall know whether it be God's will or not: So
that I shall never wish any thing, which shall not be accomplished: An I as it
is God's Perfection to have his will always done (though all his Laws be not
obeyed,) so my Perfection shall consist in this likeness unto God, that my will
shall be still fulfilled. And then Christ's promises will be perfectly
performed, Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name he will give it you, Joh.
15. 16. and. 16. 2^^. and. 14. 13, 14. and 15. 7. Ye shall ask what you will,
and it shall be done unto you: While their will was the same with the will of
Christ: But he says not that it shall all be given us here: we ask for
Perfection, and we shall have it, but not here.

5. III. Yea my will it self shall be my Fruition: For it shall not be the will
of one in need; a desire of what I want; for I shall want nothing: Therefore it
is said that we shall Thirst no more: But it will be a Complacency in what I do
possess: And in this also my perfection will be the Image of God's perfection:
Not but that all Creatures still Receive from God, and in that sense may be
said to need, in that they have nothing of themselves, but all by gift and
communication from him: But being still and full possessours they cannot
properly be said to want* Complacency in that which we possess is Love and
Pleasure in one act: And indeed Pleasure and Love are the same thing: To Love
any thing is to have that thing to be Pleasing to my mind. Even when it is
wanted, it is thought on a pleasing thing, and therefore desired; so that the
desiring act of the Will is but a second act occasioned by want, and following
the first act, which is Complacency or simple Love. I desire it because I love
it. Rightly therefore is the Will itself called LOVE; for in the first act,
Love, Will, and Rational Appetite are all words of the same signification. My
will therefore must needs be perpetually full of perfect JOY, when enjoying
Love and Pleasure will be my will itself: Thus shall I have in me the Spring of
Living Waters; and the Comforter will then perfectly do his work; when my
constant will itself shall be Comfort: well therefore is Glory said to be the
^erfection of sanctifying Grace: when this Grace is the beginning of that Love
and Joy which Glory is the Perfection of: And Perfection is the Spirits work.

6. IV. And it will be much of my felicity that my Will shall be confirmed and
fixed in this conformity to the will of God, and holy LOVE will be its Nature.
Now both understanding and will are so lamentably mutable, that further than
God promises to uphold us, we know not one day, what we shall think, judge or
Will the next. But when Love is as a fixed Nature in us, we shall be still the
same, adhering to amiable goodness, without intermission or Cessation: It will
be as easy to us (and more) to love God and Holiness, as it is to the Hungry
and Thirsty to love meat and drink, or to the proud to love praise or
domination; yea or to any Man to love his life. And we shall be no more weary
of Loving, than the Sun is of shining, or than the Hungry is of Feasting, or a
Friend of friendly love and converse: Nay the Comparison is quite too low; for
all Creatures here have a fading vanity which wearieth the satiated or failing
Appetite; but there is no such thing in Heaven.

7. II. And as from the nature of that act, so much more from the nature of the
Object, my love will appear to be my happiness: The Objects (which are as the
Matter of the act) will be these.

1. GOD himself will be the full and everlasting Object of my Love. And he that
could but understand as well as those in Heaven do, what this word signifies [
to LOVE GOD and be BELOVED of him] would say that there needs no other
description of perfect happiness! Perfect joyful Complacency in God is the
Heaven which I desire and hope for. This is my Felicity, and much more. As I am
the Agent of Love to God, and the Object of God's Love to me, it is my
Felicity: As God is the ultimate Object of my Love, and the Agent of his Love
to me (that is, of the effects of it,) so it is unspeakably more high and
excellent than to be my felicity: Love is the closure of the Wills of God and
Man: And as it is God's part or interest (efficiently or objectively) it is
infinitely more excellent, than as it is my part and interest.

8. In GOD there is all that Love can desire for its full everlasting Feast. 1.
He is Infinitely good in himself, that is most amiable: And the nature of Man's
will is to love Good as Good: Could we love God with a Love that is adequate to
the Object, we should be God our selves which is impossible; none but God can
adequately know God or Love him: In God's Love to Himself, both the Act and
Object are Infinite, and indeed are both one, there being not that formally
which we know by the name of Act and Object; but [ Act and Object] are our
analogical inadequate conceptions of that Act of God which is his Essence. But
in our Love to God, the Act is finite and infinitely below the Object: Yea, the
Object which in reality (...) itself infinite, yet proximately as the esse
Cognitum is the Object of our Love, is finite there: It is the Conception or
Idea of God in the Intellect, which is the proper and nearest Object of the
Will: And this is as a Face in a Glass, a shadow; even the finite little
shadow of an infinite Being. The same Infinite good is a felicity to diver^
Persons in diverse degrees according as they diversely love him, and are
receptive of his Love.

9. 2. God who is infinitely Good in himself, will be that most suitable Good
to me, and meetest for the dearest embracements of my will. For, 1. He has All
in himself that I need or can desire: There is no Room, nothing above him, or
beyond him, or without him, for love to cleave to: (Though Below him the
Creature, though not being without him, is loved without him, by the deception
of the mind.)

10. 2. He is willing to be loved by me: He disdaineth not my Love: He might
have refused to be embraced by such affections, as have so often and sinfully
polluted themselves by embracing vanity and filth: As Persons of state and
stately cleanliness will not be touched by filthy hands; much less let Dogs or
dirty Swine leap on them which come from wallowing in the mire: God might have
driven me away from the happiness of loving him; and have denied me the leave
for so high a work: But he commands my Love, and makes it my greatest duty:
He inviteth and entreats me, as if he were a gainer by my happiness: He
seeks to me to seek to him, and as he is the first, so is he the most earnest
suitor: He is far readier to receive my Love, than I am to give it him. All the
compassionate invitations which I have had from him here, by his Word and
Mercies, assure me that he will there receive me readily; he that so valued my
poor cold imperfect love to him on Earth, will not reject my perfect love in
Heaven: He that made it the great work of his Spirit to Effect it, will not
refuse it when it is made perfect by himself.

11. 3. And he is near to me, and not a distant God out of my reach, and so
unsuitable to my Love: Blind Unbelievers may dream that he is far off; but he
is as near us even now, as we are to our selves: He is not far from any of us,
for in him we live, and move, and have our being: The Light of the Sun is not
so nea^ my Eyes, as God will be for ever to my Mind. When he would sanctify us
to love him, he brings us nigh to him in Christ. As we love our selves easily
as being, as they say, the nearest to our selves: So we shall as easily love
God as our selves, when we see ^^at he is as near us as we are to our selves,
as well as that he is infinitely more Amiable in himself.

12. 4. And because of the imparity of the Creature and the Creator, he has
provided such Means to demonstrate to us his nearness, as are necessary to the
exercise of our Love: We shall see his G^o^y and taste his Love in our
glorified Mediator, and in the G^o^y of the Church and World: God will
condescend to show himself to us according to our Capacities of beholding him:
Here we see him in his Works and Word, and there we shall see him in the glory
of all his perfect Works. But this leads me to the second Object of my Love.

13. II. Under God as I shall see, so I shall delightfully Love the glorious
Perfection of the Universe; even the Image of God in all the World; as my Love
will be my delight, so I shall love best that which is best, and most delight
in it: And the whole is better than any part: And there is a peculiar Beauty
and Excellency in the whole World, as perfect, compaginate, harmonious, which
is not to be found in any part, no not in Christ himself as Man, nor in his
Church.

The mavelous inclination that all things have to Union, even the Inanimates,
might persuade me, if I felt it not certainly in my self, that it is most
credible that Man also shall have the like inclination, and such as is
agreeable to the nature of his Faculties: And therefore our love and delight in
all things, is that uniting inclination in Man.

14. III. And I shall have a special Love to the Holy Society, the triumphant
Universal Church, consisting of Christ, Angels, and Saints, as they are
specially amiable, in the Image and Glory of God: God himself loves them more
than his inferior works: (that is, his Essence, which is Love, and has no
degrees or change, does send forth fuller streams of good upon them, or makes
them better and happier than the rest:) And my love will imitate the love of
God, in my Capacity. And if Societies on Earth, more holy and wise than others,
though imperfectly, are very amiable, what then will the heavenly Society be?
Of this I spoke before (of knowing them.)

15. 1. Think here, O my Soul, how sweet a state* unto thee it will be to Love
the Lord Jesus thy glor^fied Head with perfect love! When the glory of God
which shines in him, will feast thy love with full and everlasting pleasure:
The highest created Perfection of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, refulgent in
him, will not give leave to thy Love, to cease, or intermit, or abate its
fervor. When thou shall see in the glorified Church the precious fruits of
Christ's Redemption, Grace, and Love, this also will feed thy love to him, from
whom this heavenly Glory comes: And when thou shall feel thy self possessed of
perfect happiness, by his Love to thee, will not this also do its part? Yea the
remembrance of all his former Love; what he did for thee, and what he did in
thee here on Earth, how he called thee with a Holy calling, how he washed thee
in his Blood from all thy sins, how he kindled in thee those desires which
tended to that perfect Glory, how he renewed thy Nature, how he instructed, and
guided, and preserved thee from thy Childhood, and how many and how great sins,
enemies, dangers, and sufferings he saved thee from, all this will constrain
thee Everlastingly to love him: Thus, (though he give the Kingdom to the Father
as ceasing his Mediatory, healing, saving work of acquisition) he will be to
thee the Mediator of fruition: God in him will be accessible, and condescend to
a suitable communion with us, Joh. 17. 24. And as Christ is thy Life, radically
and efficiently, as he is the giver of Grace and the Spirit of Love, so he will
be Objectively thy Life as he is Lovely, and it will be formally thy Life to
Love him, and God in him for ever.

16. 2. Think also, O my Soul, how delectable it will be to Love, (as well as
to know) those Angels that most servently love the Lord! They will be lovely to
thee as they have loved thee, and more as they have been Lovers and Benefactors
to the Church and to Mankind; but far more as they are so many refulgent Stars
which continually move, and shine, and burn in purest love to their Creator. O
blessed difference between that amiable Society of holy Spirits, and this dark,
mad, distracted, wicked World! Here Devils tempt me within, and Devils
incarnate persecute me without: Blaspheming of God, reviling godliness,
deriding the Sacred Scriptures, and Sacred exercises, malignant slandering of
the Servants of God, hating, persecuting, silencing and saying all manner of
evil falsely of them, for their Righteousness sake, while such Crimes are
pretended as they once falsely charged on Christ himself; this is the
Conversation of those that I have long dwelt with in this World: Atheism,
Infidelity, Papal Church tyranny, bloody Wars, destroying the Righteous,
oppressing the Poor, Adultery and Fornication, Stigmatizing-Perjury, Ambition,
Violence, Covetousness, deceit, sottish Ignorance, wilfulness in Sin, hatred of
Reproof, revengeful Malice; these and such like are the fruits of the Soil
where I have long sojourned (Though through the Grace of Christ among the
faithful there have been better fruits:) And is not the Company of Holy Angels
better than this? With whom God is all; who are even made up of shining Wisdom,
and holy Lov^, and beneficent activity: who are the blessed Cho^e that
melodiously sing forth the high Praises of their Maker: Among whom God dwells
as in his presence Chamber or his Temple, and in whom he takes his great
delight: With these I shall see or hear no evil: No mixture of fools or wicked
Ones do pollute or trouble their Society: There will be no false Doctrine, no
evil Example, no favoring Wickedness, no accusing Goodness, no hurtful
Violence, but holy, powerful, operative Love, will be all and do all, as their
very Nature, Life, and Work. And is it not better be a Doorkeeper there than
to dwell in the Palaces of Wickedness! And is not a Day with them better than
a Thousand here?

17. 3. And with the holy Angels I shall love holy Souls that are made like
unto them and joined with them in the same Society (and it is likely with them
Judge, that is, Rule the World.) All their infirmities are there put off with
the Flesh; they also are Spirits made up of holy Life, and Light, and Love:
There is none of their former ignorance, error, imprudence, selfishness,
contentiousness, impatience, or any other troubling hurtful thing. When I think
with what fervent love to God, to Jesus Christ, and to one another, they will
be perfectly united there, alas, how sad and how shameful is it, that they
should here be prone to disaffections and divisions, and hardly agree to call
each other the Servants of God, or to worship God in the same Assembli^^* But
the remnants of dividing Principles (viz. Pride, Error and Uncharitableness)
will be all left behind. Society with imperfect Saints is sweet: The imperfect
Image of God upon them is amiable: But their frailties here are so vexatious,
that it is hard to live with some of them in Peace. But perfect Love will make
them one, and O how delightful will that communion of Saints be. I can never
forget how sweet God has made the course of my Pilgrimage, by the fragrancy
and usefulness of his Servants graces: How sweet have my bosom Friends been,
(though mutable?) How sweet has the Neighborhood of the godly been? How sweet
have the holy Assemblies? And how many hours of comfort have I there had? How
profitable have their Writings, their Conference, and their Prayers been? What
then will it be to live in the union of perfect Love with perfect Saints in
Heaven for ever, and with them concordantly to love the God of Love?

18. III. And as the Act and the Object of LOVE will constitute my felicity, so
will my Reception from the Love of God, and his Creatures be sweeter to me than
my own activity can be: For it is Mutual Love that makes it up. I shall not be
the Fountain of my own delights; nor can I act till I am acted, nor offer any
thing to God, but what I have first received from him. And Receive I shall
abundantly and continually, and from thence shall overflow to God, and
Receiving and Returning (are now and) will be, the circular endless motion, and
our true perpetual Life and Happiness.

19. I. All my Receivings shall be from God. His LOVE is not a mere Immanent
Will, nor a Wish which touches not the Object: But it is what Heat is in or
from the Sun or Fire: It is an efflux of Goodness: It is the most powerful,
sweet, communicating Principle or Work. All Love is communicative; but none in
comparison of Gods: As there is none primitive and simply good but God. How
much does Love in the affairs of men? All that is pleasant in the World is it,
or its effects. Were it not for sensual Love there would be no Generation of
Man or Bruits: God has made it a generating Principle: Hatred causes not
congress, but fighting with or flying from one another: Were it not for Natural
Love, Mothers would never endure the pain, and trouble, and care, which is
necessary to humane Birth and Education: Were it not for Love, Parents would
never labor all their lives to leave their Children well instructed and well
provided for when they are gone. My Food would not please me, did I not love
it, and I should neglect it to the neglect of my life: Did I not love my Books
and Learning itself, I should never have bestowed so much of Threescore Years
in poring on them, and searching for Knowledge as I have done: Did I not love
my House, my Conveniences and necessaries I should neglect them; and they would
be to me of small use: Did I not love my Friends, I should be less profitable
to them and they to me: Did not I love my Life, I should neglect it, and never
have endured the labor and cost about it as I have done! If a Man love not his
Courtrey, Posterity and the common good, he will be as a burdensome Drone in the
Hive, or as pernicious Vermin. What is done in the World that is good, but by
LOVE?

And if created Love be so necessary, so active, so communicative, how much
more will the infinite Love of the Creator be? His Love is now the Life of the
World: His Love is the Life of Nature in the Living, the life of Holiness in
Saints; and the life of glory in the Blessed. In this infinite Love it is that
I and all the Saints shall dwell for ever more. And if I dwell in LOVE, and
LOVE in me, surely I shall have its sweet and plenteous communication; and
shall ever drink of the Rivers of Pleasure. It is pleasant to Nature to be
Beloved of others: Especially of the great, and wise, and good: much more to
have all the communications of Love, in converse and gifts, in plenty and
continuance, which may be still expressing it to our greatest benefit! Had I a
Friend now that did for me but the hundredth part of what God does, how dearly
should I love him? Think then, think believingly, seriously, constantly, O my
Soul, what a life thou shall live for ever in the Presence, the Face, the Bosom
of infinite Eternal Love? He now shines on me by the Sun, and on my Soul, by
the Sun of Righteousness but it is as through a Lanthorn, or the crevises of my
darksom Habitation: But then he will shine on me, and in me, openly and with
the fullest streams and beams of Love.

20. God is the same God in Heaven and Earth, but I shall not be the same Man;
Here I receive comparatively little, but live in darkness, doubtful and
frequent sorrows; because my Receptivity is less: The windows of my Soul are
not open to his light: Sin has raised clouds, and consequently storms against
my comforts: The enterances to my Soul by the streights of Flesh and Sense are
narrow; and they are made narrower by sin than they were by Nature, Alas how
often would Love have spoken comfortably to me, and I was not at home, to be
spoken with, but was abroad among a world of Vanities; or was not at leisure;
or was asleep and not willing to be awaked! How often would LOVE have come in and
dwelt with me, and I have unkindly shut my doors against him! How often would he
have been with me in secret where he freely would embrace me, but I had some
pleasing company or business which I was loath to leave! How often would he have
feasted me, and had made all ready, but I was taken up and could not come; ^ay,
when his Table has been spread before me, Christ, Grace and Glory have been
offered to me, my Appetite has been gone or dull, and all has been almost
neglected by me, and has scarce seemed pleasant enough to be accepted, or to
call off my mind from luscious Poison! How often would he have shined upon me,
and I have shut my windows or mine eyes: He was jealous indeed, and liked not a
Partner: He would have been All to me, if I would have been All for him: But I
divided my Heart, my Thoughts, my Love, my Desires, and my Kindnesses; and
alas, how much did go besides him? yea, against him to his Enemies, even when I
knew that all was lost, and worse than lost, which was not his? What wonder
then if so foolish and unkind a sinner, had little pleasure in his Love; and if
so great ingratitude and neglect of Sovereign goodness, were punished with such
strangeness, and fears, and faintings, as I have long with groans lamented?
Recipitur ad modum recipientis.

But in Heaven I shall have none of these obstructions: All old unkindness and
ingratitude will be forgiven: The great reconciler in whom I am beloved, will
then have perfected his work: I shall then be wholly separated from the vanity
which here deceived me! My open Soul will be prepared to receive the heavenly
influx: With open Face I shall behold the open Face of glorifying Love; I shall
joyfully attend his Voice; and delightfully relish the Celestial Provisions! No
disease will corrupt my Appetite: No sluggishness will make me guilty again of
my old neglects: The Love of the Father, by the Grace of the Son, and the
Communion of the Holy Spirit, will have got the victory over all my deadness
folly, and disaffection, and my God-displeasing and self-undo^ng averseness and
enmity will be gone for ever! The perfect LOVE which God does first effect in
me, will be my everlasting Receptivity of the fullest Love of God: Benevolent
love will make me good, that is, a Holy lover of God; and then pleased love
will make me his delight, and benevolence will still maintain me in my capacity.

Study this heavenly work of Love, O my Soul; these are not dead or barren
studies: These are not sad, unpleasant studies: It is only love that can relish
love, and understand it: The will here has its gust, so like to an
understanding, as makes some Philosophers say that voluntas percipit, is a
proper Phrase: What can poor carnal Worldlings know of glorious Love, who study
it without Love? What sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals, a lifeless Voice,
are they that preach of God, and Christ and heavenly Glory without Love? But
gazing upon the face of Love in Christ, and tasting of its gifts, and looking
up to its glorious reign, is the way to kindle the Sacred Fire in thee. Look
upwards if thou would see the Light that must lead thee upwards! It is not
for nothing that Christ has taught us to begin our Prayers with [ Our Father
which art in Heaven:] It is Fatherly Love that must win our Hearts, and that
must comfort them: And it is [ in Heaven] where this is gloriously manifested:
As I said before, as the Soul is in all the Body, but yet understands not in
the Hand as it does in the Head, nor rejoiceth not in the Foot as it does in
the Heart; so God that is every where, does not every where glorify his Love,
as he does it in Heaven: Thither therefore the Mind and Eye are even by Nature
taught to look up as to God, as we look a Man in the Face when we speak to him,
rather than to his Feet, though his Soul be also there.

My sinful Heart has needed sorrow! My careless, rash, presumptuous Soul has
needed fears; and I have had some part of these: Mercy saw it good for me, as
necessary to prevent my more dangerous deceits and lapses! And O that in the
hour of sensual temptations, I had feared more, and departed from evil. But it
is HOLY LOVE that must be my life! Or else I am dead notwithstanding fear.

O come then and study the life of Love: It is more of a Holy Nature than of
Art; but yet study must do much to prepare thee to receive it. This is the
great use of a heavenly Conversation! It is the contemplation, belief and hope
of the glorious state of Love hereafter, that must make us like it, and kindle
it in us here: The burning Glass must be turned directly to the Sun, if you
will have it set any thing on fire. There is a carnal or common love to God,
which is kindled in men by carnal pleasures: But a Holy love like that in
Heaven must be studiously fetched from Heaven, and kindled by the fore sight of
what is there, and what we shall be there for ever: Faith must ascend, and look
within the vail; thou must not live as a stranger to thy home, to thy God, and
Savior, and thy hopes: The fire that must warm thee is in Heaven, and thou
must come near it, or open thy self to its influence, if thou will feel its
powerful efficacy. It is night and winter with carnal minds, when it is day and
summer with those that set their Faces Heavenward.

21. II. But though all my Receivings will be from God, they will not be from
him alone: We must live in perfect Union also with one another, and with all
the heavenly Society; and therefore as we must love them all, so shall we be
beloved by them all: And this will be a subordinate part of our blessedness:
God there will make use of second causes, even in communicating his Love and
Glory.

22. 1. The Lord Jesus Christ will not only be the Object of our delightful
love, but will also love us with an effectual operative love for ever: His love
will be as the Vital Heat and Motion of the Heart to all the Members; the Root
of our Life and Joy. The Love of our Redeemer will flow out into us all as the
Vital Spirits, and his Face of Glory will be the Sun of the heavenly Jerusalem,
and will shine upon us, and show us God: And in his light we shall have light.
Did his tears for a dead Lazarus make men say, Behold how he loved him! O then
what will the reviving Beams of heavenly life, make us say of that love, which
fills us with the pleasures of his presence, and turns our Souls into JOY
it self! He comfort us now by the teaching of his Word; but surely the
fruition of Salvation will be more gladding then the tidings of it! When he
that told us of Glory in his Gospel shall give it us, we shall not only believe
but feel that he loves us.

23. Believe, O my Soul, thy Saviors Love that thou may foretast it and be
fit to feel it. We were incapable in sinful Flesh of seeing him otherwise than
as clothed with Flesh; and his consolations were administered by a word of
Promise suitable to his appearance: But when he withdrew his bodily presence,
the Comforter was sent with a fuller Consolation: But all that was but the
earnest and the first fruits of what he will be to us for ever: Be not seldom,
not unbelieving, nor slight in the thoughts of thy Saviors love; for it is he
that is the way to the Infinite love: Let thy believing be so much of thy daily
work, that thou may say, that he dwells in thy Heart by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.
and that while thou live here it is Christ that lives in thee; and that thy
life in the Flesh is not a fleshly life, but by the Faith of the Son of God
that has loved thee and given himself for thee, Gal. 2. 20. And that though
thou see him not, yet believing thou love him also with unspeakable Joy, as
believing the unspeakable, perfect Joy which his Love-will communicate to thee
for ever.

Look upon the Sun and think thus with thy self, [ How wonderful is the
Emanation of this Sun: Its motion, light, and heat communicated to so many
Millions of C^eatures all over the Earth, and in the Seas: What if all these
beams of light and heat, were proportionable beams of perfect Knowledge, Love,
and Joy? and that all Creatures that are under the Sun had from its influx as
much Wisdom, Love, and Joy, as they have Light, Heat, and Motion:
Would not then this Earth be as a World of Angels, and a Heaven? O what a
blessed World would it be? And what a benefactor would the Sun be to the World?
Why, even such will Jesus Christ be to the Celestial World! He is the Sun of
Glory: His Influence will send forth LIFE, and LIGHT and JOYFUL LOVE upon all
the blessed from the Face of the God, as the Sun sends forth from God, its
Motion, Light, and Heat, upon this World. Now therefore begin and live upon
him: live upon the influence of his Grace, his Teaching, Love-kindling, and
Quickening Grace, that thou may have his Name and Mark, and he may find in
thee something of himself or of his own, when thou come to his Righteous
ryal. His Grace is not in my power, not at my command: It is not meet it should
be so: But he has not bid me seek and beg in vain: If he had never told me
that he will give it me, it is equal to a promise if he do but bid me seek and
ask: But I have more! He teaches me to pray: He makes my Prayers: He writes
me out a Prayer Book on my Heart: He gives me desires, and he loves to be
importuned by them! His Spirit is first a Spirit of supplication, and after of
Consolation, and in both a Spirit of Adoption: so far is he from being loath to
be troubled with my importunity, that he seeks to me to seek his grace, and
is displeased with me that I will ask and have no more!

All this is true! But how then comes my Soul to be yet so low, so dark, so
fond of this wretched Flesh and World, and so backward to go home, and dwell
with Christ? Alas a taste of Heaven on Earth is a Mercy too precious to be cast
away, upon such as have long grieved and quenched the Spirit, and are not by
diligent and patient seeking prepared to receive it: He that proclaims a
general Peace, will give Peace only to the Sons of Peace: If after such unkind
neglects, such wilful sins as I have been guilty of, I should expect to be
suddenly in my Saviors Arm^* and to be feasted presently with the first Fruits
of Heaven, I should look that the Most Holy should too little manifest his
hatred of my sin. My Conscience remembers the follies of my Youth, and many a
later odious sin; and tells me that if Heaven were quite hid from my sight,
and I should never have a glimpse of the Face of glorious eternal Love, it were
but just: I look upward from Day to Day; I groan to see his pleased Face, and
better to know my God and my home! I cry to him daily [My God, this little is
better than all the pleasures of sin: My Hopes are better than all the
Possessions of this World: Thy gracious looks have often revived me, and thy
mercies have been unmeasurable to my Soul and Body: But O how far short am I of
what even Forty Years ago I hoped sooner to have attained? Where is the Peace
that passes Understanding that should keep my Heart and Mind in Christ! O
where is the seeing, the longing, the rejoicing and triumphing Faith? Where is
that pleasant familiarity above, that should make a Thought of Christ and
Heaven to be sweeter to me than the Thoughts of Friends, or Health, or all the
Prosperity and Pleasure of this World? Do those that dwell in God, and God in
them, and have their Hearts and Conversations in Heaven, attain to no more
clear and satisfying perceptions of that blessed state, than I have yet
attained! Is there no more acquaintance above to be here expected? No livelier
sense of future joys! No sweeter foretast? Nor fuller silencing of doubts and
fears? I am not so loath to go to a Friend, nor to the Bed where I often spend the
Night in restless pains and rolling, as I have too often been to come to thee!
Alas, how many of thy Servants are less afraid to go to a Prison than to their
God! and had rather be banished to a Land of Strangers, than sent to Heaven!
Lord, must I that am called Thy Child, and an Heir of Heaven, and a Coheir
with Christ, have no more acquaintance with my glorified Lord, and no more love
to Thee that art my portion, before I go hence, and come before thee! Shall I
have no more of the heavenly Life, and Light, and Love? Alas, I have scarce
enough in my Meditations, to denominate them truly heavenly Meditations: I have
scarce enough in a Prayer to make it indeed a heavenly Prayer: or in a Sermon
to make it a heavenly Sermon: And shall I have no more when I come to die! Must
I go hence so like a stranger to my home! Will thou take Strang^^^ into Heaven,
and know them as thine that do no better know thee here? O my God, vouchsafe a
Sinner yet more of his Spirit, that came down on Earth to call up earthly minds
to God: and to open Heaven to all Believers! O what do I beg for so frequently,
so earnestly, for the sake of my Redeemer, as the Spirit of Life and
Consolation, which may show me the pleased Face of God, and unite all my
affections to my glorified Head, and draw up this dark and drowsy Soul to love
and long to be with thee.]

But alas, though these are my daily groans, how little yet do I ascend! I dare
not blame the God of Love! He is full and willing! I dare not blame my blessed
Savior! He has showed that he is not backward to do good! I dare not accuse
the holy Spirit! It is his work to sanctify and comfort Souls! If I knew no
reason of this my low and dark Estate, I must needs conclude that it is
somewhat in my self! But, alas, my Conscience wants not matter, to satisfy me
of the cause! Sinful resistance of the Spirit, and unthankful neglects of Grace
and Glory, are undoubtedly the cause. But are they not a cause that Mercy can
forgive? That grace can overcome: and may I not yet hope for such a Victory
before I die.

Lord, I will lie at thy doors and groan! I will pour out my moans before thee!
I will beg, and whatever thou will do with me! Thou describest the kindness of
the Dogs to a Lazarus that lay at a rich Man's Doors in Sores? Thou commendest
the neighbourly pity of a Samaritan, that took care of a wounded Man! Thou
condemnest those that will not show mercy to the poor and needy! Thou biddest
us, Be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful: If we see our Brother have
need and shut up the Bowels of our compassion from him, it is because thy love
dwells not in us: And shall I wait then at thy Doors in vain and go empty
away from such a God; when I beg but for that which thou have commanded me to
ask, and without which I cannot serve thee or come to thee, live or die in a
habit beseeming a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an H^ir of Heaven? O
give me the wedding Garment without which I shall but dishonor thy bounteous
Feast: Let me wear a Livery which becomes thy Family, even a Child of God! How
often have thou commanded (...) to Rejoice? Yea, to rejoice with exceeding and
unspeakable joy: And how fain would I in this obey thee? O that I had more
faithfully obeyed thee in other preparatory duties, in ruling my Senses, my
Fantasy, my Tongue, and in diligent using all thy Talents? Then I might more
easily have obeyed thee in this! Thou know, Lord, that Love and Joy are
duties that must have more than a Command: O bid me do them with an effecting
word. How can I Rejoice in Death and Darkness: When the Bridegroom is absent I
must fast and mourn* While I look toward Heaven but through the crevises of
this dungeon Flesh, my Love and Joy will be but answerable to my Light: How
long is it since I hoped that I had been translated from the Kingdom of
Darkness, and delivered from the power of the Prince of Darkness, and brought
into that Light which is the entrance of the Inheritance of Saints: And yet
alas, Darkness, Darkness is still my misery! There is Light round about me, in
thy word and works, but darkness is within me. And if my Eye be dark, the Sun
will be no Sun to me. Alas my Lord, it is no^ all the Learning in the World, no
not of Theology that consists in the knowledge of Words and Methods, which I
can take for the satisfactory heavenly Light! To know what thou have written in
the Sacred Book, is nor enough to make me know my glorified Savior, my Father,
and my home. It must be a Light from Heaven, that must show me Heaven; and a
Light accompanied with Vital heat, that must turn to Love and Joy within me: O
Let me not have only dreaming knowledge, of Words and Signs, but quickening
Light, to show the Things which these words do signify, to my M^nd, and Heart!
Surely the Faith By which we must live, must be a l^ving Faith! And must reach
further than to Words, how true soever. Can Faith live in the Dark? What is it
but an effect of thine Illumination! What is my Unbelief but the Darkness of my
Soul! Lord Jesus scatter all these mists: Make thy way O thou Son of
Righteousness into this benighred mind! O send thine Advocate to silence every
temptation that is against thy truth and thee, and thine Agent to prosecute thy
cause against thine Enemies and mine, and to be the resident Witness of thy
Verity, and my Sonship, and Salvation. Hearing of thee is not satisfactory to
me! It must be the Presence and Operation of thy Light and Love, shed abroad by
thy Spirit on my Heart, that must quiet and content my Soul! I confess with
shame that I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am unworthy to
have any glimpse or taste of Heaven! But so did many that are now entertained
and feasted by thy Love in Glory!

My Lord, I know that Heaven is not far from me! It is not (I believe) one Days
or Hours journey to a separated Soul! How quick is the communion of my Eyes
with the Sun, that seems far off! And could thou not show it me in a moment?
Is not Faith a seeing Grace? It can see the invisible God, and the unseen
World, the new Jerusalem, the innumerable Angels, and the Spirits of the
perfected Just, if it be animated by thine influx! Without which it can do
nothing, and is nothing! Thou that often healedst the Blind here in the Flesh,
did tell us that it is much more thy work to illuminate Souls! It is but
forgiving all my sins, and removing this film that sin has gathered, and my
illuminated Soul will see thy Glory: I know that the vail of Flesh must be also
rent before I shall see thee with open Face, and know my fellow Citizens above
as I am known! It is not Heaven on Earth that I am begging for, But that I may
see it from Mount Nebo, and have the bunch of Grapes; the Pledge, and the first
Fruits; that Faith and Hope which may kindle Love and Desire, and make me run
my Race in Patience, and live and die in the Joy which beseems an Heir of
Heaven!

But if my part on Earth must be no greater than yet it is, let it make me the
wearier of this Dungeon, and groan more fervently to be with thee, and long for
the day when all my longing shall be satisfied, and my Soul be filled with thy
light and love.

24. And doubtless as I shall love the Angels and Saints in Heaven, so I shall
some way in subordination to Christ be a Receiver from them: Our love will be
mutual: And which way soever I owe duty, I shall expect some answerable return
of benefit. The Sun shines upon the Stars as well as on the Earth, and the
Stars on one another. If Angels are greatly useful to me here, it is like they
will be much more there, where I shall be a more capable receiver. It will be
no diminution to Christ's honor that he there makes use of my fellow
Creatures to my joy, no more than it is here: The whole Creation will be still
one compaginated frame; and the heavenly Society will for ever retain their
Relation to each other, and their aptitude and disposition to the duties and
benefits of those Relations. And as we shall be far sitter for them than here
we are, so shall we have far more comfort in them: How gloriously will God
shine in the glory of the Blessed? How delightful will it be to see their
Perfection in Wisdom, Holiness, Love and Concord? What Voices they use, or what
Communication instead of Voices we shall shortly know: But surely there is a
blessed harmony of Minds, and Wills, and Practice. All are not equal, but all
accord to love and praise their glorious God, and readily to obey him, and
perfectly to love each other: There is no jarring or discordant Spirit that is
out of tune: no separation or opposition to each other! As God's love in Christ
is our full and final happiness; so Nature which has made us sociable teaches
us to desire to be loved of each other: but especially by wise and worthy
Persons: Saints and Angels in Heaven will love incomparably better than our
dearest Friends on Earth can do; and better than they did themselves when we
were on Earth: For they will love that best which is best; and where there is
most of God appearing: Else it were not intellectual love! And therefore they
will love us as much better when we come to Heaven, as we shall be better. If
we go from loving friends on Earth, we shall go to them that love us far more:
The love of these here does but pity us in our pains, and go weeping with our
Carcasses to the Grave: But the love of those above will joyfully convoy or
welcome out Souls, to their triumphing Society: All the holy Friends that we
thought we had lost, that went before us, we shall find rejoicing there with
Christ.

And O what a glorious state will be that common uniting and united love! If
two or three Candles joined together make a greater flame and light, what would
Ten thousand Stars united do* When all the LOVE of Angels and Saints in full
Perfection, shall be so united as to make ONE LOVE, to God that is One, and to
one another who are there all one in Christ, O what a glorious LOVE will that
be? That LOVE and JOY will be the same thing: And that One universal LOVE will
be One universal JOY.

Little know we how great a Mercy it is to be here commanded to love our
Neighbors as our selves; and much more to be effectually taught of God so to
love one another. And did we all here live in such unfeigned Love, we should be
like to Heaven, as bearing the Image of the God of Love: But alas, our
Societies here are small; our Goodness which is our Amiableness woefully
imperfect, and mixed with loathsome sin and discord: But there a whole Heaven
ful^ of blessed Spirits will flame for ever in perfect Love to God, to Christ,
and one another.

Go then, go willingly, O my Soul! Love joineth with LIGHT to draw up thy
desires! Nature inclines all things unto Union! Even the lifeless Elements
have an Aggregative motion, by which the parts when violently separated, do
hastily return to their Natural adhesion. Art thou a Lover of Wisdom, and
would thou not be united to the Wise? Art thou a Lover of Holiness, and of
Love itself, and would thou not be united to the Holy who are made of Love?
Art thou a hater of enmity, discord and divisions, and a Lover of Unity here on
Earth, and would thou not be where all the just are One? It is not an
unnatural Union to thy loss: Nothing shall be taken from thee by it: Thou shall
receive by it more than thou can contribute: It shall not be forced against
thy will: It is but a Union of Minds and Wills; a perfect Union of Loves. Let
not natural or sinful selfishness cause thee to think suspiciously or hardly of
it: For it is thy happiness and end: What got the Angels that fell to
selfishness from Unity? And what got Adam that followed them herein! The
further any man goes from UNITY by SELFISHNESS, the deeper he falls into sin
and misery from God! And what does Grace but call us back, from sin and
selfishness to Gods Unity again! Do^e not then on this dark divided World! Is
not thy Body, while the parts by a uniting Soul are kept together and make One,
in a better state than when it is crumbled into lifeless dust? And does not
death creep on thee by a gradual dissolution? Away then from this sandy
incoherent state! The further from the Center the further from Unity: A Unity
indeed there is of all things; but it is One heavenly LIFE, and LIGHT, and LOVE
which is the true felicitating Union.

We dispute here whether the Aggregative Motion of separated parts (as in
descensu gravium) be from a Motive Principle in the part, or by the Attraction
of the whole, or by any external impulse. It is like that there is somewhat of
all these: But sure the greatest cause is like to do most to the effect: The
body of the Earth has more power to attract a Cload or Stone, than the
intrinsic Principle to move it downwards: But intrinsic Gravity is also
necessary. The superior attractive Love and Loveliness must do more to draw up
this mind to God, than my intrinsic Holiness to move it upward: But without
this Holiness the Soul would not be capable of feeling that attractive influx.
Every Grace comes from God to fit and lead up my Soul to God: Faith therefore
believes the heavenly state, and Love does with some Delight desire it, and
Hope gapeth after it, that I may at last attain it.

They that have plea^ed against Propriety, and would have all things common in
this World, have forgotten that there is a Propriety in our present Egoity, and
Natural Constitution, which rendereth some accidental Propriety necessary to
us: Every Man has his own bodily parts, and inherent accidents, and every Man
must have his own Food, his own Place, Clothing and Acquisitions; his own
Children, and therefore his own Wife, etc. But that the greatest Perfection is
most for Community as far as Nature is capable of it, God would show us in
making the first Receivers of the extraordinary pourings out of his Spirit, to
sell all and voluntarily make all common, none saying, This or that is my own!
which was not done by any constraining Law, but by the Law or Power of uniting
Love: They were first all as of one Heart and Soul, Act. 4. 32.

Take not then thy inordinate desire of Propriety for thy Health, but for thy
Sickness: Cherish it not, and be not afraid to lose it, and measure not the
heavenly felicity by it: Spirits are penetrable: They claim not so much as a
Propriety of place, as Bodies do: It is thy weakness and state of Imperfection
now, which makes it so desirable to thee that thy House should be Thine and
nones but thine; thy Land be Thine, and nones but Thine; thy Clothes, thy
Books, yea, thy knowledge and grace, be Thine and Nones but Thine. How much
more excellent a state were it, (if we were here capable of it) if we could say
that all these are as the common Light of the Sun, which is mine and every ones
as well as mine! Why are we so desirous to speak all Languages, but that we
might understand all men and (...) understood of all, and so might make our
sentiments as common as is possible? Whence is it that men are so addicted to
talkativeness, but that Nature would make all our Thoughts and passions as
common a^ it can? And why else are Learned men so desirous to propagate their
Learning, and Godly men so desirous to make all others wise and godly: It
seems one of the greatest calamities of this life; that when a Man has with
the longest, and hardest study attained to much knowledge, he cannot bequeath
it, or any part of it, to his Heir, or any Person when he dies, but every Man
must acquire it for himself: And when God has sanctified the Parents, they
cannot communicate their Holiness to their Children (though God promise to
bless them on their account.) Much less can any Man make his Grace or Knowledge
common: Nature and Grace incline us to desire it: but we cannot do it. For this
end we Talk, and Preach, and Write; for this end we study to be as plain and
convincing and moving as we can, that we may make our Knowledge and Affections
as common to our Hearers and Readers as we can: And O what a blessed work
should we take Preaching and Writing for, if we could make them all know but
what we know, and love what we are persuading them to love? There would then be
no need of Schools and Universities: A few Hours would do more than they do in
an Age. But alas, how rare is it for a Father of excellent Learning and Piety,
to have one Son like himself, after all his industry!

Is not the heavenly communion then desirable, where every Man shall have his
Own, and yet his Own be common to all others? My knowledge shall be mine own,
and other men's as well as mine: My goodness shall be my own and theirs: My
glory and felicity shall be mine and theirs: And theirs also shall be mine as
well as theirs: The Knowledge, the Goodness, the Glory of all the heavenly
Society, shall be Mine according to my Capacity: Grace is the Seed of such a
state, which makes us all one in Christ, (neither Barbarian, nor Scythian,
Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, Bond, nor Free;) by giving us to love our
Neighbors as our selves and to love both our Neighbors and our selves for
Christ, and Christ in all: Well might Paul say, All things yours, But it is
here but as in the Seed; the perfect union and communion is hereafter. Earth
and Heaven must be distinguished: We must not extend our hopes or pretensions
here beyond the Capacity of our Natures: As perfect Holiness and Knowledge, so
perfect Unity and Concord is proper to Heaven, and is not here to be expected:
The Papal pretensions of an impossible Union in one Governor of all the Earth,
is the means to hinder that Union which is possible. But the state of
Perfection is the state of perfect union and communion. Hasten then upwards, O
my Soul, with the ferventest desires, and breath after that state with the
strongest Hopes; where thou shall not be rich, and see thy Neighbors poor
about thee, nor be poor while they are rich; nor be well while they are sick,
or sick while they are well: But their Riches, their Health, their Joy will be
all thine, and thine will be all theirs, as the common Light; and none will
have the less for the participation of the rest: Yea, Communion will be part of
every ones felicity: It constitueth the very being of the City of God. This
Celestial Communion of Saints in one holy Church, above what is here to be
attained, is now an Article of our Belief: But believing will soon end in
seeing and enjoying.

V. The Constitutive Reasons from the heavenly Life or Practice.
1. Seeing and Loving will be the heavenly Life: But yet it seems that
besides these, there will be EXECUTIVE Powers, and therefore some answerable
PRACTICE. There are GOOD WORKS in Heaven, and far more and better than on
Earth. For, 1. There will be more Vital Activity, and therefore more exercise
of it: For the Power is for Action. 2. There will be more Love to God and one
another: And Love is active. 3. There will be more likeness to God and our
Redeemer, who is communicative, and does good as he is good. 4. Our Union with
Christ who will be everlastingly beneficent, as well as benevolent, will make
us in our places also beneficent. 5. Our Communion in the City of God, will
prove that we shall all bear our part as the Members of the Body, in
contributing to the welfare of the whole, and in the common returns to God.

2. But, What are the heavenly Works, we must perfectly know when we come
thither: In general we know, 1. That they will be the works of love to God and
to his Creatures; that is, such as Love inclines us to exercise. 2. And they
will be works of Obedience to God; that is, such as we shall do to please his
will, and because he wills them to be our duty. 3. They will be useful works
to others. 4. They will be pleasant to our selves and part of our felicity. 5.
And they will carry all to God our End.

3. And somewhat of them is particularly described in the holy Scriptures: As,
1. We shall in Concord with the whole Society or Chore* give Thanks and Praise
to God and our Redeemer, Rev. 19. 5. 1 Pet. 4. 11. Rev. 7. 4. and 4. 7, 11. and
5. 13. and 7. 12. and 19. 1. Phil. 4, 20. Whether there be any Voice, or only
such Spiritual activity and exultation as to Man in Flesh is not to be clearly
understood, is not fit for us here to presume to determine: It will be somewhat
more high and excellent than our vocal Praise, and Singing is; and of which
this bears some analogical resemblance or signification. As all Passions
earnestly desire vent and exercise, so specially do our holy affections, of
Love, Joy and Admiration of God Almighty! And there is in us a desire of
communion with many in such affections and expressions: Methinks when we are
singing or speaking God's praise in the great Assemblies, with joyful and
fervent Souls, I have the liveliest foretast of Heaven on Earth: And I could
almost wish that our Voices were loud enough to reach through all the World,
and unto Heaven itself: Nor could I ever be offended (as many are) at the
Organs and other convenient Music, soberly and seasonably used, which excite
and help to tune my Soul, in so holy a work, in which no true assistance is to
be despised. No work more comfort me in my greatest sufferings, none seems
more congruous and pleasant to me while I wait for Death, than Psalms and words
of Praise to God; nor is there any exercise in which I had rather end my life:
And should I not then willingly go to the heavenly Chore, where God is praised
with perfect Love, and Joy, and harmony? Had I more of a Praising frame of
Soul, it would make me long more for that Life of Praise. For I never find my
self more willing to be there, than when I most joyfully speak or sing God's
praise. Though the Dead praise not God in the grave, and dust does not give him
thanks; yet living Souls in Heaven do it joyfully, while their fleshly
clothing turns to dust!

Lord ^une my Soul to thy Praises now, that sweet experience may make me long
to be where I shall do it better! I see where any excellent Music is, Nature
makes men flock to it; and they that are but Hearers, yet join by a concurrent
fantasy and delight: Surely if I had once heard the heavenly Chore, I should
Echo to their holy Songs, though I could not imita^ them; and I should think
it the truest Blessedness to be there and bear my part. My God, the voice of
thy comforting Spirit, speaking thy Love effectually to my Soul, would make
such holy Music in me, that would incline me to the Celestial consort; and
without it all these thoughts and words will be in vain. It is the inward
M^lody of thy Spirit and my Conscience that must tune me to desire the h^avenly
Melody. O speak thy love first to my Heart, and then I shall joyfully speak it
to my Brethren, and shall ambitiously seek that communion of them, that praise
thee better, than sinful groaning Mortals can: And though my sins here make a
loathed jar and discord in my Songs, I hope my groans for these sins and their
effects, will make no discord: Sighs and Tears have had the honor to be
accepted by thee, who despisest not a contrite Soul: But if thy Spirit will
sing and speak within me, and help me against the discordant murmurs of my
unbelieving Heart, and pained Flesh, I shall offer thee that which is more
suitable to thy Love and Grace. I confess Lord that daily Tears and Sighs are
not unsuitable to the Eyes and Voice of so great a Sinner, who is under thy
correcting Ro^! What better could I expect when I grieved thy Spirit, than that
it should prove my grief! Yea, this is far better than the genuine effects of
sin. But this is not it that is mee^est to be offered to the God of Love: He
that offers Praise does glorify thee! And is not this the Spiritual
Sacrifice acceptable through Christ, for which we were made Priests to God, 1
Pet. 2. 5. I refuse not Lord to lie in Tears and Groans when thou requirest it;
and do not thou refuse those Tears and Groans; but O give me better, that I may
have better of thine own to offer thee: And by this prepare me for the far
better, which I shall find with Christ: And that which is Best to us thy
Creatures, will be accepted as Best by Thee, who art glorified and pleased in
the Perfection of thy works.

4. II It is at least very probable that God makes glorified Spirits his
Agents and Ministers of much of his beneficence to the Creatures that are below
them. For, 1. We see that where he endueth any Creature with the noblest
endowments, he makes most use of that Creature to the benefit of others* We
shall in Heaven be most furnished to do good; and that furniture will not be
unused. 2. And Christ tells us that we shall be like or equal to the Angels;
which though it mean not [ simply and in all things] yet it means more than
to be above carnal Generation; for it speaks of a similitude of Nature and
State as the Reason of the other. And that the Angels are God's Ministers for
the good of his chosen in this World, and Administrators of much of the Affairs
on Faith, (...) past all doubt. 3. The Apostle tells us (...) the Saint^
shall Judge the World and Angels: And Judging in Scripture is often put for
Ruling! It is therefore probable at least, that the Devils, and the Damned,
shall be put under the Saints, and that with the Angels they shall be employed
in some Ministerial Oversight of the Inhabitants and Affairs of the promised
New-Earth. 4. And when even the more noble Superior Bodies, even the Stars,
are of so great use and influx to inferior Bodies, it is like that accordingly
Superior Spirits will be of use to the Inhabitants of the World below them.

5. But I think it not meet to venture here upon uncertain conjectures beyond
the revelation of God's Word, and therefore shall add no more, but conclude
that God knows what use to make of us hereafter as well as here, and that if
there were no more for us to do in Heaven, but with perfect Knowledge, Love and
Joy, to hold communion with God and all the heavenly Society, it were enough to
attract a sensible and considerate Soul to fervent desires to be at home with
God.

6. And here I must not overpass my rejection of the injurious opinion of too
many Philosophers and Divines, who exclude all Sense and Affection from Heaven,
and acknowledge nothing there but Intellect and Will: And this is because they
find Sense and Affection in the Bruits, and they think that the souls of Bruits
are but some quality or perishing temperament of Matter; and therefore that
Sense and Affection is in us no better.

7. But, 1. What felicity can we conceive of without any affection of delight
or joy: Certainly bare Volition now without these does seem to be no felicity
to us: Nor knowledge neither, if there were no delight in knowing.

8. 2. Yea, I leave it to men's experience to judge, whether there be now any
such thing in us as proper willing which is not also some internal sense of and
affection to the good which we will? If it be Complacency or the Pleasedness of
the Will, this signifies some Pleasure, and Love in the first act is nothing
else but such an Appetite: If it be Desire, it has in it a Pleasedness in the
thing desired as in esse cognito, as it is thought on by us; and what Love is
without all sense and affection?

9. 3. Why does the Scripture ascribe Love and Joy to God and Angels if there
were not some reason for it? Doubtless there is great difference between the
heavenly Love and Joy, and ours here in the Body: And so there is also between
their knowledge and ours, and their Will and ours: But it is not that theirs is
less or lower than ours, but somewhat more excellent, which ours gives us some
analogical (or imperfect formal) notice of.

10. 4. And what though Bruits have Sense and Affection, does it follow
therefore that we have none now? Or that we shall have none hereafter? Bruits
have Life: And must we therefore have no Life hereafter, because it is a thing
that is common ^oBruits? Rather as now, we have all that the Bruits have and
more, so shall we then have Life, and Sense, and Affection of a nobler sort
than Bruits, and more. Is not God the Living God? Shall we say that he lives
not because Bruits live? Or rather that they live a sensitive life, and Man a
Sensitive and Intellectual, because God is Essential, Transcendent Infinite
Life, that makes them live.

11. 5. But if they say that there is no Sensation or Affection but by bodily
Organs, I answered before to that; the Body feels nothing at all, but the
Soul in the Body: The Soul uniteth itself most nearly to the Igneous-aereal
parts called the Spirits; and in them it feels, sees, tastes, smells,
etc. And that Soul that feels, and sees, does also inwardly love, desire,
and rejoice: And that Soul which does this in the Body, has the same power and
faculty out of the Body: And if they judge by the cessation of sensation when
the Organs are undisposed or dead, so they might as well conclude against our
future Intellection and Will, whose operation in an Apoplexy, we no more
perceive than that of Sense. But I have before showed that the Soul will not
want exercise for its Essential faculties, for want of Objects or bodily
Organs; and that men conclude basely of the souls of Bruits, as if they were
not an enduring substance, without any proof or probability: And tell us idle
dreams, that they are but vanishing temperaments, etc. which are founded on
another Dream, that FIRE (or the Motive-Illuminative-Calefactive Cause) is no
substance neither; and so our unnatural Somatists know none of the most
excellent substances, which actuate all the rest, but only the more base and
gross which are actuated by them: and they think they have well acquit
themselves, by telling us of subt^le act^d Matter and Motion, without
understanding what any Living Active-Motive Faculty, or Virtue is. And because
no Man knows what God does with the souls of Bruits, (whether they are only
one common sensitive soul of a more common Body, or whether Individuate still
and Transmigrant from Body to Body, or what else:) Therefore they make
Ignorance a plea for Error, and feign them to be no substances, or to be
Annihilate.

12. I doubt not but Sensation (as is aforesaid) is an excellent Operation of
the Essential faculties of real substances called Spirits; and that the highest
and noblest Creatures have it in the highest excellency: and though God that
fitteth every thing to its use, has given, e. g. a Dog a more perfect Sense of
Smelling than a Man, yet Man's internal Sense is far more excellent than the
Bruits, and thereby is an advantage to our Intellection, Volition and Joy here
in the Flesh: And that in Heaven we shall have not less, but more, even more
excellent Sense and Affections of Love and Joy, as well as more excellent
Intellection and Volition: but such as we cannot now clearly conceive of.

13. Therefore there is great reason for all those Analogical collections which
I have mentioned in my Book called, The Saints Rest; from the present
operarations and pleasures of the Soul in Flesh, to help our Conceptions of its
future pleasures: And though we cannot conclude that they will not
unconceivably differ in their manner from what we now feel, I doubt not but
feel and rejoice we shall, as certainly as Live (and the Soul is Essential
Life) and that our Life, and Feeling, and Joy, will be unconceivably better.

The Concluding Application.
1. I am convinced that it is far better to depart and be with Christ, than to
be here: But there is much more than such conviction necessary to bring up my
Soul to such desires. Still there resists, 1. The natutural averseness to
Death which God has put into every Animal, and which is become inordinate and
too strong by sin. II. The remnants of Unbelief, taking advantage of our
darkness here in the Flesh, and our too much familiarity with this visible
World. III. The want of more lively fortasts in a heavenly mind and love,
through weakness of Grace, and the fear of Guilt. These stand up against all
that is said; and words will not overcome them: what then must be done? Is
there no remedy?

2. There is a Special sort of the Teaching of God by which we must learn so to
number our Days as to apply our Hearts to Wisdom: Without which we shall never
effectually, practically and savingly learn either this or any the most common
and obvious easy Lesson. When we have read, and heard, and spoken, and written
the soundest Truth, and certainest Arguments, we know yet as if we knew not and
believe as if we believed not, with a slight and dreaming kind of apprehension,
till God by a special Illumination bring the same things clearly to our Minds,
and awaken the Soul by a special suscitation, to feel what we know, and suit
the Soul to the Truth revealed, by an influx of his Love, which gives us a
pleasing sense of the Amiableness and Congruity of the things proposed. Since
we separated our selves from God, there is a hedge of separation between our
Senses and our Understandings, and between our Understandings and our Wills and
Affections, so that the communion between them is violated, and we are divided
in our selves, by this Schism in our Faculties. All men still see the
demonstrations of Divine Perfections, in the World and every part thereof; and
yet how little is God known. All men may easily know that there is a God, who
is Almighty, Omniscient, Goodness itself, Eternal, Omnipresent, the Maker,
Preserver, and Governor of all, who should have our whole Trust, and Love, and
Obedience; and yet how little of this knowledge is to be perceived in men's
Hearts to themselves, or in their Lives to others? All men know that the World
is Vanity, that Man must die, that Riches then profit not, that time is
precious, and that we have only this little time to prepare for that which we
must receive hereafter: And yet how little do men seem to know indeed, of all
such things as no Man doubts of? And when God does come in with his powerful
awakening Light and Love, then all these things have another appearance of
affecting reality, than they had before; as if but now we began to know them:
Words, Doctrines, Persons, Things do seem as newly known to us.

All my best Reasons for our Immortality and future Life, are but as the
New-formed Body of Adam, before God breathed into him the Breath of Life: It is
he that must make them Living Reasons. To the Father of Lights therefore I must
still look up, and for his Light and Love I must still wait; as for his
blessing on the Food which I have eaten, which must concoct it into my living
substance: Arguments will be but undigested Food, till God's effectual influx
do digest them. I must learn both as a Student and a Beggar: when I have
thought and thought a Thousand times, I must beg thy Blessing, Lord, upon my
Thoughts, or they will all be but dullness or self-distraction. If there be no
Motion, Light, and Life, here without the Influx of the Sun, what can Souls do,
or receive or feel without thy influx. This World will be to us without thy
Grace, as a Grave or Dungeon, where we shall lie in Death and Darkness. The eye
of my Understanding, and all its Thoughts will be useless or vexatious to me,
without thine illuminating Beams? O shine the Soul of thy Servant into a
clearer knowledge of thy Self and Kingdom, and Love him into more Divine and
heavenly love; and then he will willingly come to thee!

3. 1. And why should I strive by the fears of Death, against the common course
of Nature, and against my only hopes of Happiness? Is it not appointed for all
men once to die? Would I have God to alter this determinate Course, and make
sinful Man immortal upon Earth? When we are sinless we shall be immortal. The
love of life was given to teach me to preserve it carefully and use it well,
and not to torment me with the continual troubling foresight of Death: Shall I
make my self more miserable than the Vegetatives and Bruits? Neither they nor I
do grieve that my Flowers must fade and die, and that my sweet and pleasant
Fruits must fall, and the Trees be uncloathed of their beauteous leaves, until
the Spring. Birds, and Beasts, and Fishes, and Worms, have all a
self-preserving fear of Death, which urges them to fly from danger: But few if
any of them have a tormenting fear arising from the fore-thoughts that they
must die. To the Body death is less troublesome than sleep: For in sleep I may
have disquieting pains or dreams: And yet I fear not going to my bed. But of
this before.

If it be the misery after Death that is feared, O what have I now to do, but to
receive the free reconciling Grace which is offered me from Heaven, to save me
from such misery, and to devote my self totally to him, who has promised, that
those that come to him he will in no wise cast out.

4 But this comes by my selfishness: Had I studied my duty, and then remembered
that I am not mine own, and that it is God's part and not mine to determine of
the duration of my life, I had been quiet from these fruitless fears: But when
I fell to my self from God, I am fallen to care for my self, as if it were my
work to measure out my Days, and now I trust not God as I should do with his
own. And had my resignation and devotedness to him been more absolute, my trust
in him would have been more easy! But Lord, thou know that I would fain be
thine, and wholly thine; and it is to thee that I desire to live: Therefore let
me quietly Die to Thee, and wholly Trust Thee with my Soul.

5. II. And why should my want of formal Conceptions of the future state of
separated Souls, and my strangeness to the manner of their subsistence and
operations, induce me to doubt of those generals, which are evident, and beyond
all rational doubting? That Souls are substances, and not annihilated, and
essentially the same when they forsake the Body, as before, I doubt not.
Otherwise neither the Christians Resurrection, nor the Pythagoreans
transmigration were a possible thing. For if the Soul cease to be, it cannot
pass into another Body, nor can it re-enter into this? If God raise this Body
then it must be by another Soul! For the same Soul to be Annihilated, and yet
to begin again to be, is a contradiction: For the second beginning would be by
Creation, which makes a new Soul, and not the same that was before. It is the
Invisible things that are excellent, active, operative and permanent: The
Visible (excepting Light which makes all things else visible) are of
themselves but lifeless dross: It is the unseen part of Plants and Flowers
which causes all their growth and beauty, their fruit and sweetness: Passive
Matter is but moved up and down by the invisible active Powers, as Chess-men
are moved from place to place by the Gamesters hands: What a loathsome Corpse
were the World without the invisible Spirits and Natures that animate, actuate
or move it* To doubt of the being or continuation of the most excellent
Spiritual parts of the Creation, when we live in a World that is actuated by
them, and where every thing demonstrates them as their effects, is more foolish
than to doubt of the being of these gross materials which we see.

6. How often have I been convinced that there are good Spirits with whom our
Souls have as certain communion (though not so sensible) as our Life has with
the Sun, and as we have with one another? And that there are evil and envious
Spirits that fight against our Holiness and Peace, as certain Narratives of
Apparitions and Witches, and too sad experience of Temptations do evince. And
the mavelous diversity of Creatures on Earth, for kind and number, yea, the
diversity of Stars in Heaven, as well as the diversities of Angels, and Devils,
do partly tell me, that though All be of One, and through One, and to One, yet
absolute Unity is the divine Prerogative, and we must not presume to expect
such Perfection, as to lose our specifique or numerical diversity by any Union
which shall befall our Souls. Nor can I reasonably doubt that so noble and
active a Nature as Souls, dwelling above in the lucid Regions, in communion
with their like, and with their betters, shall be without the activity, the
pleasure, and felicity, which is suitable to their Nature, their Region, and
their Company. And my Savior has entered into the Holiest, and has assured
me that there are many Mansions in his Fathers House, and that when we are
absent from the Body we shall be present with the Lord.

7. Organical sight is given me for my use here in the Body: And a Serpent or a
Hawk has as much or more of this than I have: Mental knowledge reaches
further than sight, and is the act of a nobler Faculty, and for a higher use:
Though it be the Soul itself embodied in the igneous Spirits that sees, yet it
is by a higher and more useful Faculty, that it understands: And Faith is an
understanding act: It knows things unseen because they are revealed. Who can
think that all believing holy Souls, that have passed hence from the beginning
of the World, have been deceived in their Faith and Hope? And that all the
wicked worldly Infidels, whose hope was only in this life, have been the wisest
men and have been in the right: If Virtue, and Piety, are faults or fo^lies,
and brutish Sensual^ty be best, then why are not Laws made to command
Sensual^ty, and forb^d Piety and Virtue? To say this, is to deny humanity, and
the Wisdom of our Creator, and to feign the World to be governed by a Lie, and
to take the Perfection of our Nature for its disease, and our greatest disease
for our Perfection. But if Piety, and Virtue, be better than Impiety and Vice,
the Principles and necessary Motives of them are certainly true, and the
exercise of them is not in vain. What abominable folly and wickedness were it
to say the wicked only attain their ends, and that they all lose their labor,
and live, and die in miserable deceit, who seek to please God in hope of a
better life to come, believing that God is the Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him? Wou^d not this justify the foolish Manichees that thought a bad God
made this World; yea, and would infer that he not only made us for a mischief,
but Rules u^ to our deceit and hurt, and gives us both Natural and
Supernatural Laws, in ill will to us, to m^slead us to our misery, and to fill
our lives with needless troubles: Shall I not abhor every suggestion that
contains such inhumane absurdities as these? Wonderful! that Satan can keep
up so much Unbelief in the World, while he must make men such fools, that he
may make them unbelievers and ungodly.

8. III. That my Soul is no more heavenly, and my foretast of future
Blessedness is so small, is partly the fruit of those many wilful sins, by
which I have quenched the Spirit that should be my Comforter: And it is partly
from our common state of darkness and strangeness, while the Soul is in Flesh,
and operateth as the Bodies form, according to its Interest and Capacity:
Affections are more easily stirred up to things seen, than to things that are
both unseen, and known only very defectively, by general, and not by clear
distinct apprehensions. And yet this, O this is the misery and burden of my
Soul! Though I can say that I love God's Truth and Graces, his Work, and his
Servants, and whatever of God I see in the World, and that this is a love of
God in his Creatures, Word and Works; yet that I have no more desiring and
delightful Love of Heaven, where his Loveliness will be more fully opened to my
Soul, and that the thoughts of my speedy appearing there, are no more joyful to
me, than they are, is my sin, and my calamity, and my shame: And if I did not
see that it is so with other of the Servants of Christ, as well as with me, I
should doubt whether affections so unproportionable to my Profession, did not
signify unsoundness in my belief. It is strange and shameful that one that
expects quickly to see the glorious World, and to enter the Holy Celestial
Society, should be no more joyfully affected with these hopes: And that I
should make any great matter of the pain and langishing and perishing of the
Flesh, when it is the common way to such an end? O hateful sin that has so
darkened and corrupted Souls, as to estrange and undispose them to the only
state of their hoped happiness: Alas, what did Man when he forsook the Love and
Obedience of his God? How just it is that this Flesh and World should become
our Prison, which we would make our home, and would not use as our Lord
appointed us, as our Servant and way to our better state? Though our way must
not be our home, our Father would not have been so strange to us in the way, if
we had not unthankfully turned away from his Grace and Love.

9. It is to us that know not the Mysteries of Infinite Wisdom, the saddest
thought that ever does possess our Minds, to consider that there is no more
Grace and Holiness, knowledge of God, and communion with him in this World!
That so few are Saints, and those few so lamentably defective and imperfect!
That when the Sun shines on all the Earth, the Sun of Righteousness shines on
so small a part of it, and so few live in the Love of God, and the joyful hopes
of future Blessedness; and those few have so low a measure of it, and are
corrupted and troubled with so many contrary affections. Infinite goodness is
not undisposed to do good* He that made us capable of Holy and Heavenly
affections, gave us not that Capacity in vain. And yet, alas, how little of God
and Glory takes up the Hearts of men!

But Man has no cause to grudge at God! The Devils before their fall were not
made indefectible! Divine Wisdom is delighted in the diversity of his Works,
and makes them not all of equal excellency. Free will was to act its part!
Hell is not to be as good as Heaven! And sin has made Earth to be next to
Hell! So much Sin, so much Hell! What is sin but a willful forsaking of God?
And can we forsake him and yet love him and enjoy his love! God's Kingdom is
not to be judged of by his Jail, or Gibbets. We wilfully forsook the Light,
and made the World a Dungeon to our selves! And when recovering Light does
shine unto us, how unthankfully do we usually entertain it! We cannot have the
conduct and comfort of it while we shut our Eyes and turn away. And what though
God give not to all men an overcoming measure, nor to the best so much as they
desire? The Earth is but a spot or point of God's Creation; not so much as an
Ant hillock to a Kingdom, or perhaps to all the Earth: And who is scandalized
because the World has an heap of Ants in it, yea, or a Nest of Snakes, that
are not men! The vast unmeasurable Worlds of Light which be above us are
possessed by Inhabitants suitable to their Glory! A Casement or Crevise of
Light, or a Candle in this darksom World, is an unspeakable Mercy! yea, that we
may but hear of a better World, and may seek it in Hope! we must not grudge
that in our Prison we have not that presence of our King, and pleasures of the
Kingdom, as innocent and free Subjects have hope of Pardon, and of a speedy
deliverance are great Mercies to Malefactors.

10. And if my want of the Knowledge and Love of God, and joyful communion with
the heavenly Society, by my Prison and as the Suburbs of Hell, should it not
make me long for the Day of my Redemption, and the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God? My true desires of deliverance, and of Holiness and Perfection, are my
Evidences that I shall obtain them. As the Will is the Sinner, so it is the
obstinate continuance of a Will to sin, which is the bondage, and the cause of
continued sin: And a continued Hell, is continued sin, as to the first part at
least: Therefore they that continue in Hell, do continue in a sinning Will, and
so continue in a Love and willingness of so much of Hell. So far as God makes
us willing to be delivered from sin, so far we are delivered: And our initial
imperfect deliverance is the way to more. If pains then make me groan for ease,
and sickness make me wish for Health, why should not my remnants of Ignorance,
Unbelief, and Strangeness to God, occasion me to long for the Day of my
Salvation? This is the greatest of all my troubles: And should it not then be
the greatest wearying burden from which I should earnestly desire to be eased:
As Grace never does hurt efficiently, and yet may be ill used and do hurt
objectively (as to them that are proud of it) so sin never does good
efficiently and of itself, and yet objectively may do good: For sin may be the
Object of Grace, and so to use it is not sin. My unbelief, and darkness, and
disaffection, and inordinate love of this life, do of themselves most hinder my
desires of deliverance and of a better life; but objectively what more fit to
make me a weary of such a grievous state? Were my unbelief and earthly mind
predominant, they would chain my affections to this World; or if I were
constrainedly weary of a miserable life, I should have no comfortable hopes of
a better. But as it is the Nature of my sin to draw down my Heart from God and
Glory, it is the nature of my Faith, and Hope, and Love to carry it upward, and
to desire the heavenly Perfection: Not to love Death, but to love that which is
beyond it. And have I been so many years in the School of Christ, learning both
how to live and die, begging and studying for this Grace, and exercising it
against this sinful Flesh, and shall I now after all find Flesh more powerful
to draw me downward, than Faith, Hope and Love to carry my desires up to God!

11. O God forbid! O thou that freely gave me thy Grace, maintain it to the
last against its Enemies, and make it finally victorious! It came from thee; it
has been preserved by thee; it is on thy side, and wholly for thee; O let it
not now fail, and be conquered by blind and base Carnality, or by the
temptations of a hellish conquered Enemy! without it I had lived as a Beast,
and without it I should die more miserably than a Beast! It is thine Image
which thou love; it is a Divine Nature, and heavenly Beam; what will a Soul
be without it, but a Dungeon of Darkness, a Devil for malignity, and dead to
Holiness and Heaven? without it, who shall plead thy Cause against the Devil,
World and Flesh? without thy Glory Earth is but Earth; without thy Natural
Efficacy, it would be nothing; without thy wise and potent Ordination, it would
be but a Chaos; and without thy Grace, it would be a Hell. O rather deny me the
Light of the Sun, than the Light of thy Countenance! Less miserable had I been
without Life or Being, than without thy Grace. Without thee and my Savior's
help I can do nothing; I did not live without thee, I could not pray or learn
without thee; I never could conquer a temptation without thee; and can I die,
or be prepared to die without thee? Alas! I shall but say as Philip of Christ,
I know not whither my Soul is going, and how then shall I know the way. My Lord
having loved his own in the World, did love them to the end. Thou love
fidelity and perseverance in thy Servants, even those that in his sufferings
forsook him and fled, yet are commended and rewarded by Christ, for continuing
with him in his temptations, Luke 22. 28. And will thou forsake a sinner in his
extremity, who consents to thy Covenant, and would not forsake thee? My God,
I have often sinned against thee, but yet thou know I would fain be thine: I
have not served thee with the resolution, fidelity and delight, as such a
Master should have been served, but yet I would not forsake thy service, nor
change my Master or my Work; I can say with thy Servant Paul, Act. 27. 23. that
thou art the GOD WHOSE I AM, and WHOM I SERVE; and O that I could serve thee
better! For to serve thee, is but to Receive thy Grace, and to use it for my
own, and others good, and so to glorify thee, and please thy will, which being
LOVE it self, is pleased best when we receive and do most good. I have not
loved thee as Infinite Goodness, and Love it self, and fatherly Bounty should
have been loved; but yet I would not forsake thy Family; and nothing in this
World is more my grief than that I love thee no more; forsake not then a sinner
that would not forsake thee, that looks every hour toward thee, that feels
it as a piece of Hell to be so dark and strange unto thee, that gropeth, and
groaneth, and gaspeth after thee; feeling to his greatest sorrow, (though thou
art every where) that while he is present in the body, he is absent from the
Lord. My Lord, I have nothing to do in this World, but to seek and serve thee;
I have nothing to do with a Heart and its affections, but to breath after thee?
I have nothing to do with my Tongue and Pe^, but to speak to thee, and for
thee, and to publish thy Glory and thy Will? What have I to do with all my
Reputation, and Interest in my Friends, but to increase thy Church, and
propagate thy holy Truth and Service? What have I to do with my remaining Time,
even these last and languishing hours, but to look up unto thee, and wait for
thy Grace, and thy Salvation? O pardon all my carnal thoughts, and all my
unthankful neglects of thy precious Grace, and Love, and all my wilful sin
against thy Truth and thee! and let the fuller Communications of thy forfeited
Grace, now tell me by experience that thou do forgive me! Even under the
terrible Law thou did tell Man thy very Nature, by proclaiming thy Name,
Exodus 34 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering,
and abundant in goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression and sin; and is not the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ revealed in the Gospel for our more abundant Faith and Consolation? My
God, I know, as I cannot Love thee according to thy Loveliness, so I cannot
Trust thee according to thy Faithfulness: I can never be sufficiently confident
of thy alsufficient Power, thy Wisdom, and thy Goodness. When I have said, as
Psalm. 77. 7. Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no
more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his Promise fail to Generations?
has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?
Conscience has replied, that This is my infirmity? I never wanted comfort,
because thou wantedst mercy, but because I wanted Faith and fitness to receive
it, and perceive it. But have thou not mercy also to give me, even that
Fitness, and that Faith? My God, all is of thee, and through thee, and all is
to thee, and when I have the felicity, the Glory of all for ever will be thine.
None that trusts in thee (according to thy Nature and Promise) shall be
ashamed: If I can live and die in Trusting in thee, surely I shall not be
confounded.

12. Why then should it seem a difficult Question, how I may willingly leave
this World, and my Soul depart to Christ in Peace. The same Grace which
regenerated me, must bring me to my desired end, as the same Principle of
Vegetation which causes the Bud must bring the Fruit to sweet maturity. 1.
BELIEVE and TRUST thy Father, thy Savior, and thy Comforter. II. And HOPE for
the joyful entertainments of his Love, and for the blessed state which he has
promised. III. And long by LOVE for nearer Union and Communion with him; and
thus, O my Soul, thou may depart in Peace.

I. How sure is the Promise of God? How suitable to his Love, and to the Nature
of our Souls, and to the operations of every Grace? It is initially performed
here, whilst our desires are turned toward him, and the heavenly seed and
spark is here ingenerated in a Soul that was dead and dark, and disaffected. Is
it any strange thing for Fire to ascend? yea or the fiery Principle of
Vegetation in a Tree, to carry up the earthy matter to a great procerity? Is it
strange that Rivers should hasten to the Sea? Whither should Spirits go but to
the Region, or World of Spirits? and whither should Christ's Members, and holy
Spirits go, but to himself, and the heavenly Society? And is not that a more
holy and glorious place and state, than this below? Earth is between Heaven and
Hell; a place of gross and passive matter, where Spirits may indeed operate
upon that which needs them, and where they may be detained a while in such
operation, or as incorporated Forms, if not incarcerate Delinquents; but it is
not their center, end, or home. Even sight and reason might persuade me, that
all the noble Invisible powers that operate on this lower World, do principally
belong unto a higher; and what can Earth add to their Essence, Dignity or
Perfection?

13. But why, O my Soul, art thou so vainly solicitous, to have formal, clear,
distinct, conceptions of the Celestial World, and the individuation, and
operations of separated Souls, any more than of the Angels? While thou art the
formal Principle of an animated Body* thy conceptions must be but suitable to
their present state and use: When thou art possessed of a better state, thou
shall know it as a possessor ought to do: For such a knowledge as thou look
after, is part of the possession: And to long to Know and Love, in Clearness
and Perfection, is to long to possess. It is thy Savior and his glorified
Ones, that are comprehensors and possessors! And it is his knowledge which must
now be most of thy satisfaction. To seek his Prerogative to thy self is vain
usurping arrogance? Would thou be a God and Savior to thy self? O consider
how much of the fall is in this selfish care and desire to be as God, in
knowing that of Good and Evil which belongs not to thee but to God to know.
Thou know past doubt that there is a God of Infinite Perfection, who is the
rewarder of them that diligently seek him: Labor more to know thy duty to this
God, and absolutely Trust him as to the particularities of thy felicity and
reward. Thou did trust thy Parents to provide thee food and raiment, when
thou did but dutifully obey them: Though they could have forsaken thee or
killed thee every hour, thou did never fear it. Thou have trusted Physicians
to give thee even ungrateful Medicines, without enquiring after every
ingredient, or fearing lest they should wilfully give thee Poison! I trust a
Barber with my Throat: I trust a Boatman or Shipmaster with my life: Yea, my
Horse that might cast me; because I have no reason to distrust them, (saving
their insufficiency and uncertainty as Creatures.) If a Pilote undertake to
bring thee to the Indies, thou can trust his conduct, though thou know thy
self, neither the Ship, nor how to govern it, neither the way, nor the place to
which thou art conveyed. And must not thy God and Savior be trusted to bring
thee safe to Heaven, unless he will satisfy all thy enquiries, of the
individuation and operation of Spirits? Leave unsearchable and useless
Questions to him that can easily resolve them, and to those to whom the
knowledge of them does belong. Thou do but entangle thy self in sin and
self-vexation, while thou would take God's work upon thee, and would know
that for thy self, which he must know for thee: Thy knowledge and care for it,
did not precede nor prepare for thy Generation; nor for the motion of one Pulse
or Breath, or for the Concoction of one bit of all thy Food, or the continuance
of thy life one hour; supposing but thy care to use the means which God
appointed thee, and to avoid things hurtful, and to beg his Blessing. The
command of being careful for nothing, and casting all thy care on God, who
cares for us, obliges us in all things that are God's part; and for our Souls
as well as for our Bodies: Yea, to Trust him with the greatest of our concerns,
is our greatest duty; supposing we be careful about our own part, viz. to use
the means and obey his Precepts. To dispose of a departing Soul is God's part
and not ours! O how much evil is in this distrustful self-providing Care! If I
did but know what I would know about my Soul and my Self; and if I might but
choose what condition it should be in, and be the final disposer of it my Self,
O what satisfaction and joy would it afford me? And is not this to be partly a
God to my self? Is he not fitter to know and choose, and dispose of me, than I
am? I could Trust my self easily, even my Wit and Will in such a Choice, if I
had but power. And cannot I trust God and my Redeemer, without all this care,
and fear, and trouble, and all these particular enquiries? If you are convoying
your Child in a Boat, or Coach, by Water, or by Land, and at every turn he be
crying out [O Father, whither do we go? Or what shall I do? or I shall be
drowned or fall;] Is it not rather his Trust in you, than the particular
satisfaction of his ignorant doubts, that must quiet and silence him? Be not
then foolishly distrustful and inquisitive? Make not thy self thy own
disquieter or tormentor* by an inordinate care of thy own security. Be not cast
down, O departing Soul, nor by unbelief disquieted within me: Trust in God, for
thou shall quickly by experience be taught to give him thanks and praise, who
is the health of my countenance and my God.

14. O what clear reason! What great experience do command me to Trust him?
absolutely and implicitly to Trust him, and to distrust my self.

1. He is Essential Infinite Perfection, Power, Wisdom and Love? There is in
him all that should invite and encourage rational trust, and nothing that
should discourage it.

2. There is nothing in any Creature to be trusted, but God in that Creature,
or God working in and by it. Distrust him and there is nothing to be trusted:
Not the Earth to bear me, nor the Air to breath in, much less any mutable
Friend.

3. I am altogether his Own: His Own by right, and his own by devotion and
consent: And shall I not trust him with his own.

4. He is the great Benefactor of all the World, that gives all good to every
Creature, not by constraint, nor by commutation, but as freely as the Sun
gives forth its light: And shall we not trust the Sun to shine?

5. He is my Father and special Benefactor; and has taken me into his Family
as his Child: And shall I not trust my heavenly Father?

6. He has given me his Son as the great Pledge of his Love: And what then
will he think too dear for me? Will he not with him give me all things, Romans 8.

7. His Son came purposely to reveal the Fathers unspeakable Love, and purpose
to save us: And shall I not trust him that has proclaimed his Love and
Reconciliation by such a Messenger from Heaven.

8. He has given me the Spirit of his Son, even the Spirit of Adoption, which
is the surest Character of his Child, the Witness, Pledge, and Earnest of
Heaven, the Name, and Mark of God upon me, HOLINESS TO THE LORD; and yet shall
I not believe his Love and Trust him?

9. He has made me a Member of his Son, and so far already united me to him:
And will he not take care of the Members of his Son? Will he lose those that
are given him? Is not Christ to be trusted with his Members.

10. I am his interest and the interest of his Son: Freely beloved; dearly
bought! For whom so much is suffered and done, that he is pleased to call us
his peculiar Treasure. And may I not trust him with his dear bought Treasure.

11. He has stated me in a relation to Angels, who rejoiced at my Repentance,
and to the heavenly Society which shall not miss the smallest part: Angels
shall not lose their joy, nor ministration.

12. He is in Covenant with me; even the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: He has
given me many great and precious Promises: And shall I fear lest he will break
his Word or Covenant?

13. My Savior is the forerunner, entered into the Holiest, and there appearing
and interceeding for me: And this after he had conquered Death, and risen again
to assure me of a future life, and ascended into Heaven to show us whither we
must ascend; and that after these comfortable words, SAY TO MY BRETHREN, I
ASCEND TO MY FATHER AND YOUR FATHER, TO MY GOD AND YOUR GOD, Joh. 20. 17. And
shall I not follow him through Death, and trust such a Guide and Captain of my
Salvation?

14. He is there to prepare a place for me, and will take me to himself? And
may I not confidently expect it.

15. He told a Malefactor on the Cross, that he should that day be with him in
Paradise, to tell believing Sinners what they may expect.

16. The Church by the Article of his Descent into Hell, has signified their
common belief, that his separated Soul, had its subsistence and operation, and
did not sleep or perish, to tell us the Immortality of separated Souls.

17. His Apostles and other Servants have on earth served him all with these
expectations.

18. The Spirits of the perfected Just are now in possession of what I hope
for! And I am a follower of them who by Faith and Patience have attained the
promised Felicity! And may I not trust him to save me who has already saved
Millions in this way? When I could trust a Ferriman to pass me over a River,
that had safely passed over Thousands before me: Or I could trust a Physician
who cures all that he undertaketh of the same Disease.

19. I must be at his disposal whether I will or not: I shall live while he
will, and die when he will, and go whither he will: I may sin and vex my Soul
with fears, and cares, and sorrows, but I shall never prevail against his will.

20. Therefore there is no Rest for Souls but in the Will of God: That will
created us, and that will did govern us, and that will shall be fulfilled on
us. It was our Efficient and our Regent Cause, and it shall be our End. Where
else is it that we should rest? In the will of men, or Angels, or in our own
wills? All Creatures are but Creatures: And our own Wills have undone us: They
have misgoverned us, and they are our greatest Enemies; our Disease, our
Prison, and our Death, till they are brought over to the will of God: Till then
they are like a Foot out of joint; like a Child or Subject in Rebellion! There
is no rectitude or health, no order, no peace or true felicity, but in the
Conformity of our wills to the will of God. And shall I die in distrustful
striving against his will, and desiring to keep up my own before it.

21. What abundant experience have I had of God's fidelity and love? and after
all this shall I not trust him? His undeserved Mercy gave me being, it chose my
Parents; it gave them a tender love to me, and desire of my good; it taught
them to instruct me early in his Word, and to Educate me in his fear: It chose
me suitable Company and Habitation: It gave me betimes a teachable ingeny: It
chose my Schoolmasters: It brought to my Hands many excellent and suitable
Books: It gave me some profitable public Teachers: It placed me in the best of
Lands on Earth; and I think in the best of Ages which that Land had seen: It
did early destroy all great expectations and desires of the World, teaching me
to bear the Yoke from my youth, and causing me rather to groan under my
infirmities, than to fight with strong and potent Lusts: It chastened me
betimes, but did not destroy me. Great Mercy has trained me up all my days,
since I was Nineteen years of Age, in the School of Affliction, to keep my
sluggish Soul awake in the constant expectations of my change, and to kill my
Pride, and overvaluing of this World, and to lead all my studies to the most
necessary things, and as a Spur to excite my Soul to seriousness, and
especially to save me from the supine neglect and loss of time: O what
unspeakable Mercy has a life of constant but gentle Chastisement proved to me?
It urged me against all dull delays, to make my Calling and Election sure, and
to make ready my accounts as one that must quickly give them up to God. The
Face of Death, and nearness of Eternity, did much convince me, what Books to
read, what studies to perfer and prosecute, what Company and Conversation to
choose! It drove me early into the Vineyard of the Lord; and taught me to
preach as a dying Man to dying men: It was Divine Love and Mercy which made
Sacred Truth, so pleasant to me, that my life has been (under all my
infirmities) almost a constant recreation and delight, in its discoveries,
contemplation, and practical use: How happy a Teacher have I had? What
excellent help, and sweet illumination? How far beyond my expectation has
Divine Mercy encouraged me in his Sacred work? How congruously did he choose
every place of my Ministration, and Habitation to this day, without my own
forecast or seeking? When and where since he first sent me forth, did I labor
in vain? How many are gone to Heaven, and how many are in the way, to whom he
has blessed the Word which in weakness I did by his Grace and Providence
deliver? Many good Christians are glad of now and then an Hours time, to
meditate on God's Word, and recreate themselves in his holy worship; but God
has allowed and called me, to make it the constant business of my life. My
Library has afforded me both profitable and pleasant company and help, at all
times, when ever I would use them. I have dwelt among the shining Lights, which
the Learned, Wise, and Holy men of all Ages have set up, and left to illuminate
the World. How many comfortable Hours have I had in the Society of living
Saints, and in the love of faithful Friends? How many joyful Days have I had
in the solemn Assemblies, where God has been worshipped with seriousness and
alacrity, by concordant though imperfect Saints. Where the Spirit of Christ
has manifested his presence, by helping my self and my Brethren in speaking,
and the People in ready delightful hearing, and all of us in loving and gladly
receiving his Doctrine, Covenant and Laws? How unworthy was such a sinful Worm
as I (who never had any Academical helps, nor much from the Mouth of any
Teacher) that Books should become so great a Blessing to me, and that quite
beyond my own intentions, God should induce or constrain me to provide any such
like helps for others? How unworthy was I to be kept from the multiplied snares
of Sects and Errors which reigned in this Age, and to be used as a means for
other men's preservation and reduction: And to be kept in a love of Unity and
Peace: How unworthy was I that God should make known to me so much of his
reconciling truth, while extremes did round about prevail, and were commended
to the Churches by the advantages of Piety on one side, and of worldly
Prosperity and Power on the other? And the God should use me above thirty Years
in so comfortable a work as to plead and write for Love, Peace and Concord, and
to vouchsafe me so much success therein as he has done, notwithstanding the
general prevalency of the contentious military Tribe. Mercy I have had in
Peace, and Liberty in times of Violence: And Mercy I have had in Wars, living
two years in safety in a City of defense in the very midst of the Land, (
Coventry,) and seeing no enemy while the Kingdom was in Wars and Flames; and
only hearing of the common Calamities round about: And when I went abroad and
saw the effects of humane folly and fury, and of God's displeasure, he
mercifully kept me from hurting any one, and being hurt by any: How many a time
has he preserved me by Day and Night, in difficulties and dangers, from the
Malice of Satan, and from the Wrath of Man, and from accidents which threatened
sudden Death: While I beheld the ruins of Towns and Countries, and the Fields
covered with the Carcasses of the slain, I was preserved and returned home in
Peace. And O how great was the mercy which he showed me, in a teachable
tractable, peaceable, humble, unanimous People? So many in number, and so
exemplary in quality; who to this Day keep their Integrity and Concord, when
violence has separated me from them Twenty two years: Yea, the like Mercy of
acceptance and success beyond my expectation, he has showed me every where I
have had opportunity of free ministration; even where there were many
Adversaries I have had an open Door, in the midst of humane Wrath and Rage, he
has preserved my Liberty beyond expectation, and continued my acceptance and
success. When I might not speak by Voice to any single Congregation, he enabled
me to speak by Writings to many; and for the success of my plainest and popular
writings, which cost me least, I can never be sufficiently thankful: Some of
which he sent to preach abroad in other Languages in foreign Lands. When my
Mouth with Eighteen hundred or Two thousands more had been many years stopped,
he has since opened them in some degree; and the sufferings intended us by men
have been partly put by, and partly much alleviated by his Providence, and the
hardness of our Terms has not so much hind^ed the success of faithful Labors
as we feared, and as others hoped it would have done. I have had the comfort of
seeing some Peace and Concord and Prosperity of Truth and Piety kept up, under
the utmost opposition of diabolical and humane Power, Policy, and Wrath: When I
have been sent to the common Jail for my service and obedience to him, he has
there kept me in peace, and soon delivered me. He has made the Mouths of my
greatest Enemies who have studied my defamation and my ruin, to become my
Witnesses and Compurgators, and to cross their own designs: How wonderful is it
that I should so long dwell in so much peace, in the midst of those that seemed
to want neither Power nor Skill, and much less Will, to tread me down into
contempt and misery? And O how many a danger, fear and pain has he delivered
this frail and languishing Body from? How often has he succored me, when Flesh,
and Heart, and Art have failed? He has cured my consuming Coughs, and many a
time stayed my flowing Blood; he has eased my pained Limbs, and support'd a
weary macerat'd Skeleton: He has fetched me up from the Jaws of Death, and
reversed the Sentence which men have passed on me: How many Thousand weary days
have been sweetened with his pleasant work? And how many Thousand painful weary
Nights have had a comfortable Morning? How many Thousand strong and healthful
Persons have been taken away by Death, whilst I have been upheld under all this
weakness? Many a time have I cried to the Lord in my trouble and he has
delivered me out of my distress? I have had Forty years added to my Days,
since I would have been full glad of Hezekiah's promise of Fifteen? Since the
day that I first preached his Gospel, I expected not of long time to live above
a Year; and I have lived since then Forty years; when my own Prayers were cold
and unbelieving how many Hundreds have prayed for me: And what strange
deliverances, encouraging Fasting and Prayer have I often had, upon their
importunate requests? My Friends have been faithful, and the few that proved
unfaithful have profitably taught me, to place no confidence in Man, and and
not to be inordinately affected to any thing on Earth; for I was forsaken by
none of them, but those few that I excessively valued and overloved: My
Relations have been comfortable to me, contrary to my deserts, and much beyond
my expectations: My Servants have been faithful: My Neighbors have been kind:
My Enemies have been impotent, harmless or profitable: My Superiors have
honored me by their respectful words, and while they have afflicted me, as
supposing me a remora to their designs, they have not destroyed, but protected
me! To my inferiors God has made me in my low capacity somewhat helpful? I
have been protected in ordinary health and safety, when the raging Pestilence
came near my Habitation, and consumed an Hundred thousand Citizens! My dwelling
has been safe when I have seen the glory of the Land in flames, and after
beheld the dismal ruins! When violence separated me from my too much beloved
Library, and drove me into a poor and smoaky House, I never had more help of
God, nor did more difficult work than there! What pleasant retirements and
quietness in the Country have been the fruits of persecuting Wrath? And I must
not forget, when I had more public liberty, how he saved me and all my
Hearers, even by a wonder from being buried in the ruins of the Fabric where
we were; and others from the Calamitous, Scandal, and Lamentations, which would
else have followed: And it is not a Mercy to be extenuated, that when the
Tongues and Pens of all Sects among us, and of pro^d self-exalters, and of some
worthy Pious differing Brethren, have been long and vehemently bent against me,
when my infamy has been endeavored by abundance of Volumes by the backbiting
of angry dividers of all sorts, and by the calumniating accusations of some
that were too high to be gainsaid, and would not endure me to answer them and
vindicate my innocence; yet, all these together were never able to fasten their
accusations, and procure any common belief, nor to bring me under the designed
contempt, much less to break my comforts, encouragements or labors.

These, all these, and very many more than these, are my Experiences of that
wondrous MERCY which has measured my Pilgrimage, and filled up my days. Never
did God break his Promise with me! Never did he fail me nor forsake me: Had I
not provoked him by rash and wilful sinning, how little Interruption of my
peace and comforts, had I ever been likely to have had. And shall I now
distrust him at the last? Shall I not Trust, and quietly Trust, that Infinite
Wisdom, Love, and Power, whom I have so long trusted, and found so good?

Nature teaches Man to love best those Animals that are tame and tractable,
that trust us and love us, that will come to our hands and love our Company,
that will be familiar with us and follow us; be it Horse or Dog, Beasts or
Birds: But those that are wild and live in Woods, and fly from the Face of Man,
are taken to be the Game and Preys of any one that can catch and kill them. And
shall my foolish Soul thus wildly fly from the Face of God? Shall his Children
be like the fearful Hare? Or like a guilty Cain? Or like an unbelieving
Sadduce, that either believes not, or hops not for, the forgiveness of sin,
and the life Everlasting? Does not the Spirit of Adoption incline us to love
our Fathers presence, and to be loath to be long from home? To distrust all
Creatures, even thy self, is not unreasonable; but to distrust God has no just
excuse. Fly from Sin, from Satan, from Temptations, from the World, from sinful
Flesh and Idol-self: But fly not from him that is Goodness, Love and Joy
itself: Fear thine Enemy, but Trust thy Father: If thy Heart be reconciled to
Him and his Service, by the Spirit, he is certainly reconciled to thee through
Christ* And if he be for thee, and justify and love thee, who shall be against
thee, or condemn thee, or separate thee from his Love? If thy unreconciled
will, do make thee doubt of his reconciliation, it is time to abhor and lay by
thy Enmity: Consent, and be sure that he consents: Be willing to be his, and
in Holiness to serve him, and to be united in joyful Glory to him, and then be
sure that he is willing to accept thee, and receive thee to that Glory. O dark
and sinful Soul! how little do thou know thy Friend, thy Self, or God, if
thou can more easily and quietly trust thy Life, thy Soul and Hopes to the
will of thy Friend or of thy self (if thou had power) than to the will of
God? Every Dog would be at home and with his Master; much more every ingenuous
Child with his Father: And tho Enemies distrust us, Wife and Children will not
do so, while they b^lieve us just. And has God ever showed himself either
unfaithful or unmerciful to me?

To thee, O Lord, as to a faithful Creator I commit my Soul, 1 Pet. 4. 19. I
know that thou art the faithful God who keep Covenant and Mercy with them
that love thee, and keep thy Commandments, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Thou art faithful who
have called me to the communion of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 9.
Thy faithfulness has saved me in and from temptation, 1 Cor. 10. 13. It has
stablished me and kept me from prevailing evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. And if will keep
my Spirit, Soul and Body to the coming of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23, 24. It is in
faithfulness that thou have afflicted me, Ps. 119. 75. and shall not I trust
thee then to save me? It is thy faithful Word, that all thine Elect shall
obtain the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal Glory, and if we be
dead with him, shall live with him and if we suffer we shall also reign with
him, 2 Timothy 2. 10, 11, 12.

To thee, O my Savior I commit my Soul; it is thine own by Redemption; it is
thine own by Covenant? It is marked and Sealed by thy Spirit as thine own: and
thou have promised not to lose it, Joh. 6. 39. Thou wast made like us thy
Brethren, that thou might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for our Sins: By thy Blood we have
boldness to enter into the Holiest, even by the new and living consecrated way!
Cause me to draw near with a sincere Heart, in full assurance of Faith, by thee
that art the High Priest over the House of God: For he is faithful that has
promised life through thee, Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Thy Name is Faithful
and True, Rev. 19. 11. and Faithful and True are all thy Promises, Rev. 22. 6.
and 21. 5. Thou have promised Rest to weary Souls that come to thee, Matthew. 11.
28. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. I am weary of suffering and weary of sin; weary of my flesh,
and weary of my darkness, and dullness, and distance, and of this wicked blind,
unrighteous, and confounded World! And whither should I look for Rest but home
to my heavenly Father and to Thee? I am but a bruised Reed, but thou will not
break me: I am but a smoking Flax, but thou will not quench what thy Grace
has kindled; but thou in whose Name the Nations trust, wilt bring forth
judgment unto Victory, Matthew. 12. 20, 21. The Lord redeemeth the Souls of his
Servants, and none of them that trust in thee shall be desolate, Psa. 34. 22.
Therefore will I wait on thy Name, for it is good, and will trust in the Mercy
of God for ever, Psalm. 52. 8, 9. The Lord is Good; a strong-hold in the day of
trouble, and he knows them that trust in him, Nah. 1. 7. sinful fear is a
snare; but he that puts his trust in the Lord shall be set on high, Prove.
29. 25. Blessed is the Man that makes the Lord his trust, and respects not
the Proud and such as turn aside to lies, Psalm. 40. 4. Thou art my hope, O Lord
God, thou art my trust from my youth^: By thee have I been holden up from the
Womb, my praise shall be continually of thee: Cast me not off now in the time
of Age; forsake me not when my strength fails, O God, thou have taught me
from my youth, and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works: Now also when I
am old and gray, O God, forsake me not, Psalm. 17. 5, 6, 9, 17, 18. Leave not my
Soul destitute; for mine Eyes are toward thee, and my trust is in thee, Psa.
14. 8. I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the Land of the Living: Even where they that live shall die no more. The Sun
may cease to shine on Man, and the Earth to bear us; but God will never cease
to be Love, nor to be faithful in his Promises. Blessed be the Lord, who has
commanded me so safe and quietting a duty, as to trust him, and cast all my
cares on him, as on one that has promised to care for me!

11. And blessed be God who has made it my Duty to HOPE for his Salvation:
HOPE is the Ease, yea, the life of our Hearts that else would break, yea, die
within us. Despair is no small part of Hell. God cherishes Hope as he is the
lover of Souls: Satan our Enemy cherishes Despair, when his way of blind
Presumption fails. As Fear is a foretast of Evil, before it is felt; so Hope
does anticipate and foretast Salvation before it is possessed. It is then
worldly Hypocrites Hope that perishes, for all that Hope for true or durable
Happiness on Earth, in the pleasures of this perishing Flesh, must needs be
deceived. But happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose Hope
is in the Lord his God, which made Heaven and Earth, which keeps Truth for
ever, Ps. 146. 5, 6. Woe to me, were my Hope only in the time and matters of
this fleshly life, 1 Cor. 15. 19. But the Righteous has hope in his Death,
Prove. 14 32. And Hope makes not ashamed, Romans 5. 5. Blessed is the Man that
trusts in the Lord, whose Hope the Lord is, Jer. 17. 7. Lay hold then, O my
Soul, upon the Hope which is set before thee, Heb. 6. 18. It is thy firm and
steadfast Anchor, v. 19. without it thou will be as a shipwrackt Vessel. Thy
foundation is sure; it is God himself: Our Faith and Hope are both in God, 1
Pet. 1. 21. It is Jesus our Lord who is risen from the Dead, and Reigns in
Glory Lord of all, 1 Timothy 1. 1. Yea it is the Christ who by Faith does dwell
within us, who is our Hope of Glory, Ephesians. 3. 17. Col. 1. 27. In this Hope which
is better than the Law that Moses gave, it is that we draw nigh to God, Heb. 7.
19. It is the Holy Ghost that is both our Evidence and the Efficient of our
Hope, Gal. 5. 5. Romans 8. 16, 23. By him we hope for that which we see not, and
therefore wait in Patience for it. v. 24, 25. By Hope we are saved: It is an
encouraging Grace, which will make us stir, when as despair does kill
endeavors: It cures sloth, and makes us diligent and constant to the end, and
by this does help us to full assurance, Heb. 6. 11, 12. It is a desiring Grace,
and would fain obtain the Glory hoped for. It is a quieting and comforting
Grace, Romans 15. 4. The God of Hope does fill us with Joy and Peace in believing
that we may abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost, v. 13. Shake
off despondency, O my Soul, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. Romans 5. 2.
Believe in Hope, though dying Flesh would tell thee that it is against Hope,
Romans 4. 18. God that cannot lie, has confirmed his Covenant by his immutable
Oath, that we might have strong consolation who are fled for refuge to the Hope
which is set before us, Heb. 6. 18. What blessed preparations are made for our
Hope? And shall we now let the Tempter shake it or discourage it? The abundant
Mercy of God the Father has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the
Resurrection of Christ, to an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and
that fades not away reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Grace teaches us
to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this World, as looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the Great God and our Savior, Tit. 2. 12, 13. We are renewed by
the Holy Ghost and justified by Grace, that we should be made Heirs according
to the hope of Eternal life, Tit. 3. 6, 7. We are illuminated that we may know
the hope of Christ's calling, and what is the riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. The Hope that is laid up for us in
Heaven, is the chief Doctrine of the Gospel, which brings Life and
Immortality into clearer Light, Col. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 1. 10. It is for this hope
that we keep a Conscience void of offense, and that God is served in the World,
Act. 24. 15, 16. and 26. 7. wherefore gird up the loins of thy Mind: put on
this Helmet, the hope of Salvation, 1 These. 5. 8. and let not Death seem to
thee as it does to them that have no hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. The love of our
Father and our Savior have given us everlasting Consolation, and good hope
through Grace^ to comfort our Hearts and stablish them in every good word and
work, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16, 17. Keep therefore the rejoicing of Hope firm to the end,
Heb. 3. 6. continue grounded and settled in the Faith, and be not moved away
from the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1. 23. 1 Pet. 1. 13. And now Lord, what wait
I for? my hope is in thee, Psalm. 39. 7. Uphold me according to thy Word, that I
may live, and let me not be ashamed of my Hope, Psalm. 119. 116. Though mine
Iniquities testify against me, yet O thou that art the hope of of Israel, the
Savior thereof in time of trouble, be not as a stranger to my Soul ( Jer. 14.
7, 8.) Thy Name is called upon by me, O forsake me not, v. 9. Why have our Eyes
beheld thy Wonders, and why have we had thy Covenant and thy Mercies, but that
we might set our hope in God, Psalm. 78. 5, 7. Remember the Word to thy Servant,
upon which thou have caused me to hope. Psalm. 119. 49. If thou Lord should
mark Iniquity, O Lord, who should stand? But there is forgiveness with thee,
that thou may be feared: I wait for the Lord; my Soul does wait, and in his
Word do I hope: I will hope in the Lord, for with him there is Mercy and
plenteous Redemption, Psalm. 130. 3, 4, 5, 7. For he takes pleasure in them
that fear him, in those that hope in his Mercy, Psalm. 147. 11. Though Flesh and
Heart fail, the Lord is the Rock of my Heart; he is my Portion, says my Soul,
therefore will I hope in him: The Lord is good to them that wait for him; to
the Soul that seeks him: It is good that I should both hope, and quietly wait
for the Salvation of the Lord: It is good for me that I have born the Yoke in
my Youth, and that I keep silence and put my Mouth in the Dust, if so be there
may be hope, Psalm. 73. 26. Lam. 3. 24, 25, 26, 27, 29.

God need not flatter such Worms as we, nor promise us that which he never
means to perform: He has laid the rudiments of our hope, in a nature capable
of desiring, seeking, and thinking of another life: He has called me by Grace,
to actual desires and endeavors: And some foretasts he has vouchsafed: I look
for no Heaven, but the Perfection of Divine Life, Light, and Love in endless
Glory with Christ and his holy Ones: And this he has begun in me already: And
shall I not boldly hope when I have the capacity, the promise, and the earnest
and foretast? Is it not God himself that has caused me to hope; was not
Nature, Promise, and Grace from him? And can a Soul miscarry and be deceived,
that departs hence in a hope of God's own causing and encouraging? Lord, I
have lived in hope? I have prayed in hope: I have labored, suffered and waited
in hope: And by thy Grace I will die in hope? And is not this according to thy
Word and Will? And will thou cast away a Soul that hops in thee, by thine own
Command and Operation* Had Wealth and Honor, or continuance on Earth, or the
favor of Man, been my reward and hope, my hope and I had died together: Were
this our best, how vain were Man? But the Lord lives, and my Redeemer is
glorified and interceedeth for me! And the same Spirit is in Heaven, who is in
my Heart; (As the same Sun is in the Firmament which is in my House:) And the
Promise is sure to all Christ's Seed: And Millions are now in Heaven, that once
did live and die in hope; they were Sinners once as now I am: They had no other
Savior, no other Sanctifier, no other Promise than I now have, confessing that
they were Strangers here, they looked for a better Country, and for a City
that had Foundations, even a heavenly where now they are: And shall I not
follow them in hope that have sped so well? Hope then O my Soul unto the end, 1
Pet. 1. 13. From henceforth and for ever hope in the Lord, Psalm. 131. 13. I
will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more; my Mouth shall
show forth thy Righteousness and Salvation, Psalm. 71. 14, 15. The Lord is at my
right Hand; I shall not be moved: My Heart therefore is glad, and my glory
rejoiceth; my Flesh also shall dwell confidently and rest in hope; for God has
showed me the path of Life; in his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right
Hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11.

III. What then remains, O my Soul, but that in TRUST and HOPE thou LOVE thy
God, thy Savior, thy Comforter, the Glorious Society, thy own Perfection in
Glorious, Endless, Heavenly Life, and Light, and Love, and the Joyful Praises
of Jehovah, better then this burden of painful and corruptible Flesh, and this
howling Wilderness, the Habitation of Serpents and untamed Bruits, where
unbelief and murmuring, Lust and Folly, Injustice and Uncharitableness, Tyranny
and Divisions, Pride and Contention, have long provoked God, and wearied thee?
Where the Vintage and Harvest is Thorns and Thistles, Sin and Sorrows, Cares
and Crosses, manured by manifold Temptations! How odious is that darkness and
unbelief, that unholiness and disaffection, that deadness and stupidity, which
makes such a work as this, so reasonable, necessary, and pleasant a work, to
seem unsuitable or hard! Is it unsuitable or hard to the Eye to see the Sun and
Light? Or by it to see the beautified World? Or for a Man to love his Life or
Health; his Father or his Friend? What should be easier to a Nature that has
rational LOVE, than to Love him, that is Essential LOVE itself: He that loves
all, and gives to all the Loving faculty, should be loved by all: And he that
has specially loved me should be specially loved by me?

Love is the Perfection of all thy Preparations: It desires to Please God; and
therefore to be in the most pleasing state, and freed from all that is
displeasing to him; which is not to be hoped for on Earth: It desires all
suitable nearness, acquaintance, union and communion: It is weary of distance,
estrangedness, and alien society, and affairs: It takes advantage of every
notice, intimation, or mention of God, to renew and exercise these desires:
Every Message, and Mercy from him is fuel for Love, and while we are short of
Perfection stir up our desires after more! When Love tastes of the Grapes it
would have the Vine: When it tastes of the Fruits it would dwell where they
grow, and possess the Land! Its thoughts of Proximity and fruition are sweet.
No other Person or Thing can satisfy it. The Soul is where it loves: If our
Friend dwell in our Hearts by Love; and if fleshly Pleasure, Riches, and
Honor, do dwell in the Heart of the Voluptuous, the Covetous, and the Proud,
surely God and our Redeemer, the heavenly Society, Holiness, and Glory, do
dwell in the Heart which loves them with a fervent Love! And if Heaven dwell
in my Heart, shall I not desire to dwell in Heaven? Light and Light, Fire and
Fire are not more inclined to union then Love and Love; Gracious Love, and
Glorious Love: Would Divine Original, Universal LOVE, communicate and pour out
itself more plentifully upon my Heart, how easy would it be to leave this Flesh
and World? And to hear the Sentence of my departure to my God? Death and the
Grave would be but a Triumph for victorious Love: It would be easier to die in
Peace and Joy, than to rest at Night, or to come home from my Travel to my
beloved Friends, or to go when I am hungry to a Feast: A Little Love has made
me study willingly, and preach willingly, and write willingly, yea, and suffer
somewhat willingly; and would not more make me go more willingly to God? Shall
the imagination of House, Gardens, Walks, Libraries, Prospects, Meadows,
Orchards, Hills, and Rivers, allure the desires of deceived Minds? And shall
not the Thoughts of the heavenly Mansions, Society and Delights, much more
allure and draw up my desires? The reading of a known Fiction of a Civitas
Solis, an Utopia, an Atlantis, etc. has pleased many: But if I did believingly
hear of such a Country in the World, where men did never die, nor were sick,
or weak or sad, where the Prince were perfectly just and pious, wise and
peaceable, devoted to God and the public good; and the Teachers were all wise
judicious men, of Universal certain knowledge, perfectly acquainted with the
Matter and Method of Natural and Theological Truths, and all their duty, and
all of one Mind, and of one Heart, and Tongue and Practice; loving each other,
and the People as themselves, and leading the Flocks heavenward through all
temptations, with triumphant hopes and joy; where all the People perfectly
obeyed God, their Commanders and their Teachers, and lived in perfect Love,
Unity, and Peace, and were daily employed in the joyful praises of God and
hopes of Glory, and in doing all possible good to one another, contending with
none through ignorance, uncharitableness or pride, nor ever reproaching
injuring or hurting one another, etc. I say, if I knew or heard of such a
Country, should I not love it before I ever see it, and earnestly desire to be
there? Nay, do I not over-love this distracted World, where Tyranny sheddeth
streams of Blood, and lays desolate Cities and Countries, and exposes the
miserable Inhabitants to lamentable Distress and Famine; where the same Tyranny
sets up the Wicked, reproacheth and oppresses the Just and Innocent, keeps
out the Gospel, and keeps up Idolatry, Infidelity, and Wickedness in the far
greatest part of all the Earth; where Satan chooses Pastors too often for the
Churches of Christ, even such as by Ignorance, Pride, Sensuality, Worldliness,
and Malignity, become Thorns and Thistles, yea, devouring Wolves, to those whom
they should feed and comfort; where no two Persons are in all things of a Mind;
where Evil is commended, and Truth, and Goodness accused and oppressed, because
men's Minds are unacquainted with them or unsuitable to them: And those that are
the greatest pretenders to Truth, do most eagerly contend against it and oppose
it; and almost all the World are scolding or scuffling in the Dark: And where
there appears but little hopes of a remedy: I say, can I love such a World as
this? And shall I not think more delightfully of the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light, and the uniting Love and joyful praises of the Church triumphant and
the heavenly Chore?

Should I not love a Lovely and a Loving World much better than a World where
there is comparatively (...) little Loveliness or Love? All that is of God is
Good and Lovely: But it is not here that his Glory shines in felicitating
Splendour: I am taught to look upward when I pray, and to say, Our Father which
art in Heaven: God's works are amiable even in Hell; and yet though I would
know them, I would not be there: And, alas, how much of the works of Man, are
mixed here with the works of God? Here is God's Wisdom manifest; but here is
Man's obstinate folly: Here is God's Government; but here is Man's Tyranny and
Unruliness: Here is God's Love and Mercies; but here are m^ns Malice, Wrath and
Cruelty, by which they are worse to one another than Wolves or Tigers,
depopulating Countries, and filling the World with Bloodshed, Famine, Misery,
and Lamentations; proud Tyrants being worse than raging Plagues; (which made
David choose the Pestilence before his Enemies pursuit:) Here is much of God's
beauteous order, and harmony: But here is also much of Man's madness, deformity
and confusion. Here is much historical Truth, and some Civil and Ecclesiastic
Justice; but, alas, with how much odious falsehood, and injustice is it mixed?
Here is much precious Theological Verity: But how dark is much of it to such
blind and negligent and corrupted minds, as every where abound: Here are wise
judicious Teachers and Companions to be found; but, alas, how few in comparison
of the most? And how hardly known by those that need them? Here are Sound and
Orthodox Ministers of Christ: But how few that most need them know which are
they, and how to value them or use them? And how many Thousands of seduced or
sensual Sinners are made believe that they are but Deceivers, or as they called
Paul, pestilent fellows, and movers of Sedition among the People: And in how
many parts of the World are they as the Prophets that Obadiah hid in Caves, or
as Micatah, or Elias among the Lying Prophets, or the Baalites? Though such as
of whom the World is not worthy. (And is that World then more worthy of any
love than Heaven?) There are Worthy and Religious Families which honor God,
and are honored by him: But, alas, how few? And usually by the temptations of
Wealth and Worldly Interest, how full even of the sins of Sodom, Pride, Fullness
of Bread, and abundance of Idleness, if not also Unmercifulness to the Poor:
And how are they tempted to plead for their sins and snares, and account it
rustic Ignorance which contradicts them: And how few Pious Families are
there of the greater sort that do not quickly degenerate, and Posterity by
false Religion, Error or Sensuality, grow most contrary to the minds of their
Pious Progenitors? There are many that educate their Children wisely in the
fear of God, and have accordingly comfort in them: But how many are there that
having devoted them in Baptism to God, do train them up in the service of the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, which they renounced, and never understood, or
at least intended, for themselves, or Children, what they did profess: How many
Parents think, that when they offer their Children to God in Baptism without a
sober and due consideration of the nature and meaning of that great Covenant
with God, that God must accept and certainly regenerate and save them? Yea, too
many Religious Parents forget, that they themselves are Sponsors in that
Covenant, and undertake to use the means on their part, to make their Children
sit for the Grace of the son, and the Communion of the Spirit, as they grow up,
and think God should absolutely sanctify, keep and save them at Age, because
they are theirs and were Baptized, though they keep them not from great and
unnecessary temptations, nor teach them plainly and seriously the meaning of
the Covenant which was made for them with God as to the nature, benefits or
conditions of it: How many send them to others to be taught in Grammar, Logic,
Philosophy, or Arts; yea, and Divinity, before their own Parents ever taught
them, what they did with God in Baptism, what they received? And what they
promised and vowed to do? They send them to Trades, or secular Callings, or to
travel in foreign Lands, among a Multitude of Snares, among tempting Company,
and tempting Baits, before ever at home they were instructed, armed, and
settled against those Temptations which they must needs encounter, and which if
they overcome them, they are undone: How ordinarily when they have first
neglected this great duty of their own for their fortification, do they plead a
necessity of thrusting them out on these temptations, though utterly unarmed
from some Punctilio of Honor or Conformity to the World, to avoid the Contempt
of worldly men, or to adorn their (yet naked) Souls, with some of the Plumes or
painted Trifles, Ceremonies or Complements, which will never serve instead of
heavenly Wisdom, Mortification, and the Love of God and Man: As if they were
like to learn that fear of God in a crowd of diverting and tempting Company,
Baits and Business, which they never learnt under the teaching, nurture and
daily oversight of their religious Parents in a safer station: Or as if for
some little reason they might send them as to Sea without Pilot or Anchor, and
think that God must save them from the Waves: Or as if it were better to enter
them into Satan's School or Army, and venture them upon the notorious danger of
Damnation, than miss of Preferment and Wealth, or of the Fashions and Favor of
the Times? And then when they hear that they have forsaken God, and true
Religion, and given up themselves to Lust and Sensuality, and perhaps as
Enemies to God and good men, destroy what their Parents labored to build up,
these Parents wonder at God's Judgments, and with broken Hearts lament their
infelicity, when it were better to lament their own misdoing, and it had been
best of all to have prevented it.

Thus Families, Churches and Kingdoms run on to blindness, ungodliness and
confusion: Self-undoing and serving the malice of Satan, for fleshly Lust, is
the too common employment of Mankind: All is wise, and good, and sweet which is
prescribed us by God, in true Nature or Supernatural revelation: But folly,
sin, and misery, mistaking themselves to be Wit, and Honesty, and Prosperity,
and raging against that which nominally they pretend to and profess, are the
ordinary case and course of the most of men: And when we would plead them out
of their deceit and misery, it is well if we are not tempted to imitate them, or
be not partly infected with their Disease, or at least reproached and oppressed
as their Enemies: Such a Bedlam is most of the World become, where madness
goes for the only Wisdom, and he is the bravest Man that can sin and be damned
with reputation and renown, and successfully drive or draw the greatest number
with him unto Hell: To which the World has no small likeness, forsaking God,
and being very much forsaken by him.

This is the World which stands in competition for my Love, with the
Spiritual blessed World: Much of God's Mercies and Comforts I have here had:
But their sweetness was their taste of Divine Love, and their tendency to
heavenly Perfection. What was the end and use of all the Good that ever I saw,
or that ever God did for my Soul or Body, but to teach me to Love him, and to
long for more? How many weaning experiences? How many Thousand bitter or
contemning Thoughts have I had of all the glory and pleasures of this World?
How many Thousand love tokens from God have called me to believe and taste his
Goodness? Where ever I go, and which way soever I look, I see VANITY and
VEXATION written upon all things in this World, so far as they stand in
competition with God, and would be the end and portion of a fleshly Mind: And I
see HOLINESS TO THE LORD written upon every thing, so far as it declares God
and leads me to him as my ultimate end. God has not for nothing engaged me
in a War against this World, and commanded me to take and use it as mine Enemy:
The emptiness, dangerousness, and bitterness of the World, and the
All Sufficiency, Trustiness, and Goodness of God have been the Sum of all the
experiences of my life? And shall a worldly backward Heart overcome the
teachings of Nature, Scripture, the Spirit of Grace, and all Experience? Far be
it from me!

But, O my God, LOVE is thy great and special gift: All Good is from thee: But
LOVE is the Godlike Nature, Life, and Image: It is given us from the Love of
the Father, the Grace of the Son, and the quickening, illuminating and
sanctifying Operation of the Holy Spirit: What can the Earth return unto the
Sun but its own reflected Beams? (If those.) As how far soever Man is a Medium
in Generation, Nature and that Appetite which is the moving pondus in the Child
is thy work; so whatever is Man's part in the Mediate work of Believing and
Repenting, (which yet is not done without thy Spirit and grace,) certainly it
is the blessed Regenerator which must make us New Creatures by giving us this
Divine Nature, holy LOVE, which is the holy Appetite and Pondus of the Soul.
Come down, Lord, into this Heart, for it cannot come up to thee. Can the Plants
for Life, or the Eye for Light, go up unto the Sun? Dwell in me by the Spirit
of Love, and I shall dwell by Love in Thee. Reason is weak, and Thoughts are
various, and Man will be a slippery uncertain Wight, if LOVE be not his fixing
Principle, and do not incline his Soul to Thee! Surely through thy Grace I
easily feel, that I love thy Word, I love thy Image, I love thy Work, and O how
heartily do I Love to Love thee! And long to Know and Love thee more! And if
all things be of Thee, and through Thee, and to Thee, surely this Love to the
Beams of thy Glory here on Earth, is eminently so! It Is Thee, Lord, that it
means! To Thee it looks: It Is Thee it serves! For Thee it mourns, and
seeks, and groans! In Thee it Trusts! And the Hope, and Peace, and Comfort
which support me, are in Thee! When I was a returning Prodigal in rags, thou
saw me afar off, and mettest me with thy embracing, feasting Love: And shall
I doubt whether he that has better clothed me, and dwelt within me, will
entertain me with a Feast of greater love in the heavenly Mansions, the World
of Love?

The suitableness of things below to my fleshly Nature, has detained my
affections too much on Earth! And shall not the suitableness of things above to
my Spiritual Nature, much more draw up my Love to Heaven. There is the GOD whom
I have sought and served: He is also here; but veiled, and but little known:
But there he shines to heavenly Spirits in heavenly Glory. There is the
Savior in whom I have believed: He has also dwelt in Flesh on Earth: B^t
clothed in such meanness, and humbled to such a Life and Death, as was to the
Jews a stumbling Block, and to the Gentiles matter of reproach: But he Shines
and Reigns now in Glory, above the malice and contempt of Sinners. And I
shall there Live because he lives; and in his Light I shall have Light. He
loved me here with a Redeeming, Regenerating and preserving Love: But there he
will love me with a perfecting, glorifying joyful Love. I had here some Rays
of heavenly Light: But interpositions caused Eclipses and Nights, yea, some
long and winter Nights: But there I shall dwell in the City of the Sun, the
City of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, where there is no Night, Eclipse or
Darkness! There are the heavenly Hosts whose holy Love and Joyful Praises I
would fain be a partaker of? I have here had some of their Loving assistance,
but to me unseen, being above our fleshly way of Converse. But there I shall be
with them, of the like Nature, in the same Orb, and of the same Triumphant
Church and Chore! There are perfected Souls gathered home to Christ: Not, as
here, striving like Esau and Jacob in the Womb, not yet as John when he leaped
in the Womb, because of his Mothers joy; nor as wrangling Children that are
hardly kept in the same House in Peace: Not like the Servants of Abraham and
Lot, like Paul and Barnabas, like Epiphanius and Chrysostom, like Luther and
Carolostadius, like Ridley and Hooper, or the many striving Parties now among
us; nor like the Disciples striving who should be the greatest: Not like Noah's
Family in a wicked World, or Lot in a wicked City, or Abraham in an Idolatrous
Land, nor like Elijah left alone, nor like those that wandered in Sheep Skins
and Goat Skins, destitute, afflicted, and tormented, hid in Dens and Caves of
the Earth; not like Job on the Dunghill, or like Lazarus at the rich Man's
Doors: Not like the African Bishops whose Tongues were cut out; nor like the
Preachers silenced by Papist imposers, (in German) by the Int^rim or
elsewhere;) Nor like such as Tzegedine, Peucer and many other worthy men, whose
maturest Age was spent in Prisons: Not as we poor bewildred Sinners, feeling
evil, and fearing more, confounded in folly, and mad contention, some hating
the only way of Peace, and others groping for it in the dark, wandering and lost
in the clearest Light, where the illuminated can but pity the Blind, but
cannot make them willing to be delivered: What is Heaven to me, but GOD? GOD
who is LIFE, and LIGHT, and LOVE, communicating himself to blessed Spirits,
perfecting them in the Reception, Possession and Exercise of LIFE and LIGHT,
and LOVE, FOR EVER. These are not the Accidents, but the Essence of that God
who is Heaven and All to me; should I fear that Death which passes me to
Infinite Essential Life? Should I fear a darksom passage into a World of
perfect LIGHT? Should I fear to go to LOVE itself? Think, O my Soul, what the
Suns quickening Light and Heat is to this lower corporeal World? Much more is
GOD, even Infinite, LIFE and LIGHT and LOVE to the blessed World above: Does it
not draw out thy desires to think of going into a World of LOVE? When LOVE will
be our Region, our Company, our Life: More to us than the Air is for our
Breath! than the Light is for our sight; than our Food is for our Life, than
our Friends are for our Solace: And more to us than we are to our selves, and
we more for it as our ultimate end, than for our selves. O excellent Grace of
Faith which does foresee, and blessed Word of Faith that does foreshew, this
World of LOVE! Shall I fear to enter where there is no WRATH, no fear, no
strangeness, nor suspicion, nor selfish separation, but LOVE will make every
holy Spirit as dear and lovely to me as my self, and me to them as lovely as
themselves, and God to us all more amiable than our selves and all: Where LOVE
will have no defects or distances, no damps or discouragements, no
discontinuance or mixed disaffection; but as LIFE will be without Death, and
LIGHT, without Darkness, (a perfect everlasting Day of Glory,) so will LOVE be
without any hatred, unkindness, or allay. As many Coals make one Fire, and many
Candles conjoined make one Light, so will many living Spirits make one Life,
and many illuminated Glorious Spirits, one Light and Glory, and many Spirits
innaturalized into LOVE, will make one Perfect LOVE of GOD, and be LOVED as One
by God for ever: For all the Body of Christ is One; even here it is One in
initial Union of the Spirit, and Relation to One God, and Head, and Life, 1
Cor. 12. throughout. Ephesians. 4. 1. to 17. and shall be presented as beloved and
spotless to God, when the great Marriage Day of the Lamb shall come, Ephesians. 5.
24, 25, etc. Rev. 21. and 22.

Had thou not given me, O Lord the LIFE of Nature, I should have had no
conceptions of a Glorious everlasting Life: But if thou give me not the Life of
Grace, I shall have no sufficient delightful inclination and desire after it.
Had thou not given me Sight and Reason, the Light of Nature, I should not
have thought how desirable it is to live in the Glorious Light and Vision; but
if thou give me not the Spiritual Illumination of a seeing Faith, I shall not
yet long for the Glorious Light, and beatifical Vision. Had thou not given me
a Will and Love which is part of my very Nature itself, I could not have tasted
how desirable it is, to live in a World of Universal, perfect, endless LOVE:
But unless thou also shed abroad thy LOVE upon my Heart, by the Spirit of Jesus
the Great Medium of LOVE, and turn my very Nature or Inclination into Divine
and Holy LOVE, I shall not long for the World of LOVE. Appetite follows
Nature: O give me not only the Image and the Art of Godliness; the approaches
toward it, nor only some forced or unconstant acts; but give me the Divine
Nature, which is Holy Love, and then my Soul will hasten toward thee, and cry,
How long, O Lord, How long! O come, come quickly, make no delay. Surely the
fear of dying intimates some contrary Love that inclines the Soul another
way; and some shameful unbelief and great unapprehensiveness of the Attractive
Glory of the World of LOVE: Otherwise no frozen Person so longs for the Fire,
none in a Dungeon so desires Light, as we should long for the heavenly Light
and Love.

God's Infinite Essential SELF-LOVE, in which he is Eternally delighted in
himself, is the most Amiable Object, and Heaven itself to Saints and Angels:
And next to that His Love to all his Works, to the World, and to the Church in
Heaven speaks much more of his Loveliness than his Love to me. But yet due
Self-love in me, is his work, and part of his natural Image; and when this by
sin is grown up to excess, (through the withdrawing of a contracted narrow
Soul, from the Union and due Love to my fellow Creatures, and to God) I must
also, I cannot but, enquire after God's Love to me, and by this my desires must
much be moved: For I am not so capable of ascending above Self-interest, and
Self-love, as in the state of Glorious Union I shall be. I am glad to perceive
that others do love God; and I love those most that I find most love him: But
it is not other men's love to God that will be accepted by him instead of mine:
Nor is it God's Love to others (which yet rejoiceth me) that will satisfy me
without his love to me. But when all these are still before me, God's Essential
Self-love and Delight, his Love to his Creatures, especially the Glorified, and
his Love to me also, even to me a vile unworthy Sinner; what then should stay
my ascending Love, or discourage my desires to be with God?

And do thou doubt, can thou doubt, O my Soul, whether thou art going to a
God that loves thee? If the Jews discerned the great love of Christ to Lazarus
by his Tears, can not thou discern his Love to thee in his Blood? It is never
the less but the more obliging and amiable, that it was not shed for thee
alone, but for many. May I not say as Paul, Gal. 2, 20. I live by the Faith of
the Son of God, that has loved Me, and given himself for me! Yea, it is not so
much I that live, as Christ Lives in me? And will he forsake the Habitation
which his love has chosen? And which he has so dearly bought! O read often
that triumphing Chapter, Romans 8. and conclude, What shall separate us from the
Love of God? If Life have not done it, Death shall not do it. If leaning on his
Breast at Meat, was a token of Christ's special love to John, is not his
dwelling in me by my Faith, and his living in me by his Spirit, a sure token of
his love to me: And if a dark saying, [ If he tarry till I come, what is that
to thee?] raised a report that the beloved Disciple should not die, why should
not plain Promises assure me that I shall live with him that loves me for
ever? Be not so unthankful, O my Soul, as to question doubtingly whether thy
heavenly Father, and thy Lord does love thee? Can thou forget the sealed
Testimonies of it? Did I not even now repeat so many as should shame thy
doubts? A multitude of thy Friends have loved thee so entirely, that thou can
not doubt of it? And did any of them signify their love with the convincing
evidence that God has done? Have they done for thee what he has done: Are
they Love itself; Is their love so full, so firm and so unchangeable as his? I
think the sweetlier of Heaven because abundance of my ancient Lovely and Loving
Holy Friends are there, and am the willinger by Death to follow them. And
should I not think of it more pleasedly because my God and Father, my Savior,
and my Comforter is there? And not alone, but with all the Society of Love. Was
not Lazarus in the Bosom of God himself? yet it is said, that he was in
Abraham's Bosom; as the Promise runs, that we shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God. And what makes the Society of Saints
so sweet as holy Love? It is comfortable to read that, To love the Lord our God
with all our Heart, and Soul, and might, is the First and great Commandment;
and the Second is like to it, To Love our Neighbors as our selves. For God's
Commands proceed from that Will which is his Nature or Essence, and they tend
to the same as their Objective end. Therefore he that has made Love the Great
Command, does tell us that LOVE is the Great conception of his own Essence, the
spring of that Command; and that this commanded imperfect Love, does tend to
perfect heavenly Love, even to our communion with Essential Infinite Love. It
were strange that the Love and Goodness which is equal to the Power that made
the World, and the Wisdom that orders it, should be scant and backward to do
good, and to be suspected more than the Love of Friends! The remembrance of the
holiness, humility, love and faithfulness of my dearest Friends of every Rank
with whom I have conversed on Earth, in every place where I have lived, is so
sweet to me, that I am often ready to recreate my self with the naming of such as
are now with Christ: But in Heaven they will love me better than they did on
Earth; and my love to them will be more pleasant: But all these Sparks are
little to the Sun.

Every place that I have lived in was a place of Divine Love, which there set
up its obliging Monuments. Every Year and Hour of my life has been a time of
Love: Every Friend, and every Neigbour, yea, every Enemy have been the
Messengers and Instruments of Love. Every state and change of my life,
notwithstanding my sin, has opened to me Treasures and Mysteries of Love. And
after such a life of Love, shall I doubt whether the same God do love me? Is he
the God of the Mountains and not of the Valleys? Did he love me in my youth and
health? And does he not love me in my Age, and Pain, and Sickness; Did he love
all the Faithful better in their life than at their Death? If our hope be not
chiefly in this life, neither is our state of Love, which is principally the
heavenly endless Grace. My groans grieve my Friends, but abate not their love.
Did he love me for my strength, my weakness might be my fear: as they that love
for Beauty, loath them that are deformed, and they that love for Riches,
despise the Poor: But God loved me when I was his Enemy to make me a Friend,
and when I was bad to make me better: What ever he takes pleasure in, is his
own gift. Who made me to differ? And what have I that I have not received? And
God will finish the Work, the Building, the Warfare that is his own. O the
multitude of Mercies to my Soul and Body, in Peace and War, in Youth and Age,
to my self and friends, the many great and gracious deliverances which have
testified to me the Love of God! Have I lived in the experience of it, and
shall I die in the doubts of it? Had it been Love only to my Body, it would
have died with me, and not have accompanied my departing Soul: I am not much in
doubt of the truth of my Love to him: Though I have not seen him save as in a
Glass, as in a Glass seen I love him: I love my Brethren whom I have seen, and
those most that are most in Love with him: I love his Word, and Works, and
Ways, and fain I would be nearer him, and love him more; and I loath my self
for loving him no better. And shall Peter say more confidently, [Thou know
that I love thee] than [ I know that thou love me?] Yes, he may; because
though God's Love is greater and stedfaster than ours, yet our knowledge of his
great love, is less than his knowledge of our little love; and as we are
defective in our own Love, so are we in our certainty of its sincerity. And
without the knowledge of our Love to God, we can never be sure of his special
love to us. But yet I am not utterly a stranger to my self: I know for what I
have lived and labored in the World! And who it is that I have desired to
please. The God whose I am, and whom I serve has loved me in my youth, and he
will love me in my aged weakness. My Flesh and my Heart fail: my pains seem
grievous to the Flesh: But it is LOVE that chooses them, that uses them for
my good, that moderateth them, and will shortly end them. Why then should I
doubt of my Fathers Love? Shall pain or dying make me doubt? Did God love none
from the beginning of the World, but Henoch and Elias? And what am I better
than my Forefathers? What is in me that I should expect exemption from the
common lot of all Mankind? Is not a competent time of great Mercy on Earth, in
order to the unseen felicity all that the best of men can hope for? O for a
clearer, stronger Faith, to show me the World that more excels this, than
this excels the Womb where I was conceived! Then should I not fear my third
Birth day, what pangs soever go before it; nor be unwilling of my change! The
Grave indeed is a Bed that Nature does abhor: Yet there the weary be at rest:
But Souls new born have a double Nature that is Immortal, and go to the place
that is agreeable to their Nature; even to the Region of Spirits, and the
Region of Holy Love. Even passive Matter that has no other Natural motion,
has a Natural Inclination to uniting, aggregative motion. And God makes all
Natures suitable to their proper ends and use: How can it be that a Spirit
should not incline to be with Spirits? And Souls that have the Divine Nature in
holy Love, desire to be with the God of Love? Arts, and Sciences, and Tongues
become not a Nature to us; Else they would not cease at Death: But holy LOVE is
our New Nature, and therefore cease not with this bodily life. And shall
accidental love make me desire the company of a frail and mutable Friend? And
shall not this ingrafted inseparable love, make me long to be with Christ?
Though the love of God to all his Creatures will not prove that they are all
Immortal, nor oblige them to expect another life, that never had Capacity or
Faculties to expect it; yet his love to such as in Nature and Grace are made
capable of it, does warrant and oblige them to believe and hope for the full
Perfection of the work of love. Some comfort themselves in the love of St.
Peter, as having the Keys of Heaven: And how many could I name that are now
with Christ, who loved me so faithfully on Earth, that were I sure they had the
Keys and Power of Heaven (and were not changed in their Love) I could put my
departing Soul into their Hands, and die with joy. And is it not better in the
Hand of my Redeemer, and of the God of Love, and Father of Spirits? Is any love
comparable to his? Or any Friend so boldly to be trusted? I should take it for
ungrateful unkindness in my Friend, to doubt of my love and trustiness, if I
had given him all that he has, and maintained him constantly by my kindness!
But O how odious a thing is sin! Which by destroying our love to God, does make
us unmeer to believe and sweetly perceive his Love? And by making us doubt of
the Love of God, and lose the pleasant relish of it, does more increase our
difficulty of loving him! The Title that the Angel gave to Daniel [A Man
greatly beloved of God,] methinks should be enough to make one joyfully love
and trust God, both in life and death. Will Almighty LOVE ever hurt me or
forsake me? And have not all Saints that Title in their degrees? What else
signifies their Mark and Name, HOLINESS TO THE LORD? What is it but our
separation to God as his peculiar beloved People? And how are they separated
but by mutual love, and our forsaking all that alienateth or is contrary? Let
Scorners deride us as self flatterers that believe they are God's Darlings (and
woe to the Hypocrites that believe it on their false Presumption;) without such
belief or grounded hopes I see not how any Man can die in true Peace. He that
is no otherwise beloved than Hypocrites, and Unbelievers, must have his portion
with them: And he that is no otherwise beloved than as the ungodly, unholy and
unregenerate, shall not stand in judgment, nor see God, nor enter into his
Kingdom. Most upright Souls are to blame for groundless doubting of God's Love;
but not for acknowledging it, rejoicing in it, and in their doubts being most
solicitous to make it sure: Love brought me into the World, and furnished me
with a Thousand Mercies! Love has provided for me, delivered me, and preserved
me till now! And will it not entertain my separated Soul? Is God like false or
insufficient Friends, that forsake us in adversity!

I confess that I have wronged LOVE by sin; by many and great unexcusable sins!
But all save Christ himself were sinners, which love did purify and receive to
Glory! God who is rich in Mercy for the great love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead in sins has quickened us together with Christ (by Grace we
are saved) and has raised us up together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6. O that I could love much that have so much forgiven! The
glorified praised him who loved us, and washed us from our sins, in his own
Blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1. 5, 6. Our Father that has
loved us, gives us consolation and good hope through Grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. I
know no sin which I repent not of with self-loathing! And I earnestly beg and
labor that none of my sins may be to me unknown. I dare not justify even what
is any way uncertain; though I dare not call all that my sin which siding men
of differing judgments on each side passionately call so: While both sides do
it on contrary accounts, and not to go contrary ways is a Crime. O that God
would bless my accusations to my illumination, that I may not be unknown to my
self! Though some think me much better than I am, and others much worse, it
most concerns me to know the Truth my self, flattery would be more dangerous
to me, than false accusations, I may safelier be ignorant of other men's sins
than of my own. Who can understand his errors: Cleanse me Lord from secret
sins (and let not ignorance or error keep me in impenitence;) and keep thou me
back from presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19. 12, 13. I have an Advocate with the
Father, and thy Promise, that he that confesses and forsakes his sins shall
have Mercy. Those are by some men taken for my greatest sins, which my most
serious Thoughts did judge to be the greatest of my outward duties, and which I
performed through the greatest difficulties, and which cost me dearest to the
Flesh, and the greatest self-denial and patience in my reluctant Mind:
Wherever I have erred, Lord, make it known to me, that my confession may
prevent the sin of others; and where I have not erred, confirm and accept me in
the right.

And seeing an unworthy Worm has had so many Testimonies of thy tender love,
let me not be like them, Mal. 1. 1, 2. that when thou said, I have loved you,
unthankfully asked, Wherein have thou loved us, Heaven is not more spangled
with Stars, than thy Word and Works with the refulgent Signatures of Love. Thy
well beloved Son, the Son of thy Love, undertaking the Office, Message and Work
of the greatest Love, was full of that Spirit which is Love, which he sheds
abroad in the Hearts of thine Elect, that the Love of the Father, the Grace of
the Son, and the communion of the Spirit may be their hope and life. His Works,
his Sufferings, his Gifts, as well as his comfortable Word, did say to his
Disciples, Joh. 15. 9. As the Father loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye
in my love. And how, Lord, shall we continue in it, but by the thankful belief
of thy love and loveliness, desiring still to love thee more, and in all things
to know and please thy Will! Which thou know is my Souls desire!

Behold then, O my Soul, with what Love the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit have
loved thee, that thou should be made and called a Son of God, redeemed;
regenerate, adopted into that Covenant-state of Grace in which thou stand:
Rejoice therefore in hope of the G^ory of God, Romans 5. 1, 2. being justified by
Faith, having Peace with God, and access by Faith and Hope that makes not
ashamed; that being reconciled, when an Enemy, by the Death of Christ, I shall
be saved by his life. Having loved his own, to the end he loves them, and
without end: His Gifts and Calling are without Repentance: When Satan, and thy
Flesh would hide God's love, look to Christ, and read the golden words of Love
in the Sacred Gospel; and peruse thy many recorded experiences, and remember
the convictions which secret and open Mercies have many a time afforded thee!
But especially draw nearer to the Lord of Love, and be not seldom and slight in
thy contemplations of his Love and Loveliness; Dwell in the Sunshine, and thou
w^lt know that it is light, and warm, and comfortable. Distance and strangeness
cherish thy doubts: Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace.

Yet look up, and often and earnestly look up, after thy ascended glorified Head,
who said, Tell my Brethren, I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God
and your God! Think where and what he is, and what he is now doing for all his
own; and how humbled, abased, suffering Love is now Triumphant, regnant,
glorified Love; and therefore no less than in all its tender expressions upon
Earth. As Love is no where perfectly revealed but in Heaven, so I can no where
so fully discern it, as by looking up by Faith to my Father and Savior which
is in Heaven, and conversing more believingly with the heavenly Society. Had I
done this more and better, and as I have persuaded others to do it, I had lived
in more convincing delights of God's Love, which would have turned the fears of
Death into joyfuller hopes, and more earnest desires to be with Christ, in the
Arms, in the World, in the life of Love, as far better than to be here, in a
dark, a doubting, fearing World.

But, O my Father, Infinite LOVE, though my Arguments be many and strong, my
Heart is bad, and my strength is weakness, and I am insufficient to plead the
cause of thy Love and Loveliness to my self or others: O plead thy own cause,
and what Heart can resist? Let it not be my word only, but Thine that thou
love me, even me a Sinner; speak it as Christ said to Lazarus Arise: If not,
as thou tellest me that the Sun is warm, yet as thou have told me, that my
Parents and my dearest Friends did love me, and much more powerfully than so.
Tell it me, as thou tellest me that thou have given me life, by the
consciousness and works of life: That while I can say, Thou that know all
things, Know that I love Thee; it may include, [ therefore, I know that I am
beloved of thee;] and therefore come to thee in the confidence of thy Love, and
long to be nearer in the clearer sight, the fuller sense, and joyfuller
exercise of Love for ever. Father, into thy Hand I commend my Spirit: Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit! Amen.

AN APPENDIX.
A Breviate of the Helps of Faith, Hope, and Love. A Breviate of the proof of
Supernatural Revelation, and the Truth of Christianity.
1 TIMOTHY 3. 16. Without Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness, God was
manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to
the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory.
THese are the Creed, or Six Articles of the Gospel, which the Apostles
preached.

1. I. God manifested in the Flesh of Jesus, is the first and great Article.
Believe this and believe all: No wonder that believing that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God is so often made in Scripture, the description of saving Faith, the
Title to Baptism, and Pardon, and Salvation, the Evidence of the Spirit, etc.
He that truly and practically believes that God came in Flesh to Man, and that
Christ is the Fathers Messenger from Heaven, must needs believe that God has a
great value for the Souls of men and for his Church, that he despises not even
our Flesh, that his Word is true and fully to be trusted, that he who so
wonderfully came to Man, will certainly take up Man to him: Who can doubt of
the Immortality of Souls, or that Christ will receive the departing Souls of
the Faithful to himself, who believes that he took Man's Nature, and has
glorified it now in Heaven, in union with the Divine? Who can ever have low
Thoughts of God's love and Mercy who believes this? And who can prostitute his
Soul and Flesh to wickedness, who firmly believes that he took the Soul and
Flesh of Man, to sanctify and glorify it.

2. II. The holy Spirit is the Justification of the Truth of Jesus Christ. He
is Christ's Advocate and Witness to the World. He proves the Gospel by these
five ways of Evidence. I. By all the Prophesies, Types and Promises of Christ
in the Old Testament before Christ's coming. II. By the Inherent impress of
God's Image on the Person and Doctrine of Christ: Which Propria luce shows
itself to be Divine. III. By the concomitant Miracles of Christ: Read the
History of the Gospel for this use, and observe each History. IV. By the
subsequent gift of the Spirit to the Apostles and other Christians, by
Languages, wonders and multitudes of Miracles to convince the World. V. By the
undeniable and excellent work of Sanctification on all true Believers through
all the World, in all generations to this day. These five are the Spirits
VVitness which fully justifies the certain Truth, that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God.

3. Quest. But how are we sure who our selves never saw the Person, Miracles,
Resurrection, Ascension of Christ, that the History of them is true?

Answ. 1. We may be sure that the Spectators were not deceived. II. And that
they did not deceive them to whom they reported it. III. And that we are not
deceived by any miscarriage in the historical Tradition to us.

4. I. It was not possible that men that were not mad, that had Eyes and Ears,
could for three Years and a half believe that they saw the Lame, the Blind, the
Deaf, and all Diseases healed, the Dead raised, Thousands miraculously fed,
etc. and this among crowds of People that still followed Christ, if the things
had not been true: One Man's Senses may be deceived at some one instance, by
some deceitful accident: But that the Eyes and Ears of Multitudes should be so
often deceived many years in the open Light, is as much as to say, No Man knows
any thing that he sees and hears.

5. II. That the Disciples who received the Apostles and Evangelists report of
Christ were not deceived by the Reporters, is most evident.

For, 1. They received it not by hearsay, at the second hand, but from the Eye
and Ear Witnesses themselves, who must needs know what they said.

2. They heard this report from Men of the same Time, and Age, and Country,
where it was easy to examine the case, and confute it, had it been false.

3. The Apostles appealed to crowds and Thousands of Witnesses, as to many of
Christ's Miracles, who would have made it odious, had it not been true.

4. They sharply reproved the Rulers for persecuting Christ, which would
provoke them to do their best to confute the Apostles for their own
justification.

5. Christ chose men of no great human Learning and Subtility, but common,
plain, unlearned men, that it might not be thought a deceit of Art.

6. Yea, he did not make much more known to them before his Death, than the
bare Matters of Fact which they da^ly saw, and that he was the Christ, and
Moral Doctrine; his Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Kingdom of Heaven they
knew little of before: But experience and the sudden coming down of the Spirit
suddenly taught them all the rest.

7. They taught not one another, but were every one personally taught of God.

8. And yet they all agreed in the same Doctrine, when they were dispersed over
the World; and never differed in any one Article of Faith.

9 They were men that had no worldly Interest, Wealth or Dominion to seek.

10. Yea, they renounced and denied all worldly Interest, and sealed their
Testimony by their Sufferings and Blood; and all in hope of a heavenly reward
which they knew that Lying was no means to obtain.

11. Had they plotted to cheat the World (for nothing) the sin is so heinous
that some one of them would have repented and confessed it, at least, at death;
which none of them did, but died joyfully as for the Truth.

12. Paul was converted by a Voice and Light from Heaven, in the presence of
those that traveled with him in his persecuting design.

13. But yet it is a fuller evidence that the Doctrine which they delivered as
from God, bears a Divine Impress, that as the Light, it is its own Evidence.

14. And for the more infallible conviction, they that testified of Christ's
Miracles did the like themselves to confirm their Testimony, they spoke with
Tongues which they never learnt: They healed all Diseases; even the shadow of
Peter, and the Clothes that came from Paul, did heal men. They raised the Dead:
And they that in all Countries converted the Nations by their own Miracles,
attesting the Miracles and Resurrection of Christ, must needs compel the
Spectators to believe them.

15. Yet, more than all this, those that believed them were presently enabled
to do the like in one kind and degree or other. The same extraordinary gift of
the Spirit fell upon the common multitude of Believers by the laying on of the
Apostles hands. So that Simon Magus would fain have bought that Power with
Money. And when men witnessed Christ's Miracles, and wrought the like
themselves, and those that believed them had and did the like, (either Healing,
Tongues, Prophecy or some wonders,) it was sure an infallible way of
testifying.

16. When wrangling Heretics quarrelled with the Apostles, and would draw away
Disciples to themselves by disparaging them they still appealed to the Miracles
wrought by these Disciples themselves, or in their sight; as Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3,
5. And as Christ, when the Jews said he did all by Beelzebub, when he cast out
devils, asked them [ By whom do your Children cast them out?] Which had it been
false, would have turned all the People from them.

17. Their adversaries were so far from writing any Confutation of their
Testimony, that they confessed the Miracles, and had no shift but either to
blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and say that they were done by the Devil; or else by
persecution and violence to oppress them. As if the Devil were Master of the
World, and could remedilesly deceive it against God's will, or God himself
would send or suffer a full course of Miracles remedilesly to deceive the
World, which is to make God like the Devil: Or as if the Devil were so good as
by Miracles to promote so holy and amiable and just a Doctrine as that of
Christianity, to make men wise, and good, and just, and kill their sin. So that
this blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, makes Satan to be God, or God to be Satan.

18. All the cruelty, powers, Learning and Policy of their Adversaries was not
able to stop the progress of this Testimony, much less to prevail against it.

III. It is then most certain that the first Witnesses were not deceived by
Christ, nor Believers after deceived by them: The next Question is, whether we
be not deceived by a false historical Tradition of these things. Had we seen
them all our selves, we must needs have believed; but at this distance we know
not what misreports may interven: what Eyesight and hearing was to them, that
Tradition is to us. Now the Question is, Is it certainly the very same Fact and
Doctrine which they received, and which we receive?

And here let it be premised that there is no other way of assurance than that
which God has afforded us, that the reason of Man could have desired.

1. If we would see God, and Heaven, and Hell, this is not a way suitable to
the state of Probationers that live in Flesh on Earth. Angels live by vision
and fruition of Glory: And Bruits by sense on sensible things: But reasonable
Travelers must live by reason, and by believing certain Revelation.

2. If God will send his Son from Heaven to ascertain us, and we will believe
no more than we see our selves, then Christ must dwell on Earth to the end of
the World, and he must be in all places of the Earth at once that all may see,
and he must die and rise again before all men in all Ages: And how mad an
expectation is this?

3. Or if all that deliver us the History must work Miracles before our Eyes,
or else we will not believe them, it is still most absurd. Will you not believe
that the Laws of the Land are genuine, or that ever there were such Kings as
made them unless he that tells it you work Miracles? Shall not Children believe
their Parents, or Scholars their Tutors, unless they work Miracles.

3. I must premise that there is three sorts of Tradition, I. Such as depends
on the common Wit and Honesty of Mankind: And this is very much to be
suspected, wickedness, folly and lying being grown so common in the World.

II. Such as depends on the extraordinary skill and honesty of some proved men:
And this deserves much belief; but it is but an uncertain humane Faith.

III. Such as depends on Natural Necessity, and cannot possibly be false; we
have both these last to ascertain us of the Gospel History.

This rests on a distinction of the Acts of Man's Will: Some of them are
mutably free; and these give no certainty: Some of them are naturally and
immutably necessary, and Man can do no otherwise, and these give even natural
Infallible certainty: Such are, To love ones self, to love fel^city; to hate
torment and misery* etc. And to know that which is fully manifest to our sound
Senses, etc.

When men of contrary Interests and temper, all confess the Truth of known
things, about which their Interests stand cross, it is a Physical evidence of
Truth:

On this account men's agreement about Natural Notices is infallible.

It seems strange that all the World from Adam's time are agreed which is the
first, second, and third, etc. day of the Week, and not a day lost till now. It
could not be otherwise, Because being a thing of Natural interest and notice,
if any Kingdom had lost a day by over sleeping, or had agreed to falsify it,
all the rest of the World would have shamed them.

Thus all Grecians, Latins, Englishmen, etc. agree about the sense of Words;
for if some would pervert them, the rest would detect it.

Thus we are certain that the Statutes of the Land, are not counterfeit: For
men of cross interests hold their Lands, and lives by them; and if some did
counterfeit them, the rest would by interest be bound to detect it.

Arg. 1. There can be no effect without an adequate cause. But in Nature there
is no cause that can make all men agree to assert a known falsehood, or deny a
known Truth, against all their known interest: therefore there can be no such
effect.

Arg. 2. A necessary cause will necessarily effect: But where men's known
Interest obliges them to agree of a known Truth, this is a necessary cause of
certain credibility: therefore it has a necessary effect.

You know who were your Parents, and when and where you were Born, etc. by such
Tradition in a lower Degree. This depends not on pretended Authority, nor on
mere honesty; but on natural necessity.

Having premised this, I come to prove that we have such Tradition of Physical
infallible evidence, that the Faith of the present Church in the Essentials is
the same which the first Churches received infallibly from the Apostles.

1. The World knows that ever since Christ's Ascension all that believed in
him, were Baptized (as all Abraham's Covenanting seed were Circumcised:) And
what is Baptism, but a Profession of Belief in Jesus Christ as dead, risen and
glorified; and a devoting our selves in Covenant to God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost? All that ever were Christians by solemn Vow professed this same
Faith: And this is such a Tradition of Christianity as humane Generation down
from Adam is of the same humanity in the World.

2. They that were Baptized were Catechized first; in which the three Articles
of Baptism were opened to them, of which Christ's Death, Resurrection and
Ascension were part: And this has been an undeniable Tradition of the same
Faith.

3. The Sum of the Christian Faith was from the beginning drawn up in certain
Articles called the Creed, which expounded the three Baptismal Articles; and
all Churches on Earth had the same in sense, and most in Words; and all at Age
that were Baptized, professed this Creed: Which is as full a Tradition of the
same Belief in Christ's Birth, Death, and Resurrection, Ascension and Glory, as
Speaking is a Tradition of the same humane Nature.

4. Before Christ's Ascension, he instituted the Office of the Sacred Ministry,
which Friends and Foes confess has continued ever since: And what is this
Ministry, but an Office of publishing the Gospel of Christ, his Life, Death,
Miracles, Resurrection, Grace, etc. What else have they done in all Ages in the
World? So that the Office is an undeniable Tradition.

5. Christ and his Apostles instituted the Weekly Celebration of the
Remembrance of his Resurrection on the Lord's days: Friends and Foes confess
the History, that the first Day of the Week has been kept for such Memorial
ever since, through all the Christian part of the World: Which proves the
uninterrupted belief of Christ's Resurrection, as a Notorious Practical
Tradition.

6. Christ and his Apostles ever since his Resurrection instituted Solemn
Assemblies of Christians to be held on those Days, and at other Times: Once a
Week was the least through the Christian World: And what did they meet for but
to Preach, hear and profess the same Christian Faith?

7. It was the constant custom of Christians in their Assemblies, and their
Houses, to sing Hymns of Praise to Jesus Christ, in remembrance of his
Resurrection, etc. Pliny tells Trajan that this was the practice by which
Christians were known by their Persecutors: Which is a Practical Tradition.

8. Jesus Christ instituted, and all Christians to this Day have constantly
used, the Sacrament of Christ's Sacrifice, called the Eucharist; to keep in
remembrance his Death till he come, and profess their Belief that he is our
Life. And as the constant Celebration of the Passover with all its Ceremonies,
was a most certain Tradition of the Egyptians Plagues, and Israelites
deliverance, more than a bare written History would be; so has the Lord's
Supper been of the uninterrupted belief of the History of our Redemption by
Christ.

9. The Church has from the beginning had a constant Discipline, by which it
has kept it self separate from Heretics, who have denied any Essential
Article of this Faith: Which is a sure Tradition of the same belief.

10. None question but Christians have from the beginning been persecuted for
this same Faith; and in Persecution made Confession of it: Persecutors, and
Confessors then are both the Witnesses of the Continuance.

11. When ever Heretics or Enemies have written against Christians, their
Apologies and Defenses show that it was this same Faith that they owned.

12. Most of the adverse Heretics owned the same Matters of Fact.

13. The Jews were long before in Possession of the Books of the Old Testament,
which bear their Testimony to Christ.

14. The Books of the New Testament have by certain Tradition been delivered
down to this present Day, which contain the Matters of Fact, and Doctrine, the
Essentials, Integrals and Accidents of the Faith.

15. No Enemies have written any thing against the Matter of Fact, of any
Moment.

16. Yea, the Jews and other bitterest Enemies confess much of the Miracles of
Christ.

17. Martyrs have cheerfully forsaken Life, and all in confessing it.

18. God by his wonderful Providence has maintained it.

19. The Devil and all the Wicked of the World are the greatest Enemies to it.

20. The Holy Ghost has still blessed it, to work the same holy and heavenly
Nature, and Life in all sincere and serious Believers.

Quest. This proves infallibly the Tradition of the same Faith in the
Essentials: But how prove you that the same Holy Scripture is delivered as
uncorrupted?

Answ. All the Bible is not brought down so unchanged as are the Essentials of
our Religion: When there were no Bibles but what Scriveners wrote, no wonder if
oversight left few Copies without some of their slips. There are hundred of
various Readings in the New Testament; and of many no Man can be certain which
is true: But none of them are such as make any difference in the Articles of
our Faith, or Practice, nor on which any point of Doctrine or Fact depends.

And the words are necessary but for the Matter, which they do record.

And, 1. All Ministers, and all Churches constantly used this same Scripture
publicly, and privately, as the Word of God; so that it could not be easily
altered.

2. They all knew that a Curse is pronounced against every one that adds or
diminishes: Which must needs possess them with fear of corrupting it.

3. They took it to be the Charter of their own Salvation.

4. The work of the Ministers was to expound it, and preserve it against
Corrupters.

5. These Ministers and Churches were over much of the World, and could not
agree together to corrupt it: And if some did it, all the rest would soon
detect it.

6. Heresies and Quarrels were quickly too rife among them: So that cross
Interests and Animosities would soon have fallen upon the Corrupters.

7. Some Heretics made some adding and corrupting attempts, which the Church
presently condemned and turned it to their shame.

8. In all the Disputations then managed, the same Scriptures were appealed to.

9. The Translations into various Languages show that the Books were the same,
without any Momentous difference.

10. To this Day when Sin and Tyranny have torn the Church into many Factions,
they all receive the same Canonical Scriptures, except that some receive more
Apocryphal Writings, which yet make no alteration at all of our Gospel Faith.

Quest. But does not this laying so much on Tradition favor Popery?

Answ. No: The difference is here; 1. Papists are for Tradition as a supplement
to the Scripture, as if this were but part of the Word of God; and 2. They
plead for a peculiar power of being the Keepers and Judges of that supplemental
Tradition; which other Churches know nothing of.

But we, 1. Plead for the Infallible, Practical Tradition of the Essentials of
Christianity by itself, and in the Creed, etc. which is less than the
Scripture. 2. And next for the certain Tradition of the Scripture itself,
uncorrupted in all that Faith depends on: which Scripture is the complete
Record of God's Will and Law, containing more than Essentials and Integrals.

So much of God, 1. Manifested in the Flesh, 2. Justified in the Spirit.

III. He was seen of Angels; that is, Angels were the Beholding, Witnessing,
and admiring Servants of this great Mystery, God manifested in the Flesh.

1. Angels preached Christ at his Incarnation.

2. Angels ministered to Christ in his Temptations, Agonies, etc.

3. Angels were Preachers and VVitnesses of his Resurrection.

4. Angels rolled away the Stone, and terrified the Soldiers.

5. Angels preached his return to them that gazed up at his Ascension.

6. Angels opened the Prison Doors and set the imprisoned Apostles free once,
and Peter alone afterward.

7. Angels rejoice in Heaven at the Conversion of all that Christ brings home.

8. Angels disdain not to be the Guardians of the least of Christ's Disciples.

9. Angels are protecting Officers over Churches and Kingdoms.

10. Angels have preached to Apostles, and been the Messengers of their
Revelations.

11. Angels have been the Instruments of Miracles, and of destroying the
Churches Enemies.

12. Angels will ministerially convoy departed Souls to Christ.

13. Angels will gloriously attend Christ at his return, and sever the Wicked
from the Just.

14. Angels will be our Companions in the heavenly Chore for ever.

Therefore, 1. We should love Angels. 2. And be thankful to God for them. 3.
And think the more comfortably of Heaven for their Society: 4. And Pray for the
benefit of their Ministry on Earth, especially in all our dangers.

IV. The Fourth Article is [ Preached to the Gentiles.] The Jews having the
Covenant of Peculiarity, were proud of their Privilege, even while they
unworthily abused it: And despised the rest of the World, and would not so much
as eat with them, as if they had been God's only People. And indeed the rest of
the World was so corrupted, that we find no one Nation that as such renounced
Idolatry, and was devoted in Covenant to the true God alone, as the Jews were.
Now that God should be manifested in Flesh, to reconcile the Heathen World to
himself, and extend greater Privileges indefinitely to all Nations than ever
the Jews had in their state of Peculiarity, this was a Mystery of Godliness,
which the Jews did hardly yield belief to.

And that which aggravateth this wonder is, 1. That the Gentile World was
drowned in all Idolatry and Unnatural Wickedness, such as Paul describes, Romans
1. and. 2. Ephesians. 2. and 3. 18, etc. 2. And that God should suddenly and freely
send them the Message of reconciliation, and be found of them that sought him
not, is that wonder, which obliges us Gentiles who once lived as without God
in the World to be thankful to him.

V. The Fifth Article is [ Believed on in the World.] The effect of the Gospel
on the Souls of men in their Effectual Faith, is one of the Evidences of the
Christian Truth.

I told you before that the Fifth Witness of the Spirit on the Souls of all
Believers, I reserved to be here mentioned. Here, 1. It is a part of the wonder
that Christ should be believed on in the World, even with a common Faith. For,
1. To believe a mean Man to be the Mediator between God and Man, and the
Savior of the World, yea, one that was Crucified as a Malefactor: this must
needs be a difficult thing.

2. The very Jewish Nation was as contemptible to the Romans, being one of
their poorest subdued Provinces, as the Gentiles were to the Jews: And Christ
was by Birth a Jew.

3. The Greatness of the Roman Empire then, ruling over much of the World, was
such, that by Preaching, and not by War, to bring them to be Subjects to a
Crucified Jew, was a mavelous work; and so to bring the Conquered Nations to
become Christ's Voluntary Subjects.

4. The Roman and Greek Learning was then at the height of its Perfection: And
the Christians were despised by them as unlearned Barbarians: And that
Learning, Arts and Empire, should all submit to such a King and Savior, was
certainly a work of Supernatural Power. Christ did not levy Armies to overcome
the Nations, nor did Victory move them; but the Victors and Lords of the
World, and these no Fools, but the Masters of the greatest humane Wisdom,
were Conquered by the Gospel, preached by a sort of inferior men.

5. And this Gospel which Conquered them was still opposed by them, and the
Christians persecuted as a sort of hated men, till it overcame the Persecutors.

It Is true that Heathenism has the greatest part of the World, and Mahometans
have as much as Christians: But one sort got it by the Sword, and the other by
the Doctrine, and Holy lives of a few unarmed inferior men.

II. But I use this of the Extent of Faith, but as a probable, and not a cogent
Argument: But the main Argument is from the Sanctifying effect of Faith.

I know it will be said, that many or most Christians are as bad as other men.

But it is one thing to be of a professed Religion, because it is the Religion of
the King and Country, and therefore makes for men's worldly advantage, and
they hear little said againft it: This is the case of most in the World,
Christians, Mahometans and Heathens: And it is another to be a serious Believer,
who upon trial and consideration chooses Christianity.

And it is notorious that such serious Christians are all Holy, Sober, and
Just, and so greatly differing from the corrupted World, as fully proves that
God owneth that Gospel which he makes so effectual to so great a change.

Here consider, 1. What that change is; 2. How hard and great a work it is: 3.
That it is certainly a work of God. 4. That the Gospel is the means by which
God does it.

1. The nature of this Holy work on all serious sincere Christians, is, It sets
all their Hopes and Hearts on the promised Glory of the Life to come, and turns
the very nature of their Wills, into the predominant Love of God and Man, and
of Heaven and Holiness: It mortifieth all fleshly Lusts, and Subjects Sense to
Reason, and Faith, the Body to the Soul, and all to God: It sets a Man's Heart
on the sincere study of doing all the good he can in the World, to Friends,
Neighbors and Enemies; especially and most public good; to live soberly,
righteously and godly is his delight: Sin is his chief hatred; and nothing more
grievous to him than that he cannot reach to greater Perfection, in Faith,
Hope, Obedience, Patience, and in heavenly Love and Joy: It causes a Man to
contemn Wealth, Honor, and fleshly Pleasure, and Life, in comparison of God's
Love and Life everlasting; this change God's Spirit works on all true
Believers.

Those that are ungodly, have but the Name of Christians; they never well
understood what Christianity is; nor ever received it by a true belief. But all
that understandingly and seriously believe in Jesus Christ are sanctified by
his Spirit.

II. And this is a greater work than Miracles; in excellency and difficulty.

1. It is the very Health of the Souls: It is Salvation itself: it makes Man
in his measure like to God, and is his Image: It is a heavenly nature, and is
the earnest and preparation for Heaven: It delivers Man from the greatest
evil on Earth, and gives him the firmest peace and joy, in his peace with God,
the pardon of his Sins, and the hope of everlasting Glory.

2. It Is easy to discern how great a work this is, by the deep roots of all the
contrary Vices, in the corrupted Nature of Man: Experience assures us that Man
by vitiated Nature is proud, and ignorant, and savoureth little but the things
of the Flesh, and worldly Interest, and is a Slave to his Appetite and Lust:
His bodily Prosperity is all that really has his Heart: Yea if God restrain
them not, all wicked men are bitter Enemies to all that are truly wise and
holy, even among Heathens and Insidels, if any be but better than the rest, the
wicked are their deadly Enemies. There is so visible an Enmity between
Godliness and Wickedness, the Seed of Christ, and of the Serpent in the World
as is a great confirmation of the Scripture which describes it. And it is not
the Name of Christians that alters men's Nature. We here that have Peace from
all the World, are under such implacable hatred of wicked men, that call
themselves Christians, that so many Bears or Wolves would be less hurtful to us.

3. And the universal spreading of this wickedness over all the Earth, in all
Ages and Nations, does tell us how great a work it is to cure it.

4. And so does the frustration of all other means, till the Spirit of God do
it by setting home the Gospel upon the Heart. Children will grow up in
Wickedness, against all the Counsel, Love, Correction of their Parents: no
Words, no Reason will prevail with them, more than with drunken men or beasts.

5. We find it a very hard thing to cure a Man of some one rooted sin: much
more of all.

6. The common misery of the World proclaims Man's Vice, and the difficulty
of the cure: How else comes the World to live in self-seeking, falsehood,
fraud, malice, and in bloody Wars, wors^ than Wolves and Serpents against
each other.

7. Lastly, Where God cures this by true believing, it is done with the pangs
of sharp repentance, and a great conflict before God's Spirit overcomes.

III. It is evident then that this Sanctification of Souls is an eminent work
of God himself: 1. In that it is yet done on so many of his chosen ones in all
Ages and Places.

2. In that as hard as it is, he usually turns the Hearts of Sinners to
himself, in a very little time: Sometimes by one Sermon.

3. It is a work that none can do but God, who has the power of Souls.

4. It is a work so good that it bears God's own Image: It is but the writing
of his Law and Gospel on men's Hearts: None is so much for it as God. Satan
apparently fights against it with all the power he can raise in the World.
Mark it and you will find that most of the stir that there is in the World, by
false Teachers, and Tyrants, and private Malice, is but Satan's Wars against
Faith and Holiness, and Love: Certainly it is not he that promoteth them.

IV. And it is evident in Experience, that it is the Gospel of Christ which God
uses and blesses, to do this great sanctifying work on Souls. Among
Christians none are converted by any other means And God would not bless a word
of falsehood and deceit to such great and excellent effects: All that are made
holy and heavenly and truly conscionable among us, are made so by Christ's
Gospel: And all the wicked are Enemies to the serious practice of it, or Rebels
that despise it. The effects daily prove that God himself owneth it as his Word.

If you say, There are as good men among the Heathens and Mahometans, as holy
heavenly, and just:

I answer, It is none of my business to depretiate other men: But I can say, 1.
That I have lived above Sixty seven years, and I never knew one serious holy
Person in England that was made such by the Writings of Heathens or Mahometans.
2. Many excellent things are in the Writings of some Heathens, Plato, Cicero,
Hierocles, Plutarch, Antonine, Epictetus, and many others. But I miss in them
the expressions of that holy and heavenly frame of mind and life, and that
Victory over the Flesh and World, which Christianity contains.

3. Christ is like the Sun, whose Beams give some light, before it is seen its
self at its rising, and after it is set. The Light of Jews and Heathens, was as
the dawning of the Day before Sun rising: And the light among the Mahometans is
like the Light of the Sun which it leaves when it is set.

Doubtless the same God who has used Mahometans to be his dreadful Scourge to
wicked Christians, who abused the Gospel by a false Profession, has also used
them to do abundance of good against Idolatry in the Heathen World: Wherever
they come, Idolatry is destroyed. Yea the corrupt Christians, Greeks, and
specially Papists, that worship Images, Angels, and Bread, are rebuked and
condemned justly by Mahometans. But, O that they who have Conquered so far by
the Sword, were Conquered by the Sacred Word of Truth, and truly understood the
Mystery of Redemption, and the Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Obj. But they think us Idolaters for saying that Christ is God, and believing
the Trinity.

I. As to the Trinity; it is no contradiction that one Fire or Sun should have
Essentially a Virtue or Power to Move, Light, and Heat: Nor that one Soul
should have a power of Vegetation, Sense and Reason; Nor as Rational, to have a
peculiar power of Vitality, Intellection and Free Will. Why then should the
Trinity seem incredidible?

II. We do not believe that the Godhead has any change, or is made Flesh, or
the Manhood made God; but that the Godhead is incomprehensibly united to the
humane Nature by assumption, so as he is united to no other Creature, by and
for those peculiar Operations on the humanity of Christ, which make him our
Redeemer.

They that well think that God is All in All things, more than a Soul to all
the World, and as near to us as our Souls to our Bodies, in whom we live, and
move, and have our being, will find that it is more difficult to apprehend, how
God is further from any Soul, than that he is so much One with Christ: Save
that different Operations of God on his Creatures are apparent to us.

By all this we see that every sanctified Christian has the certain Witness in
himself that Christ is true: He is truly a Physician that heals, and a
Savior that saves all that seriously believe and obey him, The Spirit of God
in a New, and Holy, and Heavenly Nature of Spiritual Life, and Light, and Love,
is the Witness.

VI. The Sixth Article in my Text is [ Received up into Glory.]

That Christ after Forty Days continuance on Earth, was taken up into Heaven in
the sight of his Disciples, is a Matter of Fact of which we have all the
forementioned infallible proof, which I must not here again repeat.

And, 1. If Christ were not glorified now in Heaven he could not send down his
Spirit with his Word on Earth, nor have enabled the first Witnesses to speak
with all Tongues, and heal the Sick, and raise the Dead, and do all the
Miracles which they did. A dead Man cannot send down the Holy Spirit in
likeness of Fiery cloven Tongues, nor enable Thousands to do such Works; nor
could he do what is done on the Souls of serious Believers in all Ages and
Nations to this Day. He is sure alive that makes men live, and in Heaven that
draws up Hearts to Heaven.

2. And this is our Hope and Joy: Heaven and Earth are in his Power. The
Suffering and Work which he performed for us on Earth was short, but his
heavenly Intercession and Reign is Everlasting. Guilty Souls can have no
immediate access to God: All is by a Mediator: All our receivings from God are
by him: And all our services are returned by him, and accepted for his sake.
And as he is the Mediator between his Father and us, his Spirit interceedeth
between him and us: By his Spirit he gives us Holy desires and every Grace:
and by his Spirit we exercise them in returns to him.

And our glorified Savior has Satan, and all our Enemies in his Power: Life
and Death are at his command: All Judgment is committed to him: He that has
redeemed us is preparing us for Heaven, and it for us; and receives our
departing Souls to his own Joy and Glory. He has promised us that we shall be
with him where he is, and shall see his Glory. He that is our Savior will be
our Judge. He will come with Thousands of his Angels to the confusion of wicked
Unbelievers, and to be glorified in his Saints. He will make a New Heaven, and
a New Earth in which Righteousness shall dwell. Angels and Glorified Saints
shall with Christ our Head, make one City of God, or holy Society and Chore, in
perfect Love and Joy to praise the blessed God for ever.

I. The differences between this World, and that which I am going to.
I. THis World is God's Footstool. That is his Throne.

II. Here are his Works of Inferior Nature and of Grace. There he shines
forth in Perfect Glory.

III. Here is gross Receptive Matter moved by Invisible Powers. There are the
noblest efficient communicative Powers moving all.

IV. This is the Inferior, subject, Governed World. That is the Superior
Regent World.

V. This is a World of Trial, where the Soul is his that can win its consent.
That is a World where the Will is perfectly determined and fixed.

VI. Satan winning men's Consent, has here a large Dominion of Fools: There he
is cast out, and has no Possession.

VII. Here he is a (...) and Troubler of the Best: There he has neither Power
to Tempt or Trouble.

VIII. This World is as the dark Womb where we are regenerated. That is the
World of Glorious Light into which we are born.

IX. Here we dwell on a World of sordid Earth: There we shall dwell in a World
of Celestial Light and Glory.

X. Here we dwell in a troublesome, tempting, perishing Body. There we are
delivered from this burden and prison, into glorious liberty.

XI. Here we are under a troublesome Cure of our Maladies. There we are
perfectly healed, rejoicing in our Physicians praise.

XII. Here we are using the Means in weariness and hope: There we obtain the
end in full fruition.

XIII. Here sin makes us loathsome to our selves, and our own annoiance. There
we shall love God in our selves, and our Perfected selves in God.

XIV. Here all our Duties are defiled with sinful imperfection. There perfect
Souls will perfectly love and praise their God.

XV. Here Satan's temptations are a continual danger and molestation. There
perfect Victory has ended our temptations.

XVI. Here still there is a remnant of the Curse, and Punishment of sin:

Pardon and Deliverance are perfected there.

XVII. Repenting, Shame, Sorrow, and Fear are here part of my necessary work.

There all the troublesome part is past, and utterly excluded.

XVIII. Here we see darkly as in a Glass, the Invisible World of Spirits:

There we shall see them as Face to Face.

XIX. Here Faith, alas, too weak, must serve instead of sight.

There presence and sight suspend the use of such believing.

XX. Desire and Hope are here our very Life and Work.

But there it will be full felicity in fruition.

XXI. Our Hopes are here often mixed with grievous doubts and fears.

But there full possession ends them all.

XXII. Our holy Affections are here corrupted with Carnal mixtures.

But there all are purely Holy and Divine.

XXIII. The coldness of our Divine Love is here our sin and misery.

The Perfection of it will be there our perfect Holiness and Joy.

XXIV. Here though the Will itself be imperfect, we cannot be and do what we
would.

There Will, and Deed, and Attainment will all be fully perfect.

XXV. Here by Ignorance and Self-Love I have Desires which God denies.

There perfect Desires shall be perfectly fulfilled.

XXVI. Here pinching Wants of something or other, and troublesome Cares are
daily burdens.

Nothing is there wanting, and God has ended all their Cares.

XXVII. Sense here rebelleth against Faith, and Reason, and often overcomes.

Sense there shall be only Holy, and no Discord be in our Faculties or acts.

XXVIII. Pleasures and Contents here are short, narrow, and twisted with their
contraries.

There they are objectively pure and boundless, and subjectively total and
absolute.

XXIX. Vanity and Vexation are here the Titles of transitory things.

Reality, Perfection, and Glory are the Title of the things above.

XXX. This World is a point of God's Creation, a narrow place for a few
Passengers.

Above are the vast capacious Regions, sufficient for all Saints and Angels.

XXXI. This World is as Newgate, and Hell, as Tyburn: some are hence saved,
and some condemned.

The other World is the Glorious Kingdom of Jehovah with the Blessed.

XXXII. It was here that Christ was tempted, scorned and crucified.

It is there where he Reigns in Glory over all.

XXXIII. The Spiritual life is here as a Spark or Seed. It is there a glorious
flame of Love, and Joy, and the perfect Fruit and Flower.

XXXIV. We have here but the first Fruits, Earnest, and Pledge.

There is the full and glorious Harvest and Perfection.

XXXV. We are here Children in Minority, little differing from Servants.

There we shall have full possession of the Inheritance.

XXXVI. The prospect of Pain, Death, Grave, and Rottenness, blasteth all the
Pleasures here.

There is no Death, nor any fear of the ending of felicity.

XXXVII. Here even God's Word is imperfectly understood, and Errors swarm
even in the Best.

All Mysteries of Nature and Grace, are there unveiled in the World of Light.

XXXVIII. Many of God's Promises are here unfulfilled, and our Prayers
unanswered.

There Truth shines in the full performance of them all.

XXXIX. Our Grace is here so weak, and Hearts so dark, that our sincerity is
often doubted of.

There the flames of Love and Joy leave no place for such a doubt.

XL. By our unconstancy here one Day is joyful and another sad.

But there our Joys have no interruption.

XLI. We dwell here with sinful Companions like our selves in Flesh.

There holy Angels and Souls with Christ are all our Company.

XLII. Our best friends and helpers are here in parst our hinderers by sin.

There all concur in the harmony of active Love.

XLIII. Our Errors and Corruptions make us also hurtful and troublesome to our
Friends.

But there both Christ and they forgive us, and we shall trouble them no more.

XLIV. Selfishness and cross interests here jar, and mar our conversation.

There perfect Love will make the Joy of every Saint and Angel mine.

XLV. A militant Church imperfectly sanctified here lives in scandal and sad
divisions.

The glorious Church united in God in perfect Love, has no contention.

XLVI. Sin and Error here turn our very public Worship into jars.

The Celestial harmony of joyful Love and Praise is to Mortals unconceivable.

XLVII. VVeak, blind and wicked Teachers here keep most in delusion and
division.

There glorious Light has banished all Lies, deceit and darkness.

XLVIII. The wills of blind Tyrants is the Law of most on Earth.

The Wisdom and Will of the most holy God, is the Law of the heavenly Society.

XLIX. Lies here cloud the Innocence of the Just, and render Truth and Goodness
odious.

All false Judgments are there reversed, and Slander is silenced, and the
Righteous justified.

L. Government is here exercised by terror and violence.

But there God rules by Light, Love, and absolute Delight.

LI. Enemies, Reproach, and Persecution here annoy and tempt us.

All storms are there past, and the Conquerors crowned in joyful Rest.

LII. The Glory of Divine Love and Holiness is clouded here by the abounding of
Sin, and the greatness of Satan's Kingdom upon Earth.

But the vast glorious heavenly Kingdom, to which this Earth is but a Point and
Prison will banish all such erring Thoughts and Glorify God's Love and
Goodness for ever.

LIII. This is the World which as corrupted is called an Enemy to God and us,
and which as such we renounced in Baptism, and must be saved from.

That is the World which we seek, pray and wait for all our lives, and for
which all the tempting Vanities of this must be forsaken.

LIVE. This Body an World is like our riding Clothes, our Horse, our Way, and
Inn, and traveling Company: All but for our Journey homeward.

The other is our City of Blessedness and Everlasting Rest, to which all Grace
inclines Souls, and all preser^ Means and Mercies tend.

LV. The very ignorance of Nature and Sensible things, makes this life a very
Labyrinth, and our Studies, Sciences and Learned Conversation to be much like a
Dream, or Popet Play, and a Childish stir about mere Words.

But in Heaven an Universal knowledge of God's wonderful Works will not be the
least of the Glory in which he will shine to Saints.

LVI. Distance and Darkness of Souls here in Flesh, who would Fain know more of
God and the heavenly World, and cannot, does make our lives a burden by these
unsatisfied desires.

There Glorious Presence and Intuition gives full satisfaction.

LVII. Our sin and imperfection here render us incapable of being the Objects
of God's full complacential Love, though we have his benevolence which will
bring us to it.

But there we shall in our several measures perfectly please God, and be
perfectly pleased in God for ever.

LVIII. All things here are short and transitory, from their beginning, posting
toward their end, which is near and sure, and still in our Eye: so short is
time, that Beings here are next to nothing; the Bubble of worldly Prosperity,
Pomp and fleshly Pleasure, does swell up, and break in so short a Moment, as
that it Is, and and Is not almost at once.

But the heavenly substances and their work, and Joys, are crowned by Duration,
being assuredly EVERLASTING.

Such, O my Soul, is the blessed Change which God will make.

The Reasons and Helps of my Belief and Hope of this Perfection.
1. NAtural Reason assures me that God made all Creatures fitted to their
intended use: Even Bruits are more fit for their several Offices, than Man is.
He gives no Creature its faculties in vain: Whatever a wise Man makes, he
fits it to the use which he made it for. But Man's Faculties are Enabled to
think of a God, of our relation and our duty to him, of our hopes from him, and
our fears of him: Of the state of our Souls related to his judgment; of what
will befall us after Death, reward or punishment, and how to prepare for it:
This Nature, and its faculties, and powers, are not made in vain.

II. Reason assures me that all men are bound by Nature to prefer the least
probability of a Life of Everlasting Joy, before all the Prosperity of this
World; and to suffer the loss of all this short Vanity, to escape the least
possibility of endless misery: And Nature has such notices of Rewards and
Punishments after Death, that no Man can say that he is sure there is no such
thing. From whence it follows that all men are bound by the very Law of
Nature to be Religious, and to seek first and most their Salvation in the Life
to come. And if so, It Is certain that there is such a thing to be obtained:
Else God had made the very Nature of Man to be deceived by itself, and to spend
the chief part, yea all his life, through labor and suffering for that which
is not; and so made his greatest duty to be his greatest deceit and misery: And
the worst men should be least deceived. But all this is not to be imputed to
our wise and good Creator.

III. The universal sense of Moral Good and Evil in all Mankind, is a great
evidence of another life. The vilest Atheist cannot abide to be accounted a
Knave, a Liar, a bad Man; nor will equal a vicious Servant with another. All
would be thought good who will not be good. And does not God make a greater
difference than Man? And will he not show it?

IV. The World is actually ruled much by the hopes and fears of another life,
and cannot well be ruled without it, according to the Nature of Man: But the
Almighty, most Wise and most Holy God, needs not, and will not rule the World
by mere deceit.

V. The Gospel of Christ has brought Life and Immortality into a clearer Light
than that of Nature. And it must be by believing in Christ that we must have
our full satisfaction. O what has God done in the Wonders of Redemption to
make us sure? And against the doubts that are apt to rise from some hard
particular Text of Scripture, it must be considered, I. That Christ and his
Apostles did put the ascertaining Seal of the many uncontrolled Miracles to the
Gospel Doctrine, primarily; which Doctrine, 1. Was delivered and sealed Eight
years before any of the New Testament was written, and almost Seventy before
the last. 2. And Christ did not speak in the Language that the Gospel is
written to us; so that being but a Translation as to his own Words, the Matter
is the thing first sealed.

II. And that it was the two Legislator-Mediators, Moses and Christ, who came
with the great stream of uncontrolled Miracles; It being necessary that men
should have full proof that a Law or Doctrine is of God, before they believe it:
But the Priests and Prophets after Moses, and the Preachers and Pastors of the
Christian Church, who were not Commissioned to bring men any New Laws or
Gospel, but to proclaim and teach that which they received, needed no such New
Testimony of Miracles.

III. The Belief of every particular Priest or Prophet after Moses, or every
Pastor after Christ and his Apostles, was not of the same degree of necessity
to Salvation, as the belief of the Law and Gospel itself. Therefore though all
the Holy Scripture be true, the Law and the Gospel must be much differenced
from the rest.

IV. The History of the Law and Gospel have full ascertaining historical
Evidence; or else there is none such in the World. Therefore the Doctrine must
be true.

V. The Prophesies fulfilled prove the Gospel true.

VI. And the Divine Impress on the whole.

VII. And the sanctifying work of the Spirit wrought by it, in all Nations and
Ages, on serious Believers, is a constant Divine attestation.

VIII. And as my Faith has so sure a Foundation, it confirms my Faith and
Hope that it has been so long and great a work of God by his Word and Spirit
on my Soul, to raise it to believe, and love, and desire that Holy state of
Perfection and Fruition which I hope for: That which has made me so much
better than I else had been, and turned my Heart and Life, (though imperfectly)
to things above the Pleasures of the Flesh, must needs be of God: And God would
never send his Grace to work my Heart to Deceit and Lies, and give me such
Graces as shall all be frustrate: His Spirit is the Earnest and first Fruits of
Glory.

IX. And all the course of Religious and Moral duty which he has commanded me,
and in which he has employed my life, were never imposed to deceive me; I am
sure by Nature and Scripture that it is my Duty to love God and my Neighbor,
to desire Perfection, and to serve God, and do good with all my time and power,
and to trust God for my reward, believing that all this shall not be in vain;
nor that which is best be made my loss. O blessed be God for Commands and Holy
Duty: For they are equal to Promises: Who can fear that he shall lose by
seeking God?

X. As God has sealed the Truth of his Word as aforesaid, so he has by an
instituted Office and Ordinance, sealed and delivered to my self, his Covenant
with the gift of Christ and Life, in Baptism, and the Lord's Supper.

XI. He has given me such a love to Holy Things and Persons, that I greatly
long to see his Church in perfect Light, and Love, and Concord: Oh how sweet
would it be to see all men Wise, and Holy, and Joyfully praising God: Every
Christian longs for this: And therefore such a state will be.

XII. I have found here the great benefit of the Love and Ministry of Angels,
such as is described in Psalm. 91. They have kept me Night and Day; which
confirms my hope, that I shall dwell with them; for I love them better than
men, because they love and serve God better.

XIII. That low communion which I have here with God by Christ and the Spirit,
in his answer to my Prayers, Supports, Comforts, Experiences, tends to more.

XIV. The pleasure which I have by Love in thinking of the happiness of my
many, many, many holy departed Friends, and of the Glory of Christ, and the
heavenly Jerusalem, is sure some hopeful approach toward their state.

XV. When I see the Fire mount upward, and think that Spirits are of a more
sublime and excellent Nature than Fire. And when I see that all that is done in
this World, is done by Spiritual unseen powers, which move this gross and
drossie Matter, it puts me past doubt that my Soul being a Spirit, has a vast
and glorious World of Spirits to ascend to. God has by Nature put into all
things an aggregative uniting inclination. Earth has no other natural motion.
The ascent of Fire tells us its Element is above: And Spirit^ naturally incline
to Spirits, and holy Spirits peculiarly are inclined to the Holy.

XVI. I am sure, 1. By understanding that I understand, and by willing that I
will, etc. 2. I am sure by these Acts that I have the power or faculties to do
them. For none does that which it cannot do. 3. And I know that it is a
substance that has these powers: For nothing can do nothing.

My Soul then being certainly an intellective, Volitive, Vital substance; 1. I
have no reason to think that God who annihilateth not the least Sand, will
annihilate so noble a substance.

2. Nor that he will destroy those Powers which are its Essential form, and
turn it into some other thing.

3. Nor that such Essential powers shall lie as dead unactive, and so be
continued in vain.

4. There remaining therefore nothing uncertain to natural Reason, but the
continuance of Individuation to separate Souls. 1. Apparitions, and Wirches
cases have put that out of doubt, notwithstanding many Fables and Delusions. 2.
Christ has put it more out of doubt. 3. While substance, faculties and acts
continue, it is the error of our selfish state in Flesh, which makes any fear
too near a Union which shall end our individuation. The greatest Union will be
the greatest Perfection, and no loss to Souls.

XVII. God's wonderful Providence for the Church and single Saints on Earth,
are such as tell us of that love and care, which will bring them afterward to
him.

XVIII. The Nature of God takes off the terror of my departure much: I am
sure I shall die at the will, and into the Hand of Infinite Essential Love and
Goodness: whose love should draw up my longing Soul.

XIX. I am going to a God whose Mercies have ^ong told me, that he loves me
better than my dearest Friend does, and better than I love my self, and is a
far better chooser of my lot.

XX. As he has absolute right to dispose of his own, so indeed the fulfilling
of his Will, is the ultimate end of all things, and therefore most desirable in
itself And his will shall be fulfilled on me.

XXI. I go to a glorified Savior who came down to fetch me up, and has
conquered and sanctified Death, and made it my Birthday for Glory, and takes
me for his dear bought own and interest, and is in Glory ready to receive his
own.

XXII. I go to that Savior who on the Cross commended his Spirit into his
Fathers Hand, and taught me with dying Stephen to say, Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit.

XXIII. I go no solitary untrodden way, but follow all the Faithful since the
death of Abel to this day, (save Henoch and Elias) who all went by Death into
that glorious World where I shall find them.

XXIV. I have so long groaned under a languid Body, and in a blind, distracted,
and by Man uncurable World, where Satan by Lies, Malice, and Murder reigns in
-- alas how many, and specially am so weary of my own darkness and sinful
imperfection, that I have great reason to be willing of deliverance.

XXV. I have had so large a share of Mercies in this World already, in time,
and manifold comforts from God, that reason commands me to rest in God's time
for my removal.

XXVI. I shall leave some fruits not useless to serve the Church when I am
gone: and if good be done, I have my end.

XXVII. When I am gone, God will raise up and use others to do his appointed
work on Earth: And a Church shall be continued to his praise: And the Spirits
in Heaven will rejoice therein.

XXVIII. When I am gone, I shall not wish to be again on Earth.

XXIX. Satan by his temptations and all his instruments would never have done
so much as he does in the World to keep us from Heaven, if there were not a
Heaven which Conquerors obtain.

XXX. When darkness and uncertainty of the manner of the action and fruition of
separated Souls would daunt me, it is enough to know explicitly so much as is
explicitly revealed, and implicitly to trust Christ with all the rest: Our
Eyes are in our Head; who knows for us? Knowledge of Glory is part of
fruition: And therefore we must expect here no more than is suited to a life of
Faith.

XXXI. All my part is to do my own duty and then trust God; obeying his
commanding will, and fully and joyfully resting in his disposing and rewarding
will. There is no rest for Souls but in the Will of God, and there with full
Trust to repose our Souls in Life and at Death, is the only way of a safe and
comfortable departure.

XXXII. The glorious Marriage day of the Lamb cannot now be far off, when the
number of the Elect shall be complete, and Christ will come with his glorious
Angels, and will be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all Believers, and
there shall be a New Heaven, and a New Earth wherein dwells Righteousness,
and that Kingdom shall come, where that which God has prepared for them that
love him, Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, nor has it entered into the
Heart of Man to have a formal, full conception of it.

Come Lord Jesus; come quickly, Amen.

Fear not then, O my Soul, to lay down this Flesh: Mercy has kept it up for my
preparing work; but, O what a burdensome and chargeable a Companion has it
been! Is it better than the dwelling place of perfect Spirits? O what are my
groans and all my cold and faint Petitions, and my dull Thanksgiving, to their
harmonious joyful Praise? If a Day in God's Courts be better than a Thousand,
what is a Day, yea, what is Everlastingness in the heavenly Society and Work; O
how hateful a thing is darkness and unbelief, when the remnants of them thus
stop poor Souls in their ascent: And make us half unwilling to go home? What!
unwilling to be with my glorified Lord? Unwilling to be with Saints and Angels,
who are all Life, and Light, and Love? Unwilling to see the Glory of Jehovah? O
foolish sinful Soul! Has Christ done so much to purchase the heavenly Glory
for thee, and now art thou unwilling to go into the possession of it? Have thou
been seeking, and praying, and laboring, and suffering so many Years, for that
which now thou seem scarce willing to obtain? Do thou not judge thy self
unworthy of Eternal Life, when thou no more desire to enjoy it? All this is
long of thy too much adherence unto SELF and SENSE: Thou art still desiring
sensitive satisfaction, and not content to know thy part, would know that for
thy self, which Christ knows for thee: As if thou could better trust thy
self than him? Fear not, weak Soul, it is our Fathers good pleasure to give
thee the Kingdom: Trust infinite Power, Wisdom, and Love: Trust that faithful
gracious Savior who has so wonderfully merited to be trusted: Trust that
promise which never deceived any one? and which is confirmed by so many
Miracles, and by the Oath, and by the Spirit of God. Whenever thou departest
from this house of Flesh, the Arms of Mercy are open to embrace thee, yea,
Essential transcendent Love is ready to receive thee: The Spirit of Love has
sealed thee to that blessed state? Christ will present thee justified and
accepted. Most of my old holy familiar Friends are gone before me, and all the
rest that died since the World began. And the few imperfect ones left behind,
are hasting after them apace, and if I go before will quickly overtake me:
Though they weep as if it were for a long separation, it is their great
mistake: The gate of Death stands all Day open, and my sorrowful Friends are
quickly following me, as I am now following those for whom I sorrowed. O pity
them who are left a while under the temptations, dangers and fears which have
so long been thy own affliction? But be not afraid of the Day of thy
deliverance, and the bosom of everlasting Love, and the Society of the wise,
and just, and holy, and of the end of all thy troubles, and the entrance into
the Joy of thy Lord, and the place and state of all thy hope. O say, not
notionally only as from argumentative conviction, but confidently and with glad
desire and hope TO DEPART AND BE WITH CHRIST, IS FAR BETTER than to be here.

But, O my God, I have much more hope in speaking to thee, than to my self.
Long may I plead with this dark and dull, yet fearful Soul, before I can plead
it into joyful hope and heavenly desires, unless thou shine on it with the
light of thy Countenance, and Thou whom my Soul must Trust and Love, wilt give
me Faith and Love themselves. I thank Thee for convincing Arguments: But had
this been all the strength of my Faith and Hope, the tempter might have proved
too subtle for me in dispute. I thank thee that some experience tells me, that
a holy Appetite to heavenly Work, and a love to the heavenly Company and State,
does more to make me willing to die, and think with Pleasure of my change, than
ever bare Arguments would have done. O send down the streams of thy love into
my Soul, and that will powerfully draw it up by longings for the near and full
fruition. O give me more of the divine and heavenly Nature, and it will be
natural and easy to me to desire to be with Thee! Send more of the heavenly
Joys into this Soul, and it will long for Heaven, the place of Joy. I must not
hope on Earth for any such acquaintance with the World above, as is proper to
the enjoying state. But if the Sun can send its illuminating, warming Rays, to
such a World as this, according to the various disposition of Recipients;
doubtless Thou have thy effectual, though unsearchable, ways, of illuminating,
sanctifying, and attractive influence on Souls. And one such Beam of thy
pleased Face, one Taste of thy complacencial Love, will kindle my love and draw
up my desires, and make my pains and sickness tolerable; I shall then put off
this clothing with the less reluctance, and willingly leave my Flesh to the
Dust, and sing my Nunc dimittis, when I have thus seen and tasted thy
Salvation. O my God, Let not thy strengthening comforting grace now forsake me,
lest it should overwhelm me with the fears of being finally forsaken. Dwell in
me as the God of Love and Joy, that I may long to dwell in Love and Joy with
Thee for ever. As Grace abounded where sin abounded, let thy strengthening and
comforting Mercy abound, when weakness increases, and my necessities abound.
My Flesh and my Heart^ fails, but Thou art the strength of my Heart and my
Portion for ever. This short life is almost at an end: But thy loving kindness
is better than life: I know not with what pains thou will further try me: But
if I love Thee, thou have promised that all things shall work together for my
good. The World that I am going to by Death is not apparent to my sight. But my
life is hid with Christ in God; and because he lives we shall live; and we
shall be with him where he is; and when he appears we shall appear with him
in Glory; and shall enter into our Masters joy, and be for ever with the Lord,
Amen.

What sensible manifestation of his Kingdom, Christ gave in his Transfiguration.
1. Our Lord who brought Life and Immortalility to Light, well knew the
difficulty of believing so great things unseen: And therefore it pleased him to
give men some sensible helps by demonstration. In Mat. 16. and 17. 1, 2. etc.
Mark 9. 1. Luke 9. 28. he promised some of his Disciples a sight of his Kingdom
as coming in power; or such a glimpse as Moses had of the Backparts of God's
Glory: This he performed first in his Transfiguration, as afterward in his
Resurrection, Ascension, and sending the holy Ghost to enable them with power,
to preach and work Miracles, and convert the Nations.

2. By the Kingdom of God, is meant God's Government of his Holy ones by a
heavenly communication of Life, Light and Love initially on Earth, by Grace,
and perfectly in Heaven by Glory. A special Theocracy.

3. For the understanding of this we must know, that when God had made Man
good, in his Image, he conversed with him in a heavenly manner, either
immediately, or by an Angel speaking to him, and telling him his will. But Man
being made a free self-determining Agent, he was left to choose whom he would
follow: And hearkening unto Satan, and turning from God, he became a Slave of
Satan, and gave him advantage to be his deceiving Ruler: Not that Man's
rebellion nullified God's Power, or disposing Government, or took Man from
under Obligation to Obedience: but that forsaking God he was much, though not
wholly forsaken by his special fatherly approving Government, and left to Satan
and his own will: But the eternal Word interposing for Man's Reprival and
Redemption, undertook to break the Serpents Head, and to conquer and cast out
him that had deceived and captivated Man: And choosing out a special Seed he
made them a peculiar People, and set up a heavenly Prophetical Government over
them, himself by heavenly Revelation making their Laws, and choosing their
chief Governors under him, from time to time, and would not leave it to blind
and sinful Man to make Laws or choose Princes for themselves, but would keep
them in a special dependence upon Heaven. But the carnal Israelites having
provoked God by odious Idolatry to deny them much of the benefit of Government
(save when they repented and cried to him for help) they thought to amend this
by choosing a King like other Nations, and ending their dependence on heavenly
Revelation and choice for Government: And so Theocracy was turned into a more
humane Regiment, and God more cast off: Though yet he would not quite forsake
them. And the rest of the World was yet more left under the power of Satan and
their own corrupted mind and will. So that Satan has both an Internal Kingdom
in wicked Souls, and a visible Polititical Government of the wicked Kingdoms of
the World, ruling them by men that are ruled by him. And as Christ came to cast
him out of men's Hearts by his sanctifying conquering Spirit, so also to cast
him out of the Political Government of the Kingdoms of the World, and to bring
them under the Laws, and Officers, and Spirit of Christ, and rule them by
heavenly Power and Love as his own Kingdoms, that he may bring them to
Perfection in one Celestial Kingdom at last. And in this sense we pray, Thy
Kingdom come.

4. To make men believe that he is the heavenly King sent from God to cast down
Satan's Kingdom, was the great business of the preaching of the Gospel: This he
would demonstrate, as by all his Miracles which showed him to have the Victory
of Devils, and to be the Lord of Life, so also by visible Apparition in Glory.
And as it is said, 1 John 5. 7, 8. that there are three Witnesses in Heaven,
and three on Earth, so here Christ would have three heavenly, and three earthly
Witnesses of his Transfiguration. From Heaven he had the Witness, 1. Of a Voice
proclaiming, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. 2. Of
Moses the chief Lawgiver. 3. And of Elias the chief Prophet; to tell us that
the Law and the Prophets, are his prognosticating Witnesses: But [ Hear him]
notifieth to us, that Christ and his Gospel are to be heard above the Law and
the Prophets, and to teach us more than they could teach us: The Law was given
by Moses, (with its types and shadows,) but Grace and Truth (the substance so
typified) are by Jesus Christ.

5. Light and Glory are often of the same signification. Christ was
transfigured into a lucid glorious appearance of Body: He tells us by this,
that he would have us have some sort of Idea of his Kingdom, fetched from sense,
many Apparitions of Angels have been in lights. Christ appeared to Saul in a
visible light, Act. 9. So did he to John, Rev. 1, etc. God and the Lamb are the
Light of the New Jerusalem. It is an inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Some seem to me to think too basely of Sense, and too far to separate it from
Intellectual Spirits both as to Power, Act, and Object: And all because they
find it in lower Creatures. They might accordingly deny substantiality to
Spirits, because Bruits are substances: The higher have all the Perfections of
the lower, either formally or eminently. It is not a Spirits Perfection to be
insensible, or to have nothing to do with sensible things, but to be eminently
sensible, and to be Superior Agents on lower sensibles. GOD IS LOVE: And LOVE
is Complacency: And a high degree of Complacency is Delight or Joy. So that God
is Essential Infinite Joy: But without that drossie quality which is proper to
Souls in Flesh, and all that Imperfection which belongs to Creatures. Can we
tell what it is to enter into our Masters Joy, or Joyfully to love and praise
him, without any sense: I rather think that as vigorous Youth makes men
capable of more delight than decrippt, languid, ^ainful Age and Sickness, so
Heaven shall by perfecting our Natures, make them capable of unconceivably more
joy than any on Earth is capable of.

And as we shall have Sense in Exaltation as to power and act, so we shall have
sensible Objects. God himself delights in all his works; and so shall we: we
must not on pretense of taking the heavenly Jerusalem to be merely Spiritual,
deprive our selves of all the sensible Idea's of it which God's description
offers to u^ Light is sensible: Christ glorified there is sensible: Moses and
Elias were sensible to Peter, James, and John. Lazarus and Abraham were
sensible to the Man in Hell, Luke 16. Stephen saw Heaven open and Christ
sitting at the right Hand of God: And all Eyes shall see him at his glorious
return. Heavenly Glory is not enjoyed only by mere THINKING and knowing, nor as
in a Dream: but by the most eminent Intellectual sensation exalted and
invigorated.

6. Say not then, O my Soul that this Kingdom of Glory is so far above thee,
that thou can have no Idea of it: Think not that it is therefore unmeet for
thy desiring and joyful hopes, because thou can not know what it is: Have
thou no conception of the difference between Light and Darkness? If thou had
been but one Year kept in absolute darkness, would thou have no desiring
thoughts of light? The Blind think themselves half dead, while they are alive.
Indeed the Faculty and Object must be suitable: Light may be too great for our
weak Eyes, as heat may be torment in an unsuitable degree: but when our Souls
are perfected, they will be suitable Recipients of a more glorious Light than
we can here endure: Moses is not there covered in a cleft of the Rock, because
he could see but as the back parts of God's Glory. We must see here but as in a
Glass: but there as Face to Face. Though these Organical Eyes as Spectacles
shall be laid by, we shall have Media more perfect suitable to our perfect
state.

And as I can think of Heaven as a Region of glorious Light, so can I think of
it as a place and state of Life and Love: I know somewhat of the difference of
Life and Death; and that a living Dog is better than a dead Lion. And I have
felt what it is to love my Friends, and thence to desire their near communion
as my delight. And can I then have no Idea of that World, where Life, Light and
Joyful Love are the very Element of Souls, as Water is to the Fishes.

And as I can have some Idea of that state in general, so may I of the state of
the perfected Spirits of the Just which are there. They are con-natural to
their proper Element. They are Essential created Life, Light, and Love. And
they want not substance to be the Basis of those formal Powers, nor Objects on
which to exercise them. Think not then that Heaven is so far unconceivable as
not by any Idea to be thought of: If we have no Conception of it, we can have
no desires of it, and no delightful hope. What can we conceive of more
certainly, than of Life, and Light, and Love; of a Region, and of Persons
essentiated of these? Do we not know what Knowledge is? and see what Light is?
and feel what Life and Love are?

But it is true that our Conceptions hereof are lamenmentably imperfect; and so
they must be till Possession, Fruition, and Exercise perfect them. Who knows
what Light or Sight is, but by Seeing; or what Knowledge is but by knowing? Or
what Love, and Joy are but by loving and rejoicing? And who knows what Perfect
Sight, Knowledge, Love, and Joy are, but by perfect Seeing, Knowing, Loving, and
Rejoicing? No Man by an intuitive or immediate perception: But some abstractive
Conceptions of it we may have by reasoning deduction, from that poor Degree
which we here in the Kingdom of Grace possess.

Can I perceive substantiality in the dark terrene appearances, which are but
mutable lifeless matter agitated and used by invisible Powers and shall I think
of those unseen powerful substances as if they were less substantial for being
Spiritual, or were not Objects for a knowing Thought. Are the Stars which I see
less substantial than a Carcass in a darksom Grave? The Lord that appeared in
shining Glory, has Members in their measure like himself; and has promised
that we shall shine as Stars in the Kingdom of his Father: If some degree of
this be here performed in them who are called the Children of Light, and the
Lights of the World, how much more will they shine in the World of Light. They
that call Light a quality or an Act, must confess it has a substance whose
quality or act it is. Alas, what a deceived thing is a sensual Unbeliever; who
spends his Life in the pursuit of fugitive shaddows, and walks in a vain
show, and thinks of Spiritual glorious substances, as if they were the nothings
or delusions of a Dream?

6. Christ, Moses and Elias here visibly appeared as three distinct individual
Persons: This tells us that it is a false conceit that Death cease
Individuation, and turns all Souls into one: (of which before:) Perfect
indivisible infinite Unity is proper to God: From this One is multiplicity.
Reason forbids us when we see the numberless individuals in this World, and see
also the numerous Stars above, to imagine that all the Worlds above us have so
much of Divine Perfection, as to be but one undivided substance, and to have no
multiplicity of Inhabitants. Yea, some of those Sadduces hold that the Stars
are Worlds inhabited as the Earth is. And why then should they think whither
soever Souls go, that they cease their individuation) When they go among
individuals? But Christ has confuted them even to Sense. Moses is Moses still,
and Elias is Elias still: And all our Friends that are gone to Christ, are the
same still that they were, and may be called by the same Names. Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob are the same in Heaven; and Lazarus was Lazarus in Abraham's bosom.
When we lay by Flesh, and are uncloathed, we put not off our personality: Every
one shall receive his own reward, according to what he has done in the Body,
when every one must give account of his own works and talents.

Why then may I not with distinct conceptions and joyful desires look after the
Souls of my departed Friends, that are now in the Celestial Kingdom? Though
malignity has scorned me for naming some few in my Saints Rest, being such as
the Despisers hated; yet I forbear not on such accounts to Solace my self by
naming more, but because they are more than it is fit to number. In all places
where I have lived, how many excellent Souls (though here they were not
perfect) are gone to Christ? How sweet is the remembrance of the communion
which I had with many of them in Shrewsbury and other parts of Shropshire? Of
many at Dudley and the adjoining parts: Of Multitudes at Kiderminster, Bewdley,
and other parts of Worcestershire: Of abundance at Coventry, and other parts of
Warwickshire: And of many where I have sojourned in other parts of the Land:
And above all in London, and the adjoining parts? As Mr. How has elegantly
expressed it in his excellent Character of my excellent and dear Friend Mr.
Richard Fairclough: What a Multitude of Blessed Saints will arise at the last
Day out of London? and this Earth is as it were hallowed with the Dust and
Relicts of so many blessed Souls. But it is Heaven that is spangled with these
Spiritual Stars: The place honored with them, and they with it, and all by
Christ. We are like Infants, or Lambs, or other young ones, that cry for their
Dams if they be but out of sight; though they are never so near, if they see
them not, they cry as if they were not, or had forsaken them. As Christ told
his Disciples, that it was needful for them that he departed from them, and yet
their Hearts for this were sorrowful, till the Holy Ghost came upon them, as
better than Christ's fleshly presence, to prepare them joyfully to follow him;
so we think of our Friends as almost lost to us by separation, till the
heavenly Spirit tell us where they are, and prepare us to desire to be with
them.

6. Elias has a Body now in Heaven; and so has Henoch: But can we think that
only two or three that are there with Christ do so much differ from all the
rest, as to have Bodies when the rest have none? Is there such a dissimilitude
of Saints in Heaven? What are two or three in such a Society? Doubtless their
Bodies are not corruptible Flesh and Blood, but such Spiritual Bodies as all
Saints shall have at the Resurrection. But are they in Heaven such visible and
shaped Bodies as they appeared on the Mount? The same difficulty poseth us
about the risen Body of Christ: He would not have Mary touch him because he had
not yet ascended to his Father? He could appear and vanish from their sight at
his pleasure: And yet Thomas handled him, and felt that he had Flesh and Bones:
That Body of Flesh ascended visibly up toward Heaven: And yet it is not Flesh
and Blood in Heaven, but a Spiritual Body: For it is not worse than he will
make his Members. What shall we say to these things? We must say, That we are
not capable of knowing them, but have Reason to be thankful that we may know so
much, more necessary for us: But yet it seems probable that the Bodies of
Christ, and Henoch, and Elias were changeable according to the Region in which
they were to be: Christ could take up a Body of Flesh and Blood, and
immediately change that state of it into a pure incorruptible Spiritual Body,
as it entered into the incorruptible Spiritual Region: And so God did by Henoch
and Elias: As Paul says, that we shall not all die (those that live till
Christ's appearing) but we shall all be changed. And yet if Elias have business
on the Mount, he can put on the clothing of a grosser Body to be so seen of
men, and can lay it by or return to his more invisible Spiritual state when he
returns to the place from whence he came. And no wonder, when Angels (and the
Ancients say, Christ before his Incarnation) assumed Bodies suitable to their
several businesses on Earth; yea, such as could eat and drink with men; when
yet they dwelt not in Heaven so coursly clothed.

7. But how came Moses to have a Body on the Mount, who is said to have been
buried, and therefore took none with him into Heaven? We must still remember
that we enquire of things above our certain knowledge: But in humble conjecture
we may say, That it is no more impossible for Moses to assume such a Body as he
appeared in on the Mount, for that occasion, than for Angels to appear in
humane shapes; and departed Souls too, as many Apparitions have told men. And
if bad Souls can do it, why not good ones when God will have it? The Tradition
seems but a Jewish Dream, that God kept the Body of Moses uncorrupted in the
Grave; and that this was it that the Devil is said to strive for against
Michael, that the Body might be corrupted. (And say others, that at this
Transfiguration it rose again.) There need no such conceits to our
satisfaction. The Soul of Moses could assume a Body.

8. But still the dissimilitude of Henoch and Elias from all the Saints in
Heaven, is an unresolved difficulty. If we knew that God would have it so, it
might satisfy us. But there is a symmetry in the Body of Christ. And it is like
that the same Region has Inhabitants of the same Nature. What shall we think
then? That Henoch and Elias at their entrance into those Regions laid by their
Bodies, and became such as Abraham, and other holy Souls? Why are they taken up
to be so laid by? (The corruptibility no doubt they did lay by.) God knows:
but its much unknown to us. Or shall we think as all those Fathers cited by
Faustus Regiensis, and as Dr. More, and some of late, that all Spirits are
Souls. and animate some Bodies; and so that all in Heaven have some Bodies: If
so, what Bodies are they? And how differ they from the Resurrection state? As
the Soul here operateth in and by the Igneous Spirits in our Bodies, it may be
so lodged in these as to take some of them with it at Death, as the life of a
dying Plant, yet dies not in the Seed. And a Man may be said to go unclothed
to Bed, though he put not off his shift or nearest Garment, and to be clothed
again when he puts on the rest: And at the Resurrection, as there will be a New
Heaven and Earth, so Spirits now in Heaven may have much more delightful
business on the New and Righteous Earth, than now they have, and therefore may
have use for an additional Body, as much differing from what they have now in
Heaven, as the New Earth, and their employment there require; and as the Seed
does differ from the Plant. And Spirits being communicative will be more happy
by more communication. As God delights to do good to all his works, so the
Souls now confined to Heaven, will delight to be employed in doing good to the
New Earth, and to animate the Bodies suited to such work. Though now they have
use for no other than such Spiritual lucid Receptacles as are fit for the
Regions where they dwell. And it will be no debasement or dejection for a
Spirit now in Heaven to animate a Body at the Resurrection fit for the New
Earth; no more than it was to Angels to speak to Adam, and to Moses, to
Abraham, Jacob, Manoah, and others; or then it is to the Sun to enlighten and
enliven things on Earth.

It is a foolish thing to think as some do, that departed Souls will be as
dormant, and unactive, as in Apopletick or Sleeping Persons, for want of
Organized Bodies to act in. Spirits are Essentially Active, Intellective, and
Volitive: And will God continue such Essential Powers in vain? Moses and Elias
wanted not Bodies: And those in Heaven can praise Jehovah and the Lamb with
holy concordant Love and Joy; whether in any sort of ethereal Bodies or
without, we shall shortly know.

8. It is said that Moses and Elias talked with Christ: This shows that
Christ has familiar communion with the Blessed. He that would come into Flesh
on Earth; and live with Man in an humbled state, and refused not familiar
converse with poor men and women, and would eat and drink with Publicans and
Sinners, will not refuse everlasting near familiarity with the glorified: If
the Church be his dearly beloved Spouse, and as it were one with him, as his
Body, surely he will be no stranger to the least and lowest Member of it.

9. But what was it that they talked about? Luke 9. 31. says, They appeared in
Glory, and spoke of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. This
was not to make it known to Christ, who came into the World to die for sin:
What then was it for? Did Christ tell them of it, as not knowing it before?
That is not likely neither. Did he need their comfort, as Angels in his trials
ministered to him and strengthened him? The particular uses of this speech we
know not? But in general we know it was somewhat preparatory to his great
Sufferings and Death.

And must Christ's Sufferings and Death have such preparation, and must not
mine have much premeditation, and do I not need the consolatory messages of
God? Carnal men would rather have chosen pleasanter discourse, than the talk of
Sufferings and Death. But that which must be undergone, and requires greatest
strength, must be forethought of, and requires the most preparing Thoughts.
It Is worse than madness to be surprised with Sufferings and Death, before it is
seriously forethought of? So sharp a trial and so great a change, require the
greatest preparation. He that can refuse to suffer and die, may refuse to talk
or think of it. If Christ must have men from Heaven to talk with him of his
Cross, what cause have we to study the Cross? Even all our lives to foresee it,
and by obedient consent to submit unto it, and take it up to follow Christ, and
even to determine with Paul to know nothing in the World but Christ and him
Crucified, that is, to take this for the only needful and excellent Learning:
But, alas, how senslesly is Death and Suffering talked of till it comes! We are
to learn how to suffer when suffering is upon us; and to learn how to die till
Nature or the Physician pass the sentence of Death on us at hand. And it is
God's Mercy to some of us to make our sufferings long, that we may have a
competent time of learning. As we learn to write by writing, and to discourse
by discoursing, and every Art and Trade by practice; even so by suffering we
learn to suffer. And the Lesson is very hard: Malefactors suffer without
Learning, whether they will or not, but to suffer Obediently with Child-like
affections is the Lesson to be learnt. O little, too little do many honest
Christians think how much of their most excellent Obedience consists in
Child-like holy Suffering. Therefore they little expect it, and provide for it:
And then they are overwhelmed with the unexpected surprizal when it comes. Even
in the sufferings which men bring on the Faithful for Righteousness sake, how
many shrink and shift off their duty, or venture on forbidden things for
safety, because they were not prepared for it: The loss of goods or
imprisonment and want, seem to many almost unsufferable trials: But I can tell
such by some experience, that bodily pain and torment is a far greater trial,
which none of them is secured from; and requires greater strength of Faith,
obediently to accept it at the Hand of God. And others can tell them, that the
violence of temptations, and the terrors of God on a wounded Conscience, and
troubled Soul, are yet far harder than all these. And these are the saddest
because they make the mind unfit at present to improve them, and to refer them
to Holy Ends and Uses. Christ in all his Agony, and even when he cried out on
the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, had his Intellectuals
free and perfect, to know the Nature, the Reason, the uses and end of all his
Sufferings: But so have not many poor distressed, troubled, distracted Souls. O
how great a part of Christianity is it, to understand and rightly bear the
Cross? Most of our care is how to escape it, or to be delivered from it, rather
than how obediently to bear it.

10. Experience of a suffering painful state, is a great help to our
understanding of the Gospel: It takes off from me the scandal of Christ's
Cross, and helps me to perceive the great use and reasons of it, when I am
under sufferings. O what need have I of such an example as Christ's. All the
parts of his suffering are as useful to teach me how to suffer as the Ten
Commandments to teach me what to do. That he was put to fly from proud
domineering Pharisees, false Teachers and worldly Rulers, and to converse most
with the Poor in Wildernesses or obscure various places? That he was hated and
persecuted for doing good, and accounted a Sinner for neglecting men's
Ceremonies, and Traditions: That he was hardly believed even by them that saw
his Miracles: And his own Disciples were so slow in learning; and that in his
suffering they all forsook him and fled, and one denied him with Oaths and
Curses. All these are instructing Instances; That Christ's natural (though
sinless) aversation to Death and Suffering, and his fear, should be so
powerful, and the sense of God's punishing Justice so terrible, as to make his
Soul sorrowful even to the Death, and cast him into an Agony, where he swate
Water and Blood, and to pray thrice that the bitter Cup if possible might pass
from him, which he came into the World to drink; all these also are teaching
parts of the Sufferings of Christ; That Rulers, and Priests, and Soldiers, and
the Rabble should agree to Scorn him; Cloth him in derision, Spit on him,
Buffet him, Scourge him, make him their Jest that came to save them; that they
should make a Sinner of him that never sinned, but came to destroy it and save
men from it; yea, to make him no less than a Deceiver, a Blasphemer, and an
usurping Rebel against Caesar, and write this last as his Accusation on his
Cross, thinking to leave his Innocence no Vindication or Defense; for the Lord
and Savior of the World to undergo all this, is very instructing to a
suffering Believer: That he should as such a Malefactor be reviled on a Cross,
and numbered with Transgressors, and his side be pierced, and he there cry out
to his Father as forsaken by him: That thus dying he was buried, and his Soul
went to the place of separated Souls, and yet into Paradise; they are excellent
Lessons which may be learnt from all this.

I am not to suffer for others, nor to make God's Justice a satisfying
Sacrifice for sin, as Christ did: But I must suffer God's Fatherly Corrections,
and the castigation of paternal healing Justice: I must be saved as by Fire,
and pass through this Purgatory that I may be refined: I must suffer from
Christ and for Christ; for my sin, and also for Righteousness sake: And I must
with a filial Justification of God's Holiness and chastening Justice, bear his
indignation because I have sinned against him: I am predestined to be
conformed to Christ's Image, in suffering and in sanctity, Romans 8. 30. etc.
Yea, I must count all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I must not refuse to suffer the loss of all things, and
count them Dung that I may win him, and be found in him -- and not only know
the power of his Resurrection, but also the fellowship of his Sufferings, and
be made conformable to his Death, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10. Paul rejoiced in such
infirmities, and in his Sufferings for the Church, filling up that which was
behind of the afflictions of Christ in his Flesh, Col. 1. 24. Peter bids us
Rejoice in as much as we are partakers of Christ's Sufferings, that when his
Glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding Joy, 1 Pet. 4. 13.
If we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him: Romans 8. 17. It
is a great gift to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1. 29. It is for the Kingdom of
God that such suffer, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. It is happiness and joy to suffer for
Righteousness sake, for well doing, 1 Pet. 2. 10. and 3. 14, 17. and 4. 15, 16,
19. Mat. 5. 10, 11. It is the sufferings of Christ that abound in such that
their consolations may abound, 2 Cor. 1. 5.

But, alas, I suffer much more for my own sin, than for Christ and
Righteousness. But even this also by the Cross of Christ is sanctified, and
made a great remedy against my Sin. As Christ suffered for our sins, and yet
merited by his Suffering; so if we accept the castigatory punishment, and
Exercise Repentance, and Mortification in our suffering, and an obedient
submission to the Rod, God will take this as acceptable Service, and bless it
to our further good.

11. But how is it that Christ is said, to learn obedience by the things that
he suffered, and so to be made perfect? Heb. 5. 8, 9. was he unlearned and
imperfect before? He had no culpable imperfection. But his satisfactory
mediation was imperfect till it was all performed: It was not perfectly done;
and when it was done he thereby was constitutively made a perfect Mediator: as
he said upon the Cross, It is finished: And as his humane Nature received
additional acts of knowledge, as he grew up and conversed with more Objects,
and so is said to increase in Wisdom (as Adam knew the Creatures when he saw
them;) so he had a new acquaintance with Obedient suffering, when he was under
the experience of it; and is said to learn it, in that he now exercised it.

And should not my suffering be God's School; should I not learn obedience by
it? Surely, as it smartly tells me of the evil of former disobedience, so it
calls me to remember in whose hands I am, and with whom I have to do, and what
is my duty in such a state? God can do no wrong to his own: He will do nothing
finally hurtful to his Children. In all our afflictions he is said to be
afflicted, to signify that he afflicts not willingingly, or without our
provocation. Justice is good, and holiness is good; and it is good for us to
repent and be weaned from the Flesh and World: And all good must be loved, and
the means as such: Sharp Heartbreaking Sermons are unpleasing to Nature; and
yet to be loved for their use. And afflictions are God's powerful Sermons: The
proud and hardened are forced to hear them, who scorn and prosecute Preachers
for speaking the same things: And shall Believers under sufferings be untaught.
Words are but Words, but stripes go by forcible sense unto the Heart: Obedient
submission to the greatest pains, is a serious acknowledgement of God's
Dominion, and of his Wisdom and Love, and the certain hopes of a better life.
Impatience has in it somewhat of Atheism, or Blasphemy; God is not duly
acknowledged and honored. Job's Wife would have had him thus purposly provoke
God, to end his misery by Death: As if she had said, Speak no more well of him,
by whom thou suffer so much, nor honor a God that will not help thee: But
Patience says, Mic. 7. 7. I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God
of my Salvation: my God will hear me.

Impatience shows a misunderstanding of God's dealing with the afflicted; but
patience yields, because it understands whence all comes, and what will be
the fruit and end. A Man that is let Blood for his life, is not impatient with
the Chyrurgion; but a Beast will strive, and a Swine or Child will cry.

Our burdens are heavy enough of themselves: Impatience makes them heavier,
and is more painful than the thing which we suffer: Some have gone mad with
crosses which often to another would have been light. Patience is our cordial and
nepenthes: yea, the Health of the Soul by which it is able to bear its
infirmities. In our patience we possess our Souls, Luke 21. 19. whatever else
we lose, we lose not our selves. He that keeps his Faith, and Hope, and Love
by patience keeps his Soul. But the impatient lose themselves; as if their
other losses were not enough. A poor Man sings that gets his living only by
his Day-labour: When a Lord or Knight would be tormented with sorrow, if he
were reduced to his degree. Striving under our yoke and burden makes it Gall
the more: And we cannot so hopefully or comfortably pray for deliverance from
the pain which we make our selves, as from that which God lays on us: Though
also there, we must pray for the Grace that must save us from our own
impatience.

Patience preventeth many sins; which impatience causes: Hard thoughts of God,
if not hard and unseemly Words; Job sinned not nor charged God foolishly:
Impatience tempts men to think that Piety and Prayer are in vain, and to
condemn the Generatition of the Just, and to leave off Duty, and say, Why
should I wait on God any longer; yea, and to venture on false and sinful means,
in hopes of deliverance and ease.

Were it to men, we have much to allay our impatience: But against God
impatience has no just excuse. Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness can do
nothing that deserves blame: We have God's Promise that All things shall work
together for our good: And is he not to be trusted? Or is the means of our good
to be accused?

Impatience, is unseemly for them that believe that heavenly Rest and Glory are
at hand; where all their pains and sorrows will end. Were a Man on the Rack,
and were sure to have all that he desired after it, he would the more easily
endure it. Why else did the Martyrs so patiently suffer? It Is incongruous to
complain of any thing that brings a Man to Heaven.

Christ was himself Innocent, and yet accused not God for his sufferings. But
we suffer justly for our faults; and it is so much less than they deserve, that
the sins which we suffer most for are said to be forgiven us, in that the
everlasting punishment is forgiven: Should we so often sinfully please the
Flesh, and yet must it not smart? Shall we so often grieve the Spirit of God,
and not be grieved? Shall we lose our time, neglect our duty forget our home,
fall in love with the World, and yield to temptations, and defile our Souls
with filth and vanity, and must not correction tell us of our sinful folly? If
we suffer for our faults and bear it patiently, it is not thanks worthy, 1 Pet.
2. 20.

Our merciful Father does use to shame us for our impatience, by the blessed
end of our Afflictions. The End that God made with Job showed the
reasonableness of his Patience: When our afflictions are over, do not all
Believers see cause of thankfulness for them, and say, It is good for me that I
was afflicted? The pain is past, and the benefit remains. And if all that is
past was Mercy to us, why should we much fear that which is to come. Heaven
will end all, and shame impatience for ever.

Our patience is much of our perseverance: What a deal of labor do those
impatient men lose, that learn and pray, and are somewhat Religious, and have
not patience at the last assault to bear the trial, but fail when they seemed
to be near the Crown?

Hold out then poor desponding Soul: Lift up the Hands which hang down, and the
feeble Knees, and run with patience the Race which is set before thee, looking
to Jesus who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross. God will
not deceive thy hopes! Sin has brought pain and death on Man; but Christ has
sanctified it, and is the Lord of Life. Yet a little while, and the heavenly
Possession shall turn thy sorrows into everlasting Joy, and thy moans and
groans into thanks and praise, and there shall be no more sickness, pains or
death. O foolish unbelieving Hearts that cry out of suffering, and fear
deliverance; that would fain be free from all affliction, and yet fly from the
only state of freedom: That are impatient under their calamity, and yet afraid
of passing to the only rest.

12. But it is neither Pain alone, nor Death alone that will sufficiently try
our strength and exercise our Faith and Patience. It must be Great Pain (and
often Long) in order to a certain or expected Death. These two conjunct were
the Case of Christ. The torment of his Agony, Scourging, Crucifying, Piercing
and Desertion, and the certainty of Death that followed. Great pain with hopes
of recovery and ease, may be born even by a worldly Man: Because there is still
the worldly hope of better; and so there is no denial of All, while Life it
self is not denied: We must receive the Sentence of Death in our selves, if we
will find that we trust in God alone, and trust him as one that raises the
Dead, that is, for another and better life.

As long as a Man has any hope of life and ease, a Man's Faith is not tried to
the uttermost, by actual forsaking all. And yet an easy Death alone, does not
fully try a Man: For they that know that all must die, may submit to this, who
cannot bear long pains before it. But great and long pains, and the Sentence of
Death together are the trial.

And if God will so try me, why should I repine? Flesh will groan, but the Mind
may obediently submit. It is but Flesh: that Flesh that has tempted and
imprisoned my Soul. I have too much loved it, and am too loath to leave it? And
is it not Mercy from God to make me weary of it? God is engaged against Idols;
that is, all that is loved and pleased before him: and if any thing, that is
likest to be this Flesh. It Is corruptibility tells us that both its pleasure
and its pain will be but short. Long pain is usually tolerable: And intolerable
pain will conquer Nature and not be long. The Grace of Christ is sufficient for
us, and his strength is manifested in our weakness, when he will not take the
Thorn out of our Flesh, though as Christ and Paul did, we pray thrice or oftener.

And to be impatient with Death is to repine that we are born Mortal men; and
to fly from Heaven and all true Hopes, and all the Felicity purchased by
Christ? And is this renouncing the World, and trusting Christ for Life
everlasting? And why fear we that which ends all our pains and fears? A true
Believer never suffers so much, but his Mercies are far more and greater than
his sufferings. His Soul is united to Christ: His hopes of Heaven have a sure
Foundation: He is sealed up to Glory: Rest and Joy are near at hand. And former
Mercies should not be forgotten: And should not such men patiently endure? O
what a shameful contradiction is it, to choose Heaven as our only Portion, to
believe in Christ for it, and to seek it as the business of all our lives, and
yet to be loath to die, that we may obtain it, and to fly with fear from that
which we so seek and hope for? What a contradiction is it to call God our God
and Father, the God of Love, and to call Christ our Gracious glorified
Redeemer, and yet to Fly from his presence with distrustful fear? Almighty love
may correct us, may kill us, but it cannot finally hurt true Believers.

So much of Moses and Elias discourse of the Sufferings and Death of Christ.

13. Sure it is not true that the Souls of the Fathers before Christ's coming
did not enter into Heaven, but lay in some inferior Limbus? For Moses and
Elias came from Heaven; their shining glory showed that, and their discourse
with Christ, and the Voice and glory that went with them. And it is not to be
thought that they were separated from the rest of the Souls of the Faithful,
and with Henoch were in Heaven by themselves alone, and the rest elsewhere.
Though it is said that God's House has many Mansions, and there are various
degrees of Glory, yet the blessed are all Fellow-Citizens, of one Society, and
Children in one Family of God. And they that came from East and West, shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God; and Lazarus is in
Abraham's bosom, and the believing Thief with Christ in Paradise.

14. It seems that Moses and Elias appeared thus, to fore show the Resurrection
of Christ, and of the Faithful, and to make it easier to the three Disciples to
believe it. Why should they doubt whether Christ should rise, when they saw
Moses that was risen before him: And why should they doubt of the Resurrection
of the Faithful and the Glory following, when they saw these glorified Saints?
Some think that this Apparition was for the strengthening of Christ himself,
whose humane Nature had use for such Ministry also of Angels: But it is more
certain that it was for the strengthening of the Disciples Faith, and of ours
by their Testimony. As it is said, Joh. 12. 30. This Voice came not because of
me, but for your sakes.

15. It is much worth our noting, in what a Communion this Specimen of the
Kingdom of Heaven was represented in the holy Mount. Here was a Voice of God
and a glimpse of his Glory: Here was our Redeemer in a glimpse of his Glory:
Here was a Moses, and Elias in a glimpse of their Glory: And here were three
beloved Disciples, yet in the Flesh, and in weakness of Faith which needed such
confirmation, God our Father, and our Savior, the Saints of Heaven, and those
on Earth, are all of one Society or Kingdom, there is a near relation, and a
near communion among them all. When the Eternal Word disdained not so wonderful
condescension, as to come to us in the form of a Servant, even of a poor
despised Crucified Man, it is less wonder that Moses and Elias should come down
as his Witnesses and Servants Heb. 12. 23, etc. The heavenly Jerusalem, and
City of the Living God, of which we are Enrolled Burgesses or Heirs, has many
parts: There is the Assembly of the first Born, and innumerable Angels, and the
Spirits of the Just made perfect, and Jesus the Mediator of the New Cov^nant,
and God the Judge of all. O what holy, glorious, joyful Company shall we have
above? Christ and his Angels will not despise the least of Saints.

16. But what was the Introduction to this Apparition and Transfiguration? It
was Christ's praying; Luke 9. 28, 29. He went up into a Mountain to pray: and
as he prayed he was transfigured: Surely, this is written to invite and
encourage us to pray. We are in greater need than Christ. It Is folly in
Unbelievers to think Prayer vain, because God is unchangeable. We are not
unchangeable: And the exercise of Faith, dependence on God and true desires,
being the Conditions required in a due Receiver, makes those Blessings become
our^s, which else we had been incapable of God who commands fervent Prayer,
has promised to answer it. Though we must not think to be the Rulers of the
World, nor have whatever our Flesh or solly does desire, because we ask it
earnestly; yet true Prayer is the appointed way for obtaining what we need, and
is best for us, and we are fitted to receive. And as Christ had this wonderful
return to his Prayers, his Servants have experience that their choicest Mercies
for Soul and Body, have come this way.

17. Though the three Disciples were admitted to this glorious Society, how
different was their case from that of Christ, and Moses, and Elias? In the
beginning of the heavenly concourse, they were asleep with heaviness: Even
while this glorious Company stood near them: Alas, such is our infirmity in
Flesh, and such a Clog are these earthly Bodies to us, that when God is
present, and Heaven is before us, and we have the greatest cause to watch and
pray, a heavy, weary, sluggish Body, even fettereth an active Spirit, and we
sleep or turn away in wandering Thoughts, when we should seriously converse
with Christ and Heaven: Alas, what unworthy Servants has our Lord! Are such as
these meet for his work, his Love, his Acceptance, or his Kingdom? But, O how
merciful a Savior have we, who takes not his poor Servants at the worst, but
when they after served him thus in his Agony, he gently rebukes them; Could
you not watch with me one Hour: and that with an excuse, The Spirit is willing,
but the Flesh is weak.

18. It is a matter of great Moment to understand in what cases this excuse
will hold, and our weakness will not make the willingness of the Spirit
unacceptable to God. If a Drunkard, Fornicator, or other Sensualist should say,
My Spirit is willing to leave my sin, but my Flesh is weak, and in temptation
does prevail, Video meliora proboque, etc. This excuse would not prove God's
forgiveness. If a Man live in known sin, which he could forbear were he truly
willing, and say, To will is present with me, but to do I am unable; it is not
I but sin that dwells in me; this would be but a frivolous excuse: And yet to
the sleepy Disciples it was a good excuse; and I think to Paul, Rom 7. where
then is the d^fference? There are some acts of Man, which the will has not
power to rule, and some that it can rule: The will has not power always to
keep a sleepy Man awake: This sleep might be of the Flesh without any will at
all: And this excuses from all guilt: There are some acts of Man which the
will cannot rule, but by a great degree of power and endeavor: As perhaps with
much ado by preventing and resisting diligence the Disciples might have kept
awake: In this case their sleep is a fault, but a pardoned fault of weakness.
Some Persons are liable to inordinate Fear and Grief, which so surprizeth them
by the Constitution of their Bodies, that the greatest unwillingness would not
hinder them. And some could do more to resist these passions than they do, but
very hardly with the greatest diligence. These are accordingly excusable in
degree. Paul would have perfectly obeyed God's Law, and never have sinned: But
there is no Perfection in this Life: Mere Imperfection of true Grace which is
predominant in the will, does not damn men. But there are acts which are so
subject to the will that a sincere will, though imperfect, can command them: He
that does these (or does the contrary) it is not because he sincerely would and
cannot, but because he has but uneffectual wishes, and is not sincerely
willing, if he know them to be what they are. Especially if they be materially
great sins which he yields to, which true Grace more strongly resists than
it does an idle word, or thought, or action. In short, all omissions or
commissions in which the will is positively or privatively guilty, are sinful
in some degree: but only these do damn the Sinner, which are inconsistent with
the predominant Love of God, and Heaven, and Holiness, in the Soul.

19. When the Disciples awaked they saw these glorious ones in converse! Did
they hear what they said, or did Christ after tell them? The later is most
probable: Doubtless as Moses tells us how God made the World, which none could
tell him but by God's telling them first; so the Apostles have written many
things of Christ, which they neither saw nor heard, but from Christ that told
it them by Word or Inspiration. How else knew they what Satan said and did to
him in his Temptations in the Wilderness, and on the Pinnacle of the Temple? How
knew they what his Prayer was in his Agony? And so in this instance also. But
Christ's own testimony was enough to put them out of Doubt, to them that daily
saw his confirming Miracles.

20. How great a difference was there between Mount Sinai and this Mount? When,
God delivered the Law to Moses, that Mount was terrible in Flame, and Smoke,
and Thunder, so that the People trembled and fled: But now here is nothing but
Life, and Light, and Love from Heaven. A merciful Redeemer whose Face shined as
the Sun, with heavenly Company, appearing nearly to the Disciples, pitying and
bearing with their heaviness and infirmity, strengthening their Faith and Hope,
and proving to them a Resurrection and a heavenly Kingdom, by a visible
Apparition of some of its Possessors. This was not a frightful, but a
confirming delectable sight: The Law in terror was by Moses, but Grace and
Truth, Peace and Pleasure are by Christ.

This was an inviting and delighting* and not an affrighting Apparition: Was it
not a shameful infirmity and a sin, that Peter should deny Christ after such a
sight as this; and the rest of the Disciples forsake him and fly? What! after
they had seen the Kingdom of God come in Power, and Christ's Face shine as the
Sun in its brightness? Could they forget all this? Or could they doubt whether
he or his Persecutors were the stronger, and liker to prevail at last? O how
frail, how uncertain, how bad a thing is depraved Man?

But though Christ found them asleep, and though he foreknew that they would
forsake him, he forsook not them, nor used them as they deserved, but comforted
them with a glimpse of Heaven. For he died for his Enemies.

21. But this was but once in all the time of his abode among them. It was an
extraordinary Feast, and not their daily Bread: They had Christ still with
them, but not transfigured in Glory, nor Moses and Elias in their sight: We are
too apt to think that if God give us a joyful extraordinary glimpse of Heaven,
we must have it always; or that he forsakes us, and castus off when he denies
it us! O that we were as desirous of Holiness and Duty, as we are of the Joy
which is the reward! But our Father, and not we, must be the chooser both of
our Food and Feast. Moses did not dwell on Mount Nebo, that he might still see
the Land of Promise: It was enough to have one sight of it before his death. As
Flesh and Blood cannot enter into Heaven, so it is little of Heaven that
enters into it.

22. When the Disciples awake they see his Glory, and the two men that stood
with him: It must not be a sleeeping but an awakened Christian, that will have
a sight of heavenly Glory! As we must love God with all the Heart, and Soul,
and Might, all must be awakened in seeking him, and in attending him, before we
can have a joyful foretast of his Love. Carnal security, supine neglect, and
dull contempt, are dispositions which render us incapable of such delights.
Heavenly joys suppose a heavenly disposition and desires. Angels sleep not, nor
are clogged with Bodies of Clay: Earth has no Wings; It must be holy vivacity
that must carry up a Soul to God, notwithstanding the fetters of Flesh. It is
with each others Souls in the Body that we converse together on Earth. And it
is not sluggish, but lively Faith, and fervent desire that must converse in
Heaven, with Moses and Elias, and our living Head.

23. But how did Peter know Moses and Elias, whom he had never seen before?
Perhaps glorified Saints do bear each one his notifying Signature, and need not
names and sound of words to make them known: Perhaps Christ told the Disciples
who they were that talked with him: Perhaps he made them know it by
Inspiration, as Prophets have their knowledge. Any of these ways God could
notify them: It (...) not needful that we know which of them it was. But that
they were known is certain. We shall be no Strangers to any Saints in Heaven;
and therefore not to our old acquaintance. Whether we shall have any greater
love to them, or delight in them, for old acquaintance sake, or because they
were instruments of our good on Earth, I know not: But I know that our love to
them with whom we had Holy comfort on Earth, may well render Heaven more
familiar to us now, and more suitable to our desires: O how great a number of
my godly Friends are there? They are so many that I cannot make a Catalogue of
their Names; but the Memory of abundance of them does delight me. And when we
meet there we shall be far better known to each other, then we were to the most
intimate on Earth.

O let Christians now so converse together, as remembering that they must meet
in Heaven, where all that was secret will be brought to light. If we now put on
any Vizor, and seem better than we are, if we hide any sin or base corruption;
if we by fraud or falsehood deceive our Friends, all this will be opened when we
meet in Heaven. It is a daily grief and shame to my Soul, to think of the sins
that I have committed against some that are now in Heaven, which I either
excused, extenuated or hid: And to think how much evil they will know of me
there, which on Earth they knew not by me. But God who pardons them, will
cause his Servants there to forgive each other; but the detected sin for all
that will be an odious shameful thing. Lying and Hypocrisy are there no cloak,
but an aggravation of the shame. If we cannot confess and take shame to our
selves by repentance upon Earth, how shall we appear in the open light, and see
the Faces of those whom we wronged: What diminution it will make of our joy, I
know not; but it must needs be a dishonor to have been false to God or Man.
And especially when we meet where sin is perfectly hated, to think how we
either sinned together, or that we tempted and ensnared one another in any sin;
how it will affect us then I do not fully know, but it is now to me a far
greater grief to think of any in Heaven whom I tempted or wronged, than it was
while they lived with me on Earth. And I think there is somewhat of this Nature
common to good and bad: Even the Consciences of wicked men do haunt them for
notable injuries to others, especially concealed ones, and especially for
persecuting the Servants of God, when they are dead, more than while they
lived. In so much that (though I doubt not of real Apparitions) I am ready to
think, that some that say they are haunted by the sight and the voice of such
as seem to them to be deceased Persons, are rather haunted by their own
Consciences, which strongly represent those Persons to their imaginations.

But on the other side, it is a great delight to me, to think of the good which
I received from many that are now in Heaven: Of the profitable Sermons which I
heard from some, and the profitable conversation which I had with others: How
often we sweetly consulted together of the things which concern everlasting life?
How many days in public and private we spent in preparation and in some
prospect of the Blessedness which now they enjoy? And it is not a small Mercy
to me, that I can think of Multitudes now in Heaven of whose Conversion and
Salvation God has made my weak endeavors a prosperous means. O what a Mercy
is it to think on, that while I am yet compassed with temptations, and
languishing in weakness, and groaning in pain, and worst of all burdened with a
dark and sinful Soul, so many are past all this with Christ, by means of any
help which he sent them by my labors? It has often humbled me greatly to read
in the lives of such men as John Janeway, and Joseph Allen, how much of their
proficiency they ascribed to my Writings, and how far they over-went me, and
left me quite behind them in Holy delights and praises of God! But how much
more am I below a Multitude now in Heaven, who called me Father here on Earth.

And if here I must rejoice with them that rejoice, as well as mourn with them
that mourn, why should I not much more rejoice with all the blessed Society
above? And more familiarly with my old Acquaintance, Pupils, and dear Friends?
My Love should be most to the best; and therefore more to them than to any
other of my Friends: And therefore my Union with them being closer, and their
Felicity far greater, I should think with more Joy of them, than of any left
behind. They are safe in the Harbor, past all our dangerous storms and waves.
And though they know or will know more of my sins than they did on Earth, and
hate them more, yet they that feel the comfort of the Pardon of their own, will
imitate God in pardoning me, and rejoice in God's forgiveness of me. Though
their vile Bodies lie like common dust, how much better do they now know the
love of God, the Mysteries of Grace, the heavenly Glory, the state of Spirits
in the City of God, than I do who was wont to preach it to them. God that sent
down Moses and Elias, to show that Saints in Heaven, and on Earth have
communnion, will bring me and my Friends now in Heaven together again into a
far sweeter Communion than ever we had here.

24. It is no great wonder that Peter should be transported with this glorious
sight; and greatly delighted with this heavenly Communion, and say, Master, it
is good for us to be here. Would not a sight, a glimpse of Heaven, have
transported any Holy Soul? Yea, even those that now lie in tears and fears, and
are overwhelmed with doubts and troubles? When they are groping after God, and
groaning on their Knees because they feel more of his frowns than of his love,
if then they had such a sight as this, what a change would it make upon them?
Perhaps you will say, that the doubt of their own sincerity might still deprive
them of the Joy. No: This sight would banish doubts and troubles: It is a
communication of Love, and such as will fully convince the Communicants.

Without such a miraculous glimpse of Glory, God sometime gives some of his
Servants such a Mental illustration, and inward glimpse and taste of Heaven, as
greatly overcomes all the fears of Pain and Death; such many old and later
Martyrs have had: It was a strange word of the godly Bishop of St. David's, Mr.
Farrar, to his Neighbors, [ If I stir in the Fire, believe not my Doctrine:]
and accordingly he stirred not. If he had not had some Prophetical Inspiration,
this could not have been justified, from being a presumptuous tempting God: And
Mr. Baynam's case was a mere wonder, who in the Flames called to the Papists to
see a Miracle, professing to them that in the Fire he felt no more pain, than
if he had been laid in a Bed of Down or Roses.

I am just now reading in Melch. Adam's Lives of the German Philosophers, the
Life of Olympia Fulvia Morata, which ended with some such experience. In many
Ages there has been some one rare Woman who has excelled men in the
Languages, Philosophy and other humane Learning: Such a one was this Olympia
Fulvia Morata of Ferrarrie: She married Andr. Gundler a Physician: She removed
with him into Germany; being by the way convinced of the Guard of Angels by her
young Brothers falling out of a high Window on cragged Stones without any more
hurt than if it had been on the soft ground: In Germany she thus wrote to Anna
Estensis a Guisian Princess [ As soon as by the singular goodness of God, I was
departed from the Italian Idolatry, and came with my Husband into Germany, it
is incredible how God changed my Soul (or mind) which being formerly most
averse (or abhorring) to the Divine Scriptures, am now delighted in them alone,
and place in them all my Study, Labor, Care, and Mind: And as much as possible
contemn all the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures, which formerly I was wont to
admire.] But the Cross presently following (in God's usual Method,) her Husband
and She were by Soldiers stripped naked save the shift next the Body, and
narrowly scaping with life, were put so to wander from place to place, none
daring to entertain them, even when she was sick of a Fever: till at last they
found liberal entertainment; in which she shortly fell into a mortal Disease,
of which she died: And in her last Sickness, and after much torment of Body,
near Death she pleasantly smiled: Her Husband asked her the Cause; who said, I
saw a certain place which was full of a most clear and beauteous Light:
Intimating that she should be quickly there, and saying, I am wholly full of
Joy: And spoke no more till her Eyesight failing; she said, I scarce know any
of you any more: But all things else about seem to be full of most beauteous
Flowers; which were her last words, (having a long time professed that nothing
seemed more desirable to her than to be dissolved and to be with Christ, in all
her sickness magnifying his Mercies to her.

Many have thus joyfully laid down the Flesh to go to Christ: What wonder then
if Peter was loath to lose the pleasure of what he saw.

Two things are necessary to great and solid joy: First, That the Object be
truly and greatly amiable and delectable; and Secondly, That the apprehensions
of it be clear and strong: As to the first, we have so great and glorious
things to delight us, as would feast our Souls with constant Joy, were not the
Second, alas, much wanting. What Man could choose but be even in Peter's
rapture continually, if he had but ascertained heavenly Glory, apprehended by
him in as satisfactory a manner as these sensible things are? If I lay in
Prison, yea, or in torment of Colic, Stone, or any such Disease, and had but
withal such apprehensions or sight of assured Glory, surely the pain would not
be able to suppress my joy. What a mixture, what a discord would there be in my
expressions? Torment would constrain my Flesh to groan; and the sight of Heaven
would make me triumph. I cannot but think how this great discord would show the
difference between the Spirit and the Flesh: What a strange thing it would be
to hear the same Man at the same time crying out in pain with groans, and
magnifying the love of God with transporting joy! But we are not yet fit for
such joyful apprehensions; our weak Eyes must not see the Sun, but through the
allaying Medium of a humid Air, at a vast distance, and by the Chrystalline
humor and organical parts of the Eye. Fain we would get nearer, and have sight
or clearer apprehensions of the Spiritual Society and glorious World; We study,
we pray, we look up, we groan under our distance, darkness, and unsatisfying
conceptions: But yet it must not be: We must be ripened before the Shell will
break, or the dark Womb will deliver us up to the Glorious Light. But Christ
vouchsafed that to his three Apostles, which we are unworthy of, and yet unfit
for. O happy sight! O happy men! It is incongruous to say, What would I not
give for such a sight? Lest it should savor of Simon Magus folly: And I have
nothing to give. But it is not incongruous to say, What would I not do? And
what would I not suffer for such a fight? Yea, Christ puts such kind of
Questions to us; O that I had better answered them! in the Hour of Duty, and in
the Hour of Temptation! When he asked, Can ye drink of the Cup that I drink of,
and be Baptized with the Baptism, that I am Baptized with? I have been ready
with James and John to say, I can; but when the trial comes (as they after in
his suffering forsook him and fled,) how insufficient is my own strength to
perform my promise? When he imposes on me, the denying of my self, forsaking
all, and taking up the Cross and following him, I yielded and covenanted by Vow
to do it: but it was, By the help of the Holy Spirit which he promised to give
me. I stand, Lord, to my Covenant: Help me to perform it; and give me, though
not his present sight, yet some of Peter's Mental apprehensions, and a glimpse,
a taste of that which transported him with delight. Let who will (or who Thou will) take the Riches, and Grandeur of the World: O give me some delightful
taste of that which I am made for, redeemed for, and which thy Spirit has long
taught me, to seek and hope for, as my All.

25. Peter was not weary with the sight of this heavenly Apparition: Why should
I be weary of the believing contemplation of greater things? Though sight
affect us more sensibly than mere believing and thinking, yet these have their
happy Office, which may be effectual: And Christ who thus appeared in Glory to
Peter, has said, Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed:
And Peter himself says of them that see not Christ, that They rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, in believing. Oh how unexcusable am I for every
weary Prayer or Meditation of such a Glory? and for yielding to Satan and a
backward Heart, which have often made me shorten these sweet employments, when I
had time, and leave, and need to lengthen them: What! aweary of communion with
Christ! Aweary of speaking to my heavenly Father, for endless Blessedness, upon
such joyful terms of Hope as he has given me? Aweary of the Thoughts of the
City of God, the heavenly Society and Work? Aweary of exciting Divine Love, and
exercising it in Divine Praise, which are the works of Angels, and all the
heavenly Host? O how justly might God be as it were aweary of me, and of my
weary Services; yea, of the best that I can offer him, which has in it so much
to give him cause?

26. Peter did not fly from this glorious Prospect; but would fain have had
more of it, and have dwelt upon the Holy Mount. And when God will call me to a
more glorious Vision, and Fruition in Heaven, shall I draw back and be
unwilling to go? Was that Mount a better place than Heaven? Is not Christ now
to be there seen in greater Glory? Is the Jerusalem above, the Glorious Company
of Saints and Angels, no better and more desirable a sight, than Moses and
Elias were on the Mount? Alas, when we have read, and heard, and thought, and
talked so much of Heaven, and done, and suffered so much for it, that yet we
should draw back with fear and unwillingness to go to it? O what lamentable
weakness of Faith, and power of Flesh, does this discover: when I read Peter's
words [ It Is good to be here:] I am grieved that I who dwell in a World so near
like Hell, among the implacable haters of Holiness and Holy Peace, and in a
painful tired Body, and who have thought, said, and written so much of Heaven,
do yet say with no stronger desire and joy: It is good to be there: When I see
all natural Appetites desire earnestly their proper food, and even the Bruits
desire their beloved company, shall my holy Appetite be so dull and
indifferent: Lord quicken it by the fuller communications of thy Spirit, and
save me from this hated dangerous disease.

27. But Peter spoke he knew not what, when he talked of building Tabernacles on
Earth, for the fruition of that which is proper to Heaven. Alas, this is our
common malady and folly: We would have Christ in the Splendor of his Glory:
but we would have him here: We would see Moses and Elias, if they will come
down to us: We would have that in the Flesh, which Flesh and Blood cannot
possess. O if we knew in what Land, what City, what Country, what private
House, we might live in the least glimpse of the heavenly Glory, how joyfully
should we run to such an Habitation? Merchants make toward the most gainful
place for trade: Poor men enquire after the most fertile and delectable
Countries for Plantation! Gentlemen delight themselves with a sweet and
pleasantly seated Mansion: But if Saints on Earth could find a place where they
could see what Stephen, or Paul, or these Apostles saw, and have a little of
Heaven without dying and putting off this Body, what a desirable dwelling would
that seem to them. And yet, alas, how cold are our desires to the time and
place where we shall have much more? We have Christ on Earth, in the manner and
measure that we are capable. We have here some communion with Heaven, as verily
(though not so sensibly) as our Eye has with the Sun: God will not deny
Believers their Title, their Earnest, and some first Fruits: But when we would
have our All or our Best on Earth, or that on Earth which is proper to Heaven,
we know not what we desire or say.

Are we vile dirty Sinners in Flesh now fit for heavenly sights or joys? Or is
this World a place for building Tabernacles, where we may see the Lord, and
take up our rest? What! in a world of Temptations of wickedness, of sufferings,
where we are daily wrestling for our lives, and fighting not merely) against
Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World, even Spiritual Wickedness (or wicked Spirits) in high
Places (above the greatest men that are their Servants,) Ephesians. 6. 12. But that
which is of the Earth is earthly: Our earthly part would have an earthly
Felicity: But when we know that it is corruptible and a dying thing, and that
we have here no continuing City, both Faith and Reason bid us seek for one to
come. The unfaithful Steward had so much Wit as to make sure of another
Habitation, when he knew that he must be no longer Steward.

God has so constantly confuted and befooled me, by his mavelous Providence,
when ever I have said, Soul take thy ease, and have thought of building
Tabernacles on Earth, as has convinced me, that such folly is not the least
part of the danger of a Soul, from which his Mercy did so watchfully save me:
If a little Health and Ease, or a pleasant Habitation, or beloved Company and
Friends, have but flattered me into earthly delight and hopes, and made me say,
It Is good to be here; I never was long without some pains, and dangerous
sickness, or some loss or cross in Friends, or some removal by personal or
public changes, to tell me, that I knew not what I said; and that rest and
happiness are not here: As the laborious Ants and Bees are long gathering a
heap of Treasure, and furnishing a Hive with Winter Provision, and a
contemptuous foot soon spurneth about the one, and the chief owner of the Hive
destroys the other; so (while I neglected Wealth and Honor) when I have but
treasured up the choicest Books, and taken pleasure in my Work and Friends, God
saw that such pleasure needed an allay, and has taken away Books and Friends
together, or driven me often from them and my Habitation, to tell me sensibly
that I have higher to look, and further to go; and that Moses and Elias
appeared not to turn Earth into Heaven, and make me think that now I am well,
but to invite my Soul to their Celestial Habitation. When Christ has comforted
me by hearing Prayers, by great deliverances, by wonderful success of my
defective labors, by comfortable Friends, by public Mercies, it was not by
making my condition pleasant, to keep down my desires from Heaven, but to draw
them thither by such foretasts. Contentment with our Condition, as without more
of the World, is a great duty: But to be content with the World, or any thing
on Earth, without more holiness and communion with God, and without a part in
the heavenly Perfection, is a heinous and pernicious sin.

But, alas, it is a far worse mistake than Peter's which deceives the greatest
part of men. They say indeed as he, It Is good to be here, (till melancholy or
misery make them intolerable to themselves.) But it is not because they have
seen a glimpse of Heaven on Earth, or tasted the sweetness of Holy society and
work, but because their Bodies are in Health, their Purses full, their
Appetites pleased, and their inferiors do their wills and honor them. This is
all the Heaven that they love, and to leave all this is the Death which they
abhor and fear. And they will not hear God, and the experience of all Mankind
befooling them, till near the Night that their Souls shall be required, and
then, Whose will all their Treasure be?

28. But yet it was a greater part of Peter's dotage, to think of Tabernacles
for Christ, Moses, and Elias, and of detaining of heavenly Inhabitants upon
Earth: If you should offer the lowest Saint in Heaven an earthly Kingdom in
exchange for his Condition, with what disdain would he despise the offer?
Christ's Kingdom was not of this World, nor would Moses and Elias change their
lot with Alexander or Caesar. Poor trifles allure us, and seem somewhat to us
(as toys to Children) while we are dreaming in the Flesh; but if once we be
delivered and see what the Celestial Glory is, what a change will it make upon
our judgments. We fear now in the dark to go unto that World of Light, and are
loath to put off the rags of Flesh, and to depart from a known though a dirty
falling habitation: But if we get to Heaven we shall be loath to return to Earth
again, and to be so coursly clothed: When once we are there, a World would not
hire us to come back into this corruptible Body, till God will make it
Spiritual and Incorruptible. Our Friends whose Death we passionately lamented,
would be loath now to change their company for such as we are, or their abode
for such a wicked World as this, or their work for the best of ours on Earth:
No wonder that departed blessed Souls appear not to their friends on Earth:
Most Apparitions are of Devils, or miserable Souls, to whom it is no loss, or
condescension Were I once in Heaven, could I possibly be willing to be turned
again into a Bedlam World, and laid under the Feet of blinded pride and raging
madness, and live among Sodomites (called Christians) whose God is their Belly,
and who glory in their filthiness and shame, and mind nothing with love but
earthly things, and are bitter Enemies not only to the Cross, but to the
Government of Christ! Would I be again among Dogs and Swine? Yea, Devils in
Flesh, who hate and persecute the Regenerate Seed, and all that will not
receive their mark, and be as mad and bad as they? would I again be groaning
here in pain, or tired with a weary Body, and more with a feeble sinful Soul,
weak in Faith, Cold in Love, of doubtful Hope, and imperfect Duty. Would I be
here again in the prospect of a Grave, with fear of dying; as strange as now to
the heavenly Felicity? Lazarus will not come from Abraham's bosom, for the rich
Man's Wealth and Belly-pleasure, no not to warn his sensual Brethren. Had Peter
seen Heaven as he saw the Glory on the Mount, he would never have made so blind
a motion, for Christ, Moses, and Elias to continue there, who have so much
better a habitation.

29. But this glorious Apparition was but short: As the Glory of God's back
parts to Moses, which did but pass by. Presently a cloud comes, and separateth
the company, and ends the pleasant sight. When Christians receive some
extraordinary sense of the Love of God, some sweet foretasts of promised
happiness, they must not look that this should be ordinary, or always so! When
some fervent Prayer is extraordinarily answered, and a Sacrament sweetened with
unusual drops of heavenly sweetness, or a holy Discourse or Meditation has
raised us higher than ever before, we must not expect that this should be our
constant diet, and God should thus feast us all the Year. The times of fasting
also have their turn. Moses did not dwell on Mount Horeb, nor Mount Nebo or
Pisgah, from whence he saw the Land of Promise: God's Children do not always
laugh and sing: while they have their sinning times, they will have their
suffering and crying times. How suddenly does the Lark come down to the Earth,
who before was soaring out of sight, and singing pleasantly in the higher Air,
as if it had been aspiring toward the Sun. A luscious diet is not best for
such as we, that have so many corruptions to be cured by cleansing means:
Cordials must not be all our Physic; unwarrantable expectations of greater or
more continued Joys then we are meet for, is injurious both to God and to our
selves. Desires of more we may and must have: But those desires must look up to
Heaven where indeed they may be satisfied.

30. The joy of these Spectators was turned into Fear (says the Text) when
they entered into the Cloud. No wonder: The change was sudden and great; from a
sight of the Kingdom of God in Power, unto a dark Cloud! Just now they seemed
almost in Heaven, and presently they knew not where they were: From glorious
Light, to a kind of Prison of obscurity.

Such changes here we are liable to. The same Soul that lately tasted of
transporting joy, may lie in terror, hardly resisting temptations to despair:
The same Person that was confident of the Love of God, may be quickly not only
doubting of it, but sinfully denying it: The same that had assuring evidence of
sincerity, may shortly conclude that all was but Hypocrisy. The same that was
triumphing in the sense of Love, may cry out, O miserable Man that I am: And
the same that magnified the Grace of Christ, may say, The day of Grace is past^
Especially if either the Tempter get the advantage of a Melancholy Body, or of
casting the Soul in to renewed guilt of some wounding sin, or into impatient
discontents with the things that befall it in the World.

There is a stability in the Essentials of Holiness: It Is Life eternal that is
here begun: But, alas, the degrees of Grace, the exercise of it, the evenness
and integrity of our obedience, and accordingly our Comforts, are lamentably
liable to change. Even as all worldly things are mutable to the ungodly, though
their hardened Hearts are too little changeable. Expecting nothing but joy from
God, or expecting more than we are meet for, makes our dejections the greater
and more grievous. None are cast lower with terror, trouble, and almost
despair, than some that have been most transported with joy: When some other
Christians of an even conversation, have an evenness and constancy of Holy
Peace, though no such joys.

31. The Cloud separated the Company, Moses, and Elias are seen no more; no nor
the Glory of Christ: But yet Christ is not separated from them: His ordinary
presence still abides with them. Christ does not leave the Soul, when
extraordinary joys do leave it: It loses not his saving Grace, nor the
presence of his Spirit, as often as it loses heavenly delight. Desire shows
Love to him, and to his Holiness: And he never forsakes those that love him:
As long as the Soul breaths after Christ, and after more communion with God,
and conscious of its imperfection would fain be perfect, and resolves to
continue waiting for increase of Faith and Holiness in the use of the means
which Christ has appointed, it is not forsaken. Christ by his Spirit dwells,
and works in that Soul. It may enter into a Cloud, and Christ may be unseen,
and seem quite lost, but the Cloud will vanish, and he will appear; and he will
first find us, that we may seek and find him. If he appear to us, but as in his
humiliation, and as crucified, and thereby humble us, and crucify to us the
World and the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts thereof, and cause us but to
seek first his Kingdom and Righteousness, he will raise us higher, and show us
his Glory, when Grace, and Conquest, and Perseverance have prepared us: We are
in a cloudy World and Body; and our sins are yet a thicker Cloud, between God's
glorious Face and us: But as God is God, and Heaven is Heaven, so Christ is
Christ, and Grace is Grace, when we see it not, but fear that we are undone,
and entering into outer darkness: And at Sun rising all our darkness, and all
our doubts and fears will vanish.

32. Luke 9. 15. There came a Voice out of the Cloud, This is my beloved Son;
hear him: Had I heard such a Testimony from Heaven, would it not have set my
Faith above all doubts and unbelief? For the Voice that thus owned Christ and
his Word, might embolden me fully to trust all his Promises, as it binds me
to obey his Precepts.

God's Love is effective and communicative; and as his Life and Light cause
Life and Light, so his Love causes Love; and Christ that is called his Beloved
Son, is likest him in Love: None loves us so much as God our Father, and his
Beloved Son, who is also as God Essential Love. And shall I think with cold or
little Love, of such a God, and such a Savior? It is as unreasonable to fly
from God or Christ, as fearing that he wants Love, to a capable Soul, as to
fly from the Sun, as wanting heat or light. O what an unruly froward thing is
the corrupted Soul of Man? When we think of God's judgment, and how we are in
his hands as to all our hopes, for Soul and Body, we fear and are
uncomfortable, lest he have not so much Love and Mercy, as should cause us
confidently to trust him: We could trust some Friends with Life and Soul were
we in their power: but infinite love itself, and a loving Savior we can hardly
trust; so far as to quiet us in Pain or Death: And yet when Christ to cure this
distrust, has manifested his Love by the greatest Miracles that ever God
showed to mortal men, even by Christ's Incarnation, his Life, his Works, his
Death, Resurrection, Intercession, and the advancement of humane Nature in him
above Angels, the greatness of this Incomprehensible Love, occasioneth the
difficulty of our believing it; as if it were too great and wonderful to be
credible: Thus dark and guilty Sinners hardly believe our Fathers Love, whether
it be expressed by ordinary, or by the most wonderful effects.

33. As Christ is called the Son of God, so also are all his Members: We have
so far the same title, that we might partake of the same comforts: He is God's
only Son by Eternal Generation, and the hypostatical union upon his miraculous
conception: But through him we are Sons by Regeneration and Adoption. And shall
not the love of such a Father be trusted, and the presence and pleasing of such
a Father be desired? If Manoah's Wife could say, If he would have killed us Re
would not have accepted a Sacrifice of us; I may say, If he would have damned
me, or forsaken my departing Soul, he would not have Adopted me, nor made and
called me his Son Christ was made his Incarnate Son, that we might be made his
Adopted Sons: And we are made his Adopted Sons, for the sake and by the Grace
of Christ his Natural Son.

34. The Command [ Hear him] is Relative as to Moses and Elias: 1. Hear him
whom the Law and the Prophets typified and foretold, and were his Servants and
Preparatory Instructors* to lead us to him. 2. Hear him before Moses and the
Prophets, where his Coming and Covenant abrogateth the Law of Moses, and as a
greater Light he obscureth the less: He has revealed more than they revealed;
and the same more clearly: Life and Immortality is more fully brought to light
by him: His Gospel is as the Heart of the Holy Bible: We use the Old Testament
Books especially as the Witnesses of Christ.

35. And whom should we hear so willingly, so obediently as Christ? Abraham
sent not Dives's Brethren to the King or to the High Priest to know what
Religion he should choose, or what he should do to escape Hell torments: But it
was Moses, and the Prophets that they must hear. But God from Heaven has sent
us yet a better Teacher, and commanded us to hear Him: Moses was faithful in
God's House as a Servant, but Christ as a Son: His Authority is above Kings and
Highpriests; and they have no Power now but from him; and therefore none
against him, or his Laws: All commands are null to Conscience which contradict
him: The examples in Da. 3. and 6. and of the Apostles tell us whether God or
Man should be first obeyed. Therefore it is that the Bible is more nec^ssary to
be searched and learned than the Statute Book or Canons: Were Man to be heard
before Christ, or against him, or as necessarily as he, why have we not Law
Preachers every Lord's day to expound the Statutes, and Canons to all the
People? And why are they not Catechized out of the Book of Canons, or Law, as
well as out of the Bible.

And sure if we must hear Christ and his Gospel before Priests or Princes, or
before our dearest friends, much more before our fleshly Lusts and Appetites,
and before a profane and foolish Scorner, and before the temptations of the
Devil. O had we heard Christ warning us, when we hearkened to the Tempter, and
to the Flesh, how safely had we lived, and how comfortably might we have died!

36. But this word [ Hear him] is as comfortable as obligatory. Hear him
Sinner, when he calls thee to repent and turn to God, Hear him when he calls
thee to himself, to take him for thy Lord and Savior, to believe and trust him
for Pardon and Salvation. Hear him he when calls, Come to me all ye that are
weaty and heavy laden: Ho, every, every one that thirsts come! whoever will,
let him drink of the Water of Life freely. Hear him when he commands, and
hear him when he promises; and hear him before the worldly wise when he
teaches us the way to God. Hear him, for he knows what he says: Hear him, for
he is true, and faithful, and infallible: Hear him, for he is the Son of God,
the greatest Messenger that ever God sent! Hear him, for he purposly came down
into Flesh, that he might familiarly teach us: Hear him, for none else in the
Word has made known the things of God like him, and none can do it. Hear him,
for he means us no hurt: He is our dearest Friend, and Love itself, and says
nothing but for our Salvation, and promises nothing but what he will perform.
Yea, Hear him, for every Soul that will not hear him shall be cut off.

Hear him therefore, if he contradict thy fleshly Appetite; Hear him, if great
or small, if any or all shall be against it. Hear him if he set thee on the
hardest work, or call thee to the greatest suffering: Hear him, if he bid thee
take up the Cross and forsake all and follow him in hope of a reward in Heaven:
Hear him if he call thee to lay down thy Life; for none can be a loser by him.

Hear him now in the Day of Grace, and he will hear thee in the day of thy
Extremity, in the day of Danger, Sickness, Death, and Judgment, when the World
forsakes thee, and no ones hearing else can help thee.

37. But, I was not one that saw this Vision: Had I seen it my self it would
have satisfied me and confuted all my doubts. Answ. But it is the will of God
that the Ministry and Testimony of Man, shall be a means of our believing: It Is
Faith and not Sight that must be the ordinary way of our Salvation. Else Christ
must have showed himself and his Miracles, Resurrection, and Ascension to every
one in the World that must believe in him: And then he must have been visible
at once in every Kingdom, Parish, and Place on Earth, and continued so to the
end of the World; and must have died, risen and ascended many Millions of
times, and in every place. They that will put such Laws on their Lawgiver
before they will believe in him, must be saved without him, and against him if
they can. This is more unreasonable than to tell God that you will not believe
that there is a Heaven or Hell, unless you see them. But God will have us live
and be saved by believing, and not by sight. And he will use Man for the
Instruction and Salvation of Man, and not send Angels with every Message.

38. But, Why did Christ show this Vision but it Three of his Disciples? Answ.
He is not bound to tell us why: But we may know that a sight of heavenly Glory
is not to be ordinarily expected on Earth? Why did God show the back parts of
his Glory to none but Moses, no not to his Brother Aaron? Why did he speak to
him only in the Bush and in the Mount? Why did he translate none to Heaven
without dying but Henoch and Elias? Why did he save but Noah and Seven with him
in the Ark? These are not things ordinary, nor to be common to many.

39. But by this it appears that even among his Twelve Apostles, Christ made
a difference, and preferred some before the rest: Though he set no one over the
rest in any Governing Authority, yet some of them were qualified above the
rest, and esteemed, and used by him accordingly. Peter is called the first, and
it seems was qualified above the rest, by his more frequent speaking and
familiarity with Christ, and his Speeches and Miracles after the Resurrection.
Though yet the Faction that said, I am of Cephas, or I am of Paul was rebuked
as Carnal; so far was Christ from directing the Churches to end all difference
by obeying Peter as their Supreme Ruler. James and John are called the Sons of
Thunder: They had some more eminent qualification than the rest: So that James
was the first Martyred Apostle, and John the Disciple whom Jesus specially
loved. Ministers of the same Office, and Order may much differ in Gifts and
Grace, in labor and success, and in God's acceptance and reward, and in the
Churches just esteem and love. All Pastors were not such as Cyprian, Basil,
Gregory Nazianzene, Chrysostom, or Augustine. And the rest must not envy at
the preference of Peter, James, and John. Andrew seems to be Peter's Elder
Brother, and knew Christ before him, as Aaron was Elder Brother to Moses; and
yet must give God leave to choose to give pre-eminence to whom he will.

40. But, Why did not these Three Apostles tell any of this Vision till after
Christ's Resurrection? Ans. Christ did forbid it them. And it was according to
the Method of his Revelation. He would make himself known to the World by
degrees; and more by his Works than by bare Words: And these works were to be
finished, and all set together to be his convincing Witness to the World. And
the chief of these were his Resurrection, Ascension, and sending down the Holy
Ghost: The Apostles could not say till then, [ Jesus is risen, ascended and
has given us the Seal of the Spirit: therefore he is the Son of God. Christ
first preached Repentance like John Baptist: And next he told them that the
Kingdom of God (by the Messiah) was come and was among them. And then he taught
them to believe his Word to be sent from God, and to be true: And he taught
them the Doctrines of Holiness, Love and Righteousness toward men: And he
wrought those Miracles which might convince them that what he said or should
say, deserved their belief: But yet before his Resurrection his Apostles
themselves understood not many of the Articles of our Creed; they knew not that
Christ was to die for sin, and so to redeem the World by his Sacrifice; nor
that he was to Rise, Ascend, and Reign, and Intercede in Glory. And yet they
were then in a state of Grace and Life, such as Believers were in before
Christ's Incarnation. (And sure no more is required of the Nations that cannot
hear the Gospel.)

But the Resurrection was the beginning of the proper Gospel State and Kingdom,
to which all before was but preparatory: and then by the Spirit Christianity
was formed to its settled Consistence, and is a known unalterable thing.

And it is a great confirmation to our Faith, that Christ's Kingdom was not
settled by any advantage of his personal Presence, Preaching and Persuasion, so
much as by the Holy Ghost in his Apostles and Disciples, when he was gone from
them into Heaven.

41. But how are we sure that these three men tell us nothing but the Truth?
Ans. This is often answered elsewhere. The Spirit which they spoke and work'^ by,
was Christ's Witness and theirs. They healed the Sick, raised the Dead, spoke
various Languages which they never learnt; and Preached, and Recorded that Holy
Doctrine committed to them by Christ, which itself contained the evidence of its
Divinity and of their Truth: And Christ then and to this Day has owned it by
the sanctifying Efficacy of the same Spirit, upon Millions of Souls.

How Holy a Doctrine does Peter himself deliver as confirmed by this Apparition?
2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18. We have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we
made known to you the Power and Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were Eye
Witnesses of his Majesty: For he received from God the Father, Honor and
Glory, when there came such a Voice to him from the excellent Glory, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: And this Voice which came from Heaven we
heard when we were with him in the Holy Mount. The words [In whom I am well
pleased] are only here and in Matthew: Mark and Luke omitting them, tell us
that the Evangelists undertook not to recite all that was said and done, but
each one so much as seemed necessary for him to say.

42. And now what remains, O my Soul, but that thou take in the due
Impression of this Apparition, of the Glory of Jesus and his Saints; and that
thou joyfully obey this heavenly Voice, and Hear the Beloved Son of God in whom
the Father is well pleased.

I. As we that are Born in another Age and Land, must know what Christ said by
the transmission and certain testimony of them that heard him, infallible
Tradition by Act, Word, and Record, being our way of notice, as immediate
sensation was theirs, so even the glorious Apparition itself may be the
mediation of their infallible Record, be partly transmitted to our Imagination.
An Incorporate Soul is so used to a mixed way of knowing by imagined Idea's
received by sense, that it would fain have such a sort of knowledge of
separated Souls and other Spirits, and of their glorious state and place and
work, and is hardly fully satisfied without it: Seeing Christ has partly
condescended to this our culpable weakness, lose not the help of his
condescension. Let this clear description of the heavenly sight, make it to
thee partly as if thou had been one of the three Spectators: till thou can
say, Methinks I almost see the Face of Christ shine as the Sun, and his raiment
whiter than the Snow; and Moses and Elias ( no doubt in some degree of glory)
standing with him: Methinks I almost hear them discoursing of Christ's Death,
and Man's Redemption: And by this sight I partly conceive of the unseen
heavenly Company and State: Methinks I see the Cloud receive them, when Peter
had been transported with the sight: and I almost feel his pleasant raptures,
and am ready to say as if I had been with him, It is good for us to be hear:
Methinks I almost hear the heavenly Voice, This is my beloved Son, Hear him.
And shall I yet doubt of the Celestial Society and Glory? Had I once seen that,
what a sense would it have left upon my Heart, of the difference between Earth,
and Heaven, Man and God, Flesh and Spirit, Sin and Duty? how thankfully should
I have thought of the work of Redemption and Sanctification?

And why may I not accordingly put my self as into the case of them, who saw
all Christ's Miracles and saw him risen and ascend toward Heaven? Or at least
of all those ordinary Christians who saw all the wonders done by the Reporters
of these things? I can easily receive a pleasing Idea of some foreign happy
Country, which a Traveller describes to me, though I never saw it; and my
Reason can partly gather what great things are, if I see but lesser of the same
kind, or somewhat like them. A Candle shows somewhat by which we may conceive
of the greatest flame. Even Grace and Gracious actions do somewhat notify to
us the state of Glory: But the sight on the Mount did more sensibly notify it.

Think not then that heavenly contemplation is an impossible thing, or a mere
dream, as if it had no conceivable subject matter to work upon; the visible
things of Earth are the Shaddows, the Cobwebs, the Bubbles, the Shows,
Mummerries, and Masks: and it is loving them and rejoicing and trusting in
them, that is the dream and dotage. Our heavenly Thoughts, and Hopes; and
Business are more in comparison of these, than the Sun is to a Glowworm, or
the World to a Molehill, or Governing an Empire to the motions of a Fly. And
can I make somewhat, yea, too much of these almost nothings; and yet shall I
make almost nothing of the active, glorious unseen World; and doubt, and grope
in my Meditations of it, as if I had no substance to apprehend? If invisibility
to Mortals were a cause of doubting, or of unaffecting, unsatisfying Thoughts,
God himself who is All to Men and Angels, would be as no God to us, and Heaven
as no Heaven; and Christ as no Christ, and our Souls which are our selves would
seem as nothing to themselves; and all men would be as no men to us, and we
should converse only with Carcasses and Clothes.

Lord shine into this Soul with such an heavenly potent quickening Light, as
may give me more lively and powerful conceptions of that which is all my hope
and life. Leave me not to the exercise of Art alone, in barren notions; but
make it as Natural to me to love Thee and breath after Thee: Thou teach the
young ones both of men and bruits, to seek to the Dam for food and shelter: And
though Grace be not a brutish Principle, but work by Reason, it has its Nature
and Inclining force; and tends toward its Original as its End. Let not my
Soul be destitute of that holy Sense and Appetite, which the Divine and
Heavenly Nature does contain. Let me not lay more stress and trust upon my own
Sight and Sense, than on the Sight and Fidelity of my God and my Redeemer. I am
not so foolish as to live as if this Earth were no bigger than the little of it
which I see: Let me not be so much more foolish as to think of the vast and
glorious Regions, and the Blessed Inhabitants thereof, and the Receptacles of
justified Souls, as if they wanted either substantiality or certainty, to
exercise a heavenly conversation here, and to feast believing Souls with joy,
and draw forth well grounded and earnest desire, to depart and be with Christ.

43. II. Hear then, and Hear with Trust and Joy, the tidings and promises of
him, whom the Voice from Heaven commanded Man to hear. He is the glorified Lord
of Heaven and Earth! All is in his power. He has told us nothing but what he
knew, and promised nothing but what he is able and willing to give. Two sorts
of things he has required us to Trust him for: Things notified by express
particular Promises and things only generally promised and known to us.

1. We may know particularly that he will receive our departing Souls, and
justify them in judgment, and raise the Dead, and all the rest particularly
promised. And we know in general that we have a heavenly City and Inheritance,
and shall see God and be with Christ in everlasting Happiness, Loving and
Praising God with Joy in the perfected glorious Church of Christ. All this
therefore we must explicitly believe. But it is little that we know distinctly
of the consistence and operations of Spirits and separated Souls as to a formal
or modal conception; a great deal about the place, state and mode, their acting
and fruition is dark to us; but none of it is dark to Christ: Here therefore an
implicit Trust should not only bound and stop our selfish and over bold
enquiries, but also quiet and comfort the Soul, as well as if our selves knew
all.

O my Soul, abhor and mortify thy selfish Trust, and unbelieving thirst to
have that knowledge of Good and Evil thy self, which is the Prerogative of thy
Lord and Savior. This was the sin that first defiled humane Nature, and
brought calamity on the World. God has set thee enough to learn: know that and
thou know enough. If more were possible, it would be a perplexity and a
snare, and he that increases such knowledge, would increase sorrow: But when
it is both unprofitable and impossible, what a sin and folly is it, to wast our
time, and tire and deceive our Minds, in long and troublesome searches after it;
and then disquietly to murmur at God, and the Holy Scripture, and die with sad
distrustful fears, because we attain it not: When all this while we should have
understood, that this part of knowledge belongs to Christ and the heavenly
Society, and not to sinful Mortals here; and that we have without it as much as
may cause us to live and die in Holiness, Safety, Peace and Joy, if we can but
Trust him who knows for us. Christ perfectly knows what Spirits are, and
how they act, and whether they have any corporeal Organ, or Vehicle, or none:
and what is the difference between Henoch and Elias, and those that left their
Bodies here; and what a Resurrection will add to Souls, and how it will be
wrought, and when; and what is meant by the Thousand year previous Reign; and
who they be that shall dwell in the New Earth, and how it will be renewed! All
the dark passages of Scripture and Providence he can perfectly resolve: He
knows why God leaves the far greatest part of the World in Satan's slavery,
darkness and wickedness, and chooses so few to real Holiness: And why he
makes not men such as he commands them to be; and why he leaves serious
Christians to so much weakness, error, scandal and division. These and all
other difficulties are fully known to Christ. And it is not the Child, but the
Father, that must know what food and clothing he should have, and the
Physician that must know what are the ingredients of his Medicines, and why.

Lord open my Eyes then, to see what thou have revealed; and help me willingly
to shut them to the rest; and to believe and trust in Thee for both: Not to
stagger at thy sealed Promises, nor selfishly to desire particular knowledge,
which belongs not to me, as if I could trust my self, and my own knowledge, and
not Thine. Lord teach me to follow Thee, even in the dark as quietly, and
confidently, as in the Light, (having the general Light of thy Promise of
Felicity.) I knew not the Mystery of thy Conception, Incarnation, or the way of
the workings of thy Spirit on Souls. No wonder if much of the Resurrection and
unseen World be above my reach; much more that thy Infinite Majesty is
Incomprehensible to me: How little do the Bruits that see me know of my
thoughts or me. I have no adequate knowledge of any one thing in the World, but
somewhat of it is unknown. O blessed be that Love and Grace that has given me
a glorified Head in Heaven to know all for me which I know not: Hear and Trust
Him living and departing. O my Soul! who has told thee that we shall be with
him where he is, and shall behold his Glory, and that a Crown of Salvation is
laid up for us, and we shall Reign with him, when we have conquered and
suffered with him, and has bid us live in joyful Hope of our exceeding eternal
heavenly Reward, and at our Death to commend our Spirits into his hand: Receive
us Lord according to thy Promises, Amen.

SHORT MEDITATIONS ON ROM 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Of the shedding abroad God's Love on the Heart, by the Holy Ghost.
EXperience of the want of this Effusion of God's Love, and some small taste of
its Sweetness, make me think the thoughts of this very suitable to one
expecting Death.

The words contain a golden Chain of highest Blessings on all true Christians.

I. They are supposed to have Faith; that is both a general Trust to God's
Revelations and Grace, and a special Trust in Jesus Christ, as given by the
Father's Love to be the Redeemer, to Justify, Sanctify and Glorify his
People: I have often proved this justifying Faith to be no less then our
unfeigned taking Christ for our Savior, and becoming true Christians,
according to the Tenor of the Baptismal Covenant: As to the Acts, it is
formally Trust: One in three: The Understandings Assenting Trust; the Wills
consenting Trust; and the executive Powers Practical, Venturing, Obeying Trust.

II. All true Believers are justified: Even all that consent to the Baptismal
Covenant, and choose God to be their God, and Christ to be their Savior, and
the Holy Ghost to be their Sanctifier, and give up themselves to him by true
resolution, as their only Ruler, Hope and Happiness; though this be done with
so great weakness, as ends not all doubts, nor quieteth the Mind.

To be justified is not to be accounted such as have no sin, but, 1. To be made
such by Pardon through Christ's Merits, and by true Faith, as God will take by
special love and favor unto life. 2. To be accounted such by God. 3. To be
virtually Sentenced such by the Law of Grace and Faith, and to be just in
Lawse^ce. 4. At last we shall be judged such by public Sentence. 5. And be
used as such.

Not justified by the Law of Innocence or of Moses, but by Christ's Law of
Grace.

Not justified perfectly till the time of Perfection: Much punishment on Soul
and Body, is yet to be taken off: And more sins daily to be pardoned; and we
before the World to be sentenced as just to life everlasting.

III. The justified have Peace with God. They are reconciled, and in a state of
love and friendship. It signifies mutual Peace; but with great inequality:
God's Love and favor to us is the stable, constant part: Our consent also and
acceptance of his terms of Peace is constant in its truth: But our sense of
God's Love, which is the Peace possessed by the Soul, is weak and unconstant,
and too often quite lost or obscured by ignorance, mistake, and f^^r: But it must
be known that this is a discased state, unnatural to the Believer as such; as
it is unnatural for a Woman married to a faithful Husband to lie in terror,
thinking that he will kill her, or does not love her, or for a Child to think
the same of a loving Father. Faith of its own nature tends to the Souls Peace
and Joy, in the sense of God's love. And how is Christ offered to us but as a
Savior to bring us by Grace to Glory? And he that accepts him as such
(whereby he is justified) does sure believe that he is offered as such: For
none can accept what he thinks not to be offered: And this implies some hope
at least, that Christ will be such to us: And did Faith work strongly and
kindly, its effect would be a constant joyful state of Soul, as pleasant Health
and Mirth is to our Natures. All our distrustful fears, and griefs, and
disquietments of Soul, are for want of more Faith, as Sickness, and Pain is for
want of the Vital causes of Health.

IV. This Peace with God is only [ through our Lord Jesus Christ.] Though it be
a vain dream to think by justifying Faith, is meant Christ only, and not Faith:
Yet it is no other Faith, but the foresaid Believing Trust on Christ: Therefore
as Faith is our part, so it supposes Christ and all the works of his Office
(and Righteousness) on his part as its Object. Christ is the purchasing cause:
But our Trust and Acceptance is that which is pleasing to God, and chosen by
him to be our part, without Innocence, or keeping the Jewish Law.

Since Man once sinned, God's Justice and Man's Conscience tell us that we are
unfit for God's acceptance or communion immediately, but must have a suitable
Mediator. O blessed be God for this suitable Mediator. Without him I dare not
pray, I cannot hope, I dare not die; God would else frown me away to misery.
All the hope of Pardon and Salva^ion that I have; all the access to God, and
the Mercies and Deliverances that I have received, have been by this Author and
Finisher of our Faith: Into his conducting hands I give my Soul, and into his
preserving hands both Soul and Body, and into his receiving hands I commend my
departing Soul.

V. v. 2. [ By whom we have access by Faith unto this Grace wherein we stand;]
That is, into this state of blessed Christianity, Peace with God, and the
following Blessings. As it is by Marriage that a Woman has right to her
Husbands Estate and Honors; and by Inheritance that a Child comes to his
Father's maintenance and Land: This is no diminution to God's Love. To say, It
is all by Christ is not to take it as ever the less from God the Father; it is
more to give us Christ and Life in him, than to have given us life without a
Christ. Joh. 3. 16. 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12. As God is never the less the Giver of
light to the Earth, forgiving it them by the Sun. Second causes diminish not
the Honor of the first.

VI. [ And rejoice in hope of the Glory of God.] Here is, 1. The beatifical
Object: The Glory of God. 2. The beatifical Act, [ Rejoice,] 3. The mediate
causing Act, [ Hope:] all presupposing Faith and Justification.

2. The Glory of God, is that glorious appearance of God to Man (and Angels)
which makes happy. 1. The mind by beholding it. 2. The will by loving it, and
receiving the communications of Love. 3. The executive powers by joyful praise,
etc.

2. Though some foretasts are here, it is yet said to be hoped for; and we hope
for that which is not seen. When Faith is said to be that which we are
justified or saved by, it includes hope, though more precisely taken they are
distinct. We are saved by hope. The same word is often translated [ Trust] and [
Hope.] And Faith is [ Trust:] to Trust Christ for Salvation, includes hoping
that he will save us. But Hope is denominated from the Good hoped for, and
Faith from the Cause by which we hope to obtain it.

Hope does not necessarily imply either certainty or uncertainty: It may stand
with both in various degrees.

3. Rejoicing is made by God the very naturally desired state of the Soul: It
is when natural the pleasant efflorence of the Spirits, or their state of
Health.

It is Pleasure that is the Spring or Poise of all motion sensitive in the
World: Trahit sua quemque volisptas. Appetite or Will is the Active Principle,
and congrucus Good, or delectable, is the Object. The World is undone by the
seduction of false deceitful Pleasure, and men are blessed only in true and
durable pleasure. And though we that made not our selves, are not so made for
our selves, as that our Pleasure or Felicity in God, should be so high in our
desire, as God himself, who is the ultimate Object of our Love; yet seeing such
an Object he is, and the Love of him (and received from him) is our Felicity,
these are never to be separated.

What have I to rejoice in, if this hoped Glory, be not my joy? All things else
are dying to me. And God himself is not my Felicity, as he afflicts me, nor as
he gives me the transitory gifts of Nature, but as he is to be seen in Glory.
If this be not my joy, it is all but vanity. What then should all my thoughts
and labor aim at more (as to my self) than to hope for, and foretast this
Glory. No sin lies heavier on me, than that my hopes of Glory raise me to no
higher joy, and that the great weakness of my Faith, appears by such dull
thoughts of Glory, or by withdrawing fears. Sure there is enough in the Glory
of God, soundly believed and hoped for, to make a Man rejoice in pain and
weakness, and to make him long to be with Christ. I live not according to the
Nature of Christianity, if I live not as in peace with God, and in the joyful
hopes of promised Glory.

VII. [ Not only so, but we glory in Tribulation.] Glory is so Transcendent,
and Tribulation so small and short, that an expectant of Glory may well rejoice
in bodily sufferings. It is Tribulation for Christ and Righteousness sake, that
we are said to Glory in: The rest for our sins, it is well if we can improve and
patiently bear. Yet in them we may rejoice, in hope of Glory, though we glory
not of them. O if all the painful languid Days, and Nights, and Years that I
have had, as the fruit of my sin, had been sufferings for that which I am now
hated and hunted for, even for preaching Christ when men forbid me, how
joyfully might I undergo it: But yet even here, approaching Glory should be my
joy. Alas, my groans and moans are too great, and my joy too little.

VIII. [ Knowing that Tribulation works Patience.] That which works
Patience is matter of Joy: For Patience does us more good than Tribulation can
do hurt; Why then do I groan so much under suffering, and so little study and
exercise Patience, and no more rejoice in the exercise thereof?

IX. [ And Patience, Experience.] It is manifold and profitable Experience,
which patient suffering brings. It gives us experience, as of Natures
weakness, and the great need of Faith: So of the Truth of God's Promises, the
love and tenderness of Christ, the acceptance of our Prayers; and the power of
the Spirits aid and grace. O what abundance of experiences of God and our
selves, and the vanity of Creatures had we wanted, if we had not waited in a
suffering state: Alas, how many Experiences have I forgotten!

X. [ And Experience, Hope.] A bare Promise should give us Hope: But we are
still distrustful of our selves and of all the clearest Evidences, till
experience help us, and set all Home. O what an advantage has a Christian of
great and long experience for his hope and joy! And yet when notable
experiences of God's Providence are past and gone, an unbelieving Heart is
ready to question whether the things came not by mere natural course; and like
the Israelites in the Wilderness, dangers and fears bear down even long and
great experiences: This is my sin.

XI. [ And Hope makes not ashamed.] That is, true Hope of what God has
promised shall never be disappointed. They that trust on deceitful Creatures
are deceived, and ashamed of their Hope: For all men are Liars, that is,
untrusty; but God is true, and ever faithful: O what a comfort is it that God
commands me to trust him? Sure such a command is a virtual Promise, from him
that cannot fail that trust, which he commands. Lord help me to trust thee in
greatest dangers, and there to rest.

XII. [Because the Love of God is shed abroad upon our Hearts, by the Holy
Ghost which is given to us.]

It is the Love of God shed abroad on our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, which must
make us rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, even in Tribulation.

Here I must consider, I. What is meant by the Love of God. II. Why, and how it
is shed abroad on the Heart by the Holy Ghost.

I. By the Love of God is meant the Effects of his Love; 1. His special Grace:
2. The pleasant gust or sense of it.

II. God's Love thus shed on the Heart, pre-supposeth it expressed in the Gospel,
and Providence, and contains all these particulars.

1. The sanctifying of the Soul by renewing Grace. This is the giving of the
Spirit, as he is given all true Christians.

2. Herein the Holy Ghost makes us perceive the exceeding desirableness of the
Love of God, and makes us most desire it.

3. He gives the Soul some easing Hope of the Love of God.

4. He quieteth the doubts, and fears, and troubles of the Soul.

5. He raises our Hopes by degrees to confident assurance.

6. Then the thoughts of God's love are pleasant to the Soul, and give it such
delight as we feel in the love and fruition of our most valued and beloved
friends.

7. The Soul in this state is as unapt to be jealous of God or to question his
Love, as a good Child or Wife to question the Love of a Parent or Husband, or
to hear any that speak evil of them.

8. This then becomes the habitual state of the Soul, in all changes to live in
the delightful sense of the love of God, as we do live in pleasure with our
dearest Friends.

O blessed state, and first fruits of Heaven! and happy are they that do attain
it! And though lower degrees have their degree of happiness, yet how far short
are such, in goodness, amiableness and comfort, of those that are thus rich in
grace.

This presupposes; 1. Knowledge of God and the Gospel. 2. True belief and
hope. 3. A sincere and fruitful life. 4. Mortification as to Idol, worldly
vanities. 5. A conviction of our sincerity in all this. 6. A conclusion that
God does love us.

But yet it is somewhat above all this. A Man may have all this in his Mind and
Mouth, and yet want this gust of effused Love upon his Heart. These are the way
to it, but not itself.

This is the greatest good on this side Heaven: to which all Wealth and Honor,
all fleshly Pleasure and long Life, all Learning and Knowledge, are unworthy to
be once compared: Briefly,

1. It is the flower and highest part of God's Image on Man.

2. It is the Souls true communion with God, and fruition of him, which carnal
men deride. Even as our Eye has communion with the Sun, and the flourishing
Earth enjoys its reviving heats.

3. It is that which all lower grace does tend to, as Childhood does to
Manhood: And what is a world of Infants comparatively good for?

4. It is that which most properly answers the design of Redemption and the
wonders of God's love therein: And all the tenor of the Gospel.

5. It is that which is most fully called, The Spirit of God, or Christ in us:
He has lower works, but this is his great work by which he possesses us as
God's most pleasant Habitation: For we have not received the Spirit of Bondage
again to fear, but the Spirit of Power and Love, and a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7.

6. It is only that which all men in general desire I mean, the only satisfying
content and pleasure that Man is capable of on Earth! All men would have
quieting and constant Pleasure; and it is to be found in nothing else, but the
effused love of God.

7. It is that which will make every burden light; and all affliction easy:
When the sense of God's love is still upon the Soul, all pain and crosses will
be but as Blood-letting by the kindest Physician, to save the Patients life.
God will not be suspected or grudged at in suffering; his love will sweeten all.

8. It will overcome abundance of Temptations, which no men's Wit, or Learning,
or knowledge of the words of Scripture, will overcome. No Arguments will draw a
loving Child or Wife, from the Parents or Husband that they know does love
them. Love is the most powerful Disputant.

9. It puts a mellow pleasant sweetness into all our duties: When we hear the
Word, or receive the Sacrament, it is to such a Soul as pleasant Food to the
most healthful Man: When we pray or praise God, it comes from a comforted Heart
and excites and increases the comfort it comes from. O who can be backward to
draw near to God in Prayer or Meditation, who tastes the sweetness of his
Love. This is Religion indeed, and tells us what its life, and use, and glory
is: This is the true walking with God in the best degree: When the Soul lives
in the taste of his Love, the Heart will be still with him, and that will be
its Pleasure: And God most delights in such a Soul.

10. This is it that puts the sweetest relish on all our Mercies: Deny God's
love, and you deny them all. If you taste not his love in them, you taste little
more than a Beast may taste: Poor Food and Raiment is sweet with the sense of
the Love of God. Had I more of this, I should lie down, and rise, and walk in
Pleasure and content: I could bear the loss of other things: And though Nature
will feel pains, I should have Pleasure and Peace in the midst of all my pains,
and groans. This is the white Stone, the New Name: No Man well knows it who
never felt it in himself.

1. There is no dying comfortably without this experienced taste of the Love of
God. This will draw up the desires of the Soul: Love tasted, casts out fear;
though God be Holy and Just, and Judgment terrible, and Hell intolerable, and
the Soul has no distinct Idea of its future state out of the Body, and though
we see not whither it is that we must go, the taste of God's love will make it
go joyfully, as trusting him; as a Child will go any whither in his Father's
power and hand.

But all the knowledge in the World without this, quiets not a departing Soul.
A Man may write as many Books, and Preach as many Sermons of Heaven as I have
done, and speak of it, and think of almost nothing else, and yet till the Soul
be sweetened and comforted with the Love of God shed abroad on it by the Holy
Ghost, death and the next life will be rather a Man's fear, than his desire.
And the common fear of death which we see in the far greatest part even of
godly Persons, does tell us, that though they may have saving desires, and
hopes, yet this sense of God's love on the Heart is rare.

What wonder then if our Language, our Converse, our Prayers, have too little
savor of it, and in comparison of joyful Believers duties, be but like green
Apples to the mellow ones.

My God, I feel what it is that I want, and I perceive what it is that is most
desirable: O let not guilt be so far unpardoned, as to deprive my Soul of this
greatest good, which thou have commended to me and commanded, and which in my
languishing and pains I so much need. Did I beg for Wealth or Honor, I might
have it to the loss of others: But thy Love will make me more useful to all,
and none will have the less for my enjoyment: For thou Lord art enough for all;
Even as none has the less of the Sun-light for my enjoying it. The least well
grounded hope of thy Love is better than all the pleasures of the Flesh: But
without some pleasant sense of it, alas, what a withered languishing thing is a
Soul; thy loving kindness is better than life; but if I taste it not, how shall
I here rejoice in God, or bear my heavy burdens?

O let me not be a dishonor to thy Family, where all have so great cause to
honor thy bounty by their joy, and hopes: Nor by a sad and fearful Heart,
tempt men to think that thy love is not real and satisfactory; I can easily
believe and admire thy Greatness, and thy Knowledge: Let it not be so hard to
me to believe and taste thy Goodness and thy Love: Which is as necessary to me.

If there be any thing (as surely there is) in which the Divine Nature and
Spirit of Adoption consists, as above all the Art and Notions of Religion,
which are but like to other acquired Knowledge, sure it must be this holy
Appetite and Habitual Inclination of the Soul to God by way of Love, which is
bred by an internal sense of his Loveliness, and Loving inclination to Man:
which differenceth a Christian from other men, as a Child differs toward his
Father, from Strangers or from common Neigbours. Till the love of God be the
very state or nature of the Soul, (working here toward his Honor, Interests,
Word, and Servants) no Man can say that he is God's habitation by the Spirit:
And how the Heart will ever be thus habited, without believing God's Love to
us, it is hard to conceive.

Experience tells the World how strongly it constrains Persons to love one
another, if they do but think that they are strongly beloved by one another. In
the love that tends to marriage, if one that is inferior do but know that a
Person of far greater worth does fervently love them, it almost puts a
necessity and constraint on them for returns of Love: Nature can scarce choose
but love in such a case. Love is the Loadstone of Love. A real taste of the
Love of God in saving Souls by Christ and grace, is it that constrains them
to be holy; that is, to be devoted to that God in Love.

III. But this must as necessarily be the work of the Holy Ghost, and can be no
more done without him, than the Earth can be illuminated, and the Vegetables
live without the Sun. But all the approaches of the Holy Spirit suffice not to
produce this great effect, and give us the Divine holy Nature.

The same Sun shine has three different effects on its Objects.

1. On most things (as Houses, Stones, Earth,) it causes nothing but the
Accidents of Heat, Color, and Motion.

2. On some things it causes a seminal Disposition to Vegetable life, but not
Life itself.

3. In this disposed matter it causes Vegetable life itself.

So does the Spirit of God, 1. Operate on Millions but lifeless Accidents, as
the Sun on a stone Wall. 2. On others Dispose and prepare them to Divine Life.
3. On others ( so disposed) it effects the Divine life itself: When holy Love
is turned into a habit like to Nature.

That none but the Holy Ghost does make this holy change, is evident: For, the
effect cannot transcend the causes; 1. Nature alone is dark, and knows not
the attractive amiableness of God, till illuminated; nor can give us a
satisfactory notice of God's special Love to us.

2. Nature is Guilty; and Guilt breeds fears of Justice; and fear makes us
wild and fly from God, lest he will hurt us.

3. Nature is under penal sufferings already; and feels pain, fear, and many
hurts, and foreseeth Death: And under this is undisposed of itself, to feel the
pleasure of God's Love.

4. Nature is corrupted and diverted to Creature vanity, and its Appetite goes
another way, and cannot cure itself, and make itself suitable to the
amiableness of God.

5. God hates wickedness and wicked men; and mere Nature cannot secure us that
we are saved from that enmity.

Diligence may do much to get religious Knowledge, and Words, and all that
which I call the Art of Religion: And God may bless this as a preparation to
holy Life and Love: But till the Souls Appetite incline with desire to God and
Holiness, Divine things will not sweetly relish.

And this is a great comfort to the Thoughts of the Sanctified, that certainly
their holy Appetite, Desire, and Complacency is the work of the Holy Ghost.
For, 1. This secureth them of the Love of God, of which it is the proper token.

2. And it assures them of their Union with Christ, when they live because he
lives, even by the Spirit, which is his Seal and Pledge. 3. And it proves
both a future life, and their title to it: For God makes not all this
preparation for it by his Spirit, in vain.

But, alas, if it were not a work that has great impediment it would not be so
rare in the World: What is it in us that keeps the Sun of Love from so
shining on us, as to revive our Souls into Holy contentments and delight.

It must be supposed, 1. That all God's gifts are free, and that he gives not
to all alike: The wonderful variety of Creatures proves this. 2. The reasons
of his differencing works are his own will, and inferior reasons are mostly
unknown to us, of which he is not bound to give us an account.

3. But yet we see that God does his works in a causal order, and one work
prepares for another; and he makes variety of capacities, which occasion
variety of receptions and of gifts; and he uses to give every thing that, to
which he has brought it into the next capacity and disposition.

And therefore in general we may conclude that we feel not God's Love shed
abroad upon the Heart, because the Heart is undisposed, and is not in the next
disposition thereto: And abused free will has been the cause of that. That we
have Grace is to be ascribed to God: That we are without it is to be ascribed
to our selves.

1. Heinous guilt of former sin may keep a Soul much without the delights of
Divine love: And the heinousness is not only in the greatness of the evil done
materially, but often in our long and willful committing of smaller sins against
Knowledge and Conscience, and consideration. The Spirit thus grieved by
hardened Hearts, and willful repulses, is not quickly and easily a comforter to
such a Soul; and when the sinner does repent, it leaves him more in
uncertainty of his sincerity, when he thinks, I do but repent, purpose and
promise now; and so I often did, and yet returned the next temptation to my sin:
And how can I tell that my Heart is not the fame, and I should sin again if I
had the same temptations. O what doubts and perplexities does often willful
sinning prepare for.

2. And sins of omission have here a great part: The sweetness of God's Love is
a reward which sloathful Servants are unmeet for. It follows a [ Well done good
and faithful Servant:] There is needful a close attendance upon God, and
devotedness to him, and improvement of Gospel Grace and Revelation, to make a
Soul fit for amicable sweet communion with God: All that will save a Soul from
Hell will not do this.

He that will taste these Divine Love Tokens must, 1. Be no stranger to holy
Meditation and Prayer, nor unconstant, cold and cursory in them; but must dwell
and walk above with God. 2. And he must be wholly addicted to improve his
Masters Talents in the World, and make it his design and trade on Earth to do
all the good in the World he can. And to keep his Soul clean from the flesh and
worldly vanity: And to such a Soul God will make known his Love.

3. And, alas, how ordinarily does some carnal a^fection corrupt the appetite
of the Soul? When we grow too much in love with men's esteem, or with earthly
Riches, or when our Throats or Fantasies can master us into obedience or vain
desires of Meat, Drink, Recreation, Dwelling, etc. the Soul loses its Appetite
to things Divine; and nothing relisheth where Appetite is gone or sick: We
cannot serve God and Mammon, and we cannot at once taste much pleasure both in
God and Mammon. The old austere Christians found the mortification of the
fleshly Lusts, a great advantage to the Souls delight in God.

4. And many errors about God's nature and works much hinder us from feasting
on his Love.

5. And especially the slight, and ignorant thoughts of Christ, and the
wondrous workings of God's Love in him.

6. And specially if our belief itself once shake, or be not well and firmly
founded.

7. And our slight thoughts of the Office and Work of the Holy Ghost on Souls,
and our necessity of it, and our not begging and waiting for the Spirits
special help.

8. And lastly, our unfaithful forgetfulness of manifold experiences and
testimonies of his Love, which should still be as fresh before us.

Alas, my Soul, thou feel thy defect, and know the hinderance, but what
hope is there of remedy? Will God ever raise so low, so dull, so guilty a
Heart, to such a foretast of Glory, as is this effusion of his Love by the Holy
Ghost? The lightsom Days in Spring and Summer when the Sun reviveth the late
naked Earth, and clothes it with delectable beauties differs not more from
Night and Winter, than a Soul thus revived with the Love of God, does differ
from an unbelieving formal Soul.

Though this great change be above my power, the Spirit of God is not impotent,
backward, barren or inex^^able. He has appointed us means for so high a state;
and he appoints no means in vain. Were my own Heart obedient to my commands,
all these following I would lay upon it: Yea I Will do it and beg the help of God.

I. I charge thee think not of God's Goodness and Love as unproportionable to
his Greatness and his Knowledge: Nor overlook in the whole frame of Heaven and
Earth, the manifestation of one any more than of the other.

II. Therefore let not the the wickedness and misery of the World tempt thee to
think basely of all God's Mercies to the World; nor the peculiar privileges of
the Churches, draw thee to deny or contemn God's common Mercies unto all.

III. I charge thee to make the study of Christ, and the great work of Man's
Redemption by him, thy chiefest Learning, and most serious and constant work;
and in that wonderful Glass to see the Face of Divine Love; and to hear what is
said of it by the Son from Heaven; and to come boldly as reconciled to God by
him.

IV. O see that thy repentance for former sins against knowledge, and
Conscience, and the Motions of God's Spirit, be sound and thoroughly lamented
and abhorred, how small soever the matter was in itself That so the doubt of
thy sincerity keep not up doubts of God's acceptance.

V. Let thy dependence on the Holy Ghost as given from Christ, be henceforth as
serious and constant to thee, as is the dependence of the Eye on the light of
the Sun, and of natural Life upon its heat and motion. Beg hard for the Holy
Spirit, and gladly entertain it.

VI. O never forget the many and great experiences thou have had, (these almost
Sixty years observed) of mavelous favor and providence of God, for Soul and
Body; in every time, place, condition, relation, company or change thou have
been in: Lose not all these Love Tokens of thy Father, while thou art begging
more.

VII. Hearken not too much to pained Flesh, and look not too much into the
Grave; but look out at thy Prison Windows to the Jerusalem above, and the
heavenly Society that triumph in Glory.

VIII. Let all thy sure notices of a future life, and of the communion we have
here with those above, draw thee to think that the great number of Holy Souls
that are gone before thee, must needs be better than they were here; and that
they had the same Mind, and Heart, and Way, the same Savior, Sanctifyer and
Promise that thou have; and therefore they are as Pledges of Felicity to thee.
Thou have joyfully lived with many of them here; and is it not better be with
them there? It is only the state of Glory foreseen by Faith, which most fully
shows us the greatness of God's Love.

IX. Exercise thy self in Psalms of Praise, and daily magnifying the Love of
God, that the due mention of it may warm and raise thy love to him.

X. Receive all temptations against Divine Love, with hatred and repulse:
Especially temptations to unbelief: And as thou would abhor a temptation to
murder, or perjury, or any other heinous sin, as much abhor all temptations
which would hide God's Goodness, or represent him to thee as an enemy or
unlovely.

Thus God has set the Glass before us, in which we may see his amiable Face.
But, alas, Souls in flesh are in great obscurity, and conscious of their own
weakness, are still distrustful of themselves, and doubt of all their
apprehensions, till over-powering Objects and Influences satisfy, and fix
them. For this my Soul with daily longings does seek to thee my God and Father:
O pardon the sin that forseits Grace: I am ready to say, Draw nearer to me, but
its meeter to say, Open thou my Eyes and Heart, and remove all impediments, and
undisposedness, that I may believe and feel how near thou art and have been to
me, while I perceived it not.

XIII. It is God's Love shed abroad on the Heart by the Holy Ghost, which must
make us Rejoice in hope of the Glory of God: This will do it, and without this
it will not be done.

This would turn the fears of Death, into joyful hopes of future life. If my
God will thus warm my Heart with his Love, it will have these following effects
in this matter.

I. Love longs for union, or nearness, and fruition: And it would make my
Soul long after God, in glorious presence.

II. This would make it much easier to me to believe that there is certainly a
future blessed life for Souls; while I even tasted how God loves them? It Is no
hard thing to believe that the Sun will give light and heat, and revive the
frozen Earth: Nor that a Father will show kindness to his Son, or give him an
inheritance. Why should it be hard to believe that God will glorify the Souls
whom he loves? And that he will take them near himself: And that thus it shall
be done to those whom he delights to honor.

III. This effusion of Divine Love would answer my doubts of the pardon of sin:
I should not find it hard to believe that love itself, which has given us a
Savior, will forgive a Soul that truly repents, and hates his sin, and
gives up himself to Christ for Justification. It Is hard to believe that a
Tyrant will forgive, but not that a Father will pardon a returning prodigal Son.

IV. This effusion of Divine Love, will answer my fears which arise from mere
weakness of Grace and Duty: Indeed it will give no other comfort to an
unconverted Soul, but that he may be accepted if he come to God by Christ, with
true Faith and Repentance, and that this is possible. But it should be easy to
believe that a tender Father will not kill or cast out a Child for weakness,
crying or uncleanness: Divine Love will accept and cherish, even weak Faith,
weak Prayer, and weak obedience and patience which are sincere.

V. This effused Love would confute temptations that are drawn from thy
afflictions; and make thee believe that they are not so bad as flesh
repesenteth them: It would understand that every Son that God loves, he
chasteneth, that he may not be condemned with the World, and that he may be
partaker of his Holiness, and the end may be the quiet fruit of Righteousness;
it would teach us to believe that God in very faithfulness does afflict us; and
that it is a good sign that the God of Love intends a better life for his
beloved, when he tries them with so many tribulations here: And though Lazarus
be not saved for his suffering, it signified that God who loved him, had a life
of comfort for him, when he had his evil things on Earth. When pangs are
greatest, the Birth is nearest.

VI. Were Love thus shed on the Heart by the Holy Ghost, it would give me a
livelier apprehension of the state of Blessedness which all the faithful now
enjoy: I should delightfully think of them as living in the joyful Love of God,
and ever fully replenished therewith. It pleases us to see the Earth flourish
in the Spring; and to see how pleasantly the Lambs and other young things will
skip and play: Much more to see Societies of Holy Christians loving each other,
and provoking one another to delight in God: O then what a pleasant thought
should it be, to think how all our deceased godly Friends, and all that have so
died since the Creation, are now together in a World of Divine perfect Love!
How they are all continually wrapped up in the Love of God, and live in the
delight of perfect Love to one another.

O my Soul, when thou art with them, thou will dwell in Love, and feast on
Love, and rest in Love; for thou will more fully dwell in God, and God in thee:
And thou will dwell with none but perfect Lovers: They would not silence thee
from praising God in their Assembly: Tyrants, Malignants, and Persecutors are
more strange there (or far from thence) than Toads, and Snakes, and Crocodiles
are from the Bed or Bedchamber of the King. Love is the Air, the Region, the
World they live in: Love is their Nature, their Pulse, their Breath, their
Constitution, their Complexion, and their work: It is their life, and even
themselves and all. Full loath would one of those Spirits be, to dwell again
among blind Sodomites, and mad self-damning Malignants upon Earth.

VII. Yea, this effused Love will teach us to gather the Glory of the Blessed
from the common Mercies of this life: Does God give his distracted malignant
Enemies, Health, Wealth, Plenty, Pleasure, yea, Lordships, Dominions, Crowns,
and Kingdoms, and has he not much better for beloved holy Souls.

Yea, does he give the Bruits, Life, Sense, Delight and Beauty, and has he not
better things for men? for Saints?

There are some so blind as to think that Man shall have no better hereafter,
because Bruits have not, but perish. But they know not how erroneously they
think. The sensible souls of Bruits are substance: And therefore are not
annihilated at death: But God put them under us, and made them for us, and us
more nearly for himself. Bruits have not Faculties to know and love God, to
meditate on him, or praise him, or by moral agency to obey his Precepts: They
desire not any higher felicity than they have: God will have us use their
service, yea, their lives and Flesh to tell us they were made for us. He tells
us not what he does with them after death: But whatever it is, it is not
annihilation, and it is like they are in a state still of service unto Man:
Whether united or how individuate we know not: Nor yet whether those
Philosophers are in the right, that think that this Earth is but a small Image
of the vast superior Regions, where there are Kingdoms answerable to these
here, where the Spirits of Bruits are in the like subjection in aerial Bodies,
to those low rational Spirits that inhabit the Aerial Regions as in Flesh they
were to Man in Flesh. But it is enough for us that God has given us Faculties
to know, love, praise, and obey him, and trust him for Glory, which he never
gave to them, because they were not made for things so high. Every Creatures
Faculties are suited to their use and ends:

And Love tells me that the blessed God, who gives to Bruits that life,
health, and pleasure which they are made and fitted for, will give his Servants
that heavenly delight in the fullness of his Love and Praise, and and mutual
joyful Love to one another, which Nature fundamentally, and Grace more
immediately has made them fit for.

Blessed Jehovah, for what tastes of this effused Love thou have given me, my
Soul does bless thee, with some degree of gratitude and joy: And for those
further measures which I want, and long for, and which my pained languid state
much needs, and would raise my joyful hopes of Glory, I wait, I beg, from day
to day. O give me now at the Door of Heaven, some fuller taste of the heavenly
Felicity: Shed more abroad upon my Heart, by the Holy Ghost, that Love of
thine, which will draw up my longing Soul to thee, rejoicing in hope of the
Glory of God.

FINIS.

