FAIR-WARNING: OR, XXV. REASONS Against Toleration and Indulgence of POPERY;
WITH THE Archbishop of Canterbury's LETTER TO THE KING, AND All the Bishops of
Irelands Protestation to the Parliament to the same Purpose. With an Answer to
the Roman Catholics reasons FOR INDVLGENCE.

ALSO THE Excellent Reasons of the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS Against
INDULGENCE; With Historical Observations thereupon.

London, Printed for S. U. N. T. F.S. 1663.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY,
May it please your Majesty,
I Have been too long silent, and am afraid, by my silence, I have neglected
the duty of the place it has pleased God to call me unto, and your Majesty to
place me in. And now I humbly crave leave, I may discharge my conscience
toward God, and my duty to your Majesty. And therefore I beseech your Majesty,
give me leave freely to deliver my self, and then let your Majesty do with me
what You please. Your Majesty has propounded a Toleration of Religion: I
beseech you Sir, take into your consideration, what the Act is, next what the
Consequence may be. By your Act you labor to set up that most damnable, and
heretical Doctrine of the Church of Rome, whore of Babylon. How hateful will
it be to God, and grievous unto Your good Subjects, the true professors of the
Gospel; that your Majesty, who has often disputed, and learnedly written
against those wicked Heresies, should now show Your self a Patron of those
Doctrines, which Your Pen has told the World, and Your Conscience tells Your
self, are superstitious, idolatrous, and detestable. Besides, this Toleration
which You endeavor to set up by Proclamation, cannot be done without a
Parliament, unless your Majesty will let your Subjects see, that You will take
unto your self a liberty to throw down the Laws of the Land at your pleasure.
What dreadful consequence these things may draw after them, I beseech your
Majesty to consider. And above all, lest by this Toleration, and discontinuance
of the true profession of the Gospel, whereby God has blessed u^, and under
which this Kingdom has for many years flourished, Your Majesty do not draw
upon the Kingdom in general, and your self in particular, Gods heavy wrath
and indignation Thus in discharge of my duty toward God, to your Majesty, and
the place of my calling, I have taken humble boldness to deliver my
conscience. And now, Sir, do with me what you please.

I am Your most faithful Subject and Servant. G. Canterbury.

TO THE Right Honorable THE LORDS AND COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
Humbly shows, Religion of the Papists is Superstitious and Idolatrous, their
Faith and Doctrine erroneous and heretical, their Church in respect of both
Apostaticall. To give them therefore a Toleration, or to consent that they may
freely exercise their Religion, and profess their Faith and Doctrine is a
grievous sin; and that in two respects.

For first, It is to make our selves accessory, not only to their superstitious
Idolatries, Heresies, and in a word, to all the abom^nations of Popery; but
also (which is a consequent of the former) to the perd^tion of the seduced
people, which perish in the Deluge of the Catholic Apostasy.

And as it is a great sin, so also a matter of most dangerous consequence, the
consideration whereof we commend to the wise and jud^cious. Beseeching the
zealous God of Truth, to make them who are in Authority, zealous of Gods Glory,
and of the advancement of true Religion; zealous resolute, and courageous
against all Popery, Superstition and Idolatry. Amen.

Ja: Armachanus. Auth: Medensis. To: Dunensis. etc. Richard Cork, Cloyne,
Rosses. Tho: Kilmore and Ardagh. Mich: Waterford, and Lismore. Mal: Casohellen:
Tho: Hernes. and Laughlin. Geo: Deceus. Andr: Alachadeus Theo: Dromore. Franc:
Lymrick.
Since then, neither in right reason, and true policy of State, it is either
becoming or safe, for Christian Magistrates, to have no acknowledgment of any
face of Religion, so far among their people and Subjects as to stablish, own
and command it; nor is it any piety, for Christians, to be always scepticks in
Religion; ever unsatisfied, and unresolved, and unestablished in matters of
Gods worship, and man's salvation, still ravelling the very grounds of Religion
with endless cavells and endless disputes. Since the Word of God is near and
open to direct all men in the ways of God; and since what is necessary to be
believed and obeyed in truth and holiness, is of all parts in Scripture most
plain and easy; No doubt, but Christian Magistrates are highly bound in
Conscience to God, and in charity to the good of their Subjects, (to whom they
must do more good, then they are desired to do by the Vulgar) to establish
those things, as to the extern order, Ministry, form and profession of
Religion, both in doctrine and duties, which they shall in their conscience
judge and conclude, upon the best advice of learned and godly men, to be most
agreeable to the will of God, as most clearly grounded on the Word in the
general tenor and analogy of it; and as most fundamentally necessary to be
believed and obeyed by all Christians; whereto the Catholic belief and
practice of all Churches (more or less agreeing) gives a great light and
direction. Christians must not be always tossing to and fro in Religion, as if
nothing were true fixed and certain in Religion; nothing heretical, corrupt,
and damnable in opinion and doctrine; nothing immorall, unlawful, and
abominable in practice; nothing perverse, uncharitable, and uncomely in
seditions, schisms and separations.

John Wigorn.

Twenty five Reasons Against Toleration of Popery
Reason. 1.
THat way which seduceth poor Souls from the great Rule God has given to live
by and be saved, is not to be tolerated (shall we allow them among us who take
away from Immortal Souls all the sure foundation they have against the time to
come? shall we endure them among us whose business it is to hide the eternal
counsel of God from men.) Popery does seduce poor Souls from the great Rule of
life. Papistis, (and shall they be tolerated) make it part of their Religion to
persuade us that we should not search the Scripture, wherein we may have life?
Catholics (and shall they be Indulgent?) make it their business to keep us
from the holy Sriptures which are able to make us wise unto salvation, perfect
and thoughly furnished unto all good works: they of Rome (and shall they be
connived at) draw poor Souls from the word of God that is able to build us up
and to give us an inheritance among them that are sanctified: they (said that
there should be such among us) endeavor that we should not prove what is the
good, the perfect, the acceptable will of our God: that without knowledge of
this will the people should perish: they (and what can Satan do more?) disuade
poor Souls from reading the Scriptures: they persuade them that the Scriptures
ought to be in an unknown Tongue; that hearing poor Souls might hear and not
understand the things that belong to their peace, must we needs have these
among us that may persuade people too much inclined of themselves to sit in
ignorance among us who (after all our pains to instruct an ignorant world) now
persuade poor souls to be still alienated from the life of God, to have their
understanding still darkened to retain still the blindness of their hearts?
and can the enemy of mankind do any more: shall we have those in the midst of
us (who notwithstanding all our endeavors to teach the world a saving
knowledge of God) shall yet (and alas! the murderer from the beginning desires
no more) persuade mankind that it is a vein thing to be filled with the
knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding: no Christian
state can Tolerate those people whose Religion is to keep the world in
ignorance of all Religion, who know we must love God, yet will not suffer us to
know him; who know we must obey him, yet will not suffer us to know his will.

Reason 2.
That way that persuades men to believe and live by the traditions of men, and
to make the word of God of none effect is not to be tolerated, how can a King
(who must give an account of himself to God) answer for his connivance at that
profession which teaches men to live, not by the will of God that made them,
but by the will of men like themselves. How can Kings answer it if they suffer
men to live by the Law of men, and not of God, will God endure that the world
should be governed by the Creature and not by the Creator? But Popery takes men
off from the will of God: they say we have no Scripture but what the Pope allow
do not they teach (and that among Christians too) that we must think the
Scripture the word of God no longer than the Church says it is so? do not they
write (and that among us that wait upon God to hear the Scripture weekly and
daily,) that their customs and opinions are to be the Rule and foundation of
our faith as well as the Scripture do not they equal the Popes decrees to Gods
word, and say their Church may impose new Articles of faith upon poor Souls
every day prefering the judgment of the Church before the counsel of God? that
say the authority of the Church in its Laws is above the authority of God in
the Scripture, and yet the authority of the Pope in his decrees is above the
authority of the Church in her Laws: that say God in his word did not say
enough to save men, did not speak clearly enough to instruct them in the
knowledge of the truth. Be wise O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the
Earth? to what end has he set up you, but to see that men should walk
according to his will? to what end has God advanced you but to see that men
lived according to his Law has God raised you up? and will you suffer
Antichrist to advance himself above every thing that is called God? does not
God see this? does not he observe it?

Reason 3.
That way which builds the salvation of men upon the Infallibility of one man
is not to be tolerated Popery does so therefore, etc. O Princes do you not watch
over your people for good? have you any care of precious Souls? will you endure
those men that will not suffer us to rest upon the foundation of God which
stands sure, and allure us to trust in the foundation of men that will fail:
will you indulge men that delude your people to rely upon man that is a lie, and
the son of man that may deceive) will your God keep silence when he observes
you looking on men making one another a God and yet keep silence: will you
stand by and see God robbed of his honor, and vain man endeavoring to be as
God, and use not that power God gave you to punish: has he pulled down the
usurpers of your throne; and will you not keep under the usurpers of his
attributes, has he overturned them that would be Kings as well as you: and
will you encourage them that would be infallible as well as he? can you stand
still and see so many perish and led away in that great Error of the wicked:
That man is Infallible: O suffer not that way which leads us to man,
bottometh us upon man: and leaves us short of God.

Reason 4.
That way that leaves men, no certain way to be saved is not to be Tolerated:
Popery is that way etc. When poor Souls would know how to be saved? They say
hear the Church: If he say how shall I know wether the Church is infallible?
They say by the Scripture: how shall we know the Scriptures: they say by the
Church, O will you suffer your subjects, O ye Kings to be thus led in a maze: to
be thus perplexed in a circle, for eternity: is this your kindness to give them
leave to be utterly at a loss for another world! Is this Indulgence to let them
live and dye, they know not how: besides its a cruel Favor to let people throw
away their Souls upon these uncertain traditions, decrees, etc. that the most
learned can hardly understand: if you love them keep them to the Law of God
which is perfect converting the Soul; the Testimoney of the Lord which is sure,
making wise the simple; the commandment of the Lord, which is pure enlightening
the eyes: the fear of the Lord which is clean, enduring for ever: the
judgments of the Lord which are true and righteous altogether: however be not
so unmerciful us to let Christians cease to hear the Scripture, that they may
hear the Pope cease to be Christians that they may be Papists.

Reason 5,
Being there is but one safe way to Salvation, do you think that the Protestant
way is that way, or is it not. If it be not, why do you live in it. If it be,
how can you find in your heart to give your subjects liberty to go another way:
can you in your Conscience give them leave to go on in that course in which in
your conscience you think you could not be saved?

Reason 6.
A way to serve God, which no man can know must not be Tolerated (O we must not
be Indulged to worship we know not what) Popery is a way that no man can
certainly know: For the Papists way is to believe as the Church believes: Now a
man knows not whether he believe a right in that way; if he is not sure. 1.
That the Church of Rome is the true Church. 2. That this Church is by the
promise made to St. Peter infallible. 3. That the Pope is Peter's true
successor. 4. They must know that he is rightly qualified, duly, well-chosen to
his place: 5. Whether the Cardinals, the People, or the Emperor have the right
power to make a Pope: For there have been Popes chosen by all these at one
time. 6. They must know which of the Popes is infallible* when sometimes one
Pope disannulleth, what another decreed. 7. When there are many Popes at once
(as there have been) they must know which is the Infallible. 8. They must be
sure at this distance that the Cardinals consecrated him who is now in the
seat, they must know in England that they have the right decree of the Pope, or
travel so many miles to him themselves: and the right meaning of them etc. will
you (O gracious Prince) give up the peoples Souls that are under you, to these
infinite doubts and scruples which it is impossible for any to be satisfied in?
will you not keep them to the Sure word of prophecy? To which they do well to
take heed, as to a light shining in a dark place.

Reason 7.
The greatest novelty and Schism in the world is not to be Tolerated Popery:
See Bishop Abbot on Jer. 6 16. ^e Dr. Pierce Sermon.
is the greatest Schism and novelty in the world: So great a Schism that
separate from all the world and damn all the world: So great a novelty that we
have no footsteps of it in the Scripture which is the reason why they would not
have us read the Scriptures: will you Indulge novelties, O ye the defenders of
the Faith, Once delivered to the Saints. Will you allow them amongst us whose
business it is to persuade the world that you and we are damned?

Reason 8.
Nothing is to be Tolerated that is directly contrary to the word etc. For
therefore indeed Kings are commanded to read the word of God that they may
suffer nothing that is contrary to the word, you can do nothing against the
truth but for the truth you are to be a terror to them that do evil against the
word, and an Encouragement to them that do well according to that word: we pray
four you that are in authority that we may lead peaceable and quiet lives in
all godliness according to the word of God: and honesty according to the Laws
of men: how can you stand by and see the Communion and administered in one kind
against the Institution of Christ which is, Eat ye all of this, drink ye all of
this? How can you stand by and look upon them serving or rather mocking God in
an unknown tongue in dispight of the Apostolical injunction, 1 Cor. 14. will
you allow men a liberty to choose whether they will read the Scripture, when
you know that these things are written that ye might believe, and that
beleiving ye might have life through his name, will you suffer them that say
rend not these holy Scriptures least they destroy your faith and bring you to
damnation, when you know that whatsoever things are written, are written for
our learning that we through the comforts of the Scriptures might have hope.
What shall I do says the man in the Gospel that I may inherit eternal Life?
Our Savior answers what is written in the Law, how read thou? What sins
will you punish, O you Kings. 1. If you wink at them, that vilify Gods words
us obscure or insufficient for Salvation: even the late times of liberty denied
liberty to them that denied the Scripture. 2. That presume to alter the express
Institutions of God. 3. That forbid the reading of the Scripture, the only way
of Life: Lord what shall not be allowed if these men be allowed.

Reason 9.
Idolatry is not to be Tolerated? What have we to do any more with Idols?
Popery is Idolatry, etc. can you have the patience to see the Creature
worshipped instead of the Creaor: is not your spirit stirred within you to see
men change the truth of God into a Lie, and worshipping, and serving the
Creature, more than the Creator God blessed for ever, do you not know that this
sin overthrew Princes, over turned Kingdoms, and has the wrath of the jealous
God, who will not give his honor to another always attending it: If you
forbid not their sin, you commit it: and if you partake of their sins, you will
partake of their Plagues: Has God honored you (O ye excellent Princes) and
will you see him thus dishonored? has he exalted you, and will you see him
thus debased? would you see an Usurper upon your Throne, and can you endure
stocks and stones in Gods house? he that honors God, God will honor: he that
dispiseth him, shall be lightly esteemed: shall Darius make a decree for all
people, nations, and Languages that dwell on the Earth that all men should
tremble and fear only before the living God. And shall Christian Kings endure
other Gods should be worshipped. How can you endure to see men falling down
before the works of men's hands. O remember that Rev. 2.10. Notwithstanding I
have a few things against thee: because thou have suffered that woman Iesabel
which calls her self a Prophetess to teach, and to seduce my servants to
commit Fornication: and to eat things sacrificed to Idols: I have a few things
against thee, because thou have there, them that hold the Doctrine of Baalam,
who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before the Children of Israel, to
Eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit Fornication.

Reason 10.
That Religion which destroys all civil Government is not to be Tolerated
(shall Princes wink at their own ruin Popery destroys all civil Government:
Kings have no more power, subjects owe no more duty: then the Pope is pleased
to grant the one and enjoin the other, shall we admit these among us that upon
all occasions let loose the people to cut one another Throat: and to destroy
their sovereigns: who then may be safely: the Prince must daily look for poison
and daggers. The people for Massacres and cruelties, all for dangerous attempts
against the Lord and against his Anointed, who embroyled us in the late War
was it not Papists? upon what principle did we Rebel, kill and take possession,
but upon the principles of popery, if they did such mischief when checked and
awed by Laws what will they do when tolerated? shall a Protestant Prince
countenance them that may in conscience be bound to kill them as Heretics,
shall the Prince look upon them as subjects who may upon the least occasion be
absolved by the Pope from all fealty and Allegiance to the great danger of the
Kingdom if they are Papists they cannot be indulged, for they are not subjects,
if they are Protestants they need not be Indulged for they are and will be
obedient and faithful, subjects as whole Profession states the Rightly of civil
Government upon the most clear and firm principles, secure them by the most
powerful obligation, and urges them upon the most efficatious imotives of
reward and punishment in the world, shall we allow them that upon ruin of
encommunication and damnation may not dare to be faithful: who must renounce
their Religion i.e. obedience to the Pope, that they be Loyal.

Reason 11.
That way must not be tolerated; Whose tolleration increases our danger, and
yet lesseneth those Incomes whereby we defrayed the charges of our danger: the
Papists disturbed us indeed formerly, but their Estates secured us: they
threatened us; and their Estates maintained those forces by Sea and Land that
protected us; shall we now increase our danger in allowing their liberty, and
yet quit those two parts of their Estates by which we weathered out the danger?
what at once let in an enemy and weaken our selves.

Reason 12.
Blasphemy must not be tolerated (he that blasphemed was to be put to death
you know) Popery is Blasphemy: do not your ears tingle to hear them say, that
God in the Scripture is not infallable, but the Pope in his decrees is. 2. That
they can make a God of a piece of bread. 3. That that God may be eaten by the
most wicked man, yea the most vile creature, by a Dog, or a Mouse, etc. Shall
the name of God through you be blasphemed, God forbid?

Reason 13.
That way which brings to an uncertainty is not to be tolerated, etc. Will you
suffer men to live among us that persuade us we must not believe our eyes: that
are so deceitful, that when we see a piece of bread, must needs insinuate to us
that we see a God, a Savior; if we cannot trust our eyes, how shall we live?
if we cannot trust our senses how can we know you, and obey you? how can we
know the Scripture and believe it? O suffer not those men among us, that are
about to persuade us that we must not believe our eyes, and that we can know
nothing.

Reason 14.
They are not to be tolerated who turn all Religion to interest and formality;
will you endure them that teach poor men no more religion then 1. the
advancement of one to be head of the Church; For let us believe what we will,
if we deny that the Pope is head of the Church, we are damned.) 2. then a few
formalities and ceremonies: will you suffer poor men to rest in a form of
Godliness denying the power thereof: will you let Christianity turn a piece of
Pagentry, and all Christians walk in a vain show: will you not once appear
before that God that is to be worshipped in Spirit and in truth: and can you
forbear't when you look abroad and see the Holy and Blessed God mocked with
histrionical, gaudy, vain bablings, childish canting, saying and hearing they
know not what; God forbid we should countenance that in the world by a
Christian Religion, whose business is to mock God with an unreasonable
Service, and to set up man in an unreasonable pomp, greatness, dominion, and
tyranny over the world. O shall the spiritual and inward frame and power of
Religion be turned to an outward show.

Reason 15.
That Religion that allows men the greatest liberty to sin is not to be
tolerated, etc. Shall you who have power given you to restrain evil, allow a
Religion that gives the greatest liberty to it. In vain are you Kings, if you
allow that way which can dispense with all oaths and obligations of Subjects
unto Kings. In vain will you make Laws against profaneness, if you indulge a
Religion (if I may so call it) which may give indulgence to all profaneness. In
vain will you punish, if you suffer men to think the Pope may pardon. In vain
do you trust your Subjects upon their oaths and promises, if you countenance
that Religion that teach men to equivocate, to speak one thing, to mean
another. In vain do you profess the Protestant-Religion, if you allow that
Religion that gives men liberty to dissemble any Religion, to be Anabaptists,
to be Quakers, to be any thing to promote their own cause. Will you permit that
way which leads men to these abominable courses. My soul come not thou into
their secrets. Shall the poor people be given over to believe Lies and Legends:
and when they have seen their ridiculousnesse and folly, at last come to
believe nothing; their holy frauds and cheats, making most of the ancient
writings uncertain: a mischief as we cannot express, so they cannot repair.

Reason 16.
A way that engages poor souls in certain perjury, contradiction, and
impossibility, is not tolerable. etc. The Papists Can you, O ye tender hearted
Princes see poor souls perplexed thus with impossibilities: amazed with
contradictions and plunged in perjury: and consider that posterity will write
that these things were done in your days: and that the poor souls will complain
at the last day. Alas woe is us, we were undone under your government. O most
excellent Governors, we hope better things of you.

Reason 17.
A Party whose business it is to puzzle people in their Religion, and debauch
them in their lives is not to be tolerated. The Papists are such, etc. they
puzzle us with divisions, that we know not what to do but return to Popery,
where though we do err,, yet they bear us in hand that we cannot err. They
debauch poor souls with Licenciousnesse, that when they are troubled in
conscience, and upon their deathbed, know not how to be saved: they may in
despair throw themselves into Popery for that pardon and indulgence which no
other Religion can afford them. In vain do you set up an Ecclesiastical
government, if you endure another way to take in those whom your Discpline cast
out, when we have taught the people faithfully, admonished them sincerely,
reproved them severely, censured them justly, and excomunicated them solemnly,
They in Contempt of you and us, can turn Papists and laugh at us: for Popery
and Schism is the sin and channe that receives the excrements and filth of
our Church: when we tell men of their sins they run to the Papists, and they
tell them they are venial: when we restrain men they run to them of the
separation, and there are at liberty to do what they please: it is in vain to
make Laws, if a party of dissenters be tolerated, with whom loose men may
find. Refuge against all Laws,

Reason. 18.
What destroys your Government most Excellent Prince, under which we lead
peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty, secure in our lives,
estates and liberty, is not to be tolerated: Popery destroys your
Government, they set up one whom they must obey for conscience sake, while they
obey you only for convenience: their Priests may do what they please, you
have no power over them. Sr. if the Question between us were whether we should
be holy or profane, whether we should obey Christ or not: whether we should be
good Christians and Subjects or not? we should be ashamed to come behind them:
but when we consider that all this stir is to set up one man above the world,
shall we gratify his ambition? and promote his design against our own Interest
and welfare: now they care peaceable indeed, but let a Priest be discontented
(and what State can promise to please them always?) and they will let you know
what it is to let Priests and Jesuits into England: they will incense the
people, promote discontents, conviegh whispers, occasion misunderstandings, and
make you weary of your Government and life.

Reason. 19.
You must not tolerate Popery, unless you will withal tolete all these heresies
which are contained in Popery, viz. 1. That the word of God (I tremble to write
it) is obscure, imperfect, and insufficient to lead us to all truth that may
save us, and to keep us from all error that may damn us. 2. That men must rest
upon the judgment of men for salvation. 3. That some, if not all are born
without sin: which one opinion may undo the world by keeping it in ignorance
of is misery, and in a neglect of the way of safety. 4. That man works out his
salvation by the power of nature, and is saved by the merit of his works. 5.
That some sins are venial, and deserve not death (though the Law says the man
is accursed that continues not in all things commanded in the Law to do them,)
6. That the sin against the holy Ghost is not unpardonable. 7. That Christ is
not God of himself, and that bread and wine is God. 9. That there are many
Mediators, as the Virgin Mary, etc. besides, that one Mediator Jesus Christ: by
whose merits we are saved: That Saints are to be worshipped. 10. That we must
still offer sacrifice, that preaching is the way of heretics. 11. That the
virtue of Sacraments depend upon the intention of a Priest. 12. That the
observation of outward Ceremonies is the essence of divine worship* 13. That
mingle so many Ceremonies with the pure worship and holy Sacraments. 14. That
the grace of God depends upon these Cere^onies, and the outward observance of
them. 15. That some meats are unlawful. 16. That priests marriages are
unlawful. 17. That a few words turn the bread and wine into the body and blood
of Christ. 18. That one and the same body of Christ is in heaven and in earth
all one. 19. That men must worship creatures. 20. That none are saved by the
Sacrament who communicate in both kinds against the judgment of the Church.
21. That men can pardon sin. 22. That Mass may save men after they are dead.
23. That if man believes in Christ he cannot be saved, unless he believe in the
Pope. That Kings may be deposed and murdered by their Subjects: etc. They that
indulge Popery, indulge almost all the Heresies that are in the world. Popery
being nothing else but a forage of old errors, heresies, and superstition
brought into the Church to serve the interest of men, is it a light thing with
us to suffer damnable heresies, shall we hang men for injuries done to few men,
and shall suffer them that intend to damn all.

Reason. 20.
We ought not at this time to set up Popery, when God seems (according to the
prophesies that went before of it) to pull it down, what when Babylon is
falling, shall we put an hand to uphold it, when the Kings who have given their
Kingdoms to her, threaten her, shall we Indulge her?

REV. 18.1, 2, 3, 4 5. And after these things I saw another angel come down
from heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightened with his glory,

And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every
foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of of her fornication, and
the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants
of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.

And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues:

For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.

Reas. 21 That which we pray against we should not allow: we pray against
Popery -- etc. shall we not deliver our selves from all false Doctrine and
Heresy, when we pray, from all false Doctrine and Heresy good Lord deliver
us: Do we pray that Antichrist may be destroyed; and yet do we uphold him? do
we set a solemn day, viz. 5. of November, to thank God that he delivered us
from the superstition, Idolatry, Heresy, Tyranny and cruelty of Rome: and
shall we admit them? O do nothing against your Faith, do nothing against your
prayers. --

Reas. 22. If the Papists may with a safe conscience conform with us; then we
ought not to comply with them but they may conform with us; -- therefore, etc.
-- our Religion is the same it was in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
but when they came to our Churches, they heard our prayers, and our Sermons,
why can they not do it now? yea many of them come to our Churches now, -- why
may they not all do so? the Pope forbids them they say: -- and do they deserve
an indulgence from our Magistrates, who will rather obey a foreign Power, then
submit to our laws; they are not worthy of protection, much less of favor
among us that own a foreign power, which they assert for disobedience to our
own.

Reas. 23. If we had the happiest times for peace, plenty, prosperity and
general satisfaction to all people, when the severest Laws against Papists
were made, -- then we ought not to mitigate those Laws; the restraint of
faction is our security, their indulgence is our danger: O the happy years of
Queen Elizabeth when Papists durst not show their heads; the blessed time of
King James when a Priest durst not be seen; -- we date our happiness from that
hour in Queen Elizabeth's time that Popery was voted treason; we date our
miseries from that time in the last years of King James that it was declared
Tolerable; what calm, what peace, what quiet, what unity, order and uniformity
before? what fears, what jealousies, what troubles, what dangers, what
divisions and disorders since.

Reas. 24. And what you think would our Forefathers say, if they saw those
whom they resisted unto blood, enjoining equal liberty with themselves:
methinks Reverend Cranmer's ashes stir at the mention of the Toleration of
Popery; -- methinks the blood of Martyrs cries aloud. no Toleration of Popery;
the Mill^o^s that have been massacred in Ireland, etc c^y how long Lord, good
and true, will thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? shall
God avenge? and will you indulge.

Reas. 25 And to say no more when I see Coutzen Campanella, Allen, etc. laying
this m^thod for the undermining of the reformed Religion and the promoting the
Popish: viz. 1. That seeing the Papists are so odious among Protestants, they
would put on the visors of several Sects and factions, and under that pretense
oppose the established Religion in any Country privately with more success
then they did openly; 2 They should endeavor to make the Sects so considerable
as to gain an universal Toleration wherein they might be included by the
benefit whereof they might advance the Catholic cause with security and
confidence; I promise my self that no ingenious Protestant will advance this
Toleration, which seems to be the greatest design that conclave of Rome
manageth, -- which is the wisest assembly of men that overlooketh the World;
have they embroyled us in war, broken us in Religion, confounded us in our
government only for Toleration, and shall it in peace be granted them, if
indulgences be the utmost that a Papist can with confidence desire; (and we
know they are not overmodest) it is more then Protestants may with safety grant.
--

And whereas under the vizor of the sect before mentioned you are of late so
earnest in pleading for a toleration, deal but impartially like honest men, and
I will set in with you. Procure but a toleration for the Reformed Christian
Religion in Italy and Spain and your part of Germany, Portugal, etc. and I
should willingly petition the sovereign Powers in England that you might have
as much liberty here: But that you shall have full liberty here, and
Protestants have none where you can hinder it, this is not equal dealing. But
how comes it to pass that you that pretend so much to unity are in this also of
so many opinions; the English Papists are for liberty of Religion, and the
Spanish and Italian are against it? But I must cry you mercy: I now consider,
It is but your selves that you think have right to liberty here, and others
should have it but in order to yours. As hardly as you think you are used in
England, you live openly among us, and no man that I hearof lays hands on
you: When you know if a Spaniard or Italian be known to be a Protestant, he is
as sure tormented and burnt at a stake as the coat is on his back. Do you not
know this to be true? Were I in these places where your Religion has its will,
I know one leaf of this Book would cause me to be burnt to ashes: that I am
alive is because I am not in your power: But for my part I wish not the
shedding of one drop of your blood, nor your imprisonment or banishment, but
only your moderate and necessary restraint from open iniquity, and seducing of
those that are unfurnished to encounter you.

1. Either Scripture is True or not true: If not, Popery is not true, which
pleads its warrant from it (And some of them argue, as if they purposed to
disprove the Scripture, and to imitate Samson, in pulling down the house on
their own heads and ours, in revenge for the dishonor they have suffered by
the Scripture.) If it be true (as nothing more true) then Popery is not true,
which palpably contracteth it, as in the points of Latin service, and denying
the Cup in the Lords Supper, and many other is most evident.

3. Either the Judgment of the ancient Doctors is sound or not: If not, then
the Church of Rome is unsound, that is sworn to expound the Scripture only
according to their consent: If it be sound, then the Church of Rome is unsound,
that arrogate a universal Government and infallibility, and build upon a
foundation, that was never allowed by the ancient Doctors (as in the third
Dispute. I have fully proved) and which most Christians in the World do still
reject.

4. Either Reason it self is to be renounced or not: If it be, then none can be
Papists but mad men. If not, then Popery must be renounced, which founded our
very faith upon impossibilityes, and teaches men of necessity to believe in
the Pope as the Vicar of Christ, before they believe in Christ, with many the
like which are afterward laid open.

5. Either our five Senses, and the Judgment made upon them, is certain and
infallible or not, If not, then the Church of Rome, both Pope and Council are
Fallible, and not at all to be trusted. For when all their Tradition, is by
hearing or reading, they are uncertain whether ever they heard or read any such
thing; and we must all be uncertain whether they speak or write it: And then we
must not only subscribe to Fransc. Sanchez, Quod nihil scitur, but also say
that Nihil certo creditur. But if sense be certain and infallible, then the
Church of Rome, even Pope and Council are not only Fallible, but certainly
false deceivers and deceived. For the Pope and his Council tell the Church that
it is not Bread and Wine which they take, eat and drink in the Eucharist. But
the senses of all sound men, do tell them that it is. I see that it is Bread and
Wine, I smell it, I feel it, I taste it; and somewhat I hear to further my
assurance: And yet if Popery be not false, it is no such matter. One would think
the dullest Reader, might be quickly here resolved, whether Popery be true or
false. Look on the consecrated bread and Wine, touch it, smell it, taste it,
and if thou can but be sure that it is indeed Bread and Wine thou may be as
sure that Popery is a delusion. And if thou can but be sure, that it is not
Bread and Wine, yet thou may be sure that the Pope or his Council, nor any of
his Doctors are not to be believed. For if other men's senses be deceitful,
theirs and thine are so too.

Reader, Adhere to God, and the Righteousness of Christ, and the Teachings of
the Holy Ghost, by the Holy Scriptures, and a faithful Ministry, in the
Communion of the Saints, and as a member of the Catholic Church, which
arising at Jerusalem, is dispersed over the World, containing all that are
Christians; renounce not right Reason, or thy senses; and live according to the
light which is vouchsafed thee; and then thou shall be safe from Popery and all
other pernicious damning errors.

Richard Baxter, Catholic.

An answer to the Roman Catholics Reasons for Indulgence
JUst as I was closing this afternoones diversion, the Reasons aforesaid come
to my hand; Reasons why Roman Catholics should not be persecuted: what indeed
I expected, it being an ill cause for which so many Learned Men as are devoted
for that way, can say nothing, and though I hear they are answered by an abler
hand, yet thus much I thought fit to add concerning them.

Reason, -- We have great reason to bless God that they deal with us with calm
reasons, who dealt with our forefathers with cruel persecutions, -- that when
they burned them, they are so restrained that they can only dispute with us,
that they only argue here, while they banish as in Poland; torment as in Spain;
Massacre as in other places: -- not unto us, not unto us; it is even so O
Father, because so it pleased thee. --

Reasons why Roman Catholics -- reason is as universal as Mankind, and of as
great a compass as nature; -- does reason say in England, that Roman
Catholics shall not be persecuted, and does not reason say in Spain, Italy,
etc. that poor Protestants shall not be tormented: does men's reason tell them
that a small fine is intolerable in England, and does men's reason tell them
that the inquisition is tolerable in Spain. Be not partial in your selves,
but judge righteous judgment: desire no more in reason from us, then you would
in reason allow us. --

Should not be persecuted, alas! for you -- how modestly you insinuate --
should not be persecuted? you mean no harm, only you would not be oppressed
-- very good, and how are you persecuted, your Priests are safe, your estates
are intyre, your way is connived at: and yet what pains you take to prove you
should not be persecuted, -- will you never leave your tricks -- thus when you
lived peaceably among us, you persuaded the World we eat you up, we oppressed,
we tormented you; -- in so much that some of your people take us for Devils and
not for men, and think England is an Hell, or a Purgatory as well for Papists
as for Ho^ses; Fie upon these Religious cheates, and devout frauds, is this the
way to uphold an holy cause: what will ye lie for God, and do so great an
evil, that any good may come thereof, God forbid: -- should not be persecuted.
-- A subtle yet a palpable (...): O sirs, this is not the first time you meant
more then you spoke, i. e. should be tolerated, and at full liberty to deceive
and be deceived; not be persecuted, that is in the English that was spoken in
Queen Mary's days; persecute: we are not ignorant of your devices, we know
that an Indulgence to vice is a punishment to virtue, -- that a toleration of
error, is but a subtle oppression of truth; and an indulgence to you, is but a
sly persecution of us: you know we desire not to persecute you, but to secure
our selves: we make no Laws against your Religion, -- but for our own: we only
establish the truth we apprehend, and take care that we be not seduced to the
errors we fear. If you will needs oppose these Laws which you know will punish
you, undermine this truth which you know will prevail against you, and promote
those errors which you know will undo you; -- blame us not, your ruin is of
your selves: we may say that we desire not you misery, (if you suffer any) but
that you should turn from your evil ways, and live among us.

Not be persecuted: -- If we persecute you, it is only in part of your
Estates, which you can easily part with, and live very well, that we may save
your souls: we correct, that we may reform you; we give you over to some
punishment, that you may be saved in the day of the Lord. What you think
severity, is the greatest mercy; what you call cruelty, is the greatest
kindness in the world, as being a kindness to souls, and that for Eternity. --

Should not be persecuted: -- and who of you is persecuted?

1. Not your Priests, for they are only enjoined to stay in those foreign
parts whither they went against Law and Allegiance of their own accord, and
forbid their own Countries which they have of their own accord forsaken. -- If
they stay at home, they may have the privilege of Subjects: if they will run
beyond Sea for order and power to do mischief, here they must be punished as
fugitives: for the world must know that the French, Spaniards, etc. do not
suffer with us; only such English men as must needs go abroad to learn that
mischief which they may practice at home.

2. Not your People: -- for they only pay little more then others toward that
charge of the Government which they occasion: you endanger our Government more
then others, you pay a little more toward the support of it then others. --
It Is true, you are charged two parts of three of your Estates; but you usually
come off with a slight composition, -- which you may very well afford toward
the security of the Government which you so much hazard. Is it persecution to
allow something of your superfluities for the Kings necessities? especially
when it is not so much as the Pope extorted from you, when he called England,
Puteus inexhaustus. -- You pay nothing now for Bulls, Pardons, Licenses, Dirges
obits, -- Vestments, Crosses, etc. You may have a cheap way of serving God: and
therefore I hope you may afford his Majesty the more that he may maintain that
way. --

Should not be persecuted: -- You are not persecuted for Religion, but punished
for disobedience. -- You say you disobey for conscience sake: -- be that
between God and you: -- the Magistrates observe your actions, and punish them;
your hearts they know not, and therefore they judge them not. -- There is no
governing of Mankind, if the Magistrate must not punish men's actions which he
sees, but indulge them for their conscience which he sees not. --

Should not be persecuted: -- You are not persecuted, but only disabled from
persecuting us: you are weakened in your Estates only, that you may not ruin
us: you are incapable of power, that you may not oppress us: to live quietly,
soberly and honestly, you have enough; to live seditiously, dangerously and
factiously, you have too much. We are so indulgent to you, that you want
nothing which may be necessary for your livelihood, though we are so jealous
over you that you want that which may be necessary for your design: we take
away part of your Estates, that you may not be capable of attempting that
whereby you may forfeit the whole. --

Here I observe two Rules: 1. The one of Charity; teaching not to do to others
what we would not have done to our selves: where we must distinguish what we
would not in reason, and what we would not in interest: If I were a malefactor
in interest, I would not be punished; if I were a Judge in reason, I would
punish a malefactor: so if I were in an error, self-love would distaste to me
a desire of advancing my error. -- If I held the truth contrary to that
error, conscience would suggest to me my duty to suppress that for the
advancement of a truth; to the case in hand, if you should really think we were
deceived and went astray, we would have you by all means discover to us the
errors of our ways, and restrain us from them; and now we really think you in
damnable errors, we would convince you of those errors; and by all means
restrain you from them. 2. The other rule is of prudence; teaching to bear with
you the lesser inconveniences as coming nearest to us, that we may be able to
suppress other factions that go farthest from us: 1. Of two inconveniences we
may choose the least; but of two sins we may choose none, -- and really I think
it sin in me to countenance any thing in which I judge against Gods truth and
way; -- if I can discountenance it. 2. To bear with you is to bear wi^h all the
errors in the World: your way being a farrage of all the exploded heresies
among Christians.

3. Now you know we are under the disgrace of coming too near your way, we must
say and will prove it that your religion (if I may so call it) is the farthest
from that which is styled the old Protestant, then from any other way professed
and owned in England.

4. And is it come to that, that you have raised so many Sects among us -- (for
the Sects are but your by-blowes) that we have but this sad choice left, either
to be swallowed up by them, or to close with you? -- This is plain English. --

1. Reas. Roman Catholic was the Religion of England a thousand years.

Ans. the Roman Catholic way was not the Religion of England, but the
corruption of its Religion these thousand years: (Although however that is not
the Christian Religion that is of a thousand standing only) our Religion was
the Word of God for 1400 years, to which the Papist added their Idolatry,
superstition, and tradition, these 900. years: the Religion of England was
always contained in the Lords Prayer, the 10 Commandments, the Articles of
Faith, the Doctrine of the Sacraments, the Order and Discipline we have now
established by Law: -- the corruptions of Rome were only of late brought in
upon these foundations; and are now removed by Law: and really it is strange
that humane corruptions, such as Popery is, should claim the same right with
Gods institution, such as Judaism was: one institution of God may give place to
another by degrees, -- though it give not place to the corruption of men not
for an hour. -- We have buried your way in honor, our care is how that it rise
not again in dishonor. As the Primitive Christians suffered that generation of
Jews which was bred up in Judaism to continue their own way, though they
suffered neither Jews nor Gentiles to be bred up in it, in the next generation:
so we used that generation we found here at first very civilly, but would not
suffer any more to learn that way. The Apostles that suffered Jews to practice
their way for the present, would not suffer them to teach it for the future:
and we who indulged Papists in the first generation after the Reformation to
live in their own perverse way, would not allow them to pervert others in the
next generation: And as we would not force a Heathen (as he says) to our way,
so would we not suffer him to persuade others from our way; we would not compel
Heathens or Papists (who in some places are little better then Heathens) to the
truth, but we would restrain them that they should not seduce others to their
errors.

Reas. But shall the old Protestant, who confesses Rome a true Church, and
himself derived from her, persecute her, -- and call her a Whore, let the
Presbyterian, etc.

Answ. Let the world know that the old Protestant bears as little honor to the
corruptions of Rome, as the Presbyterian; and that the Presbyterian bears as
much honor to the truth of Rome as the old Protestant: and that both (for we
will not by your Artifices be divided any further then needs must) own her as a
true Church, though they do not own her as a corrupued Church. -- They will
allow the Church of Rome, and they maintain their own here: they condemn not
them that live in communion with the Church of Rome, because they have the
foundation of Religion. -- They allow them not the same privilege with those
of their own communion, because they build dangerous things upon that
foundation: we own all Protestants for Christians; yet we hang them for murder
and felony: so we own Papists for Christians, yet we punish them for
superstition and Idolatry. --

Reason, 3. If we acknowledge they have all things necessary to salvation,
then we should indulge them. --

An. Indeed you hold as you say, the fundamental truth by which men may be
saved: but you hold likewise some errors in judgment, and corruptions in
practice contrary to those fundamental truths, by which men may be damned: we
embrace your faith, and yet we oppose the heresies you hold contrary to the
faith: I love a man, though I hate his disease: -- I love the Religion of Rome,
-- I hate her profanation of that Religion: -- if any man be saved in Rome,
it is by the truths we and you hold in common, and not by those abominations we
punish in you: -- and we must needs say that we restrain you not as Christians,
whom we shall see in Heaven one day; but as Idolaters and Heretics, whom
except you repent, we shall never see in Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.20, 21. --

4. Reason, We differ but in small questions and opinions, etc. therefore.

1. Answ. If so small the difference between us, why so great your cruelty
toward us? -- were we burned, massacred, tortured, banished, imprisoned,
famished, upon quirkes, and differences in words, rather then in real points?
--

2. But is the worshipping of Creatures but a quirk^s with you? is saying to a
piece of bread, Thou art God, but a trifle? and to God, Thou art not able to
instruct us for salvation without humane tradition, but a Toy? --

5. Reason, Because we own one rule of Faith with them that is Scripture and
tradition, we ought to tolerate them.

Answ. We disown this reproachful insinuation: we own no rule of Faith but the
Scripture, -- by which we try all humane writings -- judging in our selves what
is right: -- and though we have the Fathers and the first Councils against you,
yet we desire nothing but the Scripture for our selves; -- we reverence the
practice of the Ancients; we walk by the rule of Scripture; as we would do as
they did, so would we walk by the same rule they did.

6 Reason, The Lutherans agree with the Papasts elsewhere, therefore, etc. Ans.
I. How the Lutherans agree with Papists we say not, we are sure the Papists
agree not with Lutherans, -- what else means the quarrels, plots, seditions,
tumults, discontents we hear of every day? 2. We walk not by example, but by
rule: 3. This favor the Lutherans and Hugonots got by arms, and keep by
interest; before we know how they were used.

7. Reason, As to what you say of commerce and marriage, we establish not our
religion upon policy, but upon piety -- we look not what is most advantageous,
but what is most lawful: although yet it be the interest of foreigners as
much to be of our Religion, as it is ours to be of theirs -- the English peace
and trade is as much their advantage, as theirs is ours: as for the Earl of
Bristow, he told King James and King Charles, that for which he was questioned
by the Duke of Buckingham in Parliament: As for the Earl of Leicester he did a
little regard Richleau, as he did him: -- and he has lived to see as great a
Cardinal court the English, when resolute in their way, though never so severe
to Catholics -- their resolute are fooled, the resolved are feared: -- as for
the Queen of Bohemia, if we had followed Her interest, she might have been the
greatest Queen in Europe; -- and the Lord would have let the World have seen --
that it was the highest advantage in the World to give up our selves and
relation to God and the Gospel: as for English Queens we may in time have
Protestant Queens. In the mean time we know our gracious Queens will not impose
upon us the public practice or indulgence at least of their Religion no more,
then we impose our Religion upon them: they had rather few then whole Kingdoms
should suffer, they had rather see you suffer for your conscience, then force
us to allow your way against our consciences; however to avoid some supposed
inconveniences, we will not commit sin which is a real, and the greatest
inconvenience in the World.

To your eighth, ninth and tenth Reason: we say, if you are true to the Popes
Supremacy, you cannot be true to the Kings Government: -- if you deny that, (as
you seem to do) you deny the foundation of your Religion, yea, the sum of
Christianity, as Bellarmine says. Whether you speak as you think in the eighth
and ninth Reason, we know not; for you can equivocate: -- we know your Brethren
will never say so, when they have obtained a Toleration* and we know it is no
new thing to have a few moderate men offer that in adversity, which their
Brethren will never own in prosperity. Indeed you can juggle so, as that some
shall write for Supremacy, and others against it; and laugh among your selves
to see how you cheat the world: we know what the Sorbonist^ stand upon at this
time: however, you are punished here only for actual disobedience, upon what
principle soever you disobey: if some of you think loyally, you all live
disobediently to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm.

II. Reason. You say you are forced to be dangerous by fleeing to foreign
Ambassadors, and parts for safety.

Answ. 1. It Is well we know your design. 2. If you did not go to Foreigners
for Religion, you need not go to Foreigners for Protection: if you will
worship with them, you may live with them. 3. If you keep correspondence with
our enemies, and practice against us, when you are in danger of punishment;
what will you do when you are tolerated? If you deal with Foreigners now, to
secure your selves from us; much more will you deal with them hereafter, that
you may have power over us: what you do now for liberty, you will do hereafter
for power: this threatening insinuation will signify little with us, who
measure our Religion by our Consciences, and not by Interest; whatever
inconvenience follows upon your punishment, we will not displease God to
tolerate you.

To your twelfth Reason, we can say upon sad experience that you may do more
harm by creeping into houses, then we can do good by preaching in Congregations.

To your last we say, -- Our Bishops can prove their Consecration; they will
make their authority eminent in awing you, if they cannot make their
persuasions eminent in converting you; and that when they are the severest
enemies to your corruptions, they are the most hearty well-wishers to your
persons, and you may hear them as such. --

Sirs, As you did your duty in serving the King in his just War, so he will
allow you all just privilege in time of peace: but you must not think that the
reward of your obedience to him in some things, shall be a liberty to disobey
him in other. Although we have been (as you say) fellow sufferers with you, we
will not sin with you. You say, you hazarded much to restore the King to his
Throne: To what purpose, I pray you, if every man shall do what is good in his
own eyes, as when there was no King in Israel? And you must know, his sacred
Majesty makes Laws against you, not to satisfy any man's passion or revenge,
but to satisfy his own conscience.

Whereas you speak of his Majesty's mercy, and word from Breda: -- 1. Let me
tell you, That Toleration would be the greatest cruelty in the world. -- 2. You
know his Majesty promised no more at Breda, but that he should condescend to
such provisions for tender Consciences as his Parliament would think fit.

May it please therefore the wisdom and goodness of both Houses of Parliament,
setting aside those plausible insinuations which undermine the principles of
Government, to see that the permission of Roman Catholics is not only
contrary to the peace, quiet and union of the subject, but also dangerous to
the constitution, and threatening to the welfare of this Church and Kingdom;
and not let that be promoted upon shallow and fallacious suggestion of any
interest and advantage, especially since the wisdom of France. The Duke of
Rhoan has made it appear to the world, and your wisdom makes it clear to your
selves,

That the Protestant Religion is the Interest of England.

FINIS.
The excellent Reasons of the Honorable House of Commons against Indulgence;
with Historical Observations thereupon.
BUt to what end do we trouble the World with our inconsiderable Reasons, now
we are all concluded by the common reason of the Kingdom (at least that part
of it wherein we are included) represented by the most Honorable the Commons
of England assembled in Parliament, then whom the Sun scarce beheld a more
noble, a more resolved, a more unanimous, a more loyal and Orthodox Assembly,
and Assembly as that excellent Bishop said, quo nihil videt orbis augustius:
their famous Vote which may satisfy all your Reasons, -- their Vote -- at
which your conclave at Rome may tremble, all the Conventicles in the World
shake; a dejected and forlorn Church raises up its self; decayed Religion is
recovered, the souls of the first reformers (if they have any sense of things
here below,) rejoice; (O if there be joy in Heaven at the recovery of one
sinner, what is their at the Recovery of a Nation!) millions of unstable Souls
are settled: the many breaches of our Church are close, that threatening evil of
schism and separation is checked, -- the loose hopes of dangerous men are
bounded: the callapsed Honor of England is restored; former miscariages are
expiated, for which our gracious King the Defender of the true Ancient, and
Apostolic Faith heartily thanks them. In which the Nobles if they have any
sense of their Ancestors Honor, will concur with them; the reverend Clergy
will be bound to pray for them; and we with our posterity that are yet unborn
will stand up and call them blessed: -- their famous Vote to which we must
submit is this; --

The Vote.
That it be presented to the Kings Majesty as the humble advice of this House,
That no Indulgence be granted to the Dissenters from the Act of Uniformity.

And that you may know that this is not an Act of power but -- of reason, not
what they think they may, but what they think they ought, you have added their
reason too -- Ordering.

That a Committee be appointed to collect and bring in the Reasons of this
House for this Vote upon the present Debate, to be prescuted to his Majesty;
and that the nominating of the Committee be adjourned till to morrow morning.

But reason is not reason until it be resolved on, it was therefore resolved,
etc.

That in the close of the Reasons to be presented to His Majesty for the Vote
of advice; it being also added, That this House will assist His Majesty with
their Lives and Fortunes, and That the Comittee appointed to bring in the
Reasons do pen an Address for that purpose to His Majesty.

Do you observe their reasons against your suggestions 1. As to the promise of
Breda you urge, -- they say you should not trouble his Majesty further with it.

Reas. 1. Because it is not a Promise in it self, but only a Gracious
Declaration of your Majesty's Intentions, to do what in You lay, and what a
Parliament should advise Your Majesty to do; and no such Advise was ever given,
or thought fit to be offered; nor could it be otherwise understood, because
there were Laws of Uniformity then in being, which could not be dispensed with,
but by Act of Parliament.

They who do pretend a Right to that supposed Promise, put the Right into the
hands of their Representatives, whom they chose to serve for them in this
Parliament, who have Passed, and Your Majesty consented to the Act of
Uniformity. If any shall presume so say, that a Right to this Declaration does
still remain after this Act Passed,

It tends to dissolve the very Bonds of Government, and to suppose a disability
in Your Majesty and the Houses of Parliament, to make a Law contrary to any
part of Your Majesty's Declaration, though both Houses should advise Your
Majesty to it.

Against Indulgence that most Honorable House says,

1. That it will establish schism by a Law: In the 24.25. and 26. year of
Queen Elizabeth the Non-conformists especially of Kent bestired themselves, and
procured the Lords of the Council to write to Archbishop Whitgift to take
charitable consideration of their causes, that the people of the Realm might
not be deprived of their Pastors, being diligent, learned and zealous, though
in some points Ceremonial, they may seem doubtful only in conscience, not
in willfulness, Upon this, though only an intercession of the Council: they
are encouraged to separate from the Church, and upon the Earl of Leicesters
Interest (what would they do if they had a Law of their side?) they are hardened
to hold a solemn Council at Cambridge I think to answer our Convocation;
wherein they made decrees as they call them of such things as (do seem) may
stand with the peace of Gods Church: see Bishop Bancrofts danger pos. p. 46.
they have a conference at Lambeth before the Lords of the Council with the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and the Bishop of Winchester Cambd^el.
1584. and finding but favor (no Law all this while on their behalfes in
Parliament) they erect a Presbytery at Wandsworth in Sunrey, Bishop Bancroft
Engl. scot. 3. b. c. 1. Full. Cent. xvi p. 30 where Offices and rules are
agreed on by 24. Presbyters in as much authority as our 26. Archbishops and
Bishops, this way they settle in London a while after; Altar against Altar,
Post against Post: -- they became violent Anno 1575. and left the sober men,
Humphrey --,Fox, etc. they set up prophesying, Anno 1580. and private meetings,
fasts and conferences; they meet at Cuckefield in Suffolk threescore Ministers
almost enough to make a convocation, where they resolved what was to be
Tolerated, and what was to be refused: again they meet at Cambridge, where were
many things very solemnly enacted: in the year 1585.

1. A Parliament meets, 2. Convocation sits, 3. an Assembly of Ministers vying
with the Convocation, gets together, they admonish, they threaten, they plot,
they get a 16. fold Petition drawn up for them Anno 1587. el 30. they Libel, --
they met at a Synod in Coventry 10th. of the 4. Month as they write, -- where
they resolved thirteen points against the Church, Full. xvi Cent. 194. and drew
up a discipline and form essential at all times, which was tendered to all the
classes far and near in England; -- they humble themselves at Northampton for
their former Conformity to the Church, -- John test p. 6 Full. p. 196. they
refuse Oaths tendered to them, -- they talk of a bickering and then a battle;
as one Wiggington words it, they solicit the King of Scots assistance May 2.
1591. -- Hacket and Coppinger, grow outrageous and threaten the Queen and the
Privy Council, at last they grew so odious at Court as Mr. Fuller writes that
none durst appear in their behalf, and so they continued all King James his
time -- and King Charles when we had peace until at last this Schism in the
War was established by a pretended Law, -- and England knows very well what
it is to establish Schism by a Law. --

In the latter end of King James his Reign there was a Toleration propounded,
and immediately the Popish policy and Government was set up in opposition to
ours, -- they had Archbishops to our Archbishops, Bishops to our Bishops, their
meeting of Priest to our Convocation, -- their Mass to our Common Prayer: And
so Cromwell told his Cronies in a thing called a Parliament in his loose time,
that they had their Hierarchy settled, and that they had an orderly Government
within his Government; -- this, this it is to have a Schism established by
Law. --

2. The Honorable House of Commons are against Indulgence to dissenters,
because it will make the Government of the Church precarious, and Contemptible:
What can a Bishop do, if there be parties to which all the guilty will betake
themselves, to elude his Authority, he excommunicates, they separate and
excommunicate themselves: He cites, they undervalue him; He threatens, they
(as the Church wardens of Saint Anne Aldersgate) say they will try it with him,
he would turn out a Parish-clark like him of Blackfriars, he goes to Law with
him: The Indulged Party will be the receptacle of all the discontented,
ambitious, turbulent, and guilty Persons which the Law threatens, discipline
corrects: and justice punishes.

3 The Honorable House of Commons are against Indulgence, Because,

It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law
at one Sessions for Uniformity, and at the next Sessions (the reasons of
Uniformity continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or
weaken the execution of it.

The most happy constitutions are they that are maturely, debated, resolvedly
enacted, and not without great reason, and much time repealed. The first
Parliament that ever was in England ordered that the same Assembly should not
repeal and make Laws: A Parliament Hen. the thirds time refused to alter a
most inconvenient Law, because they thought no inconvenience greater then
Alteration of Laws, so in K. H^n. 7. Hen. 8. Q. Eliz. Reign.

4 The Honorable House of Commons are against indulgence. Because,

It will expose His Majesty to the restless Importunity of every Sect and
Opinion, and of every single Person also, who shall presume to dissent from the
Church of England.

It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers will
weaken the true Protestant Profession so far, that it will at least be
difficult for it, to defend it self against them: And, which is yet further
considerable, those Numbers, which by being troublesome to the Government,
find they can arrive to an Indulgence, will, as their numbers increase, be yet
more troublesome, that so at length they may arrive to a general Toleration,
which His Majesty has declared against; and in time some prevalent S^ct, will
at last contend for an establishment; which, for ought can be foreseen, may end
in Popery.

It is a thing altogether without Precedent, and will take away all means of
convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the method and proceedings of
the Laws of England.

You know there is no end of humor and faction, Hooper procures K. Edw. 6.
letter for a dispensation from certain Rights and Ceremonies offensive to his
conscience, as the letter runs; The nonconformists in the beginning of Q
Elizabeth's reign, are only for alteration of some things offensive: The later
nonconformists were against the Common Prayer, and most of the usage of the
Church; at last they are against all Church government, discipline, orders and
forms of worship, the people will have it so? and what will ye do in the end
thereof.

5 The Honorable House of Commons are against Indulgence, to dissenters.
Because,

It is humbly conceived, That the Indulgence proposed will be so far from
tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion great
disturbance. And on the contrary, That the asserting of the Laws, and the
Religion established, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable
means to produce settled Peace and Obedience throughout Your Kingdom: Because
the variety of Professions of Religion, when openly indulged, does directly
distinguish men into parties, and withal gives them opportunity to count their
numbers; which, considering the animosities, that out of a Religious Pride will
be kept on foot by the several Factions, does tend directly and inevitably to
open disturbance. Nor can Your Majesty have any Security, that the Doctrine or
Worship of the several Factions, which are all Governed by a several Rule,
shall be consistent with the Peace of Your Kingdom.

When Master Cartwright preached at Saint Mary's in Cambridge the Church could
not hold the people, when Doctor Gouge preached at Blackfriars, it was too
little for him, when Master Dod preached, people were almost througed to death;
If a nonconformist preach, the whole City is in a tumult; if a man be but a
little inclined that way, how great is his Auditors? If Orthodox, how thin his
Congregation, which, considering the animosities, that out of a Religious Pride
will be kept on foot by the several Factions, does tend directly and
inevetably to open disturbance. Nor can His Majesty have any Security, that the
Doctrine or Worship of the several Factions, which are all Governed by a
several Rule, shall be consistent with the Peace of Your Kingdom.

What security have we that the Papists will not teach the Popes power as well
as his Religion: that they will not absolve men from their allegiance to the
King of England, as well as they absolve men from their obedience to the Church
of England; that they will not disobey, as well as not obey for Conscience
sake, -- how know we but they have all taken a solemn Covenant to defend the
Kings Majesty only in the maintenance of Religion; i. e. of their several
ways: --

Be wise therefore O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the Earth. -- Habet
aliquod ex iniquo omne magnum exemplum quod contra singulos, utilitate publica
rependitur -- Tac. An 14. Ne timeas contra Charitatem esse si unius scandalum
multorum pace compensaveris. -- Bern. Ep.
FINIS.

