Nos quoque floruimus sed flos fuit ille caducus:
Flammaque de stipula nostra brevisque fuit.
Ov. VERA EFFIGIES RICHARDI BAXTERI MIN: IES CH: IN OP ET PATA FIDEI SPEI ET
CHARITATIS. An. 1670. AETAT SUAE 55o

Farewell vain World as thou have been to me
Dust and a Shadow: those I leave with thee:
The unseen Vital Substance I committ,
The Leaves and Fruit are dropped for soil and Seed,
Heaven's heirs to generate: to heal and feed:
Them also thou will flatter and molest,
But shall not keep from Everlasting Rest.


THE LIFE OF FAITH


THE Life of Faith. In Three PARTS. The First is a Sermon on Heb. 11.1.
formerly preached before His Majesty, and published by his Command; with
another added for the fuller Application. The Second is Instructions for
confirming Believers in the Christian Faith. The Third is Directions how to
live by Faith; or how to exercise it upon all occasions.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

2 Cor. 5.7. For we walk by faith, not by sight.

2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. For which cause we faint not: but though our outward man
parish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day: For our light affliction
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory: While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen: For the things which are seen are temporal; but the
things which are not seen are eternal.

Heb. 12.27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King: for
he endured, as seeing him that is invisible.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Nevill Simmons, at the three Crowns over against
Holbern Conduit. 1670.

To the Worshipful, my much honored Friend Richard Hampden of Hampden,
Esquire; and the Lady Laetitia his Wife, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
SIR,
YOur Names stand here in the front of this Treatise, on a double account:
First, that (the custom of Writers having given me such an advantage) I may
tell the present and future Ages, how much I love and honor your Piety,
Sobriety, Integrity and Moderation, in an Age when such Virtues grow into
contempt, or into lifeless Images and Names: And how much I am my self your
debtor, for the manifold expressions of your love; and that in an Age when
(...) the superio^^ ^^culties is ou^ of f^shion; and toward such as I, is
grown ^ crime Sincerity and (...) are things that shall be honorable, when
Hypocrisy and Malice have done their worst: But they are most conspicuous and
refulgent in times of ^^rity; and when the shame of their contraries se^ them
off.

Secondly, To signify my Love and Gratitude by the best (...) which I can
make; which is, by tendering to you and to your family, the surest Directions,
for the most noble manly life on earth, in order to a blessed life in Heaven.
Though you have proceeded well; you (...) need of help: so great a (...) for
skillful counsel, and (...) and industrious, and unwea^^^ (...) And your
hopeful children may (...) to learn this excellen^ Life from these Directions,
for the love of your prefixed Names. And how happy will they b^, if they
converse with God, (...) are wallowing in the (...) of (...) When the dead
hea^ted sinner thinks not of (...) be dragged out of (...) pa^pered
corruptible flesh, to divinie (...), and ^^^with the beginnings of endless
(...), to the world where they might have found everlasting rest; what joy will
then be the portion of mortified and patient Believers, whos^ Treas^^^s, and
Hearts, and Conversati^^ in He^ven, are now the foretaste of their possession,
as the Spirit of Christ which causes this, i^ the se^^ of God, and the pledge
and earnest of their inheritance. If a (...) pleasing life in a dark,
distracted, (...) world, were better than a life with God and Angels, methinks
yet they that know they cannot have what they (...), should make sue of what
they may ha^^* And they that cannot keep what they (...), should learn to (...)
what (...) may keep. Wonderful stupidity! ^h^t they (...) dead bodies (...)
grave, is as common a work, (...) children into the world, and that this life
is but the road to another, and that all men are posting on to their (...),
should think no more considerately whither so many thousand souls do go, that
daily shoot the gulf of death* and return no more to the world which one they
called their home! That men will have no house or home, but the ship which
carries them so swiftly to eternity! and spend their time in furnishing a
dwelling on such a tempestuous Sea, where winds and tide are hasting them to
the shore! and even to the end are contriving to live where they are daily
dying! and care for no ^^bitation but on horseback! That almost all men die
much wiser than they lived; and yet the certain foreknowledge of death will not
serve to make them more seasonably and more safely wi^e! Wonderful! that it
should be possible for a man awake, to believe that he must shortly be gone
from earth, and enter into an unchangeable endless life, and yet not bend the
thoughts of his soul, and the labors of his life, to secure his true and (...)
Adam has given sin the (...) grace, and madness the priority to wisdom; and
our wisdom, health and safety, must now come after, by the way of recovery and
cure. The first born of lapsed man was a malignant persecuting Cain. The first
born of believing Abraham, was a persecutor of him that was born after the
Spirit, 1 John 3.12. Gal. 4.29. And the first born of this Isaac himself, was a
profane Esau, that for one morsel sold his birthright, Heb. 12.16. And
naturally we are all the offspring of this profaneness, and have not
acquaintance enough with God, and with healthful holiness, and with the
everlasting heavenly Glory, to make us cordially prefer it before a forbidden
cup, or morsel, or a game at foolery, or a filthy lust; or before the wind of a
gilded fools acclamation and applause; or the cap and counterfeit subjection of
the multitude: But the -- fortunae, non tua turba (ut Ov.) and quos sportula
fecit amici (ut Juv.) who will serve men's lusts, and be their servants, and
humble attendants to damnation, are regarded more than the God, the Savior,
the Sanctifier, to whom these perfidious rebels were once devoted. That you and
yours may live that more wise and delightful life, which consists in the
daily sight of Heaven, by a Living Faith, which works by Love, in constant
Obedience, is the principal end of this public appellation: That what is here
written for the use of all, may be first and specially useful to you and yours,
whom I am so much bound to love and honor; even to your safe and comfortable
life and death, and to your future joy and glory; which is the great desire of

Your obliged Servant, RICH. BAXTER.
Feb. 4. 1669.
THE PREFACE.
Reader,
1. IF it offend thee, that the Parts of this Treatise are so unlike,
understand 1. That they are for various uses: The first Part to make men
willing, by awakening persuasions; and the rest, to direct them in the
exercises of Faith, who are first made willing. 2. That I write not to win thy
praise of an artificial comely Structure; but to help souls to Holiness and
Heaven; and to these ends I labor to suit the means. 3. That the first Sermon
was published long ago; and the Bookseller desiring me to give him some
additions to it, I thought meet first to make up the exciting part in the same
style, and then to add a Directory for the practice of judicious Believers.

2. And if it offend thee that the second Part contains but such matter as I
have already published, in my Reasons of the Christian Religion, understand 1.
That I perceived that that Treatise was neglected by the more unlearned sort of
Christians, as not descending enough to their capacities; and that it would be
useful to the confirmation of their Faith, to draw forth some of the most
obvious Arguments, in as plain a manner, and as briefly as I could, that length
nor obscurity might not deprive them of the benefit, who are too slothful, or
too dull, to make use of more copious and accurate discourse. 2. And I knew not
how to write a Treatise of the Uses of Faith, which should wholly leave out the
Confirmations of Faith, without much reluctance of my Reason.

3. And again, I say, I can bear the dispraise of Repetition, if I may but
further men's Faith and Salvation.

3. And if it offend thee that I am so dull in all the Directive part, I cannot
well do both works at once, awaken the Affections, and accurately direct the
mind for practice* Or at least if I had spoken all those Directions in a
copious applicatory Sermon style, it would have swelled the Book to a very
tedious costly volume: And Affection must not too much interpose, when the
Judgment is about its proper work. And being done in the beginning, it may be
the better spared afterward.

4. If it offend you that I open the Life of Faith in somewhat an unusual
manner, I answer for my self, that if it be Methodical, true and apt for use, I
do that which I intend: And on a subject so frequently and fully handled, it
were but an injury to the Church, to say but the same which is said already:
Mr. John Ball, Mr. Ezekiel Culverwell, and Mr. Samuel Ward in a narrower room
have done exceeding well upon this subject. If you have nothing more than they
have said, read their Books only, and let this alone.

5. If it offend you that the Directions are many of them difficult, and the
style requires a slow considerate Reader, I answer, the nature of the subject
requires it; and without voluminous tediousness, it cannot be avoided. Blame
therefore your unprepared ignorant minds; and while you are yet dull of
hearing, and so make things hard to be uttered to your understanding, because
you have still need of Milk, and cannot digest strong meat: but must again be
taught the principles of the oracles of God, (Heb. 5.11, 12, 13, 14.) think not
to g^t knowledge without hard study, and patient learning, by hearing nothing
but what you know already, or can understand by one hasty reading over; lest
you discover a conjunction of slothfulness with an ignorant and unhumbled mind:
Or at least, if you must learn at so cheap a rate, or else stick still in your
Milk and your Beginnings, be not offended if others outgo you, and think
knowledge worthy of much greater diligence; and if leaving the principles we go
on toward perfection, as long as we take them along with us, and make them the
life of all that follows, while we seem to leave them: And this we will do,
if God permit, Heb. 6.1, 3.

R. B.
Feb. 3. 1669.
The Contents of the first Part.
The SERMON.
WHat Faith is, page 2. The Text opened, p. 4. The grounds of the certa^nty of
Faith briefly intimated, p. 5, etc. Why God will have us live by Faith, and not
by sight, p. 1^, etc. Use 1. To inform us what a Christian or Believer is;
described, p. 15 Use 2. The Reason why Believers are more serious in matters of
Religion, than unbelievers are. Use 3. Of Examination, p. 29 The misery of
unbelievers, p. 30 Marks of a true Faith, p. 32 Use 4. Exhortation to the
serious exercise of Faith, p. 37 Some assisting suppositions, p. 38 How those
will live who thus believe; opened in certain Questions, p 4^ Motives to live
by a foreseeing Faith on things not seen, p. 45 The Conclusion; 1. Exhorting to
live by Faith: 2. And to promote this life in others, p. 46.
The Additions.
Cap. 1. The conviction and reproof of Hypocrites, Who live contrary to the
Faith which they profess, 48 Cap. 2. A general Exhortation to live as
Believers, 56 Cap. 3. An exhortation to the particular duties of Believers. 63
The Contents of the Second Part.
Chap. 1. The Believers Directory must show him, I. How to strengthen Faith: 2.
How to use it, And I. For the first, the order of the presupposed Natural
Verities, is briefly mentioned, 8^ Chap. 2. The true Method of enquiry into the
supernatural evidences of Faith, and the Rules therein to be observed, 87 Chap.
3. The proper Evidence of Faith. The SPIRIT and the Image of God himself, 97
Chap. 4. The Image of Gods Wisdom on the Christian Religion: It Is wonderful
Method opened, in thirty instances. Six more instances, 99 Chap. 5. The Image
of Gods Goodness and Holiness on the Christian Religion: in thirty instances,
108 Chap. 6. The Image of Gods Power upon the Christian Religion; in twenty
instances, 115 Chap. 7. The means of making known all this to us infallibly.
How the first witnesses knew it. How the next Age and Churches knew it. How we
know it. Twenty special historical Traditions of Christianity, and matters of
fact. What the Spirits Witness to Christianity is, 125 Chap. 8. Twelve further
Directions to confirm our Faith, 136 Chap. 9. Twenty General Directions how to
use Faith, or to live by it, when it i^ confirmed. What Christian Faith is:
Errors about it, 148
The Contents of the third Part.
Chap. 1. How to live by Faith on God, 168 Chap. 2. How to live by Faith on
Jesus Christ, 188 Abuses of the Doctrine of Redemption. The extent of it. Of
Christ's Office: His Merits and Sacrifice: Example, etc. Chap. 3. How to live by
Faith on the Holy Ghost. Of the Trinity. Several doubts resolved about
believing in the Holy Ghost. Of giving the Spirit: His operations: Whether Love
to God, or Faith in Christ go first; exactly answered. (And consequently
whether Faith or Repentance be first.) Of the Spirit in Christ and the
Apostles: Of sufficient Grace. How Faith procures the Spirit. Whether desires
of grace be grace, 20^ Chap. 4. How to live by faith as to Gods Command^. The
admirable goodness of Gods Laws. Whether the Promise and ^^eward be the end of
Obedience, or Obedience the end of the (...) Reward. Of Scripture examples, 232
Chap. 5. How to live by faith on Gods Promises. What will of God it is,
according to which they must ask who will receive. Of a particular faith in
prayer. Is the same degree of grace conditionally promised to all? Directions
for understanding the Promises. The true nature of faith or trust in Gods
Promises, opened at large. Affiance is in the understanding, will and vital
power. Whether Faith be Obedience, or how related to it. Ten acts of the
understanding essential to the Christian Faith in the Promises. Several acts of
the will essential to Faith. And in the vital power, whether all true Faith
have a subjective certainty of the truth of the Word. Choice, and venturing or
forsaking all, is the sign of real trust. Promises collected for the help of
Faith. 1. Of Pardon, 2. Of Salvation, 3. Of Reconciliation and Adoption, 4. Of
pardon of new sins after conversion. 5. Of Sanctification: 6. Promises to them
that desire and seek. 7. To Prayer. 8. To groans that want expression. 9.
Promises of all that we want, and that is good for us. 10. To the use of Gods
Word and Sacraments. 11. To the humble, meek and lowly. 12. To the peaceable.
13. To the diligent. 14. To the patient. 15. To Obedience. 16. To the Love of
God. 17. To them that love the godly, and are merciful in good works. 18. To
the poor, 19. To the oppressed. 20. To the persecuted. 21. In dangers. 22.
Against temptations. 23. To them that overcome and persevere. 24. In sickness,
and at death. 25. Of Resurrection, final Justification and Glory. 26. For
children of the godly. 27. To the Church, 241 Chap. 6. How to exercise faith on
God^ Threatenings and Judgments. How far belief of the threatenings in good,
necessary, and a saving faith. How saving faith is a personal application. How
to perceive true faith, 297 Chap. 7. How to live by faith for Pardon and
Justification. In how many respects and ways Christ justifies us. Of the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness. Twelve reasons to help our belief of
pardon. How far sin should make us doubt of our Justification, 308 Chap. 8. 58
Dangerous Errors detected, which hinder the (...) faith about (...) and the
contrary truth^ ^sserted^* 321 Chap. 9. How to live by faith in the exercise of
other graces and duties: And 1. Of the doctrinal Directions. What
Sanctification is. How God loves the unsanctified* How (...) loves (...) in
Christ. Of Preaching mere Morality, ^61 Chap. 10. The practical Directions, to
promote Love to God and Holiness, 367 Chap. 11. Of the order and harmony of
graces and duties, which must be taken all together. Of the parts that make up
the new Creature. 1. The intellectual order; or a method, or scheme of the
heads of Divinity. 2. The order of Intention and Affection. 3. The order of
practice. Of the various degrees of means to man's ultimate end. Of the grace
necessary to concur with these various means. The circular motion by divine
communication to our Receiving Graces, and so by our Returning Graces, unto God
again. The frame of the present means of grace, and of our returning duties.
Rules about the order of Christian practice (which show that, and how the best
is to be preferred, and which is best) in fifty three Propositions. How man's
Laws bind conscience (and many other cases) resolved. A lamentation for the
great want of order, and method, and harmony in the understandings, wills and
lives of Christians. Many instances of men's partiality as to truths, graces,
duties, sins, etc. Twenty Reasons why few Christians are complete and entire,
but ^ame and partial in their Religion. Ten Consectaries. Whether all graces be
equal in habit. Religion not so perfect in us as in the Scriptures; which
therefore are the Rule to us, etc. 373 Chap. 12. How to use faith against
particular sins, 417 Chap. 13. What sins the best are most in danger of, and
should most carefully avoid. And wherein the infirmities of the upright differ
from mortal sins. 421 Chap. 14. How to live by faith in prosperity. The way by
which faith does save us from the world. General Directions against the danger
of prosperity. Twenty marks of worldliness. The pretenses of worldly minds. The
greatness of the sin. The ill effects, 428 Chap. 15. How to be poor in spirit.
And 1. How to escape the Pride of prosperous men. The cleaks of Pride. The
signs of Pride and (...), 446 Chap. 16. How to escape the (...), by faith. The
mischief of serving the appetite. (...) 465 Chap. 17. How faith must conquer
sloth and idleness. Who are guilty of this sin Cases resolved. The evil of
idleness. The remedies, 474 Chap. 18. Unmercifulness to the poor, to be
conquered by faith. The remedies, 491 Chap. 19. How to live by faith in
adversity, 493 Chap. 20. How to live by faith in trouble of conscience, and
doubts of our salvation. The difference between true and false repentance. How
to apply the universal grace to our comfort. The danger of casting our part on
Christ; and of ascribing all melancholy disturbances and thoughts to the
spirit. Of the trying the spirit: and of the witness of the Spirit, 503 Chap.
21. How to live by faith in the public Woshipping of God, Overvalue not your
own manner of Worship, and overvilifie not other men's. Of communion with
others, 519 Chap. 22. How to pray in faith, 527 Chap. 23. How to live by faith
toward children and other Relations, 530 Chap. 24. How by faith to order our
affections to public Societies, and to the unconverted world, 535 Chap. 25.
How to live by faith in the love of one another, and to mortify self-love. It
is our own interest and gain, to love our neighbors as our selves. Objections
wherein it consists. What is the sincerity of it. Consectaries. Loving others
as your selves is a duty even as to the degree, 539 Chap. 26. How by faith to
be followers of the Saints, and to look with profit to their examples and their
end, and to hold communion with the heavenly Society. Reasons of the duty. The
nature of it. Negatively, what it is not; and Affirmatively, what it is.
Wherein they must be imitated, 556 Chap. 27. How to receive the sentence of
death, and how to die by Faith, 589 Chap. 28. How by faith to look aright to
the coming of Jesus Christ in Glory, 594
Reader, The first and great Error of the Printer, i^, that he has not
distinguished the three distinct Parts of the Treatise. Therefore you must
write Page 1. PART 1. and Page 81. PART 2. Chap. 1. and Page 168. PART 3. Chap.
1.
IN the Preface, Page 3. l. 16. put If you would have. p. 8. l. 8. put out have
p. 31. l. 31. put out out p. 40. l. 22. for that r. the p. 51. l. 37. for your
r. their p. 54. l. 13. for believe r. desire p. 66. l. 31. for against r. at p.
67. l. 32. for tam r. q^am p. 68. l. 8. for murmurr r. mo^rn l. 27. after
better put country p. 69. l. 17. r. nemo p. 70 l. 16. r. ventosam p. 75. l.
24. r. made them p. 77. l. 12. r. literate p. 87. l. 3. for offered read
observed p. 93. l 25. for cannot r. can p. 96. l. 12. for Nations r. ^otions l.
21. r. conduces p. 99. l. 9. r. which ^t p. 101. l. 38. for Goodness r. Good
will p. 130. l. 13. r. inconsiderateness p. 134. l. 10. r. Victor ^t^censis p.
155. l. 37. for never r. nearer p. 163. l. 6. put out are p. 166. l. 2. for
works r. marketh l. 24. r. aim at l. 29. r. takes p. 196. r. 7. for
meditate r. med^at^ p. 206. l. 1. r. causally l. 4. for his r. this p 217.
(false Printed for 209) l. 38. blot out or p. 224. l. 6. for was r. were p.
232. l. 19. ^. Antoninus p. 241. l. 31. r. commutative p. 244. l. 38. put out
of p. 249. l. 5. for rather r. alwa^es p. 250. l. 9. blot out O and r. of
objective gra^e l. 30. for promises r. promises ^ot p. 253. l. 12. for
confirms r. confineth l. 20. for less of ^. loss of p. 254. l. 29. r.
non-amission p. ^32. l. 33. r. which most p. 346. l. 14. ^. faults p. 359. l.
18. for him r. himself p. 366. l. 29. for that r. the p. ^71. l. 12. for there
r. then p. 382. l. 28. for as r. or p. 384. l. 3. put a comma after efficient
and Dirigent p. 405. l. 36. r. Christians p. 406. l. 37. for end r. and p. 411.
l. 16. r. th^nes p. 413. l. 20. for it r. is p. 414. l. 2. put out or and l.
34. for in it r. in us (else it is blasphemy against the Scripture) p. 430. l.
23. put out may p. 435. l. 25. r. Cyn^cal p. 441. l. 5. put out not p. 485. l.
^5. for themselves r. himself p. 505. l. 27. r. Assent p. 540. l. 21. put out
and p. 582. l. 11. r. friends.

THE Life of Faith.
HEBREWS 11.1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen.


THough the wicked are distinguished into Hypocrites and Unbelievers, yet
Hypocrites themselves are Unbelievers too. They have no faith which they can
justify, by its prevailing efficacy and works: and therefore have no faith by
which they can be justified. Because their discovery is needful to their
recovery, and all our salvation depends on the sincerity of our faith. I have
chosen this text, which is a description of faith, that the opening of it may
help us for the opening of our hearts, and resolving the great question, on
which our endless life depends.

To be a Christian, and to be a Believer in Christ, are words in Scripture of
the same signification. If you have not faith, you are not Christians. This
faith has various offices and objects. By it we are justified, sanctified and
saved. We are justified, not by believing that we are justified, but by
believing that we may be justified. Not by receiving justification immediately,
but by receiving Christ for our justification: not by mere accepting the pardon
in it self, but by first receiving him that procures and bestows it, on his
terms: Not by mere accepting health, but by receiving the Physician and his
remedies, for health.

Faith is the practical Believing in God as promising, and Christ as procuring
justification and salvation. Or, the practical belief and acceptance of life,
as procured by Christ, and promised by God in the Gospel.

The everlasting fruition of God in Heaven, is the ultimate object. No man
believes in Christ as Christ, that believes not in him for eternal life. As
faith looks at Christ as the necessary means, and at the divine benignity as
the fountain, and at his veracity as the foundation or formal object, and at
the promise, as the true signification of his will; so does it ultimately look
at our salvation, (begun on earth, and perfected in Heaven) as the end, for
which it looks at the rest.

No wonder therefore if the holy Ghost here speaking of the Dignity and Power
of faith, do principally insist on that part of its description, which is taken
from this final object.

As Christ himself in his Humiliation was rejected by the Gentiles, and a
stumbling stone to the Jews, despised and not esteemed, Isa. 53.2, 3. having
made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2 7. So faith in Christ as incarnate and
crucified, is despised and counted foolishness by the world. But as Christ in
his glory, and the glory of believers, shall force them to an aweful
admiration; so faith it self as exercised on that glory, is more glorious in
the eyes of all. Believers are never so reverenced by the world, as when they
converse in Heaven, and the Spirit of Glory rests on them, 1 Pet. 4.14.

How faith by beholding this glorious end, does move all the faculties of the
soul, and subdue the inclinations and interests of the flesh, and make the
greatest sufferings tolerable, is the work of the holy Ghost in this Chapter
to demonstrate, which beginning with the description, proceeds to the proof by
a cloud of witnesses. There are two sorts of persons (and employments) in the
world, for whom there are two contrary ends hereafter. One sort subject their
reason to their sensual or carnal interest. The other subject their senses to
their reason, cleared, conducted and elevated by faith. Things present or
possessed, are the riches of the sensual, and the byas of their hearts and
lives: Things absent but hoped for, are the riches of Believers, which actuate
their chief endeavors.

This is the sense of the text which I have read to you; which setting things
hoped for, in opposition to things present, and things unseen, to those that
sense does apprehend, assures us that faith (which fixes on the first) does
give to its object a subsistence, presence and evidence, that is, it sees that
which supplieth the want of presence and visibility. The (...), is that which
quoad effectum is equal to a present subsistence. And the (...), the evidence
is somewhat which quoad effectum is equal to visibility. As if he had said, [
Though the glory promised to Believers, and expected by them, be yet to come,
and only hoped for, and be yet unseen and only believed, yet is the sound
believer as truly affected with it, and acted by its attractive force, as if it
were present and before his eyes] as a man is by an inheritance, or estate in
reversion, or out of sight, if well secured, and not only by that which is
present to his view. The Syriack Interpreter instead of a Translation, gives us
a true exposition of the words, viz. [Faith is a certainty of those things that
are in hope, as if they did already actually exist, and the revelation of those
things that are not seen.

Or you may take the sense in this Proposition, which I am next to open
further, and apply, viz. [That the nature and use of faith is to be as it were
instead of presence, possession and sight: or to make the things that will be,
as if they were already in existence; and the things unseen which God
reveals, as if our bodily eyes beheld them.

1. Not that faith does really change its object. 2. Nor does it give the same
degree of apprehensions and affections, as the sight of present things would
do. But 1. Things invisible are the objects of our faith.

2. And Faith is effectual instead of sight to all these uses: 1. The
apprehension is as infallible, because of the objective certainty, (though not
so satisfactory to our imperfect souls) as if the things themselves were seen.
2. The will is determined by it in its necessary consent and choice. 3. The
affections are moved in the necessary d^gree. 4. It rules in our lives, and
brings us through duty, and suffering, for the sake of the happiness which we
believe.

3. This Faith is a grounded wise and justifiable act: an infallible knowl^dge;
and often called so in Scripture, John 6.69. 1 Cor. 15.58. Romans 8.28, etc. And
the constitutive and efficient causes will justify the Name.

We know and are infallibly sure, of the truth of God, which we believe: As
it is said, John 6.69. [ We believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the
Son of the living God.] 2 Cor. 5.1. [ We know that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the H^avens.] Romans 8.28. We know that all things work
together for good to them that love God.] 1 Cor. 15.58. You know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord] Joh. 9.29. [ We kn^w God spoke to Moses,
etc.] 31. [ We know God hears not sinners.] John 3.2. We know thou art a
Teacher come from God.] So 1 John 3.5, 15. and 1 Pet. 3.17. and many other
Scriptures tell you, that Believing God, is a certain infallible sort of
knowledge.

I shall in justification of the work of Faith, acquaint you briefly with 1.
That in the Nature of it: 2. And that in the causing of it, which advances it,
to be an infallible knowledge.

1. The Believer knows (as sure as he knows there is a God) that God is true,
and his Word is true, it being impossible for God to lie, H^b. 6.18. God that
cannot lie has promised, Titus 1.2.

2. He knows that the holy Scripture is the Word of God; by his Image which it
bears, and the many evidences of Divinity which it contains, and the many
Miracles (certainly proved) which Christ, and his Spirit in his servants,
wrought to confirm the truth. 3. And therefore he knows assuredly the
conclusion, that all this Word of God is true.

And for the surer effecting of this knowledge, God does not only set before us
the ascertaining Evidence of his own veracity, and the Scriptures Divinity; but
moreover, 1. He gives us to believe, Phil. 1.29. 2 Pet. 1.3. For it is not of
our selves, but is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Faith is one of the fruits of
the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. By the drawing of the Father, we come to the Son. And he
that has knowledge given from Heaven, will certainly know: and he that has
Faith given him from Heaven, will certainly believe. The heavenly Light will
dissipate our darkness, and infallibly illuminate. Whilst God sets before us
the glass of the Gospel in which the things invisible are revealed, and also
gives us eye sight to behold them, Believers must needs be a heavenly people,
as walking in that light which proceeds from, and leads to the celestial
everlasting Light.

2. And that Faith may be so powerful as to serve instead of sight and
presence, Believers have the Spirit of Christ within them, to excite and
actuate it, and help them against all temptations to unbelief, and to work in
them all other graces that concur to promote the works of Faith; and to
mortify those sins that hinder our believing, and are contrary to a heavenly
life: So that as the exercise of our sight, and taste, and hearing, and
feeling, is caused by our natural life; so the exercise of Faith and Hope, and
Love, upon things unseen, is caused by the holy Spirit, which is the principle
of our new life, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have received the Spirit, that we might know
the things that are given us of God.] This Spirit of God acquainteth us with
God, with his veracity and his Word, Heb. 10.30. We know him that has said, I
will never fail thee, nor forsake thee.] This Spirit of Christ acquainteth us
with Christ, and with his grace and will. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. This heavenly
Spirit acquainteth us with Heaven, so that [ We know that when Christ
appears, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. And
we know that he was manifested to take away sin,] 1 John 3.5. And will perfect
his work, and present us spotless to his Father, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. This heavenly
Spirit possesses the Saints with such heavenly dispositions and desires, as
much facilitate the work of Faith. It brings us to a heavenly conversation;
and makes us live as fellow-citizens of the Saints, and in the household of
God, Phil. 3.20. Ephesians. 2.19. It is within us a Spirit of supplication, breathing
heavenward, with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed; and as God
knows the meaning of the Spirit, so the Spirit knows the mind of God, Romans
8.37. 1 Cor. 2.11.

3. And the work of Faith is much promoted by the spiritual experiences of
Believers. When they find a considerable part of the holy Scriptures verified
on themselves, it much confirms their Faith as to the whole. They are really
possessed of that heavenly disposition, called, The Divine Nature, and have
felt the power of the Word upon their hearts, renewing them to the Image of
God, mortifying their most dear and strong corruptions, showing them a greater
beauty and desirableness in the Objects of Faith, than is to be found in
sensible things: They have found many of the Promises made good upon
themselves, in the answers of prayers, and in great deliverances, which
strongly persuades them to believe the rest that are yet to be accomplished.
And experience is a very powerful and satisfying way of conviction. He that
feels, as it were, the first fruits, the earnest, and the beginnings of
Heaven already in his soul, will more easily and assuredly believe that there
is a Heaven hereafter. [ We know that the Son of God i^ come, and has given us
an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: This is the true God and eternal life,] 1 John 5.20. [ He that believes on the Son has the witness in himself, Verse.
10.] There is so great a likeness of the holy and heavenly nature in the
Saints, to the heavenly life that God has promised, that makes it the more
easily believed.

4. And it exceedingly helps our Belief of the life that is yet unseen, to
find that Nature affords us undeniable Arguments to prove a future Happiness
and Misery, Reward and Punishment, in the general; yea and in special, that the
Love and Fruition of God is this Reward; and that the effects of his
displeasure are this Punishment: Nothing more clear and certain than that there
is a God, (He must be a fool indeed that dare deny it, Psalm. 14.1.) as also
that this God is the Creator of the rational nature, and has the absolute
right of Sovereign Government: and therefore that the rational Creature owes
him the most full and absolute obedience, and deserves punishment if he
disobey. And it is most clear that infinite goodness should be loved above all
finite imperfect created good: And it is clear that the rational nature is so
formed, that without the hopes and fears of another life, the world neither is,
nor ever was, nor (by ordinary visible means) can be well governed; (supposing
God to work on man according to his nature.) And it is most certain that it
consists not with infinite wisdom, power and goodness, to be put to rule the
world in all ages, by fraud and falsehood. And it is certain that Heathens do
for the most part through the world, by the light of nature, acknowledge a life
of joy, or misery to come: And the most hardened Atheists, or Infidels must
confess, that [ for ought they know there may be such a life:] it being
impossible they should know or prove the contrary. And it is most certain that
the mere probability or possibility of a Heaven and Hell, (being matters of
such unspeakable concernment) should in reason command our utmost diligence to
the hazard or loss of the transitory vanities below: and consequently that a
holy diligent preparation for another life, is naturally the duty of the
reasonable creature. And it is a sure that God has not made our nature in vain;
nor set us on a life of vain employments, nor made it our business in the world
to seek after that which can never be attained.

These things, and much more, do show that nature affords us so full a
testimony of the life to come that is yet invisible, that it exceedingly helps
us in believing the supernatural revelation of it, which is more full.

5. And though we have not seen the objects of our faith, yet those that have
given us their infallible testimony by infallible means, have seen what they
testified. Though [ no man has seen God at any time, yet the only begotten Son
which is in the bosom of the Father, has declared him, Joh 1.18. [ Verily,
verily, (says our Lord) we speak that we know, and testify that we have seen]
Joh. 3.11. Verse. 31, 32. [ He that comes from Heaven is above all, and what he
has seen and heard that he testifies.] Christ that has told us saw the
things that we have not seen: and you will believe honest men that speak to you
of what they were eyewitnesses of. And the Disciples saw the person, the
transfiguration, and the miracles of Christ. Insomuch that John thus begins
his Epistle, 1 Cor. 1.1, 2, 3. [ That which was from the beginning which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
our hands have handled of the Word of life, (for the life was manifested, and
we have seen it, and bear witness, and show it to you, that eternal life which
was with the Father, and was manifested unto us:) That which we have seen and
heard declare we unto you.] So Paul, 1 Cor. 9.1. Am I not an Apostle? have have
I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 15.5.6, 7. [ He was seen of Cephas,
then of the twelve: after that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at
once, of whom the greater part remain unto this present] Heb. 2.3, 4. This
[great salvation at first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to
us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and
wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his
own will.] 2 Pet. 1.16, 17. [ For we have not followed cunningly devised
fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his Majesty: For he received from God the
Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to him, from the
excellent glory: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: And this
voice which came from Heaven, we heard when we were with him in the holy
Mount.] And therefore when the Apostles were commanded by their persecutors,
not to speak at all, or teach in the name of Jesus, they answered, [ We cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and heard.] Acts 4.18, 20. So that much
of the obj^cts of our faith to us invisible, have yet been s^en by those that
have instrumentally revealed them; and the glory of Heaven it self is seen by
many millions of souls, that are now possessing it. And the tradition of the
Testimony of the Apostles unto us, is more full and satisfactory, than the
tradition of any Laws of the Land, or History of the most unquestionable
affairs that have been done among the people of the earth: (as I have
manifested elsewhere.) So that faith has the infallible Testimony of God, and
of them that have seen, and therefore is to us instead of sight.

6. Lastly, Even the enemy of faith himself does against his will confirm our
faith by the violence and rage of malice, that he stirs up in the ungodly
against the life of faith and holiness; and by the importunity of his
oppositions and temptations, discovering that it is not for nothing that he is
so maliciously solicitous, industrious, and violent.

And thus you see how much faith has, that should fully satisfy a rational
man, instead of presence, possession and ^ight

If any shall here say, [ But why would not God let us have a sight of Heaven
or Hell, when he could not but know that it would more generally and certainly
have prevailed for the conversion and salvation of the world: Does he envy us
the most ^ff^ctua^ means?]

I answer; 1. Who art thou O man that disputest against God? shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? M^st God come
down to the bar of man, to render an account of the reason of his works? Why do
ye not also ask him a reason of the nature, situation, magnitude, order,
influences, etc. of all the Stars, and Superior Orbs, and call him to an
account for all his works? when yet there are so many things in your own
bodies, of which you little understand the reason. Is it not intolerable
impudency, for such worms as we, so low, so dark, to question the eternal God,
concerning the reason of his Laws and dispensations? Do we not shamefully
forget our ignorance, and our distance?

2. But if you must have a reason, let this suffice you: It is fit that the
Government of God be suited to the nature of the reasonable subject. And Reason
is made to apprehend more than we see, and by reaching beyond sense, to carry
us to seek things higher and better than sense can reach. If you would have a
man understand no more than he sees, you would almost equalize a wise man and a
fool, and make a man too like a beast. Even in worldly matters, you will
venture upon the greatest cost and pains for the things that you see not, nor
ever saw. He that has a journey to go to a place that he never saw, will not
think that a sufficient reason to stay at home. The Merchant will sail 1000
miles to a Land, and for a Commodity, that he never saw. Must the Husbandman
see the Harvest before he plow his Land, and sow his seed? Must the sick man
feel, that he has health before he use the means to get it? Must the Soldier
see that he has the victory before he fight? You would take such conceits in
worldly matters to be the symptoms of distraction: And will you cherish them
where they are most pernicious? Has God made man for any end, or for none? If
none, he is made in vain: If for any, no reason can expect that he should see
his end, before he use the means, and see his home before he begin to travel
toward it. When children first go to School, they do not see or enjoy the
learning and wisdom which by time and labor they must attain. You will provide
for the children which you are like to have before you see them. To look that
sight which is our fruition it self, should go before a holy life, is to expect
the end before we will use the necessary means. You see here in the government
of the world, that it is things unseen that are the instruments of rule, and
motives of obedience. Shall no man be restrained from felony or murders, but he
that sees the Assizes or the Gallows? It is enough that he foreseeth them, as
being made known by the Laws.

It would be no discrimination of the good and bad, the wise and foolish, if
the reward and punishment must be seen? what thief so mad as to steal at the
Gallows, or before the Judge? The basest habits would be restrained from
acting, if the reward and punishment were in fight. The most beastly drunkard
would not be drunk; the filthy fornicator would forbear his lust; the malicious
enemy of godliness would forbear their calumnies and persecutions, if Heaven
and Hell were open to their sight. No man will play the adulterer in the face
of the Assembly: The chaste and unchaste seem there alike: And so they would do
if they saw the face of the most dreadful God. No thanks to any of you all to
be godly if Heaven were to be presently seen? or to forbear your sin, if you
saw Hell fire, God will have a meeter way of trial: You shall believe his
promises, if ever you will have the benefit, and believe his threatenings, if
ever you will escape the threatened evil.

CHAP. 2. Some Uses.
Use 1. THis being the nature and use of Faith, to apprehend things absent as
if they were present, and things unseen, as if they were visible before our
eyes; you may hence understand the nature of Christianity, and what it is to be
a true Believer. Verily, it is another matter than the dreaming, self-deceiving
world imagines. Hypocrites think that they are Christians indeed, because they
have entertained a superficial opinion, that there is a Christ, an immortality
of souls, a Resurrection, a Heaven and a Hell; though their lives bear witness,
that this is not a living, and effectual faith; but it is their sensitive
faculties and interest that are predominant, and are the byas of their hearts.
Alas, a little observation may tell them, that notwithstanding their most
confident pretentions to Christianity, they are utterly unacquainted with the
Christian life. Would they live as they do, in worldly cares, and pampering of
the flesh, and neglect of God and the life to come, if they saw the things
which they say they do believe? Could they be sensual, ungodly and secure, if
they had a faith that served instead of sight?

Would you know who it is that is the Christian indeed? 1. He is one that
lives (in some measure) as if he saw the Lord: Believing in that God that
dwells in the inaccessible light, that cannot be seen by mortal eyes, he
lives as before his face. He speaks, he prays, he thinks, he deals with men,
as if he saw the Lord stand by. No wonder therefore if he do it with reverence
and holy fear. No wonder if he make lighter of the smiles or frowns of mortal
man, than others do that see none higher; and if he observe not the luster of
worldly dignity, or fl^shly beauty, wisdom or vainglory, before the
transcendent incomprehensible light, to which the Sun it self is darkness. When
he awaketh he is still with God, Psalm. 134.8. He sets the Lord always before
him, because he is at his right hand, he is not moved, Psalm. 16.8. And
therefore the life of Believers is often called, a walking with God, and a
walking before God, as Genesis 5.22, 24. and 6.9. and 17.1. in the case of Henoch,
Noah, and Abraham. All the day does he wait on God, Psalm. 25*5. Imagine your
selves what manner of person he must be that sees the Lord; and conclude that
such (in his measure) is the true believer. For by faith he sees him that is
invisible (to the eye of sense) and therefore can forsake the glory and
pleasures of the world, and fears not the wrath of Princes, as it is said of
Moses, Heb. 11.27.

2. The Believer is one that lives on a Christ whom he never saw, and trusts
in him, adhereth to him, acknowledges his benefits, loves him, and r^joyceth
in him, as if he had seen him with his eyes. This is the faith which Peter
calls more precious than perishing gold; that makes us love him whom we have
not seen, and in whom th^ugh now we see him not, yet believing we rejoice, with
unspeakable and glorious joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. Christ dwells in h^s heart by
faith; not only by his Spirit; but objectively; as our dearest absent friend,
does dwell in our estimation and affection, Ephesians. 3.17. O that the miserable
Infidels of the world, had the eyes, the hearts, the experiences of the true
believer! Then they that with Thomas tell those that have seen him, [ Except I
may see and feel, I will not believe] will be forced to cry out, [ My Lord and
my God,] Joh. 20.25, etc.

3. A Believer is one that judges of the man by his invisible inside, and not
by outward appearances with a fleshly worldly judgment. He sees by faith a
greater ugliness in sin, than in any the most deformed monster. When the
unbeliever says, what harm is it to please my flesh, in ease, or pride, or
meat and drink, or lustful wantonness? the believer takes it as the question of
a fool, that should ask [what harm is it to take a dram of Mercury or
Arsenick?] He sees the vicious evil, and foreseeth the consequent penal evil,
by the eye of faith. And therefore it is that he pittieth the ungodly, when
they pity not themselves, and speaks to them often with a tender heart in
compassion of their misery, and perhaps weeps over them (as Paul, Phil. 3.18,
19.) when he cannot prevail; when they weep not for themselves, but hate his
love, and scorn his pity, and bid him keep his lamentations for himself;
because they see not what he sees.

He seet^ also the inward beauty of the Saints, (as it shines forth in the
holiness of their lives) and through all their sordid poverty and contempt,
beholds the image of God upon them. For he judges not of sin or holiness as
they now appear to the d^stracted world; but as they will be judged of at the
day which he foreseeth; when sin will be the shame, and holiness the honored
and d^sired state.

He can see Christ in his poor despised members, and love God in those that are
made as the scorn and off-scou^ing of all things, by the malignant unbelieving
world. He admireth the excellency and happiness of those, that are made the
laughing stock of the ungodly: and accounts the Saints the most excellent on
earth, Psalm. 16.2. and had rather be one of their communion in rags, than sit
with Princes that are naked within, and void of the true and durable glory. He
judges of men as he perceives them to have more or less of Christ. The worth
of a man is not obvious to the sense. You see his stature, complexion and his
cloths; but as you see not his learning or skill in any Art whatsoever, so you
see not his grace and heavenly mind. As the soul it self, so the sinful
deformity, and the holy beauty of it, are to us invisible, and perceived only
by their fruits, and by the eye of faith, which sees things as God reveals
them. And therefore in the eyes of a true Believer, a vile person is contemned;
but he honors those that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4.

4. A true Believer does seek a happiness which he never saw, and that with
greater estimation and resolution, than he seeks the most excellent things that
he has seen. In all his prayers, his labors, and his sufferings, it is an
unseen Glory that he seeks: he sees not the Glory of God, nor the glorified
Redeemer, nor the world of Angels, and perfected spirits of the just: but he
knows by faith, that such a God, such a Glory, such a world as this there is,
as certain as if his eyes had seen it. And therefore he provides, he lives, he
hopes, he waits, for this unseen state of spiritual bliss, contemning all the
wealth and glory, that sight can reach in comparison thereof. He believes what
he shall see; and therefore strives that he may see it. It Is something above
the Sun, and all that mortal eyes can see, which is the end, the hope, the
portion of a believer, without which all is nothing to him; and for which he
trades and travels here, as worldlings do for worldly things, Matthew. 6.20, 21.
Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.20.

5. A true Believer does all his life prepare for a day that is yet to come,
and for an account of all the passages of his life, though he has nothing but
the Word of God, to assure him of it. And therefore he lives as one that is
hasting to the presence of his Judge; and he contriveth his affairs, and
disposes of his worldly riches, as one that looks to hear of it again, and as
one that remembers the Judge is at the door, James 5.9. He rather asks,
[what life, what words, what actions, what way of using my estate and interest,
will be sweetest to me in the review, and will be best at last when I must
accordingly receive my doom?] than [what is most pleasant to my flesh? and what
will ingratiate me most with men? and what will accommodate me best at present?
and set me highest in the world?] And therefore it is, that he pittieth the
ungodly even in the height of their prosperity; and is so earnest (though it
offend them) to procure their recovery, as knowing that how secure soever they
are now, they must give an account to him that is ready to judge the quick and
the dead, 1 Pet. 4.5. and that then the case will be altered with the
presumptuous world.

6. Lastly, A true believer is careful to prevent a threatened misery which he
never felt; and is awakened by holy fear to fly from the wrath to come, and is
industrious to escape that place of torment which he never saw, as if he had
seen it with his eyes. When he hears but the sound of the trumpet, he takes
warning that he may save his soul, Ezekiel. 33.4. The evils that are here felt and
seen, are not so dreadful to him, as those that he never saw or felt. He is not
so careful and resolute, to avoid the ruin of his estate or name, or to avoid
the plague, or sword, or famine, or the scorching flames, or death, or
torments, as he is to avoid the endless torments, which are threatened by the
righteous God. It is a greater misery in his esteem, to be really undone for
ever, than seemingly only for a time, and to be cast off by God, than by all
the world; and to lie in Hell, than to suffer any temporal calamity. And
therefore he fears it more, and does more to avoid it; and is more cast down by
the fears of Gods displeasure, than by the feelings of these present
sufferings. As Noah did for his preservation from the threatened deluge, so does
the true Believer for his preservation from everlasting wrath, Heb. 11.7. [ By
faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an Ark, to the saving of his house, by the which he condemned the
world, and became heir of the righteousness, which is by faith.] God first
gives warning of the flood: Noah believes it: not with a lifeless, but a
working faith: that first moved in him a self-preserving fear: This fear moves
Noah to obey the Lord in the use of means, and to prepare the Ark; and all this
was, to save himself and his house from a flood, that was as yet unseen, and of
which in nature there was no appearance. Thus does God warn the sinful world,
of the day of judgment, and the fire that is unquenchable; and true believers
take his warning; and believing that which they cannot see, by fear they are
moved to fly to Christ, and use his means to escape the threatened calamity. By
this they become the heirs of that Righteousness which is by faith, and condemn
the unbelieving careless world, that take not the warning, and use not the
remedy.

By this time you may see that the Life of Faith is quite another thing, than
the lifeless opinion of multitudes that call themselves believers. To say [ I
believe there is a God, a Christ, a Heaven, a Hell,] is as easy as it is
common. But the faith of the ungodly is but an uneffectual dream. To dream that
you are fighting, wins no victories: To dream that you are eating, gets no
strength. To dream that you are running, rid^ no ground: To dream that you are
plowing, or sowing, or reaping, procures but a fruitless harvest. And to dream
that you are Princes, may consist with beggary. If you do any more than dream
of Heaven and Hell, how is it that you stir not, and make it not appear by the
diligence of your lives, and the fervor of your duties, and the seriousness of
your endeavors, that such wonderful unexpressible overpowering things, are
indeed the matters of your belief? As you love your souls, take heed lest you
take an image of faith to be the thing it self. Faith sets on work the powers
of the soul, for the obtaining of that joy, and the escaping of that misery
which you believe. But the image of faith in self-deceivers, neither warms nor
works: it conquereth no difficulties; it stirs not up to faithful duty. It Is
blind, and therefore sees not God; and how then should he be feared and loved?
I^ sees not Hell, and therefore the senseless soul goes on as fearlesly and
merrily to the unquenchable fire, as if he were in the safest way. This image
of faith annihilateth the most potent objects, as to any due impression on the
soul. God is as no God, and Heaven as no H^aven, to these imaginary Christians.
If a Prince be in the room, an image reverenceth him not: If music and
feasting be there, an image finds no pleasure in them. If fire and sword be
there, an image fears them not. You may perceive by the senseless neglectful
carriage of ungodly men, that they see not by faith the God that they should
love and fear; the Heaven that they should seek and wait for; or the Hell that
they should with all possible care avoid. He is indeed the true Believer that
(allowing the difference of degrees) does pray as if he saw the Lord; and speak
and live as always in his presence; and redeem his time as if he were to die
to morrow, or as one that sees death approach, and ready to lay hands upon
him; that begs and cries to God in prayer, as one that foreseeth the day of
judgment; and the endless joy or misery that follows: that bestirreth him
for everlasting life, as one that sees Heaven and Hell, by the eye of faith.
Faith is a serious apprehension, and causes a serious conversation: for it is
instead of sight and presence.

From all this you may easily and certainly infer, 1. That true faith is a
Jewel, rare and precious: and not so common as nominal careless Christians
think. What say they, Are we not all believers? will you make Infidels of all
that are not Saints? are none Christians, but those that live so strictly?
Answer, I know they are not Infidels by profession: but what they are indeed,
and what God will take them for, you may soon perceive, by comparing the
description of faith, with the inscription legible on their lives. It Is common
to say, I do believe: but is it common to find men, pray and live as those that
do believe indeed? It is both in works of charity and of piety, that a living
faith will show it self. I will not therefore contend about the name: If you
are ungodly, unjust, or uncharitable, and yet will call your selves Believers,
you may keep the name, and see whether it will save you. Have you forgotten how
this case is determined by the holy Ghost himself, James 2.14, etc. What does
it profit my Brethren, if a man say, he has faith, and has not works? Can
faith save him? Faith if it has not works is dead, being alone. Thou believe
that there is one God: thou do well: the Devils also believe and tremble. If
such a belief be it, that thou gloriest in, it is not denied thee! But will thou
know, oh vain man, that faith without works is dead? etc. Is there life where
there is no motion? Had you that Faith that is instead of sight, it would make
you more solicitous for the things unseen, than you are for the visible trifles
of this world.

2. And hence you may observe, that most true Believers are weak in Faith.
Alas, how far do we all fall short of the love, and zeal, and care, and
diligence, which we should have if we had but once beheld the things which we
do believe? Alas, how dead are our affections? how flat are our duties? how
cold, and how slow are our endeavors? how unprofitable are our lives, in
comparison of what one hours sight of Heaven and Hell would make them be? O
what a comfortable converse would it be, if I might but join in prayer, praise,
and holy conference one day or hour, with a person that had seen the Lord, and
been in Heaven, and born a part in the Angelical Praises! Were our
Congregations composed of such persons, what manner of worship would they
perform to God? How unlike would their heavenly ravishing expressions be to
these our sleepy heartless duties? Were Heaven open to the view of all this
Congregation while I am speaking to you, or when we are speaking in prayer and
praise to God, imagine your selves what a change it would make upon the best of
us in our services! What apprehensions, what affections, what resolutions it
would raise! and what a posture it would cast us all into! And do we not all
profess to believe these things, as revealed from Heaven by the infallible God?
Do we not say, that such a Divine Revelation is as sure as if the things were
in themselves laid open to our sight? Why then are we no more affected with
them? Why are we no more transported by them? Why do they no more command our
souls, and stir up our faculties to the most vigorous and lively exercise? and
call them off from things that are not to us considerable, nor fit to have one
glance of the eye of our observation, nor a regardful thought, nor the least
affection, unless as they subserve these greater things? When you observe how
much, in your selves and others, the frame of your souls in holy duty, and the
tenor of your lives toward God and man, do differ from what they would be, if
you had seen the things that you believe, let it mind you of the great
imperfection of faith, and humble us all in the sense of our imb^cility. For
though I know that the most perfect Faith, is not apt to raise such high
affections in degree, as shall be raised by the beatifical vision in the
glorified, and as present intuition now would raise, if we could attain it; yet
seeing Faith has as sure an Object and Revelation as sight it self, though the
manner of apprehension be less affecting, it should do much more with us than
it does, and bring us nearer to such affections and resolutions, as sight would
cause.

Use 2. If Faith be given us to make things to come as if they were at hand,
and things unseen as if we saw them, you may see from hence, 1. The reason of
that holy seriousness of Believers, which the ungodly want. 2. And the reason
why the ungodly want it. 3. And why they wonder at, and distaste and deride
this serious diligence of the Saints.

1. Would you make it any matter of wonder, for men to be more careful of their
souls, more fervent in their requests to God, more fearful of offending him,
and more laborious in all holy preparation for eternal life, than the holiest
and precisest person that you know in all the world, if so be that Heaven and
Hell were seen to them? Would you not rather wonder at the dullness and
coldness, and negligence of the best, and that they are not far more holy and
diligent than they are, if you and they did see these things? Why then do you
not cease your wondering at their diligence? Do you not know that they are men,
that have seen the Lord, whom they daily serve? and seen the glory which they
daily seek? and seen the place of torments which they fly from? By Faith in the
glass of Divine Revelations they have seen them.

2. And the reason why the careless world are not as diligent, and holy as
Believers, is because they have not this eye of Faith, and never saw those
powerful objects, that Believers see. Had you their eyes, you would have their
hearts and lives. O that the Lord would but illuminate you, and give you such a
sight of the things unseen, as every true Believer has! What a happy change
would it make upon you? Then instead of your deriding or opposing it, we should
have your company in the holy path: You would then be such your selves, as you
now deride. If you saw what they see, you would do as they do. When the
heavenly light had appeared unto Saul, he cease persecuting, and enquires
what Christ would have him to do, that he might be such a one as he had
persecuted: And when the scales fell from his eyes, he falls to prayer, and
gets among the Believers whom he had persecuted, and labors and suffers
more than they.

3. But till this light appear to your darkened souls, you cannot see the
reasons of a holy heavenly life: and therefore you will think it hypocrisy, or
pride, or fancy, and imagination, or the foolishness of crackt^brain'd
self-conceited men. If you see a man do reverence to a Prince, and the Prince
himself were invisible to you, would you not take him for a mad man; and say
that he cringed to the stools or chairs, or bowed to a post, or complemented
with his shadow? If you saw a man's action in eating and drinking, and see not
the meat and drink it self, would you not think him mad? If you heard men
laugh, and hear not so much as the voice of him that gives the jest, would you
not imagine them to be brainsick? If you see men dance, and hear not the
music; if you see a Labourer threshing, or reaping, or mowing, and see no corn
or grass before him; if you see a Soldier fighting for his life, and see no
enemy that he spends his strokes upon, will you not take all these for men
distracted? Why this is the case between you and the true Believers. You see
them reverently worship God, but you see not the Majesty which they worship, as
they do: You see them as busy for the saving of their souls, as if an hundred
lives lay on it; but you see not the Hell from which they fly, nor the Heaven
they seek: and therefore you marvel why they make so much ado about the matters
of their salvation; and why they cannot do as others, and make as light of
Christ and Heaven, as they that desire to be excused, and think they have more
needful things to mind. But did you see with the eyes of a true Believer, and
were the amazing things that God has revealed to us, but open to your sight,
how quickly would you be satisfied, and sooner mock at the diligence of a
drowning man, that is striving for his life, or at the labor of the City, when
they are busily quenching the flames, in their habitations, than mock at them
that are striving for the everlasting life, and praying and laboring against
the ever-burning flames?

How soon would you turn your admiration, against the stupidity of the careless
world, and wonder more that ever men that hear the Scriptures, and see with
their eyes the works of God, can make so light of matters of such unspeakable
eternal consequence? Did you but see Heaven and Hell, it would amaze you to
think that ever many, yea so many, and so seeming wise, should wilfully run
into everlasting fire, and sell their souls at so low a rate, as if it were as
easy to be in Hell as in an Alehouse, and Heaven were no better than a
beastly lust? O then with what astonishment would you think! [Is this the fire
that sinners do so little fear? Is this the glory that is so neglected?] You
would then see that the madness of the ungodly is the wonder.

Use 3. By this time I should think that some of your own Consciences have
prevented me, in the Use of Examination, which I am next to call you to. I hope
while I have been holding you the glass, you have not turned away your faces,
nor shut your eyes: But that you have been judging your selves by the light
which has been set up before you. Have not some of your consciences said by
this time [If this be the nature and use of Faith, to make things unseen, as if
we saw them, what a desolate case then is my soul in? how void of Faith? how
full of Infidelity? how far from the truth and power of Christianity? How
dangerously have I long deceived my self in calling my self a true Christian,
and pretending to be a true Believer? When I never knew the life of Faith but
took a dead opinion, bred only by education, and the custom of the Country
instead of it; little did I think that I had been an Infidel at the heart,
while I so confidently laid claim to the name of a Believer! Alas, how far have
I been from living, as one that sees the things that he professes to
Believe?] If some of your consciences be not thus convinced, and perceive not
yet your want of faith, I fear it is because they are seared, or asleep.

But if yet conscience have not begun to plead this cause against you, let me
begin to plead it with your consciences: Are you Believers? Do you live the
life of Faith, or not? Do you live upon things that are unseen, or upon the
present visible baits of sensuality? That you may not turn away your ears, or
hear me with a sluggish senseless mind, let me tell you first, how nearly it
concerns you, to get this Question soundly answered; and then, that you may
not be deceived, let me help you toward the true resolution.

1. And for the first, you may perceive by what is said, that saving Faith is
not so common, as those that know not the nature of it, do imagine. [ All men
have not faith,] 2 These. 3.2. O what abundance do deceive themselves with
Names, and shows, and a dead Opinion, and customary Religion* and take these
for the life of faith!

2. Till you have this faith, you have no special interest in Christ. It is
only Believers that are united to him, and are his living Members: and it is by
faith that he dwells in our hearts, and that we live in him, Ephesians. 3.17.
Gal. 2.20. In vain do you boast of Christ, if you are not true Believers. You
have no part or portion in him: None of his special Benefits are yours, till
you have this living working Faith.

3. You are still in the state of enmity to God, and unreconciled to him, while
you are unbelievers. For you can have no peace with God* nor a^^ess unto his
favor, but by Christ, Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 17. And therefore
you must come by faith to Christ, before you can come by Christ unto the
Father, as those that have a special interest in his love.

4. Till you have this Faith, you are under the guilt and load of all your
sins, and under the curse and condemnation of the Law; For there is no
Justification or forgiveness, but by Faith, Act. 26.18. Romans 4, and 5, etc.

5. Till you have this sound Belief of things unseen, you will be carnal
minded, and have a carnal end to all your actions, which will make those to be
evil, that materially are good, and those to be fleshly that materially are
holy: Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Romans 8.5, 8, 9. Prove. 28.9.
Heb. 11.6.

6. Lastly, Till you have this living Faith, you have no right to Heaven, nor
could be saved if you die this hour. [ Whoever believes shall not perish but
have everlasting life: He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that
believes not, i^ condemned already: He that believes on the Son, has
everlasting life: and he that b^lieveth not the Son, shall not see life; but
the wrath of God abid^th on him, Joh. 3.16, 18, 36.

You see, if you love your selves, it concerns you, to try whether you are
true Believers: Unless you take it for an indifferent thing, whether you live
for ever in Heaven or Hell; it is best for you to put the question close to your
consciences betimes. Have you that Faith that serves instead of sight? Do you
carry within you the evidence of things unseen, and the substance of the things
which you say you hope for? Did you know in what manner this question must be
put and determined at judgment, and how all your comfort will then depend upon
the answer, and how near that day is, when you must all be sentenced to Heaven
or Hell, as you are found to be Believers or Unbelievers, it would make you
hearken to my counsel, and presently try whether you have a saving Faith.

2. But lest you be deceived in your trial, and lest you mistake me as if I
tried the weak by the measure of the strong, and laid all your comfort upon
such strong affections, and high degrees, as fight it self would work within
you, I shall briefly tell you, how you may know whether you have any faith
that is true and saving, though in the least degree. Though none of us are
affected to that height as we should be, if we had the sight of all that we do
believe, yet all that have any saving belief of invisible things, will have
these four signs of faith within them.

1. A sound belief of things unseen, will cause a practical estimation of them,
and that above all earthly things. A glimpse of the heavenly glory as in a
glass, will cause the soul deliberately to say, [This is the chief desirable
felicity; this is the Crown, the Pearl, the Treasure; nothing but this can
serve my turn. It will debase the greatest pleasures, or riches, or honors of
the world in your esteem. How contemptible will they seem, while you see God
stand by, and Heaven as it were set open to your view; you will see there is little
cause to envy the prosperous servants of the world; you will pity them, as
miserable in their mirth, and bound in the fetters of their folly and
concupiscence; and as strangers to all solid joy and honor. You will be moved
with some compassion to them in their misery, when they are braving it among
men, and domineering for a little while; and you will think, alas poor man! Is
this all thy glory! Have thou no better wealth, no higher honor, no sweeter
pleasures than these husks? With such a practical judgment as you value gold
above dirt, and jewels above common stones; you will value Heaven above all the
riches and pleasures of this world, if you have indeed a living saving faith,
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.

2. A sound belief of the things unseen will habitually incline your wills to
embrace them, with consent and complacence, and resolution, above and against
those worldly things, that would be set above them, and preferred before them.
If you are true believers, you have made your choice, you have fix^ your hopes,
you have taken up your resolutions, that God must be your portion, or you can
have none that is worth the having: that Christ must be your Savior, or you
cannot be saved: and therefore you are at a point with all things else: they
may be your Helps, but not your Happiness: you are resolved on what Rock to
build, and where to cast anchor, and at what port and prize your life shall
aim. You are resolved what to seek and trust to God or none: Heaven or nothing:
Christ or none; is the voice of your rooted, stable resolutions. Though you are
full of fears sometimes whether you shall be accepted, and have a part in
Christ, or no? and whether ever you shall attain the Glory which you aim at;
yet you are off all other hopes; having seen an end of all perfections, and
read vanity and vexation written upon all creatures, even on the most
flattering state on earth, and are unchangeably resolved not to change your
Master, and your hopes, and your holy course, for any other life or hopes.
Whatever come of it you are resolved that here you will venture all: Knowing
that you have no other game to play, at which you are not sure to lose, and
that you can lay out your love, and care, and labor on nothing else that will
answer your expectations; nor make any other bargain whatsoever* but what you
are sure to be utterly undone by, Psalm. 73.25. and 4.6, 7. Mat. 6.20, 21. and
13.45, 46. Luke 18.33.

3. A sound belief of things invisible, will be so far an effectual spring of a
holy life, as that you will [ seek first the Kingdom of God, and its
Righteousness,] Mat. 6.33. and not in your Resolutions only, but in your
Practices, the bent of your lives will be for God, and your invisible felicity.
It is not possible that you should see by faith, the wonders of the world to
come, and yet prefer this world before it. A dead opinionative belief, may
stand with a worldly fleshly life; but a working faith will make you stir, and
make the things of God your business: and the labor and industry of your lives
will show whether you soundly believe the things unseen.

4. If you savingly believe the invisible things, you will purchase them at any
rate, and hold them faster than your worldly accommodations; and will suffer
the loss of all things visible, rather than you will cast away your hopes of
the glory which you never saw. A humane faith and bare opinion, will not hold
fast when trial comes. For such men take Heaven but for a reserve, because they
must leave earth against their wills, and are loath to go to Hell: but they are
resolved to hold the world as long as they can, because their faith
apprehends no such satisfying certainty of the things unseen, as will
encourage them to let go all that they see, and have in sensible possession.
But the weakest faith that is true and saving, does habitually dispose the soul,
to let go all the hopes and happiness of this world, when they are inconsistent
with our spiritual hopes and happiness, Luke 14.33.

And now I have gone before you with the light, and showed you what a Believer
is, will you presently consider how (...) your hearts and lives agree to this
description? To know [ Whether you live by faith or not] is consequentially to
know* whether God or the world be your portion and felicity; and so whether you
are the heirs of Heaven or Hell. And is not this a question that you are most
nearly concerned in? O therefore for your souls sakes, and as ever you love
your everlasting peace, Examine your selves, whether you are in the faith or
not? Know you not that Christ is in you (by faith) except you be reprobates? 2
Cor. 13.5. will you hearken now as long to your consciences, as you have done
to me? As you have heard me telling you, what is the nature of a living, saving
faith will you hearken to your consciences, while they impartially tell you,
whether you have this life of faith, or not? It may be known if you are
willing, and diligent, and impartial: I^ you search on purpose as men that
would know whether they are alive or dead, and whether they shall live or die
for ever: and not as men that would be flattered and deceived, and are resolved
to think well of their state, be it true or false.

Let conscience tell you: What eyes do you see by, for the conduct of the chief
employment of your lives? Is it by the eye of sense, or faith? I take it for
granted that it is by the eye of Reason. But is it by Reason corrupted and
by^ssed by sense, or is it by Reason elevated by faith? What Country is it
that your hearts converse in? Is it in Heaven or Earth? What company is it that
you solace your selves with? Is it with Angels and Saints? Do you walk with
them in the Spirit, and join your eccho's to their triumphant praises, and say,
Amen, when by faith you hear them ascribing honor, and praise, and glory to
the ancient of days, the Omnipotent Jehovah, that is, and that was, and is to
come? Do you fetch your Joys from Heaven or Earth? from things unseen or seen?
things future or present? things hoped for, or things possessed? What Garden
yields you your sweetest flowers? Whence is the food, that your hopes and
comforts live upon? Whence are the spirits and cordials that revive you; when a
frowning world does cast you into a fainting fit, or swoun? Where is it that
you repose your souls for Rest, when sin or sufferings have made you weary?
Deal truly, Is it in Heaven or Earth? Which world do you take for your
pilgrimage, and which for your home? I do not ask you, where you are, but where
you dwell? not where are your persons, but where are your hearts? In a word,
Are you in good earnest, when you say, you believe a Heaven and Hell? And do
you think, and speak, and pray, and live, as those that do indeed believe it?
Do you spend your time, and choose your condition of life, and dispose of your
affairs, and answer temptations to worldly things, as those that are serious in
their belief? Speak out; do you live the life of faith upon things unseen? or
the life of sense on things that you behold? Deal truly; for your endless ^oy
or sorrow does much depend on it. The life of faith is the certain passage to
the life of glory. The fleshly life on things here seen, is the certain way to
endless misery. If you live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye by the
spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. Be not
d^ceived: God is not mocked ^ for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also
reap: For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but
he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap everlasting life, Gal.
6.7, 8. If you would know where you must live for ever, know how, and for what,
and upon what it is, that you live here.

Use 4. Having enquired whether you are Believers, I am next to ask you, what
you will be for the time to come? will you live upon things seen or unseen?
While you arrogate the name and honor of being Christians, will you bethink
you what Christianity is? and will you be indeed what you say you are, and
would be thought to be? Oh that you would give credit to the Word of God that
the God of Heaven might be but heartily believed by you! And that you would but
take his Word to be as sure as sense? and what he has told you is or will be,
to be as certain as if you saw it with your eyes? Oh what manner of persons
would you then be? how carefully and fruitfully would you speak and live? How
impossible were it then that you should be careless and profane? And here that
I may by seriousness bring you to be serious, in so serious a business, I shall
first put a few suppositions to you, about the invisible objects of faith; and
then I shall put some applicatory questions to you, concerning your own
resolutions and practice thereupon.

1. Suppose you saw the Lord in glory continually before you; When you are
hearing, praying, talking, j^sting, eating, drinking, and when you are tempted
to any wilful sin: Suppose you saw the Lord stand over you, as verily as you
see a man! (As you might do if your eyes could see him: for it is most certain
that he is still present with you) suppose you saw but such a glimpse of his
back parts as Moses did, Exodus 34. when God put him into a cleft of the Rock,
and covered him while he passed by ( Chap. 33.23.) when the face of Moses
shined with the sight, that he was fain to vail it from the people, Exodus
34.33, 34, 35. Or if you had seen but what the Prophet saw, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. when he beheld the Lord upon a Throne, high and lifted up, etc. and heard
the Seraphim cry, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is
full of his glory. When he said, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man
of unclean lips, and dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips! for mine
eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts. Or if you had seen but what Job saw,
Job 42.5, 6. when he said, [ I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear;
but now mine eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and
ashes.] What course would you take, what manner of persons would you be after
such a sight as this? If you had seen but Christ app^^ring in his glory, as the
Disciples on the holy Mount, Matthew. 17. or as Paul saw him at his conversion,
when he was smitten to the earth, Acts 9. or as John saw him, Rev. 1.13. where
he says [ He was clothed with a garment down to the foo^, and girt with a
golden girdle; his head and his hairs were white like Wool or (...), and his
eyes were as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass, as if they
burned in a furnace, and his voice as the sound of many waters; and he had in
his right hand seven Stars, and out of his mouth went a sharp two edged Sword,
and his countenance was as the Sun shines in his strength: and when I saw him,
I fell at his feet as dead; and he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me,
fear not, I am the first and the last; I am ^e that lives and was dead; and
behold I am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the keys of hell and death.]
What do you think you should be and do, if you had seen but such a sight as
this? Would you be godly or ungodly after it? As sure as you live, and see one
another, God always sees you: He sees your secret filthiness, and deceit,
and malice, which you think is hid; he sees you in the dark: the locking of
your doors, the d^a^ing of your curtains, the setting of the Sun, or the
putting out of the Candle, does hide nothing from him that is Omniscient, Psalm.
94.8, 9. [ Understand oh ye brutish among the people! and ye fools, when will
ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall be not hear? he that formed the eye,
shall he not see?] The lust and filthiness, and covetousness, and envy, and
vanity of your very thoughts are as open to his view as the Sun at noon. And
therefore you may well suppose him present that cannot be absent; and you may
suppose you saw him that still sees you, and whom you must see. Oh what a
change, a glympse of the glory of his Majesty, would make in this Assembly! Oh
what amazements, what passionate workings of soul would it excite! Were it but
an Angel that did thus appear to you, what manner of hearers would you be? how
serious? how affectionate? how sensible? And yet are you Believers, and have
none of this? when faith makes unseen things to be as seen? If thou have faith
indeed, thou see him that is invisible: thou speak to him: thou hear
him in his Word: thou see him in his Works: thou walk with him: he is the
life of thy comforts, thy converse and thy life.

2. Suppose you had seen the matters revealed in the Gospel to your faith, as
to what is past and done already? If you had seen the deluge and the Ark, and
preservation of one righteous family: the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah with
fire from Heaven; and the saving of Lot whose righte^^^ soul was grieved at
their sins, and hunted after as a prey to their ungodly rage, because he would
have hindered them from transgressing? Suppose you had seen the opening of the
Red Sea, the passage of the Israelites, the drowning of Pharaoh and his
Egyptians; the Manna and the Q^ails that fell from Heaven, the flaming Mount,
with the terrible Thunder, when God delivered the Law to Moses! what manner of
people would you have been? what lives would you have led, after such sights,
as all or any one of these? Suppose you had seen Christ in his state of
Incarnation, in his examples of lowliness, meekness, contempt of all the glory
and vanities of this world, and had heard him speak his heavenly Doctrine with
power and authority, as never man spoke. Suppose you had seen him heal the
blind, the lame, the sick, and raise the dead; and seen him after all this made
the scorn of sinners, buffeted, spit upon, when they had crowned him with
thorns, and arrayed him gorgeously in scorn; and then nailed between
malefactors on a Cross, and pierced, and die a shameful death, and this for
such as you and I. Suppose you had seen the Sun darkened without any eclipse,
the Vail of the Temple rent, the Earth tremble; the Angels terrifying the
Keepers, and Christ rise again! Suppose you had been among the Disciples when
he appeared in the midst of them, and with Thomas, had put your fingers into
his wounded side: and had seen him walking on the waters, and at last seen him
ascending up to Heaven. Suppose you had seen when the Holy Ghost came down on
the Disciples in the similitude of cloven tongues, and had heard them speak in
the various languages of the Nations, and seen the variety of Miracl^s, by
which they convinced the unbelieving world: What persons would you have been?
what lives would you have led, if you had been eyewitnesses of all these
things? And do you not profess to believe all this? and that these things are
as certain truths, as if you had seen them? why then does not your belief
affect you, or command you more? why does it not do what sight would do, in
some good measure, if it were but a lively saving faith indeed that serves
instead of sense? Yea I must tell you, Faith must do more with you, in this
case, than the sight of Christ alone, could do, or the sight of his Miracles
did on most. For many that saw him, and saw his works, and heard his Word, yet
perished in their unbelief.

3. Suppose you saw the everlasting Glory which Christ has purchased and
prepared for his Saints: That you had been once with Paul, rapt up into the
third Heavens, and seen the things that are unutterable: would you not after
that have rather lived like Paul, and undergone his sufferings and contempt,
than to have lived like the brainsick brutish world? If you had seen what
Stephen saw before his death, Acts 7.55, 56. the Glory of God, and Christ
standing at his right hand; If you had seen the thousands and millions of holy
glorious spirits, that are continually attending the Majesty of the Lord; If
you had seen the glorified spirits of the just, that were once in flesh,
despised by the blind ungodly world, while they waited on God in faith, and
holiness, and hope, for that blessed Crown which now they were: If you had felt
one moment of their joys; if you had seen them shine as the Sun in glory, and
made like unto the Angels of God; if you had heard them sing the song of the
Lamb, and the joyful Hallelujahs, and praise to their eternal King: what would
you be, and what would you resolve on after such a sight as this? If the rich
man Luke 16. had seen Lazarus in Abraham's bosom in the midst of his bravery,
and honor, and feasting, and other sensual delights, as afterward he saw it
when he was tormented in the flames of Hell, do you think such a sight would
not have cooled his mirth and jollity, and helped him to understand the nature
and value of his earthly felicity; and have proved a more effectual argument
than a despised Preachers words? at least to have brought him to a freer
exercise of his Reason, in a sober consideration of his state and ways? Had
you seen one hour what Abraham, David, Paul, and all the Saints now see, while
sin and flesh does keep us here in the dark, what work do you think your selves
it would make upon your hearts and lives?

4 Suppose you saw the face of Death, and that you were now lying under the
power of some mortal sickness, Physicians having forsaken you, and said, There
is no hope: Your friends weeping over you, and preparing your winding sheet and
coffin, digging your graves, and casting up the skulls, and bones, and earth,
that must again be cast in to be your covering and company: Suppose you saw a
Messenger from God to tell you that you must die to morrow; or heard but what
one of your predecessors heard, Luke 12.20. Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be required of thee: then whose shall these things be that thou have
provided?] How would such a Message work with you? would it leave you as you
are? If you heard a voice from God this night in your chamber in the dark,
telling you, that this i^ the last night that you shall live on earth, and
before to morrow your souls must be in another world, and come before the
dreadful God: what would be the effect of such a Message? And do you not verily
believe that all this will very shortly be? Nay, do you not know without
believing, that you must die, and leave your worldly glory? and that all your
pleasures and contents on earth, will be as if they had never been, (and much
worse!) O wonderful! that a change so sure, so great, so near, should no more
affect you, and no more be forethought on, and no more prepared for! and that
you be not awakened by so full and certain a foreknowledge, to be in good
sadness for eternal life, as you seem to be when death is at hand!

5. Suppose you saw the great and dreadful day of Judgment, as it i^ described
by Christ himself in Matthew. 25. [ When the Son of man shall come in his glory,
and all his holy Angels with him, and shall sit upon his glorious Throne, and
all Nations shall be gathered before him, and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd divides his sheep from the goats, and shall set the
sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left.] v. 31, 32, 33. and shall
sentence the righteous to eternal life, and the rest into everlasting
punishment. If you did now behold the glory and terror of that great
appearance, how the Saints will be magnified, and rejoice, and be justified
against all the accusations of Satan, and calumnies of wicked men; and how the
ungodly then would fain deny the words and deeds that now they glory in; and
what horror and confusion will then overwhelm those wretched souls, that now
outface the Messengers of the Lord? Had you seen them trembling before the
Lord, that now are braving it out in the pride and arrogance of their hearts:
Had you heard how then they will change their tune, and wish they had never
known their sins: and wish they had lived in greater holiness than those whom
they derided for it: What would you say, and do, and be, after such an amazing
fight as this? Would you sport it out in sin as you have done? Would you take
no better care for your salvation? If you had seen those sayings out of the
holy Ghost fulfilled. Jude 14, 15.2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. [ When the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.] What mind do you think
you should be of? What course would you take, if you had but seen this dreadful
day? Could you go on to think, and speak, and live as sensually, stupidly and
negligently as now you do? 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. [ The day of the Lord will come
as a thief in the night, in the which the bravens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent beat; the earth also, and the
works that are therein shall be burnt up: Is it possible soundly to believe
such a day, so sure, so near, and no more regard it, nor make ready for it,
than the carel^ss and ungodly do?

6. Suppose at that day you had heard the Devil accusing you of all the sins
that you have committed; and set them out in the most odious aggravations, and
call for justice against you to your Judge: If you heard him pleading all those
sins against you that now he daily tempts you to commit, and now makes you
believe are harmless, or small inconsiderable things: If you heard him saying,
At such a time this sinner refused grace, neglected Christ, despised Heaven,
and preferred Earth: at such a time he derided godliness, and made a mock of
the holy Word and Counsels of the Lord: at such a time he profaned the name of
God, he coveted his neighbors wealth; he cherished thoughts of envy or of
lust; he was drunk, or gluttonous, or committed fornication, and he was never
thoroughly converted by renewing grace, and therefore he is an heir of H^ll, and
belongs to me: I ruled him, and I must have him.] What would you think of a
life of sin, if once you had heard such accusations as these? How would you
deal by the next temptation, if you had heard what use the tempter will
hereafter make of all your sins?

7. What if you had seen the damned in their misery, and heard them cry out of
the folly of their ^mpenitent careless lives; and wishing as Dives, Luke 16.
that their friends on earth might have one sent from the dead, to warn them
that they come not to that place of torment (I speak to men that say they are
believers) what would you do upon such a fight? If you had heard them there
torment themselves in the remembrance of the time they lost, the mercy they
neglected, the grace resisted, and wish it were all to do again, and that they
might once more be tried with another life. If you saw how the world is altered
with those, that once were as proud and confident as others, what do you think
such a sight would do with you? And why then does the believing of it do no
more, when the ^h^ng is certain?

8. Once more; suppose that in your temptations you saw the tempter appearing
to you, and pleading with you as he does by his inward suggestions, or by the
mouths of his instruments. If you saw him, and heard him h^ssing you on to sin,
persuading you to gluttony, drunkenness, or unclean^ess? If the Devil appeared
to you, and led you to the place of lust, and offered you the harlot, or the
cup of excess and urged you to swear, or curse, or ra^l, or scorn at a holy
life; would not the sight of the Angler man his g^me, and (...) your courage,
and spoil your sport, and turn your stom^chs? would you be drunk, or filthy, if
you saw him stand by you? Think on it the next t^me you are tempted. Stout men
have been apaled by such a sight. And do you not believe that it is he indeed
that tempts you? As sure as if your eyes beh^ld him, ^t's he that prompteth
men to ^^er at god^iness, and puts your wanton ribbald speeches, and oaths, and
curses into your mouths: He is the Tutor of the enemies of grace, that teaches
them doc^e del^rare, ingeniose insanire, ingeniously to quarrel with the way of
life, and learnedly to confute the arguments that would have saved them; and
subtly to dispute themselves out of the hands of mercy, and gallantly to
scorn to stoop to Christ, till there be no remedy; and with plausible eloquence
to commend the plague and sickness of their souls; and irrefrag^bly maintain
it, that the way to Hell will lead to Heaven; and to justify the sins that
will condemn them; and honorably and triumphantly to overcome their friends,
and to serve the Devil in mood and fig^^re, and valiantly to cast themselves
into Hell, in despite of all the laws and reproofs of God or man that would
have hindered them. It being most certain that this is the D^vils work, and you
durst not do it if he moved you to it with open face, how dare you do it when
faith would assure you, that it is as veri^y he, as if you saw him?

More distinctly, answ^r these following Questions, upon the foregoing
suppositions.

Q^est. 1. If you saw but what you say you do believe, would you not be
convinced that the most pleasant gainful sin, is worse than madness? and would
you not spit at the very name of it, and openly cry out of your open folly, and
beg for prayers, and love reprovers, and resolve to turn without delay?

Quest. 2. What would you think of the most serious holy life, if you had seen
the things that you say you do believe? would you ever again reproach it as
preciseness? or count it more ado than needs? and think your time were better
spent in playing, than in praying; in drinking* and sports, and filthy lusts,
than in the holy services of the Lord? would you think then that one day in
seven, were too much for the work for which you live; and that an hour on this
holy day were enough to be spent in instructing you for eternity? Or would you
not believe that he is the blessed man, whose delight is in the Law of God, and
meditateth in it day and night? Could you plead for sensuality or ungodly
negligence, or open your mouths against the most serious holiness of life, if
Heaven and Hell stood open to your view?

Quest. 3. If you saw but what you say you do believe, would you ever again be
offended with the Ministers of Christ, for the plainest reproofs, and closest
exhortations, and strictest precepts and discipline, that now are disrelished
so much? Or rather, would you not desire them to help you presently to try your
states, and to search you to the quick, and to be more solicitous to save you
than to please you? The patient that will take no bitter medicine in time, when
he sees he must die, would then take any thing. When you see the things that
now you hear of, then you would do any thing: O then might you have these days
again, Sermons would not be too plain or long: In season and out of season
would then be allowed of. Then you would understand what moved Ministers to be
so importunate with you for conversion; and whether trifling or serious
preaching was the best.

Quest. 4. Had you seen the things that you say you do believe, what effect
would Sermons have upon you, after such a sight ^s this? O what a change it
would make upon our preaching, and your hearing, if we saw the things that we
speak and hear of? How fervently should we importune you in the name of Christ?
How attentively would you hear, and carefully consider and obey? we should then
have no such sleepy preaching and hearing, as now we have. Could I but show to
all this Congregation, while I am preaching, the invisible world of which we
preach, and did you hear with Heaven and Hell in your eye sight, how confident
should I be (though not of the saving change of all) that I should this hour
teach you to plead for sin, and against a holy life no more? and send you home
another people than you came hither. I durst then ask the worst that hears
me, [Dare you now be drunk, or gluttonous, or worldly? dare you be voluptuous,
proud, or fornicators any more? Dare you go home, and make a jest at piety, and
neglect your souls as you have done?] And why then should not the believed
truth prevail, if indeed you did believe it, when the thing is as sure, as if
you saw it?

Quest. 5. If you had seen what you say you do believe, would you hunt as
eagerly for wealth, or honor, and regard the thoughts or words of men, as you
did before? Though it is only the Believer that truly honors his Rulers, (for
none else honor them for God, but use them for themselves;) yet wonder not if
he fear not much the face of man, and be no admirer of worldly greatness* when
he sees what they will be, as well as what they are. Would not usurpers have
been less feared, if all could have foreseen their fall? Even common reason can
foresee, that shortly you will all be dust: Methinks I foresee your ghastly
paleness, your loathsome blackness, and your habitation in the dark: And who
can much envy, or desire the advancements that have such an end? One sight of
God would blast all the glory of the world, that is now the b^^t for man's
perdition.

Quest. 6. Would temptations be as powerful, as now they are, if you did but
see the things you bear of? Could all the beauty or pleasures in the world,
entice you to filthiness or sensuality, if you saw God over you, and judgment
before you, and saw what damned souls now suffer, and what believers now enjoy?
Could you be persuaded by any company or recreation, to waste your precious
time in vain, with such things in your eye? I am confident you would abhor the
motion; and entertertain temptations to the most honored, gainful, pleasant
sin, as now you would do a motion to cut your own throats, or leap into a
coal-pit, or thrust your head into a burning-oven. Why then does not faith thus
shame temptations, if indeed you do believe these things? Will you say, [ It is
your weakness, you cannot ^hus^] or that [ it is your nature to be lustful,
revengeful, sensual, and you cannot overcome it.] But if you had a sight of
Heaven and Hell, you could then resist: you cannot now, because you will not:
But did you see that which would make you willing* your power would appear. The
sight of a Judge or Gallows can restrain m^n: The sight of a person whom you
reverence, can restrain the exercise of your disgraceful sins; much more would
the sight of Heaven and Hell. If you were but dying, you would shake the head
at him that would then tempt you to the committing of your former sins. And is
not a lively foreseeing faith as effectual?

Quest. 7. Had you seen what you say you do believe, you would not so much
stick a^ sufferings, nor make so great a matter of it, to be reproached,
slandered, imprisoned, or condemned by man, when God and your salvation command
your patience. A sight of Hell would make you think it worse than madness, to
run thither to escape the wrath of man, or any sufferings on earth, Romans 8.18.

Quest. 8. And O how such a sight would advance the Redeemer, and his Grace,
and Promises, and Word, and Ordinances, in your esteem! It would quicken your
desires, and make you fly to Christ for life, as a drowning man to that which
may support him. How sweetly then would you relish the name, the word, the
ways of Christ, which now seem dry and common things!

Q^est. 9. Could you live as merrily, and sleep as quietly in a negligent
uncertainty of your salvation, if you had seen these things, as now you do?
Could you live at hearts ease, while you know not where you shall be to morrow,
or must live for ever? Oh no: Were Heaven and Hell but seen before you, your
Consciences would be more busy in putting such questions [ Am I regenerate,
sanctified, reconciled, justified, or not?] Then any the most zealous Minister
is now.

Quest. 10. I will put to you but one Qu^stion more. If we saw God, and Heaven,
and Hell before us, do you think it would not effectually reconcile our
differences, and heal our unbrotherly exasper^tions and divisions? would it not
hold the hands that itch to be using violence, against those that are not in
all things of their minds! what abundance of vain controversies would it
reconcile! As the coming in of the Master does part the fray among the
School-boyes; so the sight of God would fr^ghten us from contentions, or
uncharitable violence. This would teach us how to preach and pray better than a
storm at Sea can do; which yet does it better than some in prosperity w^ll
learn: Did we see what we preach of, it would drive us out of our man pleasing*
self-seeking, sleepy strain, as the cudgel drives the beggar from his canting,
and the breaking loose of the Bear did teach the affected cripple to find his
legs, and c^st away his c^utch^s. I would desire no better outward help to end
our controversies about indifferent modes of worship, than a sight of the
things of which we speak: This would excite such a serious ^rame of soul, as
would not suffer Religion to evaporate into formality, nor dwindle into
affectation, complement and ceremony: nor should we dare to beat our
fellow servants, and thrust them out of the vineyard, and say, you shall not
preach, or pray, or live, but upon these or those unnecessary terms: But the
sense of our own frailty, and fear of a severe disquisition of our failings,
would make us compassionate to others, and content that necessaries be the
matter of our unity, unnecessaries of our liberty, and both of charity.

If sight in all these ten particulars would do so much, should not faith do
much, if you verily believe the things you see not?

Alas, corrupted reason is asleep, (with men that seem wise in other things)
till it be awakt by faith or sight. And sleeping reason is as unserviceable as
folly. I^ does no work: it avoids no danger. A Doctor that is asleep, can defend
the truth no better than a waking child. But reason will be reason, and
conscience will be conscience, when the dust is blown out of men's eyes, and
sight and feeling have awakened, and so recovered their understandings; or
Faith more seasonably and happily awaked them.

AND O that now we might all consent to addict our^selves to the Life of Faith:
And

1. That we live not too much on visibles. 2. That we live on the things
invisible.

1. One would think that worldliness is a disease that carries with it a cure
for it self; and that the rational nature should be loath to love at so dear a
rate, and to labor for so poor a recompense. It is pity that Gehezi's
leprosy, and Judas's death, should no more prevent a succession of Gehezi's
and Judas's in all generations. Our Lord went before us most eminently in a
contempt of earth: His Kingdom was not of this world. No men are more unlike
him than the worldlings. I know necessity is the pretense: But it is the
dropsy of Covetousness that causes the thirst which they call N^c^ssity: And
therefore the cure is non addere opi^us, sed imminuere cupiditatem: The disease
must not be fed but healed. Sa^s est divitiarum non amplius velle. It has
lately been a controversy, whether this be not the golden age? that it is
aetas ferrea we have felt; our demonstrations are undeniable: that it is aetas
aurata, we have sufficient proof: and while gold is the god that rules the
most, we will not deny it to be aetas aurea, in the Poets sense, Aurea nunc
vere sunt secula: plurimus auro
Vaenit honos: auro conciliatur amor.


This prevalency of things seen, against thing unseen, is the Idolatry of the
world; the subversion of nature; the perversion of our faculties and actions;
making the soul a drudge to flesh, and God to be used as a servant to the
world. It destroys Piety, Justice and Charity: It turns JVS by perversion
into VIS; or by reversion into SVI. No wonder then if it be the ruin of
societies, when Gens sine justitia, sine remige navis in unda. It can possess
even Demosthenes with a Squinancy, if there be but an Harpalus to bring him the
infection. It can make a Judicature to be as Plutarch called that of Rome,
[(...)] impiorum regionem;] contrary to Cicero's description of Sulpitius, who
was [ magis justitiae quam juris consultus, and ad facilitatem aequitatemque
omnia contulit; nec maluit litium actiones constituere, quam controversias
tollere.] In a word, if you live by sense and not by Faith, on things present,
and not on things unseen, you go backward; you stand on your heads* and turn
your heels against Heaven; you cause the beast to ride the man; and by turning
all things upside down, will turn your selves into confusion.

2. Consider that it is the unseen things that are only Great and Necessary,
that are worthy of a man, and answer the excellency of our nature, and the ends
of our lives, and all our mercies. All other things are inconsiderable toys,
except as they are dignified by their relation to these. Whether a man step
into eternity from a Palace or a Prison, a Lordship or a Lazarus state, is
little to be regarded. All men in the world, whose designs and business take up
with any thing short of Heaven, are in the main of one condition, and are but
in several degrees and forms in the School of folly. If the intendment of your
lives fall short of God, it matters not much what it is you seek, as to any
great difference. If lesser children play for pins, and bigger boys for points
and pence, and aged children for lands and money, for titles of honor, and
command, What difference is there between these, in point of wisdom and
felicity? but that the little ones have more innocent delights, and at a
cheaper rate, than the aged have, without the vexatious cares and dangers that
attend more grave and serious dotage. As Holiness to the Lord is written upon
all that is faithfully referred to his Will and Glory; so Vanity and Sin, is
written upon all that is but made provision for the flesh, and has no higher
end than Self. To go to Hell with greater stir, and attendance, and repute,
with greater pomp and pleasure than the poor, is a poor consolation, a pitiful
felicity!

3. Faith is the wisdom of the soul: and unbelief and sensuality are its
blindness, folly and brutishness. How short is the knowledge of the wisest
unbelievers? They know not much of what is past; (and less they would know, if
Historians were not of more credit with them, than the Word of God:) But alas,
how little do they know of what is to come? sense tells them where they are,
and what they are now doing: but it tells them not where they shall be to
morrow. But Faith can tell a true Believer, what will be when this world is
ended, and where he shall live to all eternity, and what he shall be d^ing,
what thoughts he shall be thinking, what affections shall be the temper and
employment of his soul: what he shall see, and feel, and enjoy; and with what
company he shall converse for ever. If the pretenders to Astrological
prediction, could but foretell the changes of men's lives, and the time and
manner of their deaths, what resort would be to them? and how wise would they
be esteemed? but what is all this to the infallible predictions of the
All-knowing God, that has given us a prospect into another world, and showed
us what will be for ever, more certainly than you know what a day may bring
forth.

So necessary is foreknowledge in the common affairs of men, that without it
the actions of the world would be but mad tumultuary confusion: What would you
think of that man's understanding, or how would you value the employments of his
life, that looked no further in all his actions, than the present hour, and saw
no more than the things in hand? What would you call him that so spends the
day, as one that knows not there will be any night: and so past the night, as
one that looked not for that day? that knew not in the Spring there would be an
Harvest, or in the Summer, that there would be any Winter: or in Youth, that
there would be Age or Death? The silly brutes that have no foreknowledge, are
furnished with an instinct that supplieth the want of it, and also have the
help of man's foreknowledge, or else their kind would be soon extinct. The Bees
labor in Summer, as if they foresaw the Winters need. And can that man be
wise, that foreseeth not his everlasting state? Indeed he that knows not what
is to come, has no true knowledge of what is present: For the worth and use of
present things, is only in their respect to things eternal: And there is no
means, where there is no end. What wisdom then remains in Unbelievers, when all
their lives (...) mis-imployed, because they know not the end of life? and when
all their actions are utterly debased, by the baseness of (...) brutish ends,
to which they serve and are referred. (...) is truly wise or honorable, that
is done for small and (...) things. To draw a curious picture of a shadow, or
elegantly write the history of a dream, may be an ingenuous kind of foolery;
but the end will not allow it the name of Wisdom: And such are all the actions
of the world (though called Heroic, Valiant and Honorable) that aim at
transitory trifles, and tend not to the everlasting end. A bird can neatly
build her nest, but is not therefore counted Wise. How contrary is the
judgment of the world to Christ's? When the same description that he gives of
a fool, is it that worldlings give of a wise and happy man, Luke 12.20, 21. [
One that lays up riches for himself, and is not rich toward God.] Will you
persuade us that the man is wise, that can climb a little higher than his
neighbors, that he may have the greater fall? That is attended in his way to
Hell with greater pomp and state than others? That can sin more Syllogistically
and Rhetorically than the vulgar; and more prudently and gravely run into
damnation; and can learnedly defend his madness, and prove that he is safe at
the brink of Hell? Would you persuade us that he is wise, that contradicts the
God and Rule of Wisdom, and that parts with Heaven for a few merry hours, and
has not wit to save his soul? When they see the end, and are arrived at
eternity, let them boast of their Wisdom, as they find cause: We will take them
then for more competent Judges. Let the Eternal God be the portion of my soul;
let Heaven be my inheritance and hope; let Christ be my Head, and the promise,
my security, let Faith be my Wisdom, and Love be my very heart and will, and
patient persevering Obedience be my life* and then I can spare the wisdom of
the world, because I can spare the trifles that it seeks, and all that they are
like to get by it.

What abundance of complaints and calamity would foresight prevent? Had the
events of this one year been (conditionally) foreseen, the actions of thousands
would have been otherwise ordered, and much sin and shame have been prevented.
What a change would it make on the judgments of the world? how many words
would be otherwise spoken? and how many deeds would be otherwise done? and how
many hours would be otherwise spent, if the change that will be made by
Judgment and Execution, were well foreseen? And why is it not foreseen, when
it is foreshewn? When the omniscient God, that will certainly perform his Word,
has so plainly revealed it, and so frequently and loudly warns you of it? Is
he wise, that after all these warnings will lie down in everlasting woe, and
say, [ I little thought of such a day: I did not believe I should ever have
seen so great a change?]

Would the servants of Christ be used as they are, if the malicious world
foresaw the day, when Christ shall come with ten thousands of his Saints, to
execute Judgment on all that are ungodly? Jude 14, 15. When he shall come to
be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that do believe, 2 These.
1.10. When the Sa^nts shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. and when the
ungodly seeing them on Christ's right hand, must hear their sentence on this
account [ Verily I say unto you, in as much as you did it (or, did it not) to
one of the least of these (my Brethren) you did it unto me.] Matthew. 25. Yet a
few days, and all this will be done before your eyes: but the unbelieving
world will not foresee it.

Would malignant Cain have slain his brother, if he had foreseen the
punishment, which he calls afterward intolerable, Genesis 4.13. Would the world
have despised the preaching of Noah, if they had believed the deluge? Would
Sodom have been Sodom, if they had foreseen that an Hell from Heaven would have
consumed them? Would Achan have meddled with his prey, if he had foreseen the
stones that were his Executioners and his Tomb? Would Gehezi have obeyed his
covetous desire, if he had foreseen the leprosy? Or Judas have betrayed
Christ, if he had foreseen the hanging himself in his despair? It is
foreseeing Faith that saves those that are saved; and blind unbelief that
causes men's perdition.

Yea present things as well as future, are unknown to foolish Unbelievers. Do
they know who sees them in their sin? and what many thousands are suffering
for the like, while they see no danger? Whatever their tongues say, the hearts
and lives of fools deny that there is a God that sees them, and will be their
Judge, Psalm 14.1. You see then that you must live by Faith, or perish by folly.

4. Consider that things visible are so transitory, and of so short
continuance, that they do but deserve the name of things; being nothings, and
less than nothing, and lighter than vanity it self, compared to the necessary
eternal Being, whose name is IAM. There is but a few days difference between a
Prince and no Prince; a Lord and no Lord; a man and no man; a world and no
world. And if this be all, let the time that is past inform you how small a
difference this is. Rational foresight may teach a Xerxes to weep over his
numerous Army, as knowing how soon they were all to be dead men. Can you forget
that death is ready to undress you? and tell you, that your sport and mirth is
done? and that now you have had all that the world can do, for those that serve
it, and take it for their part? How quickly can a fever, or the choice of an
hundred Messengers of death, be^eave you of all that earth afforded you, and
turn your sweetest pleasures into gall, and turn a Lord into a lump of clay? It
is but as a wink, an inch of time, till you must quit the stage; and speak, and
breath, and see the face of man no more. If you foresee this, O live as men
that do foresee it. I never heard of any that stole his winding sheet, or
fought for a Coffi^, or went to Law for his grave. And if you did but see (as
wise men should) how near your Honors and Wealth, and Pleasures do stand unto
Eternity, as well as your Winding sheets, your Coffins, and your Graves, you
would then value, and desire, and seek them regularly and moderately, as you do
these. Oh what a fading flower is your strength? How soon will all your
gallantry shrink into the shell? Si vestra sunt tollite ^a vobiscum. Bern. Bu^
yet this is not the great part of the change. The terminus ad quem does make it
greater: It is great, for persons of renown and honor, to change their Palaces
for graves, and turn to noisome rottenness and dirt: and their Power and Command
into silent impotency, unable to rebuke the poorest worm, that sawcily feeds
on their hearts or faces. But if you are Believers, you can look further, and
foresee much more. The largest and most capacious heart alive, is unable fully
to conceive what a change the stroke of death will make.

For the holy soul so suddenly to pass from prayer to Angelical praise, from
sorrow unto boundless joys: from the slanders, and contempt, and violence of
men, to the bosom of eternal Love; from the clamours of a tumultuous world, to
the universal harmony and perfect uninterrupted Love and Peace; O what a
blessed change is this; which believing now, we shall shortly feel.

For an unholy unrenewed soul, that yesterday was drowned in flesh, and laughed
at threatenings, and scorned reproofs, to be suddenly sna^cht into another
world; and see the Heaven that he has lost, and feel the Hell which he would
not believe: to fall into the gulf of bottomless eternity, and at once to find,
that Joy and Hope are both departed; that horror and grief must be his
company, and Desperation has locked up the door: O what an amazing change is
this! If you think me troublesome for mentioning such ungrateful things, what a
trouble will it be to feel them? May it teach you to prevent that greater
trouble, you may well bear this. Find but a medicine against death, or any
security for your continuance here, or any prevention of the Change, and I have
done: But that which unavoidably must be seen, should be foreseen.

But the unseen world is not thus mutable; Eternal life is begun in the
Believer. The Church is built on Christ the Reck; and the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. Fix here, and you shall never be removed.

4. Hence follows another difference: The mutable creature does impart a
disgraceful mutability to the soul that chooses it. It disappointeth and
deceives: And therefore the ungodly are of one mind to day, and another to
morrow! In health they are all for pleasure, and commodity, and honor: and at
death they cry out on it as deceitful Vanity: In health they cannot abide this
strictness, this meditating, and seeking, and preparing for the life to come;
but at death or judgment, they will all be of another mind! Then O that they
had been so wise as to know their time: and O that they h^d lived as holily as
the best! They are now the bold opposers and reproachers of an holy life: But
then they would be glad it had been their own: They would eat their words, and
will be down in the mouth, and stand to never a word they say, when sight, and
sense, and judgment, shall convince them.

But things unchangeable do fix the soul. P^e^y is no matter for Repentance.
Does the Believer speak against sin and sinners: and for an holy, sober,
righteous life? He will do so to the last: Death and Judgment shall not change
his mind in this, but much confirm it. And therefore he perseveres through
sufferings, to death, Romans 8.35, 36, 37. [ For this cause we faint not: but
though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day: For
our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding eternal weight of glory: While we look not at the things that are
seen, but at the things which are not seen: For the things which are seen are
temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17.

6. Lastly, let this move you to live by a foreseeing Faith, that it is of
necessity to your salvation. Believing Heaven, must prepare you for it, before
you can enjoy it. Believing Hell, is necess^ry to prevent it. Mark 16.16. John
3.18, 36. [ The just shall live by Faith; but if any man draw back (or, be
lifted up) the Lord will have no pleasure in him. Heb. 10.38. H^b. 2.4. Take
heed that there be not in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, to depart from
the living God. Heb. 3.12. And be not of them that draw back to perdition, but
of them that believe to the saving of the soul. Heb. 10.39. It is God that
says [ They shall all be damned that believed not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness] 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.

May I now in the conclusion more particularly exhort you, 1. That you will
live upon things foreseen. 2. That you will promote this life of faith in
others, according to your several capacities.

Princes and Nobles live not always: You are not the Rulers of the unmovable
Kingdom; but of a boat that is in an hasty stream, or a ship under sail, that
will speed both Pilot and Passengers to the shore. Dixi, estis Dii: at
moriemini ut homines. It was not the least or worst of Kings, that said, [ I am
a stranger upon earth] Psalm. 119.19. Vermis sum, non homo: I am a worm, and no
man, Psalm. 32.6. You are the greater worms, and we the little ones: but we must
all say with Job, chapter 17.13, 14. [ The grave is our house, and we must make our
beds in darkness: Corruption is our Father, and the Worm our Mother and our
Sister.] The inexorable Leveller is ready at your backs, to convince you by
unresistible argument, that dust you are, and to dust you shall return. Heaven
should be as desirable, and Hell as terrible to you as to others. No man will
fear you after death: much less will Christ be afraid to judge you. Luke 19.27.
As the Kingdoms and glory of the world were contemned by him in the hour of his
temptation; so are they inconsiderable to procure his approbation. Trust not
therefore to uncertain riches. Value them but as they will prove at last. As
you stand on higher ground than others, it is meet that you should see further.
The greater are your advantages, the wiser and better you should be: and
therefore should better perceive the difference between things temporal and
eternal. It is always dark where these glowworms shine, and a rotten post
does seem a fire.

Your difficulties also should excite you; You must go as through a Needles eye
to Heaven. To live as in Heaven, in a crowd of business, and stream of
temptations, from the confluence of all worldly things, is so hard, that few
such come to Heaven. Withdraw your selves therefore to the frequent serious
fore-thoughts of eternity, and live by faith.

Had time allowed it, I should have come down to some particular instances: As,
1. Let the things unseen be still at hand, to answer every temptation, and
shame and repel each motion to sin.

2. Let them be still at hand, to quicken us to duty, when backwardness and
coldness does surprise us. What, shall we do any thing coldly for eternity?

3. Let it resolve you what company to delight in; and what society to be of;
even those with whom you must dwell for ever: What side soever is uppermost on
earth, you may foresee which side shall reign for ever.

4. Let the things invisible be your daily solace, and the satisfaction of your
souls. Are you slandered by men? Faith tells you, it is enough that Christ will
justify you. O happy day, when he will bring forth our righteousness as the
light, and set all strait, which all the false histories, or slanderous tongues
or pens in all the world made crooked. Are you frowned on or contemned by men?
Is it not enough that you shall everlastingly be honored by the Lord? Are you
wronged, oppressed, or trodden on by pride or malice? Is not Heaven enough to
make you reparation? and eternity long enough for your joys? O pray for your
malicious enemies, lest they suffer more than you can wish them.

2. Lastly, I should have become on the behalf of Christ, a petitioner to you
for protection and encouragement to the heirs of the invisible world. For them
that preach, and them that live this life of faith: not for the honors and
riches of the world; but for leave and countenance to work in the Vineyard, and
peaceably travel through the world as strangers, and live in the Communion of
Saints, as they believe. But, though it be for the beloved of the Lord, the
apple of his eye, the people that are sure to prevail and reign with Christ for
ever; whose prayers can do more for the greatest Princes, than you can do for
them; whose joy is hastened by that which is intended for their sorrow, I shall
now lay by any further suit on their behalf.

But for your selves, O use your seeing and foreseeing faculties: Be often
looking through the prospective of the promise: and live not by sense on
present things; but live as if you saw the glorious things which you say you do
believe. That when worldly titles are insignificant words, and fleshly
pleasures have an end, and Faith and Holiness will be the marks of honor; and
unbelief and ungodliness the badge^ of perpetual shame, and when you must give
account of your Stewardship, and shall be no longer Stewards, you may then by
brought by Faith unto Fruition, and see with joy the glorious things that you
now believe. Write upon your Palaces and goods, that sentence, 2 Pet. 3.11.
Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, What manner of persons ought ye ^o
be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for, and hasting to the
coming of the day of God!

HEBREWS 11.1. Now Faith is the substance of things hoped for; the evidence of
things not seen.


CHAP. I. For Conviction.
IN the opening of this Text, I have already showed, that [ it is the nature
and use of Faith to be instead of presence and sight; or to make things absent
future and unseen, to be to us, as to our Estimation, Resolution and
Conversation, as if they were present, and before our eyes: Though not as to
the degree, yet as to the sincerity of our acts.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I have already showed, that this Faith is a
grounded justifiable knowledge, and not a fancy, or uneffectual opinion; having
for its object the infallible Revelation, and certain Truth of God; and not a
falsehood, nor a mere probability or verisimile. I have showed how such a Faith
will work; how far it should carry us, if its evidence were fully entertained
and improved; and how far it does carry all that have it sincerely in the least
degree; and I have showed some of the moving considerations, that should
prevail with us to live upon the things unseen, as if they were open to our
sight.

I think I may suddenly proceed here to the remaining part of the Application,
without any recital of the explication or confirmation, the truth lying so
naked in the Text it self.

The Life of Faith, and the Life of Sense, are the two ways that all the world
do walk in, to the two extremely different ends, which appear when death
withdraws the veil. It is the ordination of God, that men's own estimation,
choice and endeavors, shall be the necessary preparative to their Fruition.
Nemo nolens bonus aut beatus est. Men shall have no better than they value, and
choose, and seek: Where earthly things are highest in the esteem, and dearest to
the mind of man, such persons have no higher, nor more durable a portion. Where
the heavenly things are highest and dearest to the soul, and are practically
preferred, they are the portion of that soul. Where the Treasure is, the heart
will be, Matthew. 6.21. The sanctifying spirit does lead the spiritual man, by a
spiritual Rule, in a spiritual way, to a spiritual, glorious, durable felicity.
The sensual part, with the sensual inclination communicated to the corrupted
mind and will, does by carnal reasonings, and by carnal means, pursue and
emb^ace a present, fading, carnal interest: and therefore it finds and
attaineth no more. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other, Gal. 5.17. They that
are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh* but they that are after
the spirit, the things of the spirit* To be carnally minded is death; but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace: Because the carnal mind is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be: So then,
they that are in the flesh cannot please God. If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, the same is none of his. If we live after the flesh, we shall die: but
if by the spirit we mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live. Romans 8. to
v. 14. Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. He that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap everlasting life, Gal. 6.7, 8. As a man is, so he
loves and desires; as he desires, he seeks; and as he seeks, he finds
and possesses. If you know which world, what riches a man prefers, intends,
and lives for, you may know which world is his inheritance, and whither he is
going as to his perpetual abode.

Reason enableth a man to know and seek more than he sees: And Faith informs
and advances Reason, to know, that by the means of supernatural Revelation,
that by no other means is fully known. To seek and hope for no better than we
know, and to know no more than is objectively revealed, (while we hinder not
the revelation) is the blameless imperfection of a creature, that has limited
faculties and capacities. To know what is Best, and yet to choose, and seek an
inferior inconsistent Good; and to refuse and neglect the Best, when it is
discerned; is the course of such as have but a superficial opinion of the good
refused, or a knowledge not wakened to speak so loudly as may be effectual for
choice; and whose sensuality mastereth their wills and reason, and leads them
backward: And those that know not, because they would not know; or hear not,
because they would not hear, are under that same dominion of the flesh, which
is an enemy to all knowledge, that is an enemy to its delights and interest. To
profess to know good, and yet refuse it; and to profess to know evil, and yet
to choose it, and this predominantly, and in the main, is the description of a
self-condemning Hypocrite: And if malignity and opposition of the Truth
professed, be added to the Hypocrisy, it comes up to that Pharisaical
blindness and obdurateness, which prepares men for the remediless sin.

Consider then but of the profession of many of the people of this Land, and
compare their practice with it, and judge what compassion the condition of many
does bespeak. If you will believe them, they profess that they verily believe
in the invisible God; in a Christ unseen to them; in the Holy Spirit, gathering
a holy Church to Christ, and employing them in a communion of Saints: that they
believe a judgment to come, upon the glorious coming of the Lord; and an
everlasting life of joy or torment thereupon. All this is in their Creed: they
would take him for a damnable Heretic that denies it; and perhaps would
consent that he be burnt at a stake: So that you would think these men should
live, as if Heaven and Hell were open to their sight. But O what an
Hypocritical Generation are the ungodly! how their lives do give their tongues
the lie! (Remember that I apply this to no better men.) It is a wonder that
such men can believe themselves, when they say they do indeed believe the
Gospel: And shows what a monster the blind deceitful heart of an impenitent
sinner is: In good sadness can they think that they truly believe that God is
God, and yet so wilfully disobey him? that Heaven is Heaven, and yet prefer the
world before it? that Hell is Hell, and yet will venture upon it for a lust, or
a thing of naught? What! believe that there is at hand a life of endless joy!
and no more mind it! but hate them that set their hearts upon it! Do they
believe, that except a man be converted and new born, he shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven? as Christ has told them, Matthew. 18.3. John 3.3, 5. and
yet never trouble their minds about it, to try whether they are converted and
new born, or not? Do they believe God, that no man shall see him without
holiness? Heb. 12.14. and yet dare they be unholy? and perhaps deride it? Do
they believe that Christ will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power, 2 These. 2.8, 9. and yet dare they disobey the
Gospel! Do they take God for their absolute Lord and Governor, while they will
not so much as meditate on his Laws, but care more what a mortal man says, or
what their flesh and carnal reason says, than what he says to them in his
holy Word? Do they take Christ for their Savior, and yet would not be saved by
him from their sins, but had rather keep them? Do they take the Holy Ghost for
their Sanctifier, while they will not have a sanctified heart or life, and love
it not in those that have it? Do they take Heaven for their endless home and
happiness? while they neither mind nor seek it, in comparison of the world? And
do they take the world for vanity and vexation, while they mind and seek it
more than Heaven? Do they believe the communion of Saints, while they fly from
it, and perhaps detest and persecute it? Is light and darkness more contrary
than their words and deeds? And is not HYPOCRISY as visible in their practice,
as Christianity in their profession? It is the complexion of their Religion.
HYPOCRITE is legibly written in the forehead of it. They proclaim their shame
to all that they converse with. When they have said, they believe the life to
come, they tell men by your ungodly worldly lives, that they are dissemblers.
When their tongue has loudly said, that they are Christians, their tongue and
hand more loudly say, that they are Hypocrites. And when they profess their
Faith but now and then, in a lifeless outside piece of worship, they profess
their Hypocrisy all the day long: in their impious neglect of God and their
salvation; in their carnal speeches; in their worldly lives, and in their
enmity to the practice of the same Religion which they profess. Their
Hypocrisy is a web, so thin, and so transparent, that it leaves their
nakedness open to their shame. They have not Profession enough to make a
considerable cover for their unbelief. They hide but their tongues: the rest
even, heart and all, is bare.

O the stupendous power of self love! the wonderful blindness and stupidity of
the ungodly! the dreadfulness of the judgment of God in thus d^serting the
w^lful resisters of his grace! That ever men (in other things of seeming
wisdom) should be such strangers to themselves, and so deceived by themselves,
as to think they love the thing they hate! and to think that their hearts are
set upon Heaven, when they neither love it, nor the way that leads to it; but
are principally bent another way: that when they ar^ strangers or enemies to a
holy life, they can yet make themselves believe, that they are holy; and that
they seek that first, which they never seek; and make that the drift and
business of their lives, which was never the serious business of an hour! O
Hypocrites! ask any impartial man of reason, that sees your lives, and hears
your prayers, whether you pray, and live, like men that believe that Heaven or
Hell must be their reward! Ask your families, whether they perceive by your
constant prayer, and diligent endeavors, and holy conversations, that your
hearts are set on a life to come! It was a cutting answer of a late Apostate,
to one that told him of the unreasonableness of Infidels that denied the life
to come; says he, There Is none in the world so unreasonable as you Christians,
that believe that there is an endless life of joy or misery to come, and do no
more to obtain the one, and escape the other. Did I believe such a life as
this, I would think all too little that I could do or suffer, to make it sure.
Who sees the certainty, greatness, and eternity of the Crown of Life, in the
resolvedness, fervency, and constancy of your holy labor! You take up with the
picture of Sermons and Prayers, and with the name of Christianity and holy
obedience: A little more Religion you will admit, than a Parrot may learn, or a
Poppet may exercise. Compare your care, and labor, and cost, for Heaven, and
for this world. That you believe the flattering deceitful world, we see by your
daily solicitousness about it: You seek it; you strive for it; you fall out
with all that stand in your way; you are at it daily, and have never done: But
who can see, that you seriously believe another world? you talk idly, and
wantonly, and proudly by the hours; but you talk of Heaven and holiness but by
the minutes: You do not turn the glass when you go to your unnecessary
recreations, or your vain discourse; or at least, you can stay when the glass
is run: But in hearing the most necessary truths of God, or in praying for
everlasting life, the hour seems long to you; and the tedious Preacher is your
weariness and molestation. You do not feast and play by the glass; but if we do
not preach and pray by it exactly, but exceed our hour, though in speaking of,
and for eternity, we are your burden, and put your languid patience to it, as
if we were doing you some intolerable wrong.

In worldly matters, you are weary of giving, but seldom of receiving: you
grudge at the asker, but seldom at the giver. But if the gift be spiritual and
heavenly, you are a weary to hear talk of it, and expostulate the case with him
that offers it: and he must show by what authority he would do you good! If
by serious holy conference he would further your preparations for the life to
come, or help you to make sure of life eternal, he is examined what power he
has to meddle with you, and promote your salvation: And perhaps he is
snapp^shly told, he is a busy, saucy fellow, and you bid him meddle with his
own matters, and let you speed as you can, and keep his compassion and charity
for himself; you give him no thanks for his undesired help. The most laborious
faithful servant you like best, that will do you the most work, with greatest
skill, and care, and diligence: But the most laborious faithful instructor and
watchman for your souls, you most ungratefully vilify, as if he were more
busy and precise than needs, and were upon some unprofitable work; and you
love a superficial hypocritical Ministry, that teaches you but to complement
with Heaven, and leads you such a dance of comical, outside, hypocritical
worship, as is agreeable to your own hypocrisy: And thus when you are mocking
God, you think you worship him, and merit Heaven by the abuse. Should a
M^nister or other friend be but half as earnest with you, for the life of your
immortal souls, as you are your selves for your estates, or friends, or lives
in any danger, you would take them for Fanatics, and perhaps do by them as his
carnal friends did once by Christ, Mark 3.21. that went out to lay hold on him,
and said, He is beside himself.] For trifles you account it wisdom to be
serious: but for everlasting things, you account it folly, or to be more busy
and solici^ous than needs. You can believe an act of pardon and indemnity from
man; when as you are little solicitous about a pardon from God, to whose
Justice you have forfeited your souls: and if a man be but earnest in begging
his pardon, and praying to be saved from everlasting misery, you scorn him,
because he does it without book, and say, he whines, or speaks through the
nose; forgetting that we shall have you one of these days, as earnest in vain,
as they are that shall prevail for their salvation; and that the terrible
approach of death and judgment, shall teach you also to pray without book, and
cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, when the door is shut, and it is all too late, Mat.
25.11.

O Sirs, had you but a lively, serious foreseeing faith; that opens Heaven
and Hell as to your sight, what a cure would it work of this Hypocrisy!

1. Such a sight would quicken you from your sloth, and put more life into your
thoughts, and words, and all that you attempt for God.

2. Such a sight would soon abate your pride, and humble you before the Lord,
and make you see how short you are of what you should be.

3. Such a sight would dull the edge of your covetous desires, and show you
that you have greater things to mind, and another kind of world than this to
seek.

4. Such a sight would make you esteem the temptations of men's reports, but as
the shaking of a leaf, and their allurements and threats as impertinent
speeches, that would cast a feather or a fly into the balance against a
mountain, or against the world.

5. Such a sight would allay the itch of lust, and quench the drunkards
insatiable thirst, and turn your gulosity into moderation and abstinence; and
acquaint you with a higher sort of pleasures, that are durable, and worthy of a
man.

6. Such a sight would cure your desire of pastime, and show you that you have
no time to spare, when all is done that necessity and everlasting things
require.

7. Such a sight would change your relish of Gods Ordinances, and esteem of
Ministers, and teach you to love and savor that which is spiritual and
serious, rather than hypocritical strains and shows: It would teach you better
how to judge of Sermons and of Prayers, than unexperienced minds will ever do.

8. Such a sight would cure your malignity against the ways, and diligent
servants of the Lord; and instead of opposing them, it would make you glad to
be among them, and fast, and pray, and watch, and rejoice with them, and better
to understand what it is to believe the communion of Saints.

In a word, did you but see what God reveals, and Saints believe, and must be
seen, I would scarce thank you to be all as serious and solicitous for your
souls, as the holiest man alive; and presently to repent and lament the folly
of your negligence and delays, and to live as men that know no other work to
mind, in comparison of that which extends to eternity. I would scarce thank
the proudest of you all, to lie down in the dust, and in sackcloth and ashes,
with tears and cries, to beg the pardon of those sins, which before you felt no
weight in. Nor the most sensual wretch, that now sticks so close to his
ambition, covetousness and lust, that he says, he cannot leave them, to spit
them out as loathsome bitterness, and be ashamed of them as fruitless things.
You would then say to the most godly, that now seem too precise, [O why do you
not make more haste, and lay hold on Heaven with greater violence! why do you
pray with no more fervency, and bear witness against the sins of the world with
no more undaunted courage and resolution; and why do you not more freely lay
out your time, and strength, and wealth, and all that you have on the work of
God? Is Heaven worth no more ado than this? Can you do no more for an endless
life, and the escaping of the wrath to come? Shall worldlings over-do you?]
These would be your thoughts on such a sight.

CHAP. II. Use of Exhortation.
WHat now remains but that you come into the light and beg of God, as the
Prophet for his servant, 2 King 6.17. to open your eyes, that you may see the
things that would do so much [ That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of glory, may give you the spirit of revelation, in the knowledge of
him; the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is
the hope of his calling, and what is the riches of the glory of his inheritance
in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.17, 18.] O set those things continually before your
eyes, that must forever be before them! Look seriously into the infallible
word; and whatsoever that fore-tells, believe it as if it were come to pass.
The unbelief of Gods threatenings, and penal Laws, is the perdition of souls, as
well as the unbelief of Promises. God gives not false fire, when he
discharges the Canons of his terrible comminations: If you fall not down, you
shall find that the lightening is attended with the thunder, and execution will
be done before you are aware. If there were any doubt of the things unseen, yet
you know it is past all doubt, that there is nothing else that is durable and
worthy of your estimation and regard: You must be Knights and Gentlemen but a
little while: speak but a few words more, and you will have spoke your last. When
you have slept a few nights more, you must sleep till the Resurrection awake
you (as to the flesh.) Then where are your pleasant habitations and contents?
your honors and attendance? Is a day that is spent, or a life that is ^xtinct,
any thing, or nothing? Is there any sweetness in a feast that was eaten, or
drink that was drunk, or time that was spent in sports and mirth, a year ago?
Certainly a known vanity should not be preferred before a probable endless joy:
But when we have certainty as well as excellency and eternity, to set against
certain, transitory vanity, what room is left for further deliberation? whether
we should prefer the Sun before a squib, or a flash of lightening that suddenly
leaves us in the dark, one would think should be an easy question to resolve.

(Up then, and work while it is day: and let us run and strive with all our
might. Heaven is at hand as sure as if you saw it. You are certain you can be
no losers by the choice. You part with nothing, for all things: you escape the
tearing of your heart, by submitting to the scratching of a bryer: You that
will bear the opening of a vein, for the cure of a Fever, and will not forbear
a necessary Journey for the barking of a Dog, or the blowing of the wind: O
leap not into Hell to escape the stinking breath of a scorner! Part not with
God, with Conscience, and with Heaven, to save your purses or your flesh. Choose
not a merry way to misery, before a prudent sober preparation for a perfect
everlasting joy. You would not prefer a merry cup before a Kingdom. You would
let go a l^sser delight or commodity for a greater here: Thus a greater sin can
forbid the exercise of a less: And shall not endless joy weigh down a brutish
lust or pleasure?

If you love pleasure, take that which is true, and full, and durable. For all
that he calls you to Repentance and Mortification, and necessary strictness,
there is none that is more for your pleasure and delight than God: or else he
would not offer you the rivers of pleasure that are at his right hand; nor
himself to be your perpetual delight. If you come into a room where are variety
of pictures, and one is gravely reading or meditating; and another with a cup
or harlot in his hand, is profusely laughing, with a gaping grining mouth;
would you take the latter or the former to be the picture of a wise and happy
man? Do you approve of the state of those in Heaven? and do you like the way
that brought them thither? If not, why speak you of them so honorably? and why
would you keep holy days in remembrance of them? If you do; examine the sacred
records, and see whether the Apostles and others that are now honored as
glorified Saints, did live as you do, or rather as those that you think are too
precise? Did they spend the day in feasting and sports, and idle talk? Did they
swagger it out in pride and wealth, and hate their brethren that were not in
all things of their conceits? Did they come to Heaven by a worldly, formal,
hypocritical, ceremonious Religion? or by faith, and love, and self-denial, and
unwearied laboring for their own and other men's salvation, while they became
the wonder and the scorn of the ungodly, and as the offscouring and refuse of
the world? Do you like holiness, when it is for from you? in a dead man, that
never troubled you with his presence or reproofs, or in a Saint in Heaven, that
comes not near you? Why then do you not like it for your selves? If it be good,
the nearer the better. Your own health, and your own wealth, do comfort you
more than another man's: And so would your own holiness, if you had it. If you
would speed as they that are now beholding the face of God, believe, and live,
and wait, as they did. And as the righteous God did not forget their work and
labor of love for his Name; so he will remember you with the same reward, if
you show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end; and be
not slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
Promises, Heb. 6.10, 11, 12.

O did you but see what they now enjoy, and what they see, and what they are,
and what they do; you would never sure scorn or persecute a Saint more? If you
believe, you see, though not as they, with open face. If you believe not, yet
it is not your unbelief, that shall make Gods Word of none effect, Romans 3.3.
God will be God if you be Atheists. Christ will be Christ if you be Infidels.
Heaven will be Heaven if you by despising it go to Hell. Judgment sleeps not
when you sleep: I'ts coming as fast when you laugh at it, or question it, as if
your eyes were open to foresee it. If you would not believe that you must die,
do you think that this would delay your death one year or hour? If ten or
twenty years time more be allotted you, it passes as swiftly, and death and
judgment come as surely, if you spend it in voluptuousness, and unbelief, as
if you watched and waited for your change.

We preach not to you Ifs and- Ands: It is not, perhaps there is a Heaven and
Hell: But as sure as you are here, and must anon go hence, you must as shortly
quit this world, and take up your abode in the world that is now to us
invisible. And no tongue can express how sensible you will then be of the
things that you will not now be made sensible of. O then with what a dreadful
view will you look before you and behind you! Behind you, upon Time, and say,
It is gone, and never will return: and hear conscience ask you, How you spent
it, and what you did with it? Before you upon Etern^ty, and say, It is come;
and to the ungodly will be an Eternity of woe. What a peal will conscience then
ring in the unbelievers ears? [Now the day is come that I was forewarned of!
the day and change which I would not believe! whither must I now go! what must
I now do! what shall I say before the Lord for all the sin that I have wilfully
committed! for all the time of mercy which I lost! How shall I answer my
contempt of Christ! my neglect of means, and enmity to a holy serious life!
What a distracted wretch was I, to condemn and dislike them that spent their
lives, in preparation for this day! when now I would give a thousand worlds, to
be but one of the meanest of them! O that the Church doors, and the door of
grace, were open to me now, as once they were, when I refused to enter. Many a
time did I hear of this day, and would not believe, or soberly consider of it.
Many a time was I entreated to prepare: and I thought an hypocritical trifling
show, would have been taken for a sufficient prep^^^tion! Now who must be my
companions! How long must I dwell with woe and horror! God by his Ministers
was wont to call to me, How long, O scorner, will thou delight in scorning? How
long will thou go on impenitently in thy folly? And now I must cry out, How
long! How long must I feel the wrath of the Almighty! the unquenchable fire!
the immortal worm! Alas, for ever! When shall I receive one moments ease? when
shall I see one glimpse of hope? O never, never, never! Now I perceive what
Satan meant in his temptations! what ^in intended! what God meant in the
threatenings of his Law! what grace was good for! what Christ was sent for! and
what was the design and meaning of the Gospel! and how I should have valued the
offers and promises of life! Now I understand what Ministers meant to be so
importunate with me for my conversion; and what was the cause that they would
even have kneeled to me, to have procured my return to God in time. Now I
understand that holiness was not a needless thing; that Christ and Grace
deserved better entertainment than contempt; that precious time was worth more
than to be wasted idly; that an immortal soul, and life eternal should have
been more regarded, and not cast away for so short, so base a fleshly pleasure.
Now all these things are plain and open to my understanding: But alas, it is now
too late! I know that now to my woe and torment, which I might have known in
time to my recovery and joy.

For the Lords sake, and for your souls sake, open your eyes, and foresee the
things that are even at hand, and prevent these fruitless lamentations. Judge
but as you will all shortly judge, and live but as you will wish that you had
lived, and I desire no more. Be serious as if you saw the things that you say
you do believe.

I know this serious discourse of another life, is usually ungrateful, to men
that are conscious of their strangeness to it, and taking up their portion
here, are loath to be tormented before the time. This is not the smoothing
pleasing way. But remember that we have flesh as well as you, which longs not
to be accounted troublesome or precise: which loves not to displease or be
displeased: And had we no higher light and life, we should ^a^k as men that saw
and felt no more than fight and flesh can reach: But when we are preaching and
dying, and you are hearing and dying, and we believe and know, that you are n^w
going to see the things we speak of, and death will straightway draw aside the
veil, and show you the great amazing sight, it is time for us to speak, and you
to hear, with all our hearts. It Is time for us to be serious, when we are so
near the place where all are serious. There are none that are in jest in Heaven
or Hell: pardon us therefore if we jest not at the door, and in the way to such
a serious state. All that see and feel are serious: and therefore all that
truly believe, must be so too. Were your eyes all opened this hour to see what
we believe, we appeal to your own consciences, whether it would not make you
more serious than we.

Marvel not if you see Believers make another matter of their salvation, than
those that have hired their understandings in service to their sense; and think
the world is no bigger or better than their globe or map; and reaches no
further than they can kenn^. As long as we see you serious about Lands and
Lordships, and titles and honors, the rattles and tarrying Irons of the
cheating world, you must give us leave (whether you will or no) to be serious
about the life eternal. They that scramble so eagerly for the bonds of worldly
riches, and devour so greedily the dr^ffe of sensual delights, methinks should
blush (if such animals had the blushing property) to blame or deride us for
being a little (alas, too little) earnest in the matters of God and our
salvation. Can you not pardon us if we love God a little more than you love
your lusts; and if we run as fast for the Crown of Life, as you run after a
feather or a fly? or if we breath as hard after Christ in holy desires, as you
do in blowing the bubble of vainglory? If a thousand pound a year in passage
to a grave, and the chains of darkness, be worth your labor; give us leave to
belie^^ that mercy in order to everlasting mercy, grace in order to glory, and
glory as the end of grace, is worth our labor, and infinitely more.

Your end is narrow, though your way be broad: and our end is broad, though our
way be narrow. You build as Miners in Cole-pits do, by digging downwards into
the dark; and yet you are laborious: Though we begin on earth, we build toward
Heaven, where an attractive loadstone draws up the workmen and the work; and
shall we loiter under so great encouragements? Have you considered that Faith
is the beholding grace? the evidence of things not seen? and yet have you the
hearts to blame Believers, for doing all that they can do, in a case of such
unspeakable everlasting consequence. If we are Believers, Heaven and Hell are
as i^ were open to our sight? And would you wish us to trifle in the sight of
Heaven? or to leap into Hell, when we see it as before us? what name can
express the inhumane cruelty of such a wish o^ motion? or the unchristian folly
of those that will obey you?

O give us leave to be serious for a Kingdom which by Faith we see! Blame us
for this, and blame us that we are not beside our selves. Pardon us that we are
awake, when the thunder of Jehovah's voice does call to us, denouncing
everlasting wrath to all that are sensual and ungodly. Were we asleep, as you
are, we would lie still and take no heed what God or man said to us.

Pardon us that we are Christians, and believe these things, seeing you profess
the same your selves. Disclaim not the practice till you dare disclaim the
profession. If we were Infidels, we would do as the ungodly world: we would
pursue our present pleasures and commodity, and say, that things above us are
nothing to us; and would take Religion to be the Troubler of the world: But
till we are Infidels or Atheists at the heart, we cannot do so.

Forgive us that we are men; if you take it to be pardonable. Were we bruits,
we would eat, and drink, and play, and never trouble our selves or others, with
the care of our salvation, or the fears of any death but one; or with resisting
sensual inclinations, and meditating on the life to come; but would take our
ease and pleasure while we may.

At least forgive us that we are not blocks or stones; that we have life and
feeling. Were we insensate clods, we would not see the light of Heaven, nor
hear the roaring of the Lion, nor fear the threats of God himself: we would not
complain, or sigh, or groan, because we feel not.

If therefore we may have leave to be awake; and to be in our wi^s, to be
Christians; to be men; to be creatures that have life and sense, forgive us
that we believe the living God; that we cannot laugh at Heaven and Hell, nor
jest at the threatened wrath of the Almighty. If these things must make us the
object of the worlds reproach and malice, let me rather be a reproached man,
than an honored beast; and a hated Christian, than a beloved Infidel; and
rather let me live in the midst of malice and contempt, than pass through
honor unto shame, through mirth to misery, and a senseless, to a feeling death.
Hate us when we are in Heaven, and see who will be the sufferer by it. If ever
we should begin to nod and relapse toward your hypocritical formality, and
senseless indifferency, our lively sight of the world invisible, by a serious
faith, would presently awake us, and force us confidently to conclude, AVT
SANCTVS AVT BRUTUS: There is practically and predominantly no Mean. He Will prove
a BRVIT that is not a SAINT.

CHAP. III.
HAving done with this general conviction and exhortation to unbelieving
Hypocrites, I proceed to acquaint Believers with their Duty, in several
particulars.

1. Worship God as Believers; serve him with reverence and godly fear, for our
God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28, 29. A seeing faith, if well excited, would
kindle love, desire, fear, and all praying graces. No man prays well, that
does not well know what he prays for. When it comes to seeing, all men can cry
loud, and pray when praying will do no good. They will not then speak sleepily,
or by rote, Fides intuendo, amorem recipit, amorem sus^^tat: Cor flagrans amore
desideria, gemitus, orationes spirat. Faith is the burning-glass which
beholding God, receives the beams of his communicated love, and inflameth the
heart with love to him again; which mounteth up by groans and prayers, till it
reach its original, and love for ever rest in love.

2. Desire and use the creature as Believers. Interpret all things as they
receive their meaning, from the things unseen: understand them in no other
sense. It Is only God and the life to come that can tell you what is good or bad
for you in the world. And therefore the ungodly that cannot go to Heaven for
counsel, are carried about by mere deceits. Take heed what you love: and take
heed of that you love. God is very jealous of our love: He sheds abroad his own
love in our hearts, that our hearts may be fruitful in love to him, which is
his chief delight. By love he commands love; that we may suitably move toward
him, and center in him. He communicates so much for the procuring of a little,
that we should endeavor to give him all that little, and shed none of it
inordinately upon the creature by the way. Nothing is great, or greatly to be
admired, while the great God is in sight. And it is unsuitable for little
things, to have great affections; and for low matters to have a high esteem. It
is the corruption and folly of the mind, and the delusion of the affections to
exalt a Shrub above a Cedar, and magnify a Molehill above a Mountain; to
embrace a shadow or spectrum of felicity, which vanishes into Nothing, when
you bring in the light. The creature is nihil and nullipotens: Nothing should
have no interest in us, and be able to do Nothing with us (as to the motions
that are under the dominion of the will.) God is All and Almighty: And he that
is All, should have All, and command All: And the Omnipotent should do All
things with us, by his Interest in Morals; as he will do by his force in
Naturals. I deny not but we may love a friend: One soul in two bodies will have
one mind, and will, and love. But as it is not the body of my friend, that I
love or converse with principally, but the soul; (and therefore should have no
mind of the case, the corpse, the empty nest, if the bird were flown) so is it
not the person, but Christ in him, or that of God which appears on him, that
must be the principal object of our love. The man is mutable, and must be
loved, as Plato did commend his friend to Dionysius: Haec tibi scribo de
homine, viz. animante natura mutabili: and therefore must be loved with a
reserve. But God is unchangeable, and must be absolutely and unchangeably
loved. That life is best that is likest Heaven: There God will be All; and yet
even there, it will be no dishonor or displeasure to the Deity, that the
glorified humanity of Christ, and the New Jerusalem, and our holy society, are
loved more dearly than we can love any creature here on earth: So here, God
takes not that affection as stolen from him, that is given to his servants for
his sake, but accepts it as sent to him by them. Let the creature have it, so
God have it finally in and by the creature; and then it is not so properly the
creature that has it, as God. If you choose, and love your friends for God, you
will use them for God: not flattering them, or desiring to be flattered by
them; but to kindle in each other the holy flame which will aspire and mount,
and know no bounds, till it reach the boundless element of love. You will not
value them as friends, qui omnia dicta and facta vestra laudant, sed qui errata
and delicta amice reprehendunt: Not them that call you good; but them that
would make you better. And you will let them know, as Phocian did Antipater,
that they can never use you, and amici^ and adulatoribus; as friends and
flatterers; that differ as a wife and a harlot.

It Is hard to love the imperfect creature, without mistakes, and inordinacy in
our love: And therefore usually where we love most, we sin most; and our sin
finds us out; and then we suffer most: and too much affection is the forerunner
of much affliction; which will be much prevented, if Faith might be the guide
of Love, and Humane Love might be made Divine; and all to be referred to the
things unseen, and animated by them. Love where you can never love too much;
where you are sure to have no disappointments; where there is no unkindness to
eclipse or interrupt; where the only error is, that God has not all; and the
only grief, that we love no more.

Especially in the midst of your entising pleasures, or entising employments
and profits in the world, foresee the end; do all in Faith, which tells you,
[ The time is short; it remains therefore, that both they that have wives, be
as though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they
that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they
possessed not; and they that use this world, as through they used it not (or
not abusing it:) for the fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30.

3. Employ your time as becomes Believers. Faith only can acquaint you, what an
unconceivable weight does lie upon this inch of hasty time. As you behave your
selves for a few days, it must go with you in joy or misery for ever: You have
your appointed time, for your appointed work. God has turned the glass upon
you; much of it is run out already. No price can call back one hour that you
have lost. No power or policy can retard its course; Sic fugiunt fraeno non
remorante dies. When it comes to the last sand, and time is gone, you will know
the worth of it: You Will then confess it should have seemed more precious in your
eyes, than to have been cast away upon things of naught. O precious time! more
worth than all the riches of the world! How highly is it valued by all at last?
And how basely is it esteemed new by the most? Now it is no more worth with
them, than to be sold for unnecessary sports, and ease, and wasted in idleness
and vain delights: But then; when it is gone, and all is too late, how loud would
they cry, if cries could call back Time again! O then what a mercy would it
seem, if God would try them once again! and trust them but with another life,
or with Hezekiah's fifteen years! or but with fifteen days, or hours, upon
such terms of grace, as they held that life which they abused! It amazeth me to
observe the lamentable stupidity of the world, how hard they beg for time when
they think it is near an end! and how carelessly they let it slide away, when
they have strength and faculties to improve it! They are grievously afraid lest
death deprive them of it; and yet they are not afraid to deprive themselves of
the use and fruit of it, and to cast it away as contemptuously, as if it were
an useless thing. I seldom come near a dying man, but I hear him complain of
the loss of Time, and wish it were to spend again, that it might be better
valued and used. And yet the living will not be warned. O value Time, as wise
men, while you have it; and not as miserable fools, when it is gone! If our
Lord said, I must do the work of him that sent me while it is day; for the
night comes when no man can work, Joh. 9.4. What need then have such as we to
be doing, and make much of time? O let not company, mirth or business, make you
forget the work of Time! Can you play, or loiter away your hours, with Eternity
in your eye? Get the Sun to stand still, and Time to make a truce with you, and
to waste no more of the oil of life, before you lose another hour.

O what heads, what hearts have all those men, that standing against the verge
of an endless world, can think they have any time to spare! Has God given you
too much? If not, why do you lose it? If he has, why are you loath that he
should shorten it? You would not throw away your gold, as contemptuously as you
do your time; when an hours time is more valuable than gold. Frown on that
company that would rob you of half an hours time. Tell them you have something
else to do, than to feast, or play, or talk away your time unnecessarily. O
tell them you were not made for nothing. You are in a race, and must not stand
still: You are in a fight, and must not cease. Your work is great; much of it
is undone. Your enemies are not idle: Death will not stop: the Judge is coming,
and still beholds you: and Heaven or Hell are ready to receive our ending life,
and tell us how we spent our time: And can you find time to spare? You are not
made as Weather-cocks, to stand up on high for men to look at, and by turning
about with every wind, to show them which way it stands. Turn not your lives
into that curse, Levit. 26.20. [ You shall spend your strength in vain.]
Believe it, Time must be reviewed. The day is near, when every man of you had
rather find it in your accounts, [so many hours spent in self-examination, and
holy meditation; so many in reading the Word of God; so many spent in fervent
prayer; and so many in doing good to others] than [so many spent in needless
sports and pleasures; so many in idleness and vain discourses; and so many in
the less necessary matters of the world.] Ask those that tempt you to mis-spend
your time, whether at death and Judgment they had rather themselves have a
life of holy diligence to review, or a life consumed in vanity, and transitory
delights.

You will not suffer impertinencies to interrupt your counsels, and serious
business in the world: You Will tell intruders, that you are busy, and cannot
have while to attend them. And are you going into Heaven or Hell, and have but
a few days time of preparation (God knows (...)) and yet can you have while to
pass this precious (...) vain? O what would you not give ere long for one of
the hours that you now mis-spend? When the oath is performed, Rev. 10.6. [ That
Time shall be no longer.] Wonderful! that men can find Time for any thing, save
that for which they had their time! Non tam been vivant, sed quamdiu
confiderant (inquit Seneca) cum omnibus p^ssit contingere ut been vivant; ut
diu nulli.] To live well is both possible and necessary, and yet is
disregarded: To live long, is neither possible, nor necessary; and yet is
sought by almost all. Incipiunt vivere cum definendum est: immo quidam ante
desierunt vivere, quam inciperent. Sen. It Is unseasonable we should begin to
live, when we should make an end: but it is most unhappy to have made an end,
before they do begin: Pulchrum est (inquit idem) consummare vitam ante mortem;
and expectare secure reliquam temporis partem.] Do the great work, and then you
may comfortably spend the rest in waiting for the conclusion. Yet you have
time, and leave, and helps: you may read, and meditate, and pray, if you will:
but shortly Time will be no more. O let not Satan insult over your carcasses
and tormented souls, and say, [Now it is too late! Now murmr and repent as
long as you will! Now pray, and cry, and spare no^!] O use that Faith which
beholds the invisible world, and makes future things as present, and then
delay and loiter if you can: Then waste your hours in idleness or vanity if you
dare! either light or fire shall awake you.

4. Suffer as Believers. Fear not the wrath of man; but endure as seeing him
that is invisible, Heb. 11.27. show plainly, that you seek a better Country,
verse. 14, 16. Read often, Heb. 11, and 12 chapters, Behold the Kingdom prepared
and secured for you by Christ, and then you will be indifferent which way the
wind of humane favor or applause shall fit; or what weather Lunatic
influences and aspects shall produce. Such a Faith will make you with Abraham,
to turn your back on all, and engage in Pilgrimage for an inheritance after to
be received; though he knew not whither he went, (with a distinct particular
knowledge) Heb. 11.8. As strangers and travelers, you will not be troubled to
leave towns and fields, buildings and ^^alth, and walks behind you, as knowing
that you were (...) ^ass by them, desiring and seeking a better, that is, an
heavenly: And you shall lose nothing by this passing by all in the world: For
God will not be ashamed to be called your God; and he has prepared for you a
City, Heb. 11.13, 16. Seriously respect the recompense of reward, and it will
make you choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches, than the treasures of the world, v. 25, 26. Stephen's sight
would cause Stephen's patience. Hold on as Christians; the end is near: Let us
run with patience the race that is set before us; looking to Jesus the Author
and Finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of
God: Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself,
lest ye be wearied, and faint in your minds, Heb. 12.2, 3.

You may well endure the buffeting, and scorn, if you foresee the honor. You
may well endure the Crown of Thorns, if you foresee the Crown of Glory: You may
endure to be forsaken of all, if you see him that will never fail you, nor
forsake you: This foretaste of the Rivers of pleasure with the Lord, will drown
the taste of the Vinegar and Gall. Whine not like worldlings that have lost
their portion, when you are stripped as bare as Job. If you are true Believers,
you have All still, for God is All: You have lost Nothing; for Faith has made
the world as Nothing to you: And will you whine and vex your self for Nothing?
Can you call it Nothing so frequently and easily in your prayers, and ordinary
speech; and do you now recall this; or tell us by your serious grief, that you
speak but in hypocrisy and jest. [ Frangitur nemo molestia adversorum, qui
non capitur delectatione prosperorum. August. Had there been less Idolatrous
Love, there would have been less tormenting grief and care. Our life consists
not in the abundance of the things that we possess. He is not happy that has
them, but he that neither needs nor desires them. [Cum in his quae homines
eripiunt, optant, custodiunt, nihil inveneris, non dico quod malis, sed quod
velis. Sen.] Superfluity does but burden and break down: The Corn that is too
rank lodges; and the branches break that are overladen with fruit. [ Omnia
quae superfluunt nocent: segetem nimia sternit ub^^tas: rami onere franguntur
ad maturitatem non pervenit faecunditas: Idem quoque animis evenit, quos
immoderata prosperitas rumpit; quia non tantum in aliorum injuriam, sed etiam
in suam utuntur. Sen.] It Is pleasure, and not pain, that is the worlds most
deadly sting: It has never so much hurt us, as when it has flattered us into
delights or hopes. [Et fera and piscis spe aliqua oblectante decipitur. Sen.]
Hope is the bait; prosperity and pleasure the net, that souls are ordinarily
ensnared by. Men lose not their souls for poverty, but for riches; nor for
dishonor, but for honor; nor for sorrow, but for delight.

[Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis.] The luxuriances of prosperity,
bring us so frequently under the pruning hook. The surfeits and summer fruits
of fullness and carnal contentments and delights, do put us to the trouble of
our sicknesses and our Physic. [ How hardly shall rich men enter into Heaven?]
says he that well knew who should enter. Says A^gustine [Difficile, immo
impossible est, ut praesentibus and futuris quis fruatur bonis; ut hic
ventrem, and ibi mentem implea^: ut a deliciu ad delicias transeat; and in
utroque seculo primus s^t* ut in terra and in coelo appareat gloriosus?] The
hope is, that [ with God such humane impossibilities are possible] But it is
more terrible, than desirable to be put upon so great a difficulty. Sweet
dishes will have wasp^ and flies; but most of them are drowned in their
delights. Says Boethius of Prosperity and Adversity; I^^a fallit, haec
instruit: illa mendacium specie bonorum mentes fruentium ligat: haec
cogitatione fragilis faelicitatis absolvit: Itaque illam videas ventrosam
fluentem, suique semper ignaram: hanc sobriam, succinctamque ac ipsius
adversitatis exercitatione prudentem. A full meal seems best in the eating; but
a light meal is better the next day. More thank God in Heaven for adversity,
than for prosperity: And more in Hell cry out of the fruit of prosperity, than
of adversity. Many did never look toward Heaven, till affliction cast them on
their backs, so that they could look no other way. [ It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes] says David, Psalm.
119.71. [ Before I was afflicted, I went astray.] v. 67. [ In very faithfulness
thou have afflicted me] v. 75. One sight of Heaven by faith will force you to
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are unworthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us] Romans 8.18. To suffer for Christ
and righteousness sake, is but to turn an unavoidable fruitless pain, into that
which being voluntary, is the more easy, and has a great reward in Heaven,
Matthew. 5.11, 12. And to part with that for a Crown of Life, which else we must
part with for nothing. Worldly friends, and wealth, and honor, are summer
fruit, that will quickly fall. Hungry fowl know where it is harvest [ At simul
intonuit fugiunt: Those that must dwell with you in Heaven, are your sure and
steadfast friends [ Caetera fortunae, etc.] Those that are now highest, and
least acquainted with the tongue of malice, the unfaithfulness of friends, or
rage of enemies, shall shortly say, [Atque haec exempli^ quondam collecta
priorum:
Nunc mihi sunt propriis, cognita vera malis.]


There is but the difference of an Est and an Erit, between their mirth and
endless sorrows: Their honor, and their endless shame; nor between our sorrow
and our endless joy. Their final honor is to be embalmed, and their dust to be
covered with a sumptuous monument, and their names extolled by the mouths of
men, that little know how poor a comfort all this is to the miserable soul. In
the height of their honor you may foresee the Chyrurgion opening their bowels,
and showing the receptacles of the treasure of the Epicure, and what remains of
the price that he received for his betrayed soul. He cuts out the heart with a
[ Hae seeds livoris erant: jam pascua vermis] you next tread on his interred
corpse, that is honored but with a [ Hic jacet] [Here lies the body of such a
one] And if he have the honor to be magnified by fame or history, it is a
fool-trap to ensnare the living, but eases not the soul in Hell. And shall we
envy men such a happiness as this? what if they be able to command men's lives,
and to hurt those that they hate for a little while? Is this a matter of honor
or of delight? A Pestilence is more honorable, if destroying be an honor. The
Devil is more powerful (if God permit him) to do men hurt, than the greatest
Tyrant in the world: And yet I hope you envy not his happiness, nor are
ambitious to partake of it. If Witches were not kin to Devils, they would never
sell their souls for a power to do hurt: And how little do tyrannical
worldlings consider, that under a mask of Government and Honor, they do the
same?

Let the world then rejoice while we lament and weep: Our sorrow shall be
speedily turned into joy; and our joy shall no man ^hen take from us, Joh.
16.20, 22. Envy not a dying man ^he happiness of a feather-bed, or a merry
dream. You think ^t hard in them to deny you the liberties and comforts of this
^^fe, though you look for Heaven: And will you be more cruel than the ungodly?
Will you envy the trifling commodities or delights of earth, to those that are
like to have no more, but to lie in Hell when the sport is ended? It is
unreasonable impatience that cannot endure to see them in silks and gallantry a
few days, that must be so extremely miserable for ever. Your crumbs, and
leavings, and overplus is their All. And will you grudge them this much? In
this you are unlike your heavenly Father, that does good to the just and
unjust: would you change cases with them? would you change the fruit of your
adversity, for the fruit of their prosperity.

Affliction makes you somewhat more calm, and wise, and sober, and cautelous,
and considerate, and preventeth as well as cures sin. Prosperity makes them
(through their abuse) inconsiderate, rash, insensible, foolish, proud,
unperswadable. And the turning away of the simple slays them, and the
prosperity of fools destroys them, Prove. 1.32. It Is long since Lazarus's
sores were healed, and his wants relieved; and long since Dives feast was
ended. O let me rather be afflicted, than rejected; and be a doorkeeper in the
house of God, than dwell in the tents of wickedness: and rather be under the
rod, than turned out of doors. Look with a serious Faith upon Eternity, and
then make a great matter of enjoyments or sufferings here if you can. Great
joys and sorrows forbid men to complain of the biting of a Flea. Thunderclaps
drown a whispering voice.

O what unbelief our impatiency and disquietness in sufferings do discover! Is
this living by faith? and conversing in another world? and taking God for All,
and the world for Nothing? What! make such a do of p^verty, imprisonment,
injuries, disgrace, with Heaven and Hell before our eyes? The Lord vouchsafe me
that condition, in which I shall be nearest to himself, and have most communion
with Heaven; be it what it will be for the things of earth. These are the
desires to which I Will stand.

To thank God for the fruit of past afflictions, as the most necessary mercies
of our lives (as some of us have daily cause) and at the same time to be
impatient under present afflictions, or inordinately afraid of those to come,
is an irrational as well as unbelieving incongruity.

Are we derided, slandered, abused by the ungodly? If we repine that we have
enemies and must fight; we repine that we are Christ's souldires, and that is,
that we are Christians. [ Quomodo potest imperator militum suorum virtutem
probare, nisi habuerit hostem] says Lactantius. Enemies of God do not use to
fight professedly against himself, but against his soldiers [Non qui contra
ipsum Deum pugnent, sed contra milites ejus inquit idem] If the remnants of
goodness had not been a derision among the Heathens themselves, in the more
sober sort, a Heathen would not have said, [ Nondum faelix es, si non te turba
deriferit: si beatus vis esse, cogita hoc primum contemnere, and ab aliis
contemni. Sen.] Thou art not yet happy, if the rabble deride thee not: If thou will be blessed, learn first to contemn this, and to be contemned of others.]
No body will deride or persecute us in Heaven.

5. Improve your talents and opportunities in your callings as Believers;
especially you that are Governors. God is the original and end of Government.
The highest are but his ministers, Romans 13.6. This world is but the way unto
another. Things seen are for things unseen: And Government is to order them to
that end: Especially by terrifying evil doers, and by promoting holiness in the
earth. The Moral as well as the Natural motion of inferior agents, must
proceed from the influence of the superior. The spring and the end of every
action truly good, are out of fight. Where these are not discerned, or are
ignorantly or maliciously opposed, the action is vitiated, and tends to
confusion and ruin. God is the end of all holy actions; and carnal self is the
end of sin. If God and self are infinitely distinct; you may easily see that
the actions material^y the same, that are intended to such distant ends, must
needs be very distant. Nothing but saving Faith and Holiness can conquer
selfishness in the lowest of the people. But where the flesh has more
plentiful provision, and self is accommodated with the fullest contents of
honor and pleasure that the world affords, how difficult a work then is
self-denial! And the reign of the flesh is contrary to the reign of Christ.
Where the flesh and visible things bear sway, the enemy of Christ bears sway.
The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to his Law, nor
can be, Romans 8.7. And how Christ's enemies will receive his Laws, and use his
Messengers, and regard his ways and servants, the most of the world have
experience to their cost. The interest of the flesh, being contrary to Christ's
interest, the competition maintains a continual conflict. The Word of God
does seem to be against them: The faithful Ministers that would save them from
their sins, do seem to wrong them, and deal too boldly with them. Were it an
Elijah, he would be called, The troubler of Israel; and met with an [ Have thou
found me O mine enemy] No measure of prudence, knowledge, piety, innocence,
meekness or self-denial, will serve to appease the wrath and displeasure of
this carnal enmity. If it would, the Apostles had escaped it: or at least it
would not have fallen so furiously upon Christ h^mself. Nay, these are the oil
that increase the flame. And Satan has still the bellows in his hand: He
knows that if he can corrupt or win the Commander, he can rout the Army, and
ruin them with the greatest ease. It has been Satan's grand design, since the
Christian name was known on earth, to advance the selfish interest of men
against the interest of Christ; and to entangle the Rulers of the world in some
cause, that Christ, and his Word, and Servants cannot favor, and so to make
them believe that there is a necessity on them to watch against, and subdue the
interest of Christ. As if it were necessary that the shore be brought to the
boat, and not the boat to the shore: And that the Physician be brought to the
Patients mind, or else destroyed or used as his enemy. I am afraid to speak out
the terrible words of God in Scripture, that are against such persons, lest you
should misunderstand me, and think I misapply them. But Christ fears no man,
and has not spoken his Word in vain; and his Messengers must be faithful; for
he will bear them out; and preventive cautions are easier and safer than
reprehensive corrasives. I will but refer you to the texts, that you may peruse
them, Matthew. 21.44. Matthew. 18.3.6. Matthew. 25.40, 45. Luke 18.7. Psalm. 2. Luke
19.27. Acts 9.4, 5. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. Read them with fear as the Words of God.
Blessed are those Rulers and Nations of the Earth, that perceive and escape
this pernicious snare of the grand deceiver; that with all his subtilty and
industry, endeavors to breed quarrels, and sow dissentions between them and
the universal King.

The more God gives to the carnal and unwise, the more they think themselves
engaged against him; because by his commands he seems to take it from them
again, by crossing the flesh, which would use it only to fulfill its lusts. Like
a Dog that fawneth on you till he have his bone; and then snarleth at you, lest
you take it from him; and will fly in your face if you offer to meddle with it.
Men readily confess that they have their wealth from God; because it cannot be
denied, and because they would use the name of God, as a cover to hide their
covetousness, and unlawful ways of getting: But if you judge by their usage of
it, and their returns to God; you would think that they believed, that they had
nothing at all from God, but some injuries; and that all their benefits and
good were from themselves. The Turkish and Tartarian Emperor will say, that
all his grandeur and power is from God; that by making it most Divine, he may
procure the more reverence and obedience to himself: But when he has said so
for his own interest, he uses the same power against God and his interest; to
the banishing of his Word and holy Worship, and the forbidding the preaching of
the Gospel of salvation; and to the cherishing of tyranny, pride and lust: As
if God had armed them against himself, and made his Officers to be his enemies;
and gave them power that they might powerfully hinder men's salvation, and made
great, to be great oppressors.

As a believing Pastor is a Priest that stands between God and the people, to
mediate under the great Mediator; to receive from God his Word and Ordinances,
and deliver them to the flocks; and to offer up supplications in their names to
God: So believing Governors of civil Societies or Families, receive from God a
power to rule the subjects for their good, and they use it to make the subjects
good, that God may be pleased and honored by all! And the obedience which they
require, is such as may be given to God in them. They take power from God to
use it for God, and are so much more excellent than the greatest of ambitious
carnal Princes, as the pleasing and honoring of God, is a more excellent
design and work, than the gratifying of fleshly lust, and the advancement of a
lump of clay. The Kingdoms of the world would all be used as the Kingdoms of
the Lord, if the everlasting Kingdom were well believed. The families of men
would be sanctified as Churches unto God, if the eternal house not made with
hands, were truly taken for their home, and their trade were to lay up a
treasure in Heaven. In Cities and Countries Brethren would dwell in holy peace,
and all concur in honoring God, if once they were made fellow Citizens with
the Saints, and their Burgeship and conversation were in Heaven, Ephesians. 2.19.
Phil. 3.20, 21.

6. Resist Temptations as Believers. If you live by Faith, then fight against
the world and flesh by Faith. Faith must be your helmet, and the Word of Faith
must be your shield, Ephesians. 6.16. And your victory it self must be by Faith, 1 John 5.4. If Satan tell the flesh of the preferment, riches, or the pleasures
of lust, answer him with a believing foresight of Gods Judgment, and the life
to come. Never look on the baits of sin alone, but still look at once on God
and on Eternity: As a just Judge will hear both parties speak, or see their
evidences before he will determine: So tell the Tempter, that as you have heard
what fleshly allurements can say, you will see also what the Word of God says,
and take a view of Heaven and Hell, and then you will answer him.

7. Rejoice as Believers. Can Faith set open the windows of the soul, and no
light of heavenly pleasures enter? Can it peruse the Map of the Land of
Promise, or see and taste the bunch of Grapes, without any sweetness to the
soul? That is the truest Belief of Heaven, which makes men likest those that
are in Heaven: And what is their character, work and portion, but the Joys of
Heavenly Light and Love! Can we believe that we shall live in Heaven for ever?
Can we believe that very shortly we shall be there? and not rejoice in such
believing? I know we commonly say, that the uncertainty of our proper title, is
the cause of all our want of joy: But if that were all, if that were the first
and greatest cause, and our belief of the promise it self were lively; we
should at least set our hearts on Heaven as the most delightful and desirable
state: and Love would work by more eager desires, and diligent seekings, till
it had reached assurance, and cast out the hindrances of our joy. How much
would a mere Philosopher rejoice, if he could find out natural evidence, of so
much as we know by Faith? You may perceive what their content in finding it,
would be, by their exc^eding pains in seeking. The unwearied studies by day and
night, which many of them used, with the contempt of the riches and greatness
of the world, do tell us how glad they would have been, to have seen but half
so far as we may. If they could but discover more clearly and certainly, the
principles, and elements, and forms of Beings; the nature of spirits; the
causes of motion; the nature and cause of light and heat; the order, course and
harmony of the universal systeme of the world; what joyful acclamations would
this produce, in the literal studious sort of men! what joy then should it be
to us, to know by Faith the God that made us; the Creation of the world, the
Laws and Promises of our Creator, the Mysteries of Redemption and
Regeneration; the frame of the new Creature, the entertainment of the spirits
of the just with Christ, the Judgment which all the world must undergo, the
work and company which we shall have hereafter, and the endless joys which all
the sanctified shall possess in the sight and Love of God for ever? How blessed
an invention would it be, if all the world could be brought again to the use of
one universal language? Or if all the Churches could be perfectly reconciled,
how joyful would the Author of so great a work be? should we not then rejoice
who foresee by Faith, a far more perfect union and consent, than ever must be
expected here on earth.

Alas, the ordinary lowness of our Comforts does tell us, that our Faith is
very small! I say not so much [ The sorrows of a doubting heart] as the little
joy which we have in the fore-thoughts of Heaven, when our title seems not
much doubtful to us: For those sorrows show, that such esteem it a joyful
place, and would rejoice if their title were but cleared: But when we have
neither the sorrow or solicitousness of the afflicted soul, nor yet the joy
which is any whit suitable to the belief of such everlasting joys, we may know
what to judge of such an uneffectual belief; at best, it is very low and
feeble. It is a joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which unseen things should
cause in a Believer, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8. Because it is an exceeding eternal
weight of glory, which he believes, 2 Cor. ^ 17, 18.

8. Finally, Learn to Die also as Believers. The life of Faith must bring you
to the very entrance into glory: where one does end, the other begins. As our
dark life in the womb by nutriment from the Mother, continues till our passage
into the open world. You would die in the womb, if Faith should cease, before
it bring you to full intuition and fruition, Heb. 11.22. By faith Joseph when
he died made mention of the departing of the children of Israel. Joseph's faith
did not die before him, Heb. 11.3. These all died in faith, confessing that
they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, and declaring that they sought a
better Country. They that live by faith, must die in faith; yea and die by
faith too. Faith must fetch in their dying comforts. And O how full, and how
near a treasure has it to go to? To die to this world, is to be born into
another. Beggars are best when they are abroad. The travail of the ungodly is
better to them than their home. But the Believers home is so much better than
his travail, that he has little cause to be afraid of coming to his Journeys
end; but should rather every step cry out, O when shall I be at home with
Christ! Is it Earth or Heaven that you have prayed for, and labored for, and
waited, and suffered for till now? And does he indeed pray, and labor, and
suffer for Heaven, who would not come thither?

It is Faith which overcomes the world and the flesh, which must also overcome
the fears of death; and can look with boldness into the loathsome grave, and
can triumph over both as victorious through Christ. It is Faith which can say,
[Go forth O my soul; depart in peace: Thy course is finished: Thy warfare is
accomplished: The day of triumph is now at hand: Thy patience has no longer
work: Go forth with joy: The morning of thy endless joys is near; and the
night of fears and darkness at an end. Thy terrible dreams are ending in
eternal pleasures: The glorious light will banish all thy dreadful specters,
and resolve all those doubts which were bred and cherished in the dark: They
whose employment is their weariness and toil, do take the night of darkness and
cessation for their rest: But this is thy weariness: Defect of action is thy
toil; and thy most grievous labor is to do too little work* And thy uncessant
Vision, Love and Praise, will be thy uncessant ease and pleasure; and thy
endless work, will be thy endless rest! Depart, O my soul, with peace and
gladness! Thou leavest not a world, where Wisdom and Piety, Justice and
Sobriety, Love, and Peace, and Order, do prevail; but a world of ignorance and
folly; of brutish sensuality and rage; of impiety and malignant enmity to
good; a world of injustice and oppression; and of confusion and distracting
strifes! Thou go not to a world of darkness, and of wrath; but of Light and
Love! From hellish malice, to perfect amity; from Bedlam rage, to perfect
wisdom; from mad confusion, to perfect order; to sweetest unity and peace; even
to the spirits of the just made perfect, and to the celestial glorious City of
God! Thou go not from Heaven to Earth, from holiness to sin, from the sight
of God, into an infernal dungeon; but from Earth to Heaven; from sin and
imperfection unto perfect holiness; and from palpable darkness, into the vital
splendor of the face of God! Thou go not amongst enemies, but to dearest
friends; nor amongst mere strangers, but to many whom thou have known by sight,
and to more whom thou have known by faith, and must know by the sweetest
communion for ever. Thou go not to unsatisfied Justice, nor to a condemning
unreconciled God; but to Love it self; to infinite Goodness; the fountain of
all created and communicated good; to the Maker, Redeemer and Sanctifier of
souls; to him who prepared Heaven for thee, and now has prepared thee for
Heaven! Go forth then in triumph, and not with terror, O my soul! The prize is
won: Possess the things which thou have so long prayed for, and sought! Make
haste and enter into thy Masters joy! Go view the glory which thou have so long
heard of; and take thy place in the heavenly Chore; and bear thy part in their
celestial melody! Sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God!
And receive that which Christ in his Covenant did promise to give thee at the
last. Go boldly to that blessed God, with whom thou have so powerful a
Mediator; and to the Throne of whose grace, thou have had so often and sweet
access. If Heaven be thy fear or sorrow, what can be thy joy? and where will thou have refuge, if thou fly from God? If perfect endless pleasures be thy
terror, where then do thou expect content! If grace have taught thee long
ago, to prefer the heavenly and durable felicity; refuse it not now when thou
art so near the port! if it have taught thee long ago, to be as a stranger in
this Sodom, and to renounce this sinful world and flesh; linger not now as
unwilling to depart; repent not of thy choice, when all that the world can do
for thee is past, repent not of thy warfare, when thou have got the victory;
nor of thy voyage, when thou art past the storms and waves, and ready to land
at the haven of felicity.

Thus Faith may sing our Nunc dimittis, when the flesh is lothest to be
dissolved.

But we must live by faith, if we would thus die by faith. Such a death does
not use to be the period of a fleshly worldly life; nor of a careless, dull and
negligent life. Nature, which brought us into the world, without our forecast
or care, will turn us out of the world without it: But it will not give us a
joyful passage, nor bring us to a better world without it. It costeth
worldlings no small care to die in an honorable or plentiful estate, (that
they may fall from an higher place than others, and may have something to make
death more grievous and unwelcome to them, and may have a greater account to
make at Judgment; and that their passage to Heaven may be as a Camels through
a Needle.) And may a believing joyful death be expected, without the
preparations of exercise and experience in a believing life? Nature is so much
afraid of dying, and an incorporated soul is so incarcerated in sense, and so
hardly rises to serious and satisfying apprehensions of the unseen world, that
even true Believers, do find it a work of no small difficulty, to desire to
depart, and be with Christ, and to die in the joyful hopes of faith. A little
abatement of the terrors of death, a little supporting hope and peace, is all
that the greater part of them attain, instead of the fervent desires, and
triumphant joys, which the lively belief of endless glory should produce. O
therefore make it the work of your lives! of all your lives! your greatest
work; your constant work, to live by faith; that the faith which has first
conquered all the rest of your enemies, may be able also to overcome the last;
and may do your last work well, when it has done the rest.

CHAP. I. Directions how to live by Faith: And first how to strengthen Faith:
And secondly, the natural Truths presupposed to be considered.
THe Directions which I shall give you, as helps to live by Faith, are of two
ranks. 1. Such as tend to the strengthening of your Faith. 2. Such as tell you
how to use it.

The first is the greatest part of our task: for no man can use that faith
which he has not; nor can use more of it than he has. And the commonest
reason why we use but little, is because we have but little to use.

But on this subject (supposing it most weighty) I have written many Treatises
already (The second part of the Saints Rest: The Unreasonableness of
Infidelity: And last of all, The Reasons of the Christian Religion: Besides
others which handle it on the by.) And somewhat is said in the beginning of
this discourse. But yet because in so great a matter I am more afraid of doing
too little than too much; I will here give you an Index of some of the chief
Helps, to be close together before you for your memories, to be the constant
fuel of your Faith.

In the work of Faith, it is first needful that you get all the prerequisite
Helps of Natural Light, and be well acquainted with their Order and Evidence,
and their Usefulness to befriend the supernatural revelations: For it is
supposed that we are men before we are Christians: We were created before we
were redeemed: And we must know that there is a God, before we can know that we
have offended him, or that we need a Savior to reconcile us to him: And we
must know that we have reasonable souls, before we can know that sin has
corrupted them, or that grace must sanctify them: And we must know, that
whatso^ver God says is true, before we can believe that the Scripture is true,
as being his revelation. Faith is an act of Reason; and Believing is a kind of
knowing; even a knowing by the testim^ny of him whom we believe; because we
have sufficient reason to believe him.

2. And next we must be well acquainted with the evidence of supernatural
Truth, which presupposes the foresaid Natural Verities. I shall set both
before you briefly in their order.

1. Think well ^f the nature of your souls, of their faculties or p^wers, their
excellency, and their proper use: And then you will find, that you are not mere
brutes, who know not their Creat^ur, nor live no^ by a Law, nor think not of
another world; nor ^^ar any ^^fferings after death: But that you have reas^n,
free will, and executive power to kn^w your Maker, and to live by ^ule, and to
hope for a Reward in another life, and to fear a p^n^shme^t hereafter. And that
as no wise Artificer makes any thing in vain; so God is much less to be
thought to have given you such souls and faculties in vain.

2. Co^sid^r next how all the world declares to you, that there is a G^d, wh^
is infinite^y p^werful, wise and good. And tha^ it is not possible that all
things which we see should have no cause, or that the derived Power, and
Wisdom, and Goodnes^ of the creature, should not proceed from that which is
more excellent in the first and total cause: Or that God should give more than
he had to give.

3. Consider nex^, in wh^t Relation such a creature must needs stand to such a
Creator: If he made us of N^^hing* (...) is not p^ssible, but that he must be
(...) Owner, and w^ and all things absolutely his Own: And if he be our Maker
and Owner, and be infinitely powerful, wise and good; and we be
Reasonable-free-agents, made to be guided by Laws or Moral Means unto our end;
it is not possible but that we should stand related to him, as subjects to
their rightful Governor. And if he be our Creator, Owner and Ruler, and also
infinitely Good, and the grand Benefactor of the world: and if the nature of
our souls be, to Love Good as Good; it cannot be possible, that he should not
be our End, who is our Creator; and that we should not be related to him as to
the Chiefest Good, both originally as our Benefactor, and finally as our End.

4. And then it is easy for you next to see, what duty you owe to that God to
whom you are thus related. That if you are absolutely his Own, you should
willingly be at his absolute dispose: And i^ he b^ your Sovereign Ruler, you
should labor most diligently to know his Laws, and absolutely to obey them.
And if he be infinitely Good, and your Benefactor and your End, you are
absolutely bound to Love him most devotedly, and to place your own felicity in
his Love. All this is so evidently the duty of man to God by nature, that
nothing but madness can deny it. And this is it which we call Sanctification,
or Holiness to the Lord. And our cohabitation and relation to men, will tell
us, that Justice and Charity are our duty as to them. And when a man is fully
satisfied that Holiness, Justice and Charity, are our duty, he has a great
advantage for his progress toward the Christian Faith.

To which let me add, that as to our selves also, it is undeniably our duty to
take more care for our souls, than for our bodies, and to rule our senses and
passions by our Reason, and to subject our lower faculties to the higher, and
so to use all sensible and present things, as conduces to the public good,
and to the advancement of our nobler part, and to our greatest benefit, though
it cross our sensual appetites.

All this being unquestionably our natural duty, we see that man was made to
live in Holiness, Justice, Charity, Temperance, and rational regularity in the
world.

5. When you have gone thus far, consider next how far men are generally from
the performance of this duty: And how backward humane nature is to it, even
while they cannot deny it to be their duty: And you will soon perceive that God
who made it their duty, did never put in them this enmity thereto: nor ever
made them without some aptitude to perform it. And if any would infer that
their indisposedn^ss proves it to be none of their duty, the nature of man
will fully confute him; and the conscience and confession of all the sober part
of the world. What wretch so blind (if he believe a Deity) who will not confess
that he should love God with all his heart, and that Justice, Charity and
Sobriety are his duty; and that his sense should be ruled by his reason, etc?
The evidence before given is not to be denied. And therefore something is
marred in nature. Some enemy has seduced man. And some deplorable change has
befallen him.

6. Yea, if you had no great backwardness to this duty your self, consider what
it must cost you faithfully to perform it, in such a malignant world as we now
live in? what envy and wrath, what malice and persecution, what opposition and
discouragements on every side we must expect? Universal experience is too full
a proof of this. (Besides what it costeth our restrained flesh)

7. Proceed then to think further, that certainly God has never appointed us
so much duty, without convenient Motives to perform it. It cannot be that he
should make us more noble than the brutes, to be more miserable: Or that he
should make Holiness our duty, that it might be our loss, or our calamity. If
there were no other life but this, and men had no hopes of future happiness,
nor any fears of punishment, what a Hell would this world be? Heart-wickedness
would be but little feared; nor heart-duty regarded: Secret sin against
Princes, States, and all degrees, would be boldly committed, and go unpunished
(for the most part.) The sins of Princes, and of all that have power to defeat
the Law, would have little or no restraint: Every man's interest would oblige
him, rather to offend God, who so seldom punishes here, than to offend a
Prince, or any man in power, who seldom lets offenses against himself go
unrevenged: And so man, more than God, would be the Ruler of the world, that
is, our God.

Nay actually the hopes and fears of another life, among most Hea^hens,
Infidels and Heretics, is the principle of Divine Government, by which God
keeps up most of the order and virtue which is in the world.

Yea, think what you should be and do your self; as to enemies, and as to
secret faults, and as to sensual vices, if you thought there were no life but
this: And is it possible that the infinitely powerful, wise and good Creator,
can be put to govern all mankind, by mere deceit, and a course of lies? as if
he wanted better means?

By how much the better any man is, by so much the more regardful is he of the
life to come, and the hopes and fears of another life, are so much the more
prevalent with him: And is it possible that God should make men good, to make
them the most deceived, and most miserable? Has he commanded all these cares
to be our needless torments, which brutes, and fools, and sottish sinners do
all escape? Is the greatest obedience to God, become a sign of the greatest
folly, or the way to the greatest loss or disappointment?

We are all sure that this life is short and vain: No Infidel can say that he
is sure that there is no other life for us: And if this be so, reason
commands us to prefer the p^ssibilities of such a life to come, before the
certain vanities of this life: So that even the Infidels uncertainty will
unavoidably infer, that the preferring of the world to come is our duty: And if
it be our duty, then the thing in it self is true: For God will not make it all
men's duties in the frame of their nature, to seek an Vtopia, and pursue a
shadow; and to spend their days and chiefest cares for that which is not;
Godliness is not such a dreaming night-walk.

Conscience will not suffer dying men to believe that they have more cause to
repent of their Godliness, than of their sin, and of their seeking Heaven, than
of wallowing in their lusts.

Nay then, these h^avenly desires would be themselves our sins, as being the
following of a lie, the aspiring after a state which is above us, and the abuse
and loss of our faculties and time: And sensuality would be liker to be our
virtue, as being natural to us, and a seeking of our most real felicity.

The common conscience of mankind does justify the wisdom and virtue of a
temperate, holy, heavenly person; and acknowledges that our heavenly desires
are of God: And does God give men both natural faculties, which shall never
come to the perfection which is their End? and also gracious desires, which
shall but deceive us, and never be satisfied? If God had made us for the
enjoyments of brutes, he would have given us but the knowledge and desires of
brutes.

Every King and mortal Judge can punish faults against Man with death: And has
God no greater or further punishment, for sins as committed against himself?
And are his rewards no greater than a man's?

These, and many more such Evidences may assure you, that there is another life
of Rewards and punishments; and that this life is not our final state, but only
a ^ime of preparation thereunto. Settle this deeply and fixedly in your minds.

8. And look up to the heavenly Regions, and think, Is this world so
replenished with inhabitants, both Sea, and Land, and Air it self? And can I
dream that the vast and glorious Orbs and Regions, are all uninhabited? O^ that
they have not more numerous and glorious possessors, than this small opacous
spot of earth.

And then think, that those higher creatures are intellectual spirits: (This is
many ways apparent) and also of the communion which they have with man: And
when we find also an intellectual nature in our selves, why should we not
believe, that our likeness of nature, does infer our likeness in our future
duration and abode.

9. And mark well but the inward and outward temptations, which solicit all
the world to sin; and what notable Evidences there be in many of them, of an
invisible power; and you will easily believe that man has a soul to save or
lose, which is of longer duration than the body.

10. Lastly, If yet there be any doubt, consider but of the sensible Evidences
of Apparitions, Witchcraft and Possessions, and it cannot choose but much
confirm you: Though much be feigned in histories of such things, yet the world
has abundant evidence of that which was certainly unfeigned. See the Devil of
Mascon, Mr. Mompessons story lately acted and published: Remigius, Bodins,
Danaeus, etc. of Witches, Lavater de Spectris; and what I have written
elsewhere.

CHAP. II. The true Method of enquiry into the supernatural Evidences of Faith,
and Rules therein to be offered.
WHen you have thus seen what evidence there is of GOD, and his Government, and
of a life of reward and punishment hereafter, and of the natural obligations
which lie on man to a holy, just, and sober life; and of the depraved state of
the world, which goes so contrary to such undoubted duty; and how certain all
this is even by natural revelation; proceed next to consider what supernatural
revelation God has added, both to confirm you in the same Truths, and to make
known such other, as were necessary for mankind to know. Where I must first
direct you in the true Method of Enquiry, and then set before you the things
themselves, which you are to know.

1. Think not that every unprepared mind is immediately capable of the Truth
(either this, or any other, except the first principles which are nota per se,
or are next to sense.) All truth requires a capacity, and due preparation of
the recipient: The plainest principles of any Art or Science, are not
understood by novices at the first fight or hearing. And therefore it were vain
to imagine that things of the greatest distance in history, or profundity in
doctrine, can be comprehended at the first attempt, by a disused and
unfurnished understanding. There must be at least, as much time, and study, and
help supposed and used, to the full discerning of the evidences of faith, as
are allowed to the attainment of common Sciences. Though grace, in less time,
may give men so much light as is necessary to salvation; yet he that will be
able to defend the Truth, and answer Objections, and attain establishing
satisfaction in his own mind, must (ordinarily) have proportionable helps, and
time, and studyes; unless he look to be taught by miracles.

2. Remember that it is a practical and heavenly doctrine which you are to
learn: It is the Art of loving God, and being happy in his love. And therefore
a worldly, sensual, vicious soul, must needs be under very great disadvantage
for the receiving of such a kind of Truths. Do not therefore impute that to the
doubtfulness of the Doctrine, which is but the effect of the enmity and
incapacity of your minds: How can he presently relish the spiritual and
heavenly doctrine of the Gospel, who is drowned in the love and care of
contrary things? Such men receive not the things of the Spirit: They seem to
them both foolishness and undesirable.

3. Think not that the history of things done so long ago, and so far off,
should have no more obscurities, nor be liable to any more Objections, than of
that which was done in the time and Country where you live. Nor yet that things
done in the presence of others, and words spoken in their hearing only, should
be known to you otherwise than by historical evidence, (unless every Revelation
to others, must have a new Revelation to bring it to each individual person in
the world.) And think not that he who is a stranger to all other helps of
Church History, should be as well able to understand the Scripture-history, as
those that have those other helps.

4. Think not that the narrativt of things done in a Country and Age so remote,
and to us unknown, should not have many difficulties, arising from our
ignorance of the persons, places, manners, customs, and many circumstances,
which if we had known, would easily have resolved all such doubts*

5. Think not that a Book which was written so long ago, in so remote a
Country, in a language which few do fully understand, and which may since then
have several changes, as to phrases, and proverbial and occasional speeches,
should have no more difficulties in it, than a Book that were written at home,
in the present Ages in our Country language, and the most usual dialect. To say
nothing of our own language, what changes are made in all other tongues, since
the times that the Gospel was recorded? Many proverbial speeches and phrases
may be now disused and unknown, which were then most easy to be understood.
And the transcribing and preserving of the Copies, require us to allow for some
defects of humane skill and industry therein.

6. Understand the different sorts of Evidence, which are requisite to the
different matters in the holy Scriptures. The matters of fact require
historical evidence (which yet is made infallible by additional miracles.) The
miracles which were wrought to confirm our history, are brought to our
knowledge only by other history. The Doctrines which are evident in nature,
have further evidence of supernatural revelation, only to help us whose natural
fight is much obscured. But it is the supernatural Doctrines, Precepts and
Promises, which of themselves require supernatural revelation, to make them
credible to man.

7. Mistake not the true Use and End of the holy Scriptures.

1. Think not that the Gospel as written was the first Constitutive or
Governing Law of Christ, for the Christian Churches. The Churches were
constituted, and the Orders, and Offices, and Government of it settled, and
exercised very many years together, before any part of the New Testament was
written to them; much more before the writing of the whole. The Apostles had
long before taught them what was commanded them by Christ; and had settled them
in the order appointed by the Holy Ghost: And therefore you are not to look for
the first determination of such doctrines or orders in the Scripture as made
thereby; but only for the Records of what was done and established before: For
the Apostles being to leave the world, did know the slipperiness of the memory
of man, and the danger of changing and corrupting the Christian Doctrine and
Orders, if there were not left a sure record of it: And therefore they did that
for the sake of posterity.

2. You must not think that all is essential to the Christian Religion, which
is contained in the holy Scriptures: Nor that they are only the adequate form
or record of that which is strictly and primarily called our Religion, or
Christianity. For there are diverse particular Books of the New Testament, which
contain much more than is essential to Christianity: And many appurtenances,
and histories, and genealogies, and circumstances are there recorded, which are
indeed subservient helps to our Religion; but are not strictly our Religion it
self.

8. As the use of the Scripture must thus be judged of according to the purpose
of the holy Spirit; so the Perfection of the Scripture must be judged of, in
relation to its intended use. It was not written to be a systeme of Physics,
nor Oratory; nor to decide grammatical Controversies about words; but to record
in apt expressions the things which God would have men to know, in order to
their faith, their duty, and their happiness. And in this respect it is a
perfect word. But you must not imagine that it is so far the word of God
himself, as if God had showed in it his fullest skill, and made it as perfect
in every respect, both phrase and order, as God could do. And if you meet in it
with several words, which you think are less grammatical, logical, or
rhetorical, than many other men could speak, and which really savor of some
humane imperfection, remember that this is not at all derogatory to
Christianity; but rather tends to the strengthening of our faith: For the
Scriptures are perfect to their intended use: And God did purposely choose men
of imperfect Oratory, to be his Apostles, that his Kingdom might not be in
word, but in power; and that our faith might not be built upon the wisdom and
oratory of man, but on the supernatural operations of the Almighty God: As
David's sling and stone must kill Goliath: So unlearned men, that cannot out-wit
the world to deceive them, shall by the Spirit and Miracles convince them.
Looking for that in the Scripture, which God never intended it for, does tempt
the unskilful into unbelief.

9. Therefore you must be sure to distinguish the Christian Religion, which is
the vital part or kernel of the Scriptures, from all the rest: And to get well
planted in your mind, the sum of that Religion it self. And that is briefly
contained in the two Sacraments, and more largely in the Creed, the Lords
Prayer, and the Decalogue, the summaryes of our Belief, Desire and Practice.
And then wonder no more that the other parts of Scripture, have some things of
less moment, than that a man has fingers, nails and hair, as well as a
stomach, heart and head.

10. Distinguish therefore between the Method of the Christian Religion, and
the Method of the particular Books of Scriptures. The Books were written on
several occasions, and in several Methods; and though that method of them all,
be perfect, in order to their proper end; yet is it not necessary that there be
in the Method no humane imperfection, or that one or all of them, be written in
that method which is usually most logical, and best. But the frame of Religion
contained in those Books, is composed in the most perfect method in the world.
And those systemes of Theology which endeavor to open this method to you, do
not feign it, or make it of themselves; but only attempt the explication of
what they find in the holy Scriptures, Synthetically or Analytically: (Though
indeed all attempts have yet fallen short of any full explication of this
divine and perfect harmony.)

11. Therefore the true Order of settling your faith, is not first to require a
proof that all the Scriptures is the Word of God; but first to prove the marrow
of them, which is properly called the Christian Religion, and then to proceed
to strengthen your particular belief of the rest. The contrary opinion, which
has obtained with many in this Age, has greatly hindered the faith of the
unskilful: And it came from a preposterous care of the honor of the
Scriptures, through an excessive opposition to the Papists who undervalue them.
For hence it comes to pass, that every seeming contradiction, or inconsistency
in any Book of Scripture, in Chronology or any other respect, is thought to be
a sufficient cause, to make the whole cause of Christianity as difficult as
that particular text is: And so all those Readers, who meet with great or
inseparable difficulties, in their daily reading of the Scriptures, are thereby
exposed to equal temptations, to damning infidelity it self: So that if the
Tempter draw any man to doubt of the standing still of the Sun in the time of
Joshua; of the life of Jonas in the belly of the Whale; or any other such
passage in any one Book of the Scriptures, he must equally doubt of all his
Religion.

But this was not the ancient method of faith: It was many years after Christ's
resurrection, before any one Book of the New Testament was written; and almost
an Age before it was finished: And all that time the Christian Churches had the
same Faith and Religion as we have now; and the same foundation of it: That is,
the Gospel preached to them by the Apostles: But what they delivered to them by
word of mouth, is now delivered to us in their writings, with all the
appurtenances and circumstances, which every Christian did not then hear of.
And there were many Articles of the Christian Faith, which the Old Testament
did not at all make known: (As that this Jesus is the Christ; that he was born
of the Virgin Mary, and is actually crucified, risen and ascended, etc.) And
the method of the Apostles was, to teach the people, the sum of Christianity
(as Paul does, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4, etc. and Peter, Act. 2.) and to bring them to
the belief of that, and then baptize them, before they wrote any thing to them,
or taught them the rest which is now in the holy Scriptures; They were first to
Disciple the Nations and baptize them, and then to teach them to observe all
things whatever Christ commanded: And the main bulk of the Scriptures is made
up of this last, and of the main subservient histories and helps.

And accordingly it was the custom of all the Primitive Churches, and ancient
Doctors, to teach the people first the Creed and sum of Christianity, and to
make them Christians before they taught them so much as to know what Books the
Canonical Scriptures did contain: For they had the sum of Christianity it self
delivered down collaterally by the two hands of tradition. 1. By the
continuation of Baptism, and public Church-professions, was delivered the
Creed or Covenant by it self: And 2. By the holy Scriptures, where it was
delivered with all the rest; and from whence every novice was not put to gather
it of himself; but had it collected to his hand by the Churches.

And you may see in the writings of all the ancient defenders of Christianity
(Justin, Athenagoras, Talianus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Arnobius, Theoph.
Antioch. Lactantius, Tertullian, ^usebius, Augustine, etc.) that they used the
method which I now direct you to.

And if you consider it well, you will find that the miracles of Christ
himself, and all those of his Apostles after him, were wrought for the
confirmation of Christianity it self immediately, and mostly before the
particular Epistles or Books were written; and therefore were only remotely and
consequentially for the confirmation of those Books as such: as they proved
that the Writers of them were guided by the infallible Spirit, in all the
proper work of their office; of which the writing of the Scriptures was a part.

1. Therefore settle your belief of Christianity it self; that is, of so much
as Baptism contains, or imports: This is more easily proved, than the truth
of every word in the Scriptures; because there are controversies about the
Canon, and the various readings, and such like: And this is the natural method,
which Christ and his Spirit have directed us to, and the Apostles and the
ancient Churches used. And when this is first soundly proved to you, then you
cannot justly take any textual difficulties, to be sufficient cause of raising
difficulties to your faith in the essentials: But you may quietly go on in the
strength of faith, to clear up all those difficulties by degrees.

I know you will meet with some who think very highly of their own mistakes,
and whose unskilfulness in these things is joined with an equal measure of self
conceitedness, who will tell you that this method smells of an undervaluing of
the Scripture: But I would advise you not to depart from the way of Christ, and
his Apostles and Churches, nor to cast your selves upon causeless hindrances,
in so high a matter as Saving Faith is, upon the reverence of the words of any
perverted factious wrangler, nor to escape the fangs of censorious ignorance.
We cannot better justify the holy Scriptures in the true Method, than they can
in their false one: And can better build up, when we have laid the right
foundation, than they can who begin in the middle, and omit the foundation, and
call the superstructure by that name.

2. Suspect not all Church History or Tradition, in an extreme opposition to
the Papists, who cry up a private unproved Tradition of their own. They tell us
of Apostolical Traditions, which their own faction only are the keep^rs of; and
of which no true historical evidence is produced: And this they call the
Tradition of the Church: But we have another sort of Tradition, which must not
be neglected or rejected, unless we will deny humanity, and reject
Christianity. Our Traditio tradens, or active Tradition, is primarily nothing
but the certain history or usage of the universal Christian Church; as Baptism,
the Lords day, the Ministry, the Church Assemblies, and the daily Church
exercises; which are certain proofs what Religion was then received by them.
And 2. The Scriptures themselves. Our Traditio tradita is nothing else but
these two conjunctly: 1. The Christian Religion, even the Faith then professed,
and the Worship and Obedience then exercised. 2. The Books themselves, of the
holy Scriptures, which contain all this, with much more. But we are so far from
thinking that Apostolical Oral Tradition, is a supplement to the Scriptures, as
being larger than them, that we believe the Scriptures to be much larger than
such Tradition; and that we have no certainty by any other than Scriptural
Tradition, of any more than the common matters of Christianity, which all the
Churches are agreed in. But he that will not believe the most universal
practice and history of the Church or world in a matter of fact, must in reason
much less believe his eyesight.

13. When you have soundly proved your foundation, take not every difficult
objection which you cannot answer, to be a sufficient cause of doubting: For if
the fundamentals be proved truths, you may trust to that proof, and be sure
that there are ways of solving the seeming inconsistent points, though you are
not yet acquainted with them. There are few Truths so clear, which a sophister
may not clog with difficulties: And there is scarce any man that has so
comprehensive a knowledge of the most certain Truths, as to be able to answer
all that can be said against it.

14. Come not to this study in a melancholy or distracted frame of mind: For in
such a case you are (ordinarily) incapable of so great a work, as the trial of
the grounds of Faith: And therefore must live upon the groundwork before laid,
and wait for a fitter time to clear it.

15. When new doubts arise, mark whether they proceed not from the advantage
which the tempter finds in your minds, rather than from the difficulty of the
thing it self: And whether you have not formerly had good satisfaction against
the same doubts which now perplex you: If so, suffer not every discomposure of
your minds, to become a means of unbelief: And suffer not Satan to command you
to dispute your faith at his pleasure: For if he may choose the time, he may
choose the success. Many a man has cast up a large account well, or written a
learned Treatise or Position well, who cannot clear up all objected
difficulties on a sudden, nor without Books tell you all that he before wrote;
especially if he be half drunk or sleepy, or in the midst of other thoughts o^
business.

15. When you are once persuaded of the truth of Christianity, and the holy
Scriptures, think not that you need not study it any more, because you do
already confidently believe it: For if your faith be not built on such cogent
evidence as will warrant the conclusion (whether it be at the present sound or
not) you know not what change assaults may make upon you (as we have known them
do on some ancient eminent Professors of the strictest Godliness, who have
turned from Christ, and the belief of immortality.)

Take heed how you understand the common saying of the Schools, that Faith
differs from Knowledge, in that it has not Evidence: It has not evidence of
sense indeed; nor the immediate evidence of things invisible, as in themselves;
but as they are the conclusions which follow the principles which are in
themselves more evident. It is evident that God is true; and we can prove by
good evidence, that the Christian Verity is his Revelation: And therefore it is
evident (though not immediately in it self) that the matter of that word or
revelation is true. And as Mr. Rich. Hooker truly says [No man indeed
believes beyond the degree of evidence of truth which appears to him, how
confidently soever they may talk.] I remember that our excellent Usher answered
me to this case, as out of Ariminensis, that [faith has evidence of
Credibility, and science has evidence of Certainty.] But undoubtedly an
evidence of Divine Revelation, is evidence of Certainty. And all evidence of
Divine Credibility, is evidence of Certainty; though of humane faith and
credibility, the case be otherwise.

16. Yea, think not that you have done the settling of your faith, when once
you have found out the soundest evidences, and are able to answer all
Objections: For you must grow still in the fuller discerning and digesting the
same evidences which you have discerned: For you may hold them so loosely, that
they may be easily wrested from you: And you may see them with so clear and
full a knowledge, as shall stablish your mind against all ordinary causes of
mutation. It is one kind (or degree rather) of knowledge of the same things,
which the Pupil, and another which the Doctor has. I am sure the knowledge
which I have now of the evidences of the Christian Verity, is much different
from what I had thirty years ago, when perhaps I could say near as much as now;
and used the same Arguments.

17. Consider well the great contentions of Philosophers; and the great
uncertainty of most of those Nations, to which the Infidels would reduce our
faith, or which they would make the test by which to try it. They judge
Christianity uncertain, because it agrees not with their uncertainties, or
certain errors.

18. Enslave not your Reason to the objects of sense: While we are in the body,
our souls are so imprisoned in flesh, and have so much to do with worldly
things, that most men by averseness and disuse, can hardly at all employ their
minds about any higher things than sensitive; nor go any further than sense
conduces them. He that will not use his soul to contemplate things invisible,
will be as unfit for believing, as a Lady is to travel a thousand miles on
foot, who never went out of her doors, but in a Sedan or Coach.

19. Where your want of learning, or exercise or light, does cause any
difficulties which you cannot overcome, go to the more wise and experienced
Believers, and Pastors of the Church, to be your helpers: For it is their
office to be both the preservers and expounders of the sacred Doctrine, and to
be the helpers of the peoples faith. The Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth: for he is the messenger
of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7.

20. Lastly, Faithfully practice with Love and alacrity what you do believe,
lest God in justice leave you to disbelieve that which you would not love and
practice.

So much to direct you in the method of your endeavors, for the getting and
strengthening of faith.

CHAP. III. The Evidences of Faith.
THese things in the Order of your enquiry being presupposed, proceed to the
consideration of the Evidences themselves, which fully prove the Christian
Verity: And here (omitting the preparatory considerations recited at large in
my [ Reasons of the Christian Religion] I shall only set before you the grand
Evidence it self, with a brief recital of some of those means, which bring it
down to our notice in these times.

The great infallible witness of CHRIST, is the SPIRIT of GOD, or the Holy
Ghost: Or that divine operation of the Holy Spirit, which infallibly proves
the attestation of God himself, as interesting him in it, as the principal
cause.

As we know the Coin of a Prince by his image and superscription, and know his
acts by his public proper Seal: And as we know that God is the Creator of the
world, by the Seal of his likeness which is upon it: Or as we know the Father
of a child, when he is so like him, as no other could beget: So know we Christ
and Christianity to be of God, by his unimitable image or impression.

The Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, are the essentialities which we call
the Nature of God: These in their proper form, and transcendent perfection, are
incommunicable: But when they produce an effect on the creature, which for the
resemblance may analogically be called by the same names; the names are
logically communicable, though the thing it self (which is the Divine Essence
or Perfections) be still incommunicable: But when they only produce effects
more heterogeneal or equivocal, then we call those effects only the footsteps
or demonstrations of their cause. So GOD, whose Power, Wisdom and Goodness in
it self is incommunicable, has produced intellectual natures, which are so
like him, that their likeness is called his Image; and analogically (yet
equivocally) the created faculties of their Power, Intellect and Will; are
called by such names, as we are fain (for want of other words) to apply to God
(the things signified being transcendently and unexpressibly in God, but the
words first used of, and applied to the creature.) But the same God has so
demonstrated his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness in the Creation of the
material or corporeal parts of the world, that they are the ^estigia and
infallible proofs of his causation and perfections, (being such as no other
cause without him can produce) but, yet not so properly called his Image, as to
his Wisdom and Goodness, but only of his Power. But no wise man who sees this
world, can doubt whether a God of perfect Power, Wisdom and Goodness, was the
maker of it. Even so the person and doctrine of Christ, or the Christian
Religion objectively considered, has so much of the Image, and so much of the
demonstrative impressions of the Nature of God, as may fully assure us that he
himself is the approving cause.

And as the Sun has a double Light, Lux and Lumen, its essential Light in it
self, and its emitted beams, or communicated Light; so the Spirit and Image of
God, by which Christ and Christianity are demonstrated, are partly that which
is essential, constitutive, and inherent, and partly that which is sent and
communicated from him to others.

In the person of Christ, there is the most excellent Image of God. 1.
Wonderful Power, by which he wrought miracles, and commanded Sea and Land, Men
and Devils, and raised the dead, and raised himself; and is now the glorious
Lord of all things. 2. Wonderful Wisdom, by which he formed his Laws, and
Kingdom, and by which he knew the hearts of men, and prophesied of things to
come. 3. Most wonderful Love and Goodness, by which he healed all diseases, and
by which he saved miserable souls, and procured our happiness at so dear a rate.

But as the essential Light of the Sun, is too glorious to be well observed by
us; but the emitted Light is it which does affect our eyes, and is the
immediate object of our sight; at least that we can best endure and use; so the
Essential Perfections of Jesus Christ, are not so immediately and ordinarily
fit for our observation and use, as the lesser communicated beams, which he
sent forth. And these are either such as were the immediate effects of the
Spirit in Christ himself, or his personal operations, or else the effects of
his Spirit in others: And that is either such as went before him, or such as
were present with him, or such as followed after him: Even as the emitted Light
of the Sun, is either that which is next to its Essence; or that which
streameth further to other creatures: And this last is either that which it
sends to us before its own appearing or rising, or that which accompanies
its appearing, or that which leaves behind it as it sets or passes away;
so must we distinguish in the present case.

But all this is but One Light, and One Spirit.

So then, I should in order speak 1. Of that Spirit in the words and works of
Christ himself, which constituteth the Christian Religion. 2. That Spirit in
the Prophets and Fathers before Christ, which was the antecedent light. 3. That
Spirit in Christ's followers, which was the concomitant and subsequent Light or
witness: And 1. In those next his abode on earth: And 2. Of those that are more
remote.

CHAP. IV. The Image of Gods Wisdom.
1. AND first, observe the three parts of Gods Image, or impress upon the
Christian Religion in it self as containing the whole work of man's Redemption,
as it is found in the works and doctrine of Christ.

1. The WISDOM of it appears in these particular observations (which yet show
it to us but very defectively, for want of the clearness, and the integrality,
and the order of our knowledge: For to see but here and there a parcel of one
entire frame or work, and to see those few parcels as dislocated, and not in
their proper places and order; and all this but with a dark imperfect sight, is
far from that full and open view of the manifold Wisdom of God in Christ, which
Angels and superior intellects have.)

1. Mark how wisely God has ordered it, that the three Essentialitie^ in the
Divine Nature, Power, Intellection and Will, Omnipotency, Wisdom and Goodness,
and the three persons in the Trinity, the Father, the Word and the Spirit; and
the three Causalities of God, as the Efficient, Directive and final Cause, (of
whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things) should have three most
eminent specimina or impressions in the world, or three most conspicuous works
to declare and glorify them; viz. Nature, Grace and Glory. And that God should
accordingly stand related to man in three answerable Relations, viz. as our
Creator, our Redeemer, and our Perfecter (by Holiness initially, and Glory
finally.)

2. How wisely it is ordered, that seeing Man's Love to God is both his greatest
duty* and his perfection and felicity, there should be some standing em^nent
means for the attraction and excitation of our Love: And this should be the
most eminent manifestation of the Love of God to us; and withal, of his own
most perfect Holiness and Goodness: And that as we have as much need of the
sense of his Goodness as of his Power, (Loving him being our chief work) that
there should be as observable a demonstration of his Goodness extant, as the
world is of his Power.

3. Especially when man had fallen by sin from the Love of God, to the Love of
his carnal self, and of the creature; and when he was fallen under vindictive
Justice, and was conscious of the displeasure of his Maker, and had made
himself an heir of Hell: And when man's nature can so hardly love one that in
Justice stands engaged or resolved to damn him, forsake him, and hate him:
How wisely is it ordered that he that would recover him to his Love, should
first declare his Love to the offender in the fullest sort, and should
reconcile himself unto him, and show his readiness to forgive him, and to save
him, yea to be his felicity and his chiefest good: That so the Remedy may be
answerable to the disease, and to the duty.

4. How wisely is it thus contrived, that the frame and course of man's
obedience, should be appointed to consist in Love and Gratitude, and to run out
in such praise and cheerful duty as is animated throughout by Love, that so
sweet a spring may bring forth answerable streams: That so the Goodness of our
Master may appear in the sweetness of our work; and we may not serve the God of
Love and Glory, like slaves, with a grudging weary mind; but like children with
delight and quietness: And our work and way may be to us a foretaste of our
reward and end.

5. And yet how meet was it, that while we live in such a dark material world,
in a body of corruptible flesh, among enemies and snares, our duty should have
somewhat of caution and vigilance, and therefore of fear and godly sorrow to
teach us to relish grace the more: And that our condition should have in it
much of necessity and trouble, to drive us homeward to God, who is our rest.
And how aptly does the very permission of sin it self, subserve this end?

6. How wisely is it thus contrived, that Glory at last should be better
rellished, and that man who has the Joy should give God the Glory; and be
bound to this by a double obligation.

7. How aptly is this remedying design, and all the work of man's Redemption,
and all the Precepts of the Gospel, built upon, or planted into the Law of
natural perfection: Faith being but the means to recover Love; and Grace being
to Nature, but as Medicine is to the Body; and being to Glory, as Medicine is
to Health: So that as a man that was never taught to speak, or to go, or to do
any work, or to know any science, or trade, or business, which must be known
acquisitively, is a miserable man, as wanting all that which should help him to
use his natural powers to their proper ends; so it is much more with him that
has Nature without Grace, which must heal it, and use it to its proper ends.

8. So that it appears, that as the Love of Perfection is fitly called the
Law of Nature, because it is agreeable to man in his Natural state of
Innocence; so the Law of Grace may be now called, the Law of depraved Nature,
because it is as suitable to lapsed man. And when our pravity is undeniable,
how credible should it be, that we have such a Law?

9. And there is nothing in the Gospel, either unsuitable to the first Law of
Nature, or contradictory to it, or yet of any alien nature; but only that which
has the most excellent aptitude to subserve it: Giving the Glory to God in the
highest, by restoring Peace unto the Earth, and Goodness toward men.

10. And when the Divine Monarchy is apt in the order of Government, to
communicate some Image of it self to the Creature, as well as the Divine
Perfections have communicated their Image to the Creatures in their Natures or
Beings, how wisely it is ordered, that mankind should have one universal
Vicarious Head or Monarch? There is great reason to believe that there is
Monarchy among Angels: And in the world it most apparently excels all other
forms of Government, in order to Unity, and Strength, and Glory: and if it be
apter than some others to degenerate into oppressing Tyranny, that is only
caused by the great corruption of humane Nature: and therefore if we have a
Head who has no such corruption, there is no place for that objection. And as
it is not credible that God would make no communication of this Image of his
Dominions in the world; so it is certain, that besides the Lord Jesus, the
world has no other Universal Head (whatever the Pope may pretend, to be an
Universal Vicarious Monarch, under the Universal Vicarious Monarch.) Kingdoms
have their Monarchs subordinate to Christ; but the world has none but Christ
alone.

11. And how meet was it that he who was the Monarch or Deputy of God, should
be also the Mediator! and that a polluted sinner dwelling in clay, should not
come immediately to God, but by a Reconciler, who is worthy to prevail.

12. And when we had lost the knowledge of God, and of the world to come, and
of the way thereto; yea and of our selves too, and our own immortality of soul;
how meet was it that a sure Revelation should settle us; that we might know
what to seek, and whither to return, and by what way! seeing Light must be the
guide of our Love and Power. And who could so infallibly and satisfactorily do
this, as a Teacher sent from God, of perfectest knowledge and veracity.

13. And when God intended the free forgiveness of our sins, how meet was it
that he who would be the Mediator of our pardon, should yield to those terms,
which are consistent with the ends of Government, and expose not the wisdom,
and veracity, and justice, and the Laws of God to the worlds contempt: If no
mark of odiousness should be put upon sin, nor any demonstration of Justice
been made, the Devil would have triumphed, and said, Did not I say truer than
God? when he told you of dying, and I told you that you should not die? And if
the grand penalty had been remitted to the world, for four thousand years
together successively, without any sufficient demonstration of Gods Justice
undertaken, why should any sinner have feared Hell to the worlds end? If you
say, that Repentance alone might be sufficient, I answer, 1. That is no
vindication of the Justice and Truth of the Lawmakers. 2. Who should bring a
sinner to Repentance, whose heart is corrupted with the love of sin? 3. It
would hinder Repentance, if men knew that God can forgive all the world upon
bare Repentance, without any reparation of the breaches made by sin, in the
order of the world. For if he that threatens future misery or death for sin,
can absolutely dispense with that commination, they may think that he may do so
as easily by his threatening of death to the impenitent.

If you say, that Threatenings in a Law, are not false, when they are not
fulfilled, because they speak not de event^, but de debito poenae; I answer,
they speak directly only de debito; but withal, he that makes a Law does
thereby say, This shall be the Rule of your lives, and of my ordinary
Judgment. And therefore consequently they speak of an ordinary event also: And
they are the Rule of Just Judgment, and therefore Justice must not be
contemned by their contempt.

Or if any shall think, that all this proves not a demonstration of Justice on
the Redeemer to be absolutely necessary, but that God could have pardoned the
penitent without it; it is nevertheless manifest, that this was a very wise and
congruous way: As he that cannot prove that God could not have illuminated, and
moved, and quickened the inferior sensitives without the Sun, may yet prove
that the Sun is a noble creature, in whose operations Gods Wisdom, and Power,
and Goodness do appear.

14. And how agreeable is this doctrine of the Sacrifice of Christ, to the
common doctrine of Sacrificing, which has been received throughout almost all
the world! And who can imagine any other original of that practice, so early
and so universally obtaining, than either divine revelation, or somewhat even
in nature, which bears witness to the necessity of a demonstration of Gods
Justice and displeasure against sin?

15. How wisely is it determined of God, that he who undertakes all ^is, should
be Man, and yet more than Man, even God? That the Monarch of Mankind, and the
Mediator, and the Teacher of Man, and the Sacrifice for sin, should not be
only of another kind; but that he be one that is fit to be familiar with man,
and to be interested naturally in his concerns; and one that is by nature and
nearness capable of these undertakings and relations? And yet that he be so
high and near the Father, as may put a sufficient value on his works, and make
him most meet to mediate for us?

16. How wisely is it ordered, that with a perfect doctrine, we should have the
pattern of a perfect life, as knowing how agreeable the way of imitation is to
our natures and necessities?

17. And as a pattern of all other virtue is still before us; so how fit was
it, especially that we should have a lively example, to teach us to contemn
this deceitful world, and to set little comparatively, by reputation, wealth,
pre-eminence, grandeur, pleasures, yea and life it self, which are the things
which all that perish prefer before God and immortality?

18. And how needful is it that they that must be overtaken with renewed
faults, should have a daily remedy and refuge, and a plaster for their wounds;
and a more acceptable name than their own to plead with God for pardon?

19. How meet was it that our Savior should rise from the dead (and
consequently that he should die) to show us, that his Sacrifice was accepted,
and that there is indeed another life for man; and that death and the grave
shall not still detain us?

20. And how meet was it that our Savior should ascend into Heaven, and
therein our natures be glorified with God; that he might have all power to
finish the work of man's salvation, and his possession might be a pledge of our
future possession?

21. Most wisely also is it ordered of God, that man might not be left under
the Covenant of Works, or of entire nature, which after it was broken, could
never justify him, and which was now unsuitable to his lapsed state, and that
God should make a New Covenant with him as his Redeemer, as he made the first
as his Creator: and that an Act of general pardon and oblivion, might secure
us of forgiveness and everlasting life: And that as we had a Rule to live by
for preventing sin and misery, we might have a Rule for our duty in order to
our recovery.

22. And what more convenient conditions could this Covenant have had, than [ a
believing and thankful Acceptance of the mercy, and a penitent and obedient
following of our Redeemer unto everlasting life?]

23. And how convenient is it; that when our King is to depart from earth, and
keep his residence in the Court of Heaven, he should appoint his Officers to
manage the humane part of his remaining work on earth? And that some should do
the extraordinary work, in laying the foundation, and leaving a certain Rule
and Order to the rest, and that the rest should proceed to build hereupon; and
that the wisest and the best of men, should be the Teachers and Guides of the
rest unto the end.

24. And how necessary was it that our Sun in glory should continually send
down his beams and influence on the earth? even the Spirit of the Father to be
his constant Agent here below; and to plead his cause, and do his work on the
hearts of men? and that the Apostles, who were to found the Church, should have
that Spirit, in so conspicuous a degree, and for such various works of Wonder
and Power, as might suffice to confirm their testimony to the world: And that
all others as well as they to the end, should have the Spirit for those works
of Love and Renovation, which are necessary to their own obedience and
salvation.

25. How wisely it is ordered, that he who is our King, is Lord of all, and
able to defend his Church, and to repress his proudest enemies.

26. And also that he should be our final Judge, who was our Savior and
Lawgiver, and made and sealed that Covenant of Grace by which we must be
judged: That Judgment may not be over dreadful, but rather desirable to his
faithful servants, who shall openly be justified by him before all.

27. How wisely has God ordered it, that when death is naturally so terrible
to man, we should have a Savior that went that way before us, and was once
dead, but now lives, and is where we must be, and has the keys of death and
Heaven; that we may boldly go forth as to his presence, and to the innumerable
perfected spirits of the just, and may commend our souls to the hands of our
Redeemer, and our Head.

28. As also that this should be plainly revealed; and that the Scriptures are
written in a method and manner fit for all, even for the meanest, and that
Ministers be commanded to open it, and apply it, by translation, exposition,
and earnest exhortation; that the remedy may be suited to the nature and extent
of the disease: And yet that there be some depths, to keep presumptuous daring
wits at a distance, and to humble them, and to exercise our diligence.

29. As also that the life of faith and holiness should have much opposition in
the world, that its glory and excellency might the more appear, partly by the
presence of its contraries, and partly by its exercise and victories in its
trials; and that the godly may have use for patience, and fortitude, and every
grace; and may be kept the easilier from loving the world, and taught the more
to desire the presence of their Lord.

30. Lastly, And how wisely is it ordered, that God in Heaven, from whom all
comes, should be the end of all his graces and our duties? and that himself
alone should be our home and happiness; and that as we are made by him, and for
him, so we should live with him, to his praise, and in his love for ever: And
that there as we shall have both glorified souls and bodies; so both might have
a suitable glory; and that our glorified Redeemer might there be in part the
Mediator of our fruition, as here he was the Mediator of acquisition.

I have recited hastily a few of the parts of this wondrous frame, to show you,
that if you saw them all, and that in the^r true order and method, you might
not think strange that [ Now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly
places is made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 2.11.
which was the first part of Gods Image upon the Christian Religion, which I was
to show you.

But besides all this, the WISDOM of God is expressed in the holy Scriptures
these several ways: 1. In the Revelation of things past, which could not be
known by any mortal man: As the Creation of the world, and what was therein
done, before man himself was made: Which experience it self does help us to
believe, because we see exceeding great probabilities that the world was not
eternal, nor of any longer duration than the Scriptures mention: in that no
place on earth has any true monument of ancienter original; and in that humane
Sciences and Arts are yet so imperfect, and such important additions are made
but of late.

2. In the Revelation of things distant, out of the reach of man's discovery. So
Scripture, History, and Prophecy do frequently speak of preparations and
actions of Princes and people afar of.

3. In the Revelation of the secrets of men's hearts: As Elisha told Gebe^i what
he did at a distance: Christ told Nathaniel what he said, and where: So
frequently Christ told the Jews, and his Disciples, what they thought, and
showed that he knew the heart of man: To which we may add, the searching power
of the Word of God, which does so notably rip up the secrets of men's
corruptions, and may show all men's hearts unto themselves.

4. In the Revelation of contingent things to come, which is most frequent in
the Prophecies and Promises of the Scripture: not only in the Old Testament, as
Daniel, etc. but also in the Gospel. When Christ foretells his death and
resurrection, and the usage and successes of his Apostles, and promises them
the miraculous gifts of the Spirit; and foretold Peter's thrice denying him; and
foretold the grievous destr^ction of Jerusalem, with other such like clear
predictions.

5. But nothing of all these predictions does shine so clearly to our selves,
as those great Promises of Christ, which are fulfilled to our selves, in all
generations. Even the Promises and Prophetical descriptions of the great work
of Conversion, Regeneration or Sanctification upon men's souls, which is wrought
in all Ages, just according to the delineations of it in the world: All the
humblings, the repentings, the desires, the faith, the joys, the prayers, and
the answers of them, which were foretold, and was found in the first Believers,
are performed and given to all true Christians to this day.

To which may be added, all the Prophecies of the extent of the Church; of the
conversion of the Kingdoms of the world to Christ; and of the oppositions of
the ungodly fort thereto; and of the persecutions of the followers of Christ,
which are all fulfilled.

6. The WISDOM of God also is clearly manifested in the concatenation or
harmony of all these Revelations: Not only that there is no real contradiction
between them, but that they all conjunctly compose one entire frame: As the age
of man goes on from infancy to maturity, and nature fitteth her endowments and
provisions accordingly to each degree; so has the Church proceeded from its
infancy, and so have the Revelations of God been suited to its several times:
Christ who was promised to Adam, and the Fathers before Moses, for the first
two thousand years, and signified by their Sacrifices; was more fully revealed
for the next two thousand years, by Moses first in a typical Gospel (the
adumbration of the grace to come) and then by the Prophets, (especially Isaiah,
Micah, Daniel and Malachi) in plainer predictions. And then came John Baptist
the forerunner, and Christ the Messiah, and the Spirit upon the Apostles, and
finished the Revelation: So that it may appear to be all one frame, contrived
and indicted by one Spirit. And the effects of it have been according to these
degrees of the Revelation.

And the end of the world (whether at the end of the last two thousand years,
or when else God pleases) will shortly show the unbelieving themselves, that
the period shall fulfill what is yet unfulfilled to the least jot and tittle.

CHAP. V. The Image of Gods Goodness.
II. THE second part of Gods Image on our Religion, is that of his matchless
GOODNESS. The whole systeme of it is, the harmonious expression of GODS
HOLINESS and LOVE. The particulars I must but name, lest I be too long.

1. The Author of it, Jesus Christ, was perfectly Good himself; being God and
man; sinless in nature, and in life; living, and dying, and rising to do good;
and making it his office and his work, even in Heaven, to do mankind the
greatest good.

2. The Matter of the Christian Religion, is GOD himself the infinite Good. The
use of it is, to teach men to know God, and to bring us to him. To which end it
makes a fuller discovery of his blessed nature, attributes and works, than is
any where else to be found in this world.

3. The utmost End of it is the highest imaginable; the pleasing and glorifying
of God: For he that is the Beginning of all, must needs be the End of all.

4. It leads man to the highest state of felicity for himself (which is an
End conjunct in subordination to the highest.) There can be no greater
happiness imaginable, than the Christian Religion directs us to attain.

5. It places our happiness so certainly and clearly in that which is
happiness indeed, that it directs man's intentions, and desires, and leaves
them no longer to the old variety of opinions about the chiefest good: Nature
perfected, and working by its perfectest acts upon the most perfect object, and
receiving the most full communications from him, and this for ever, must needs
be the most perfect felicity of man. To have all our faculties fully perfect,
and to live for ever in the perfect light and love of God, and to be
accordingly beloved of him; this is the end of Christianity.

6. To this end, the whole design of the Christian Religion is to make man
good, and to cure him of all evil, and to prepare him justly for that blessed
state.

7. To that end the great work of Jesus Christ is, to send down the sanctifying
Spirit of God, to make men new creatures, and to regenerate them to the Nature
of God himself, and to a heavenly mind and life: That they may not only have
precepts which are good, but the power of God to make them good, and a heavenly
principle to fit them for Heaven.

8. To that end, the principal means is, the fullest revelation of the love of
God to man, that ever was made, and more than is any where else revealed. All
the design of Christianity is but to show God to man, in the fullest prospect
of his Goodness and unmeasurable Love, that so he may appear more amiable to
us; and may be more beloved by us; that Loving Goodness may make us good, and
make us happy.

9. To encourage us to Love and Goodness, God does in the Gospel give us the
pardon of all our sins, as soon as ever we turn to him by Faith and Repentance:
Though we have deserved Hell, he declares that he will forgive us that desert.
If we had come to Hell before we had been redeemed, I think we should have
taken that Religion to be good indeed, which would have brought us the tidings
of forgiveness, and showed us so ready a way to escape.

10. And this mercy is given by an Universal Covenant, offered to all, without
exception: And the Conditions are so reasonable, that no one can have any just
pretense against them. It is but to accept the mercy offered with a believing
thankful mind, as a condemned man would do a pardon. And what can be more
suitable to our miserable state?

11. And to bring us to all this, and make us holy, Christ has given us a most
holy word and doctrine: perfectly holy in its precepts, and in its
prohibitions, and all the subservient histories and narratives: And he has
added the perfect pattern of his holy life, that our Rule and Example might
agree.

12. So good is this word, that it calls us to the highest degree of
Goodness, and makes Perfection it self our duty; that our duty and happiness
may agree; and we may not have liberty to be bad and miserable; but may be
every way bound to our own felicity: And yet so good is this Covenant of Grace,
that it takes not advantage of our infirmities to ruin us, but notes them to
humble us, in order to our cure: And i^ accepts sincerity, though it command
perfection. And Christ looks not at our failings, as a severe Judge, but as a
Physician, and a tender Father.

13. So good is our Religion, that the great thing which it requires of us, is
to prefer the greatest good, before the lesser, and not to be like children who
take it for their riches to fill their pin-box; or like foolish Merchants, who
had rather trade for truth, th^n for gold. The great busines^ of Christian
precept^ is, to make us know that we are capable of better things than meat,
and drink, and lust, and sports, and wealth, and worldly honors; that the Love
of God, and the felicity of the soul, in Grace and Glory, may be preferred
before the pleasure of a Swine. And is not that good, which calls us up to
the greatest good, and will not allow us to be such enemies to our selves, as
to take up with the lesser?

14. Yea, when we have most, it still engages us to seek more: And will not
allow us to take up with a low degree of grace, or with a little measure of the
greatest good: But to show that God would have us to be still better, and to
have more, it is made our duty still to ask more, and still to press higher,
and labor to be better. Asking in prayer is made our daily work; and Gods
giving, and our receiving may be our daily blessedness.

15. The mercies here provided for us, extend both to soul and body: For though
we may not prefer the less before the greater; yet we shall have it in its
place: If we seek first the Kingdom of God, and its righteousness, and labor
first for the food which never perishes, all other things shall be added to
us: We shall have then to do us good, but not to do us hurt. For godliness is
profitable to all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8. and 6.6.

16. And the future perfect Goodness, may invite us to present imperfect
Goodness, the Promises of the Gospel do second the Precepts, with the strongest
motives in the world: so that everlasting blessedness and joy, is made the
reward of temporal sincerity, in faith, love, and obedience. And if Heaven it
self be not a reward sufficient to invite men to be good, there is none
sufficient.

17. Yea the penalties and severities of the Christian Religion, do show the
Goodness of it. When God does therefore threaten Hell to save men from it, and
to draw them up to the obedience of the Gospel: Threatened evil of punishment,
is but to keep them from the evil of sin, and to make men better: And he that
will testify his hatred of sinful evil to the highest, does show himself the
greatest enemy of it, and the greatest lover of good; and he that sets the
sharpest hedge before us, and the terrible warnings to keep us from damnation,
does show himself most willing to save us.

18. So good is Christianity, that it turns all our afflictions unto good: It
assures us that they are sent as needful medicine, however merited by our sin:
And it directs us how to bear them easily, and to make them sweet, and safe,
and profitable, and to turn them to our increase of holiness, and to the
furtherance of our greatest good, Heb. 1, to 13. Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.

19. It also stablisheth a perpetual office, even the sacred Ministry, for the
fuller and surer communication of all this good forementioned. In which observe
these particulars, which show the greatness of this benefit. 1. The persons
called to it, must (by Christ's appointment) be the wisest and best of men that
can be had. 2. The number of them is to be suited to the number of the people,
so that none may be without the benefit. 3. Their work is, to declare all this
forementioned Goodness and Love of God to man, and to offer them all this grace
and mercy; and to teach them to be holy and happy, and to set before them the
everlasting joys. 4. The manner of their doing it must be with humility, as
the servants of all; with tender love, as Fathers of the flock; with wisdom and
skill, lest their work be frustrate; with the greatest importunity, even
compelling them to come in, as men that are loath to take any denial; and with
patient enduring all oppositions, as those that had rather suffer any thing,
than the peoples souls shall be unhealed, and be damned; and they must conrinue
to the end, as those that will never give up a soul as desperate and lost,
while there is any hope: And all this must be seconded with their own example
of holiness, temperance and love, Acts 20. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. Matthew. 22.8, 9.

20. So good is our Religion, that nothing but doing good is the work in which
it does employ us. Besides all the good of piety and self-preservation, it
requires us to live in love to others, and to do all the good in the world
that we are able, Ephesians. 2.10. Mat. 5.16. and 6.1, 2, etc. Titus 2.14. Gal.
6.7, 8, 9. Good works must be our study and our life: Our work and our delight:
Even our enemies we must love and do good to, Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.19, 20, 21.
And sure that doctrine is good, which is purposely to employ men in doing good
to all.

21. So good is Christianity, that it favors not any one sin, but is the
greatest condemner of them all. It is all for knowledge against hurtful
ignorance; it is all for humility against all pride; for self-denial against
all injurious selfishness; for spirituality, and the dominion of true Reason,
against sensuality and the dominion of the flesh; for heavenliness against a
worldly mind; for sincerity and simplicity against all hypocrisy and deceit;
for love against malice; for unity and peace against divisions and contentions;
for justice and lenity in superiors, and obedience and patience in inferiors;
for faithfulness in all relations: Its precepts extend to secret as well as
open practices; to the desires and thoughts, as well as to the words and deeds:
It allows not a thought, or word, or action, which is ungodly, intemperate,
rebellious, injurious, unchaste, or covetous or uncharitable, Mat. 5.

22. All the troublesome part of our Religion, is but our warfare against evil;
against sin, and the temptations which would make us sinful: And it must needs
be good, if all the conflicting part of it be only against evil, Gal. 5.17, 21,
23. Romans 6. and 7. and 8.1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13.

23. It teaches us the only way to live in the greatest and most constant joy.
If we attain not this, it is because we follow not its precepts. If endless joy
foreseen, and all the foresaid mercies in the way, are not matter for continual
delight, there is no greater to be thought on. Rejoicing always in the Lord,
even in our sharpest persecutions, is a great part of Religious duty, Phil.
3.1, and 4.4. Psalm. 33.1. Zech. 10.7. Mat. 5.11, 12. Deuteronomy. 12.12, 18.

24. It overcomes both the danger and the fear of death; and that must be
good, which conquereth so great an evil; and makes the day of the ungodly's
fears, and utter misery, to be the day of our desire and felicity, Romans 6.23. 1
Cor. 15.55. Col. 3.1, 4. Phil. 3.21.

25. It obliges all the Rulers of the world to use all their power to do good;
against all sin within their reach; and to make their subjects happy both in
body and in soul, Romans 13.3, 4, 5, 6.

26. It appoints Churches to be Societies of Saints, that holiness and
goodness combined may be strong and honorable, 1 Cor. 1.1. and 2.1. 1. Heb.
3.13. 1 These. 5.12, 13. That holy Assemblies employed in the holy love and
praises of God, might be a representation of the heavenly Jerusalem, Col. 2.5.

27. It does make the Love and Union of all the Saints to be so strict, that
the mercies and joys of every member, might extend to all: All the corporal
and spiritual blessings of all the Christians, (yea and persons) in the world,
are mine as to my comfort, as long as I can love them as my self: If it would
please me to be rich, or honorable, or learned my self, it must please me also
to have them so, whom I love as my self. And when millions have so much matter
for my joy, how joyfully should I then live! And though I am obliged also to
sorrow with them, it is with such a sorrow only, as shall not hinder any
seasonable joy, 1 Cor. 12.

28. In these societies, every member is bound to contribute his help to the
benefit of each other; so that I have as many obliged to do me good, as there
be Christians in the world; at least, according to their several opportunities
and capacities; by prayer and such distant means, if they can do no more. And
the Religion which gives every man so great an interest, in the good of all
others, and engages all men to do good to one another is evidently good it
self, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.15, 16.

29. And all this good is not destroyed, but advantaged and aggravated
accidentally by our sin: So that where sin abounded, there grace did
superabound, Romans 5.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Grace has taken occasion by sin to be
Grace indeed, and to be the greater manifestation of the goodness of God, and
the greater obligation for gratitude to the sinner.

30. Lastly, All this Goodness is beautified by harmony; it is all placed in a
perfect order. One mercy does not keep us from another; nor one grace oppose
another: nor one duty exclude another. As it is the great declaration of Mercy
and Justice wonderfully conspiring in God; (Mercy so used as to magnify
Justice; Justice so used as to magnify Mercy, and not only so as to consist)
so also it works answerably on us: It sets not Love against filial fear,
not joy against necessary sorrow, nor faith against repentance, nor praise and
thanksgiving against penitent confession of sin, nor true repentance against
the profitable use of the creatures, nor the care of our souls against the
peace and quiet of our minds, nor care for our families, against contentedness
and trusting God, nor our labor against our necessary rest, nor self-denial
against the due care of our own welfare, nor patience against due sensibility,
and lawful passion, nor mercy to men against true justice, nor public and
private good against each, nor does it set the duty of the Sovereign and the
Subject, the Master and the Servant, the Pastor and the Flock, nor yet their
interest, in any contrariety; but all parts of Religion know their place; and
every duty (even those which seem most opposite) are helpful to each other; and
all interests are coordinate; and all does contribute to the good of the
whole, and of every part, Ephesians. 4.2, 3, 15, 16.

And now peruse all this together (but let it have more of your thoughts by
far, than it has had of my words) and then determine indifferently, whether
the Christian Religion bear not the lively Image and superscription of GOD the
prime essential GOOD.

But all this will be more manifest, when we have considered how POWER has in
the execution, brought all this into effect.

CHAP. VI. The Image of Gods Power.
III. THE third part of Gods Image and superscription on the Christian
Religion, is his POWER: And as man's own corruption lies more in the want of
Wisdom and Goodness, than of Power; therefore he is less capable of discerning
God, in the impressions of his Wisdom and Goodness, than of his Power: seeing
therefore he is here most capable of conviction, and acknowledging the hand of
God, I shall open this also in the several parts, in some degree.

1. In the history of the Creation, the Omnipotency of God is abundantly set
forth; which is proved true, both by the agreeableness of the history to the
effects, and by much subsequent evidence of the Writers Veracity.

2. The same may be said of Gods drowning the old world, and the preserving of
Noah and his family in the Ark.

3. And of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah with fire from Heaven.

4. The many miracles done by Moses upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and in the
opening of the Red Sea, and in the feeding of the Israelites in the wilderness,
and keeping their cloths from wearing for forty years; and the pillar which
went before them as a fire by night, and a cloud by day, for so long time; and
the darkness, and thunder, and trembling of the Mount at the giving of the Law;
with the rest of the Miracles then done, not in a corner, or before a few, but
before all the people; who were persuaded to receive and obey the Law, by the
reason of these motives which their eyes had seen: And if all this had been
false; if no plagues had been showed on Egypt; if no Red Sea had opened; if no
Pillar had gone before them; if no such terrible sights and sounds at Mount
Sinai had prepared them for the Law; such reasons would have been so unfit to
have persuaded them to obedience, that they would rather with any reasonable
creatures, have procured scorn.

And to show posterity, that the history of all this was not forged, or to be
suspected; 1. They had the Law it self then delivered in two Tables of stone to
be still seen. 2. They had a pot of Manna still preserved. 3. They had the
miracle-working Rod of Moses and Aaron kept likewise as a monument. 4. They had
an Ark of purpose to keep these in, and that in the most inviolable place of
worship. 5. They had the braz^n Serpent (till Hezekiah broke it) still to be
seen. 6. They had the song of their deliverance at the Red Sea for their
continued use. 7. They had set feasts to keep the chief of all these things in
remembrance. They had the feast of unleavened bread, which all Israel was to
observe for seven days, to keep the remembrance of their passing out of Egypt
in so great haste, that they could not stay to knead up, and make their bread,
but took it as in meal or unready dough. They had the feast of the Passover,
when every family was to eat of the Paschal Lamb, and the door posts to be
sprinkled with the blood, to keep in remembrance the night when the Egyptians
first born were destroyed, and the Israelites all preserved. And if these had
been instituted at that time, upon a pretended occasion which they knew to be
untrue, they would rather have derided than observed them. If they had been
afterward instituted in another generation which knew not the story, the
beginning would have been known, and the fiction of the name and institution of
Moses would have been apparent to all; and the institution would not have been
found in the same Law, which was given by Moses: And it could not have been so
expressly said, that the Israelites did all observe these feasts and solemnities
from the very time of their deliverance, but in those times when the forgery
began, all would have known it to be false. 8. And they had many other words
and ceremonies among them, and even in Gods Public Worship, which were all
used to keep up the memory of these things. 9. And they had an office of
Priesthood constantly among them, which saw to the execution and preservation
of all these. 10. And they had a form of civil Policy then established, and and
the Rulers were to preserve the memory of these things, and the practice of
this Law, and to learn it themselves, and govern by it: so that the very form
of the Commonwealth, and the order of it, was a commemoration hereof: And the
Parents were to teach and tell their children all these things, and to expound
all these Solemnities, Laws and Ceremonies to them: so that the frame of
Church, and State, and Families, was a preservative hereof.

5. But, to pass by all the rest in the Old Testament, the Incarnation of
Christ was such a work of Omnipotent Love, as cannot by us be comprehended.
That God should be united to humanity in person! that humanity should thus be
advanced into union with the Deity! and Man be set above the Angels! that a
Virgin should conceive! that men from the East should be led thither to worship
an Infant by the conduct of a Star (which Caesarius thinks was one of those
Angels or Spirits which are called a flame of fire, Psalm. 104.4.) That Angels
from Heaven should declare his nativity to the Shepherds, and celebrate it with
their praises: that John Baptist should be so called to be his forerunner, and
Elizabeth, Zachary, Simeon, and Anna, should so prophecy of him: That the
Spirit should be seen descending on him at his Baptism, and the voice be heard
from Heaven, which owned him: that he should fast forty days and nights; and
that he should be transfigured before his three Disciples on the Mount, and
Moses and Elias seen with him in that glory; and the voice from Heaven again
bear witness to him: These, and many such like were the attestations of Divine
Omnipotency to the truth of Christ.

6. To these may be next joined, the whole course of miracles performed by
Christ, in healing the sick, and raising the dead; and in many other miraculous
acts, which are most of the substance of the Gospel-history, and which I have
recited together in my Reasons of the Christian Religion; see Heb. 2.2, 3, 4.

7. And to these may be added, the Power which was given over all the
creatures, to Christ our Mediator. All power in Heaven and Earth was given
him, Joh. 17.2. and 13.3. Mat. 28.19. Romans 14.9. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. He was made
Head over all things to the Church, and all principalities and powers were put
under him! And this was not barely asserted by him, but demonstrated. He showed
his power over the Devils in casting them out: and his power over Angels by
their attendance: and his power of life and death, by raising the dead: and his
power over all diseases, by healing them: and his power over the winds and
waters, by appeasing them: and his power over our food and natures, by turning
water into wine, and by feeding many thousands miraculously: yea and his power
over them into whose hands he was resolved to yield himself, by restraining
them till his hour was come, and by making them all fall to the ground at his
name: and his power over Sun, and Heaven, and Earth, by the darkening of the
Sun, and the trembling of the Earth, and the rending of the Rocks, and of the
Vail of the Temple, Mat. 27.45, 51. And his power over the dead, by the rising
of the bodies of many, Mat. 27.52. And his power over the Saints in Heaven, by
the attendance of Moses and Elias: and his power to forgive sins, by taking
away the penal maladies; and his power to change hearts, and save souls, by
causing his Disciples to leave all and follow him at a word; and Zacheus to
receive him, and believe; and the thief on the cross to be converted, and to
enter that day into Paradise.

8. And his own Resurrection is an undoubted attestation of Divine Omnipotency.
If God gave him such a victory over death, and raised him to life when men had
killed him, and rolled a stone upon his Sepulcher, and sealed and guarded it,
there needs no further evidence of the Power of God impressing and attesting
the Christian Religion, than that which ascertaineth to us the truth of Christ's
Resurrection. For he was declared to be the Son of God by POWER, by
resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4.

9. And his bodily appearance to his congregated Disciples when the doors were
shut; his miracle at their fishing, his walking on the Sea, his vanishing out
of their sight, Luke 24. when he had discoursed with the two Disciples, his
opening their hearts to understand his Word, etc. do all show this part of Gods
Image on our Religion, even his Power.

10. And so does his bodily ascending into Heaven before the face of his
Disciples, Acts 1.

11. But especially the sending down the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples
according as he promised: To cause them that were before so low in knowledge,
to be suddenly inspired with languages, and with the full understanding of his
own will, and with unanimity and concord herein; this made his Disciples the
living monuments and effects of his own Omnipotency, Acts 2.

12. And accordingly all the miracles which they did by this power, recorded
partly in the Acts of the Apostles, (or rather, the Acts of Paul, by Luke who
was his companion;) which you may there read (and no doubt but other Apostles
in their measures did the like as Paul, though they are not recorded; for they
had all the same Promise and Spirit.) This is another impression of POWER.

13. Whereto must be added the great and wonderful gifts of communicating the
same Spirit (or doing that upon which God would give it) to those converted
Believers on whom they laid their hands (which Simon Magus would fain have
bought with money, Acts 8.) To enable them to speak with tongues, to heal
diseases, to prophecy, etc. as they themselves had done, which is a great
attestation of Omnipotency.

14. And the lamentable destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, foretold by
Christ, was an attestation of Gods POWER in the revenge or punishment of their
unbelief, and putting Christ to death.

15. And so was the great fortitude and constancy of Believers, who underwent
all persecutions so joyfully as they did for the sake of Christ; which was the
effect of the corroborating Power of the Almighty.

16. And so was the Power which the Apostles had to execute present judgments
upon the enemies of the Gospel, (as Elimas and Simon Magus) and on the abusers
of Religion (as Ananias and Saphyra) and on many whom they excommunicated and
delivered up to Satan.

17. The same evidence is found in Christ's Legislation, as an universal
Sovereign making Laws for heart and life, for all the world: Taking down the
Laws of the Jewish Polity and Ceremonies, which God by Moses had for a time set
up: Commanding his Ministers to proclaim his Laws to all the world, and Princes
and people to obey them: And by these Laws, conferring on Believers no less
than forgiveness and salvation, and binding over the impenitent to everlasting
punishment.

18. But the great and continued impress of Gods Power, is that which together
with his Wisdom and Love, is made and showed in the conve^sion of men's souls to
God by Christ. You may here first consider the numbers which were suddenly
converted by the preaching of the Apostles at the first. And in how little time
there were Churches planted abroad the world: And then, how the Roman Empire
was brought in, and subdued to Christ, and Crowns and Scepters resigned to him;
and all this according to his own prediction, that when he was lifted up, he
would draw all men to him; and according to the predictions of his Prophets.
But that which I would especially open, is, the POWER which is manifested in
the work of the Spirit on the souls of men, both then and to this day.

Hitherto what I have mentioned belonging to the Scripture it self; it is to be
taken as part of our Religion objectively considered: But that which follows
is the effect of that, even our Religion subjectively considered: To observe
how God makes men Believers, and by believing sanctifies their hearts and
lives, is a great motive to further our own believing. Consider the work, 1. As
it is in it self, 2. As it is opposed by all its enemies, and you may see that
it is the work of God.

1. As the Goodness, so also the Greatness of it, is Gods own Image. It is the
raising up of our stupid faculties to be lively and active to those holy uses,
to which they were become as dead by sin. To cause in an unlearned person, a
firmer and more distinct belief of the unseen world, than the most learned
Philosophers can attain to by all their natural contemplations: To bring up a
soul to place its happiness on things so high, and far from sense! To cause him
who naturally is imprisoned in selfishness, to deny himself, and devote himself
entirely to God; to love him, to trust him, and to live to him! To raise an
earthly mind to Heaven, that our business and hope may be daily there! To
overcome our pride, and sensuality, and bring our senses in subjection unto
reason, and to keep a holy government in our thoughts, and over our passions,
words and deeds; And to live in continual preparation for death, as the only
time of our true felicity: And to suffer any loss or pain for the safe
accomplishment of this! All this is the work of the POWER of God.

2. Which will the more appear when we consider, what is done against it within
us and without us! what privative and positive averseness we have to it, till
God do send down that Life, and Light, and Love into our souls, which is indeed
his Image! How violently our fleshly sense and appetite, strive against the
restraints of God, and would hurry us contrary to the motions of grace! How
importunately Satan joyneth with his suggestions! What baits the world does
still set before us, to divert us, and pervert us! And how many instruments of
its flattery, or its cruelty, are still at work, to stop us, or to turn us
back! to invite our affections down to Earth, and ensnare them to some deluding
vainty, or to distract us in our heavenly design, and to a^right or discourage
us from the holy way.

And if we think this an easy work, because it is also reasonable, do but
observe how hardly it goes on, till the POWER of God by grace accomplish it!
what a deal of pains may the best and wisest Parents take with a graceless
child, and all in vain! what labors the worthiest Ministers lose on graceless
people! and how blind, and dead, and senseless a thing, the graceless heart is,
to any thing that is holy, even when reason it self cannot gainsay it! And God
is pleased oft-times to weary out Parents, and Masters, and Ministers, with
such unteachable and stony hearts, to make them know what naturally they are
themselves, to bring them to the more lively acknowledgement of the POWER which
is necessary to renew and save a soul. But having spoken at large of this in
the formentioned Treatise, I shall take up with these brief intimations.

19. And the preservation of that Grace in the soul which is once given us, is
also an effect of the POWER of God. Our strength is in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. It is our Lord himself, who is the Lord of life,
and whose Priesthood was made after the power of an endless life, Heb. 7.16.
who gives us the Spirit of Power and of Love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.
(or of received wisdom, for (...) is sound understanding received by
instruction: And this text expresses the three parts of Gods Image in the new
Creature, (...). And as Power is given us with Love and Wisdom; so Power with
Love and Wisdom do give it us; and Power also must preserve it, 1 Pet. 1.5. We
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 2 Timothy 1.8.
According to the power of God who has saved us. The Gospel is the Power of God
(that is, the instrument of his Power) to our salvation. Romans 1.16. So 1 Cor.
1.18, To us that are saved it is the power of God; because Christ whom it
reveals, is the power and wisdom of God, v. 24. And thus our faith stands
in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.5. 2 Cor. 6.7. And the Kingdom of God in us does
consist in power, 1 Cor. 4.20. The mind of man is very mutable; and he that is
possessed once with the desires of things spiritual and eternal, would quickly
lose those desires, and turn to present things again, (which are still before
him, while higher things are beyond our sense) if the Power and Activity of the
divine life, did not preserve the spark which is kindled in us. Though the
doctrine of Perseverance be controverted in the Christian Church, yet
experience assures us of that which all parties are agreed in: Some hold that
all true Christians persevere; and some hold that all confirmed Christians
persevere (that is, those who come to a strong degree of grace) but those that
think otherwise do yet all grant, that if any fall away, it is comparatively
but a very few, of those who are sincere. When none would persevere if
Omnipotency did not preserve them.

20. Lastly, The POWER of God also does consequently own the Christian
Religion, by the Preservation of the Church, in this malicious and opposing
world (as well as by the preservation of grace in the soul) which will be the
more apparent if you observe, 1. That the number of true Christians is still
very small in comparison of the wicked. 2. That all wicked men are naturally
(by the corruption of nature) their enemies; because the precepts and practice
of Christianity are utterly against their carnal minds and interests. 3. That
the doctrine and practice of Christianity is still galling them, and exciting
and sublimating this enmity into rage: And God does by persecutions ordinarily
tell us to our smart, that all this is true. 4. That all carnal men are
exceeding hardly moved from their own way. 5. That the Government of the Earth
is commonly in their hand, because of their numbers, and their wealth. For it
is commonly the rich that rule; and the rich are usually bad; so that the godly
Christians are in their power. 6. That all the Hypocrites that are among our
selves, have the same sinful nature and enmity against holiness, and are
usually as bitter against the power and practice of their own profession, as
open Infidels are. 7. That Christianity is not a fruit of nature; Non nati sed
facti sumus Christiani, said Tertullian. And therefore if Gods Power preserved
not Religion, the degenerating of the Christians children from their Parents
mind and way, would hasten its extinction in the world. 8. And as it is a
Religion which must be taught us; so it requires or consists in so much
wisdom, and willingness, and fortitude of mind, that few are naturally apt to
receive it* because folly, and badness, and feebleness of mind are so common in
the world. And as we see that Learning will never be common but in the
possession of a very few, because a natural ingenuity is necessary thereto,
which few are born with; so would it be with Christianity, if Divine Power
maintained it not. 9. And it is a Religion which requires much time and
contemplation, in the learning and in the practicing of it: whereas the world
are taken up with so much business for the body, and are so slothful to those
exercises of the mind, which bring them no present sensible commodity, that
this also would quickly wear it out. 10. And then the terms of it being so
contrary to all men's fleshly interest and sense, in self-denial, and forsaking
all for Christ; and in mortifying the most beloved sins, and the world putting
us to it so ordinarily by persecution; this also would deter the most, and
weary out the rest, if the Power of God did not uphold them. That which is done
by exceeding industry, against the inclinations and interest of nature, will
have no considerable number of practisers. As we see in horses and dogs which
are capable with great labor, of being taught extraordinary things in the
semblance of reason: And yet because it must cost so much labor, there is but
one in a Country that is brought to it. But (though the truly religious are but
few in comparison of the wicked, yet) godly persons are not so few as they
would be, if it were the work of industry alone. God makes it as a new nature
to them; and (which is very much to be observed) the main change is oft-times
wrought in an hour, and that after all exhortations, and the labors of Parents
and Teachers have failed, and left the sinner as seemingly hopeless.

And thus I have showed you 1. That our Religion objectively taken, is the
Image of Gods WISDOM, GOODNESS and POWER, and thereby fully proved to be from
GOD. 2. And that our Religion subjectively taken, is answerably the Spirit or
impress of POWER, and of LOVE, and of SOVND UNDERSTANDING, and is in us a
constant seal and witness to the truth of Christ.

CHAP. VII. The means of making known all this infallibly to us.
I Suppose the evidence of divine attestation is so clear in this Image of God
on the Christian Religion, which I have been opening, that few can doubt of it,
who are satisfied of the historical truth of the facts; and therefore this is
next to be considered, How the certain knowledge of all these things comes
down to us?

The first question is, whether this Doctrine and Religion indeed be the
impress of Gods WISDOM, and his GOODNESS and POWER, supposing the truth of the
historical part? This is it which I think that few reasonable persons will deny:
For the doctrine is legible, and shows it self.

But the next question is it, which I am now to resolve, How we shall know that
this Doctrine was indeed delivered by Christ and his Apostles, and these things
done by them, which the Scriptures mention?

And here the first question shall be, How the Apostles, and all other the
first witnesses, knew it themselves? For it is by every reasonable man to be
supposed, that they who were present, and we who are 1668 years distance, could
not receive the knowledge of the matters of fact, in the very same manner. It
is certain that their knowledge was by their present sense and reason: They saw
Christ and his miracles: They heard his words: They saw him risen from the
dead: They discoursed with him, and eat and drunk with him: They saw him
ascending up bodily to Heaven. They need no other Revelation to tell them what
they saw, and heard, and felt.

If you had asked them then, H^w know you that all these things were said and
done? they would have answered you, Because we saw and heard them. But we were
not then present: we did not see, and hear, what they did: Nor did we see or
hear them, who were the eyewitnesses. And therefore as their senses told it
them; so the natural way for our knowledge, must be by derivation from their
sense to ours: For when they themselves received it in a way so natural,
(though not without the help of Gods Spirit, in the remembering, recording and
attesting it) we that can less pretend to inspiration, or immediate revelation,
have small reason to think that we must know the same facts, by either of those
supernatural ways. Nor can our knowledge of a history, carried down through so
many ages, be so clearly satisfactory to our selves, as sight and hearing was
to them. And yet we have a certainty, not only infallible; but so far
satisfactory, as is sufficient to warrant all our faith, and duty, and
sufferings for the reward which Christ has set before us.

Let us next then enquire, How did the first Churches know that the Apostles
and other Preachers of the Gospel did not deceive them in the matter of fact? I
answer, They had their degrees of assurance or knowledge in this part of their
belief. 1. They had the most credible humane testimony of men that were not
like to deceive them. But this was not infallible.

2. They had in their testimony the evidence of a natural certainty: It being
naturally impossible, that so many persons should agree together to deceive the
world, in such matters of fact, at so dear a rate, in the very place and age
when the things were pretended to be done and said, when any one might have
presently evinced the falsehood, if they had been liars, about the twice feeding
of many thousands miraculously, and the raising of the dead, and many other
public miracles, and the darkness at his death, and the rending of the Rocks
and Vail of the Temple, and the Earthquake, and the coming down of the Holy
Ghost upon themselves; with many the like they would have been detected and
confuted to their confusion: And we should have read what Apologies they made
against such detections and confutations! And some of them (at least at their
death) would have been forced by conscience, to confess the plot.

3. But to leave no room for doubting, God gave those first Churches, the
addition of his own supernatural attestation, by the same threefold impress of
his Image before described: 1. In the holy Wisdom and Light which was in their
doctrine. 2. In the holy Love, and Piety, and Purity, which was conspicuous in
their doctrine, and in their lives. 3. And in the evidences of divine Power, in
the many gifts, and wonders and miracles which they wrought and manifested. And
these things seem a fuller testimony than the miracles of Christ himself. For
Christ's miracles were the deeds of one alone; and his resurrection was
witnessed but by twelve chosen witnesses, and about five hundred other persons;
and he conversed with them but forty days, and that by times: But the miracles
of the Disciples were wrought by many, and before many thousands, at several
times, and in many Countries, and for many and many years together; and in the
sight and hearing of many of the Churches: So that these first Churches had
sight and hearing, to assure them of the divine miraculous attestation of the
truth of their testimony, who told them of the doctrines, miracles, and
resurrection of Christ: And all this from Christ's solemn promise and gift,
John. 14.12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me, the works
that I do, shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do, because
I go to the Father.

But if it be demanded, How did the next Christians of the second age, receive
all this from the first Churches, who received it from the Apostles? I answer,
by the same evidence, and with some advantages. For 1. They had the credible
humane testimony of all their Pastors, Neighbors, Parents, who told them but
what they saw and heard. 2. They had a greater evidence of natural infallible
certainty: For 1. The doctrine was now delivered to them in the records of the
sacred Scriptures, and so less liable to the misreports of the ignorant,
forgetful or erroneous. 2. The reporters were now more numerous, and the
miracles reported more numerous also. 3. They were persons now dispersed over
much of the world, and could not possibly agree together to deceive. 4. The
deceit would now have been yet more easily detected and abhorred.

3. But besides this, they had also the supernatural testimony of God: For the
Apostles converts received the same spirit as they had themselves: And though
the miracles of other persons were not so numerous as those of the Apostles;
yet the persons were many thousands more that wrought them: All this is
asserted in the Scripture it self; as Gal. 3.3, 4. 1 Cor. 14. and 12. and many
places: And he that should have told them falsely that they themselves had the
spirit of extraordinary gifts and miracles, would hardly have been believed by
them. And all this also the following Ages have themselves asserted unto us.

The question then which remains is, How we receive all this infallibly from
the subsequent Ages or Churches to this day? The answer to which is, still by
the same way, with yet greater advantages in some respects, though less in
others. As 1. We have the humane testimony of all our ancestors, and of many of
our enemies. 2. We have greater evidence of natural certainty, that they could
not possibly meet or plot together to deceive us. 3. We have still the
supernatural divine attestation (though rarely of miracles, yet) of those more
necessary and noble operations of the Spirit, in the sanctification of all true
Believers; which Spirit accompanies and works by the doctrine which from our
ancestors we have received.

More distinctly observe all these conjunct means of our full reception of our
Religion.

1. The very Being of the Christians and Churches, is a testimony to us that
they believed and received this Religion. For what makes them Christians and
Churches but the receiving of it?

2. The ordinance of Baptism, is a notable tradition of it. For all that ever
were made Christians, have been baptized: And Baptism is nothing but the solemn
initiation of persons into this Religion, by a vowed consent to it, as
summarily there expressed in the Christian Covenant. And this was used to be
openly done.

3. The use of the Creed, which at Baptism and other sacred seasons, was
always wont to be professed, (together with the Lords Prayer, and the
Decalogue; the summaries of our faith, desire and practice) is another notable
tradition; by which this Religion has been sent down to following Ages: For
though perhaps all the terms of the Creed were not so early as some think, thus
constantly used; yet all the sense and substance of it was.

4. The holy Scriptures or Records of this Religion, containing integrally all
the doctrine, and all the necessary matter of fact, is the most complete way of
tradition: And it will appear to you in what further shall be said, that we
have infallible proof, that these Scriptures are the same, which the first
Churches did receive; what ever inconsiderable errors may be crept into any
Copies, by the unavoidable oversight of the Scribes.

5. The constant use of the sacred Assemblies, has been another means of sure
tradition: For we have infallible proof of the successive continuation of such
Assemblies; and that their use was still, the solemn profession of the
Christian Faith, and worshipping God according to it.

6. And the constant use of Reading the Scriptures in those Assemblies, is
another full historical tradition: For that which is constantly and publicly
read, as the doctrine of their Religion, cannot be changed, without the notice
of all the Church, and without an impossible combination of all the Churches in
the world.

7. And it secureth the tradition that one set day has been kept for this
public exercise of Religion, from the very first; even the Lords day (besides
all occasional times) The day it self being appointed to celebrate the memorial
of Christ's Resurrection, is a most current history of it; as the feast of
unleavened bread, and the Passover was of the Israelites deliverance from
Egypt. And the exercises still performed on that day, do make the tradition
more complete.

And because some few Sabbatarians among our selves do keep the old Sabbath
only, and call still for Scripture proof for the institution of the Lords day;
let me briefly tell them, that which is enough to evince their error. 1. That
the Apostles were Officers immediately commissioned by Christ, to disciple the
Nations, and to teach them all that Christ commanded, and so to settle Orders
in the Church, Mat. 28.19, 20, 21. Acts 15. etc.

2. That Christ promised and gave them his Spirit infallibly to guide them in
the performance of this commission (though not to make them perfectly
impeccable) John 16.13.

3. That de facto the Apostles appointed the use of the Lords day for the
Church Assemblies: This being all that is left to be proved, and this being
matter of fact, which requires no other kind of proof but history, part of the
history of it is in the Scripture, and the rest in the history of all following
Ages. In the Scripture it self it is evident, that the Churches and the
Apostles used this day accordingly: And it has most infallible history
(impossible to be false) that the Churches have used it ever to this day, as
that which they found practiced in their times by their appointment: And this
is not a bare narrative, but an uninterrupted matter of public fact and
practice: So universal, that I remember not in all my reading, that ever one
enemy questioned it, or ever one Christian, or Heretic denied, or once
scrupled it. So that they who tell us that all this is yet but humane
testimony, do show their egregious inconsiderations, that know not that such
humane testimony or history in a matter of public constant fact, may be most
certain, and all that the nature of the case will allow a sober person to
require. And they might as well reject the Canon of the Scriptures, because
humane testimony is it which in point of fact does certify us, that these are
the very unaltered Canonical Books, which were delivered at first to the
Churches: Yea they may reject all the store of historical tradition of
Christianity it self, which I am here reciting to the shame of their
understandings.

And consider also, that the Lords day was settled, and constantly used in
solemn worship by the Churches, many and many years before any part of the New
Testament was written; and above threescore years before it was finished. And
when the Churches had so many years been in public possession of it, who would
require that the Scriptures should after all, make a Law to institute that
which was instituted so long ago.

If you say, that it might have declared the institution, I answer, so it has,
as I have showed; there needing no other declaration, but 1. Christ's commission
to the Apostles to order the Church, and declare his commands. 2. And his
promise of infallible guidance therein. 3. And the history of the Churches
order and practice, to show de facto, what they did: And that history need not
be written in Scripture for the Churches that then were; no more than we need a
revelation from Heaven to tell us thas the Lords day is kept in England: And
sure the next Age needed no supernatural testimony of it: and therefore neither
do we: But yet it is occasionally often intimated or expressed in the Scripture,
though on the by, as that which was no further necessary.

So that I may well conclude, that we have better historical evidence that the
Lords day was actually observed by the Churches, for their public worship and
profession of the Christian Faith, than we have that ever there was such a man
as William the Conqueror in England, yea or King James; much more than that
there was a Caesar or Cicero.

8. Moreover, the very Office of the Pastors of the Church, and their
continuance from the beginning to this day, is a great part of the certain
tradition of this Religion. For it is most certain, that the Churches were
constituted, and the Assemblies held, and the worship performed with them, and
by their conduct, and not without: And it is certain by infallible history,
that their office has been still the same, even to teach men this Christian
Religion, and to guide them in the practice of it, and to read the same
Scriptures as the word of truth, and to explain it to the people. And therefore
as the Judicatures and Offices of the Judges is a certain proof that there have
been those Laws by which they judge (especially if they had been also the
weekly public Readers and Expounders of them) and so much more is it in our
case.

9. And the constant use of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, has
according to his appointment, been an infallible tradition of his Covenant, and
a means to keep him in remembrance in the Churches. For when all the Churches
in the world have made this Sacramental Commemoration, and renewed covenanting
with Christ as dead and risen, to be their constant public practice here, is a
tradition of that faith and Covenant which cannot be counterfeit or false.

10. To this we may add, the constant use of Discipline in these Churches: it
having been their constant law and practice, to enquire into the faith and
lives of the members, and to censure or cast out those that impenitently
violated their Religion: which shows, that de facto that Faith and Religion
was then received; and is a means of delivering it down to us. Under which we
may mention 1. Their Synods and Officers. 2. And their Canons by which this
Discipline was exercised.

11. Another tradition has been the published confessions of their Faith and
R^l^g^on in those Apologies, which persecutions and calumnies have caused them
to write.

12. And another is, all those published Confutations of the many heresies,
which in every age have risen up; and all the controversies which the Churches
have had with them, and among themselves.

13. And another is, all the Treatises, Sermons, and other instructing writings
of the Pastors of those times.

14 And another way of tradition has been by the testimony and sufferings of
Confessors and Martyrs, who have endured either torments or death, in the
defense and owning of this Religion: In all which ways of tradition, the
doctrine and the matter were jointly attested by them. For the Resurrection of
Christ (which is part of the matter of fact) was one of the Articles of their
Creed, which they suffered for: And all of them received the holy Scriptures,
which declare the Apostles miracles; and they received their faith, as
delivered by those Apostles, with the confirmation of those miracles: So that
when they professed to believe the doctrine, they especially professed to
believe the history of the life and death of Christ, and of his Apostles: And
the Religion which they suffered for, and daily professed, contained both: And
the historical Books called the Gospels, were the chief part of the Scripture
which they called, The Word of God, and the Records of the Christian Religion.

15. To this I may add, that all the ordinary prayers and praises of the
Churches, did continue the recital of much of this history, and of the Apostles
names and acts, and were composed much in Scripture phrase, which preserved the
memory, and professed the belief of all those things.

16. And the festivals or other days, which were kept in honorable
commemoration of those Apostles and Martyrs, was another way of keeping these
things in memory: Whether it were well done or not, is not my present enquiry
(only I may say, I cannot accuse it of any sin, till it come to over-doing, and
ascribing too much to them.) But certainly it was a way of transmitting the
memory of those things to posterity.

17. Another has been by the constant commemoration of the great works of
Christ, by the days or seasons of the year, which were annually observed: How
far here also the Church did well* or ill, I now meddle not: But doubtless the
observing of anniversary solemnities for their commemoration, was a way of
preserving the memory of the acts themselves to posterity. How long the day of
Christ's Nativity has been celebrated, I know not: Reading what Seldom has
said on one side; and on the other finding no current Author mention it (that I
have read) before Nazianzene: and finding by Chrysostom, that the Churches of
the East, till his time had differed from the Western Churches, as far as the
sixth of January is from the 25 of December. But that is of less moment,
because Christ's birth is a thing unquestioned in it self. But we find that the
time of his fasting forty days, the time of his Passion, and of his
Resurrection, and the giving of the Holy Ghost, were long before kept in
memory, by some kind of observation by fa^ts or festivals: And though there was
a controversy about the due season of the successive observation of Easter,
yet that signified no uncertainty of the first day, or the season of the year.
And though at first it was but few days that were kept in fasting at that
season, yet they were enough to commemorate both the forty days fasting, and
the death of Christ.

18. And the histories of the Heathens and enemies of the Church, do also
declare how long Christianity continued, and what they were, and what they
suffered who were called Christians; such as Plinies, Celsus, Porphyry,
Plotinus, Lucian, Su^tonius, and others.

19. And the constant instruction of Children by their Parents, which is
Family-tradition, has been a very great means also of this commemoration. For
it cannot be (though some be negligent) but that multitudes in all times would
teach their children, what the Christian Religion was, as to its doctrine and
its history. And the practice of catechizing, and teaching children the Creed,
the Lords Prayer, and the Decalogue, and the Scriptures, the more secured this
tradition in families.

20. Lastly, A succession of the same Spirit, which was in the Apostles, and of
much of the same works, which were done by them, was such a way of assuring us
of the truth of their doctrine and history, as a succession of posterity teleth
us, that our progenitors were men. The same spirit of Wisdom and Goodness in a
great degree continued after them to this day. And all wrought by their
doctrine: and very credible history assures us, that many miracles also were
done, in many ages after them; though not so many as by them: Eusebius,
Cyprian, Augustine, Victor, Vlicensis, Sulpitius, Severus, and many others,
show us so much as may make the belief of the Apostles the more easy.

And indeed, the Image of Gods WISDOM, GOODNESS and POWER on the souls of all
true Christians in the world, successively to this day, considered in it self,
and in its agreement with the same Image in the holy Scriptures, which do
imprint it, and in its agreement or sameness as found in all Ages, Nations and
Persons, is such a standing perpetual evidence that the Christian Religion is
Divine, that (being still at hand) it should be exceeding satisfactory to a
considerate Believer, against all doubts and temptations to unbelief. And were
it not lest, I should instead of an Index, give you too large a recital of what
I have more fully written in my foresaid Treatise, I would here stay yet to
show you how impossible it is that this Spirit of Holiness, which we feel in
us, and see by the effects in others, even in every true Believer, should be
caused by a word of falsehood, which he abhors, and as the Just Ruler of the
world, would be obliged to disown.

I shall only here desire you by the way to note that when I have all this
while showed you that the SPIRIT is the great witness of the truth of
Christianity, that it is, this spirit of Wisdom, Goodness and Power, in the
Prophets, in Christ, in the Apostles, and in all Christians, expressed in the
doctrine, and the practices aforesaid, which I mean; as being principally the
Evidences, or objective witness of Jesus Christ; and secondarily, being in all
true Believers, their teacher, or illuminater and sanctifier, efficiently to
cause them to perceive the aforesaid objective Evidences in its cogent
undeniable power. And thus the Holy Ghost is the promised Agent or Advocate of
Christ; to do his work in his bodily absence in the world: And that in this
sense it is, that we Believe in the HOLY GHOST, and are baptized into his Name;
and not only as he is the third person in the Eternal Trinity.

And therefore it is to be lamented exceedingly, 1. That any Orthodox Teachers
should recite over many of these parts of the witness of the SPIRIT, and when
they have done, tell us, that yet all these are not sufficient to convince us
without the testimony of the Spirit: As if all this were none of the testimony
of the Spirit; and as if they would persuade us and our enemies, that the
testimony which must satisfy us, is only some inward impress of this
Proposition on the mind, by way of inspiration, [ The Scriptures are the Word
of God, and true.] Overlooking the great witness of the Spirit, which is his
special work, and which our Baptism relates to, and feigning some
extraordinary new thing as the only testimony.

And it is to be lamented, that Papists, and quarrelling Sectaries should take
this occasion to reproach us as Infidels, that have no true grounded faith in
Christ; as telling us that we resolve it all into a private inward pretended
witness of the Spirit: And then they ask us, who can know that witness but our
selves? and how can we preach the Gospel to others, if the only cogent argument
of faith be incommunicable, or such as we cannot prove? Though both the
Believing soul and the Church be the Kingdom of the Prince of Light, yet O what
wrong has the Prince of Darkness done, by the mixtures of darkness in them
both!

So much for the first Direction for the strengthening of Faith, which is, by
discerning the Evidences of Truth in our Religion.

CHAP. VIII. The rest of the Directions for strengthening our Faith.
I Shall be more brief in the rest of the Directions, for the increase of
Faith: and they are these.

Direct. 2. Compare the Christian Religion with all other in the world: And
seeing it is certain that some way or other God has revealed, to guide man in
his duty, unto his end, and it is no other; you will see that it must needs be
this.

1. The way of the Heathenish Idolaters cannot be it: The principles and the
effects of their Religion, may easily satisfy you of this. The only true God
would not command Idolatry, nor befriend such ignorance, error and wickedness
as does constitute their Religion, and are produced by it, as its genuine
fruits.

2. The way of Judaism cannot be it: For it does but lead us up to
Christianity, and bear witness to Christ, and of it self, is evidently
insufficient; its multitude of ceremonies being but the pictures and alphabet
of that truth which Jesus Christ has brought to light, and which has
evidence, which to us is more convincing, than that of the Jewish Law,

3. The Mahometane delusion is so gross, that it seems vain to say any more
against it, than it says it self; unless it be to those who are bred up in
such darkness, as to hear of nothing else, and never to see the Sun which
shines on the Christian world; and withal are under the terror of the sword,
which is the strongest reason of that barbarous Sect.

4. And to think that the Atheism of Infidels is the way, (who hold only the
five Articles of the Unity of God, the duty of obedience, the immortality of
the soul, the life of retributior, and the necessity of Repentance) is but to
go against the light. For 1. It is a denial of that abundant evidence of the
truth of the Christian Faith, which cannot by any sound reason be confuted. 2.
It is evidently too narrow for man's necessities, and leaves our misery without
a sufficient remedy. 3. Its inclusions and exclusions are contradictory: It
asserteth the necessity of Obedience and Repentance, and yet excludes the
necessary means (the revealed Light, and Love, and Power) by which both
Obedience and Repentance must be had. It excludes Christ and his Spirit, and
yet requires that which none but Christ and his Spirit can effect. 4. It
proposes a way as the only Religion, which few ever went from the beginning
(as to the exclusions.) As if that were Gods only way to Heaven, which scarce
any visible societies of men, can be proved to have practiced to this day.

Which of all these Religions have the most wise, and holy, and heavenly, and
mortified, and righteous, and sober persons to profess it: and the greatest
numbers of such? If you will judge of the medicine by the effects, and take him
for the best Physician, who does the greatest cures upon the souls, you will
soon conclude that Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man
comes to the Father but by him, John 14.6.

Direct. 3. Think how impossible it is that any but God should be the Author of
the Christian Religion.

1. No good man could be guilty of so horrid a crime as to forge a volume of
delusions, and put Gods Name to it; to cheat the world so blasphemously and
hypocritically, and to draw them into a life of trouble to promote it. Much
less could so great a number of good men do this, as the success of such a
cheat (were it possible) would require. There is no man that can believe it to
be a deceit, but must needs believe, as we do of Mahomet, that the Author was
one of the worst men that ever lived in the world.

2. No bad man could lay so excellent a design, and frame a Doctrine and Law so
holy, so self denying, so merciful, so just, so spiritual, so heavenly, and so
concordant in it self* nor carry on so high and divine an undertaking for so
divine and excellent an end: No bad man could so universally condemn all
badness, and prescribe such powerful remedies against it, and so effectually
cure and conquer it in so considerable a part of the world.

3. If it be below any good man, to be guilty of such a forgery as aforesaid,
we can much less suspect that any good Angel could be guilty of it.

4. And if no bad man could do so much good, we can much less imagine that any
Devil or bad spirit could be the author of it. The Devil who is the worst in
evil, could never so much contradict his nature, and overthrow his own Kingdom,
and say so much evil of himself, and do so much against himself, and do so much
for the sanctifying and saving of the world: He that does so much to draw men
to sin and misery, would never do so much to destroy their sin. And we plainly
feel within our selves, that the spirit or party which draws us to sin, does
resist the Spirit which draws us to believe and obey the Gospel; and that
these two maintain a war within us.

5. And if you should say, that the good which is in Christianity, is caused by
God, and the evil of it by the Father of sin, I answer, either it is true or
false: If it be true, it is so good, that the Devil can never possibly be a
contributor to it: Nay, it cannot then be suspected justly of any evil. But if
it be false, it is then so bad, that God cannot be any otherwise the Author of
it, than as he is the Author of any common natural Verity which it may take in
and abuse; or as his general concourse extends to the whole Creation. But it
is somewhat in Christianity, which it has more than other Religions have,
which must make it more pure, and more powerful and successful, than any other
Religions have been. Therefore it must be more than common natural truths: even
the contexture of those natural truths, with the supernatural revelations of
it, and the addition of a spirit of power, and light, and love, to procure the
success. And God cannot be the Author of any such contexture, or additions, if
it be false.

6. If it be said, that men that had some good, and some bad in them, did
contrive it (such as those Fanatics, or Enthusiasts, who have pious notions
and words, with pride and self-exalting minds) I answer, The good is so great
which is found in Christianity, that it is not possible that a bad man* much
less an extremely bad man, could be the Author of it* And the wickedness of the
plot would be so great if it were false, that it is not possible that any but
an extremely bad man could be guilty of it: Much less that a multitude should
be sound at once so extremely good as to promote it, even with their greatest
labor and suffering, and also so extremely bad as to join together in the plot
to cheat the world, in a matter of such high importance. Such exceeding good
and evil, cannot consist in any one person, much less in so many as must do
such a thing. And if such a heated brain sick person as Hacket, Nailer, David,
George, or John of Leyden, should cry up themselves upon prophetical and pious
pretenses, their madness has still appeared, in the mixture of their impious
doctrines and practices: And if any would and could be so wicked, God never
would or did assist them, by an age of numerous open miracles, nor lend them
his Omnipotency to deceive the world; but left them to the shame of their proud
attempts, and made their folly known to all.

Direct. 4. Study all the Evidences of the Christian Verity, till their sense,
and weight, and order, be thoroughly digested, understood and remembered by you;
and be as plain and familiar to you, as the lesson which you have most
thoroughly learned.

It is not once or twice reading, or hearing, or thinking on such a great and
difficult matter, that will make it your own, for the stablishing of your
faith. He that will understand the art of a Seaman, a Soldier, a Musician, a
Physician, etc. so as to practice it; must study it hard, and understand it
clearly, and comprehensively, and have all the whole frame of it printed on his
mind; and not only here and there a scrap. Faith is a practical knowledge: We
must have the heart and life directed and commanded by it: We must live by it,
both in the intention of our end, and in the choice and use of all the means:
Whilst the Gospel, and the Reasons of our Religion, are strange to people,
like a lesson but half learned, who can expect that they should be settled
against all temptations which assault their faith, and able to confute the
tempter? We lay together the proofs of our Religion, and you read them twice or
thrice, and then think that if after that you have any doubting, the fault is
in the want of evidence, and not in your want of understanding: But the life of
faith must cost you more labor than so; study it till you clearly understand
it, and remember the whole method of the evidence together, and have it all as
at your fingers ends, and then you may have a confirmed faith to live by.

Direct. 5. When you know what are the sorest temptations to unbelief, get all
those special arguments and provisions into your minds, which are necessary
against those particular temptations. And do not strengthen your own
temptations by your imprudent entertaining them.

Here are th^ee things which I would especially advise you to against
temptations to unbelief. 1. Enter not into the debate of so great a business
when you are incapable of it: Especially 1. When your minds are taken up with
worldly business, or other thoughts have carried them away, let not Satan then
surprise you, and say, Come now and question thy Religion: You could not
resolve a question in Philosophy, nor cast up any long account, on such a
sudden, with an unprepared mind. When the Evidences of your faith are out of
mind, stay till you can have leisure to set your selves to the business, with
that studiousness, and those helps, which so great a matter does require. 2.
When sickness or melancholy does weaken your understandings, you are then unfit
for such a work. You would not in such a case dispute for your lives with a
cunning sophister upon any difficult question whatsoever: And will you in such
a case dispute with the Devil, when your salvation may lie upon it?

2. When your faith is once settled, suffer not the Devil to call you to
dispute it over again at his command. Do it not when his suggestions urge you
at his pleasure; but when God makes it your duty, and at his pleasure: Else
your very disputing with Satan, will be some degree of yielding to him, and
gratifying him. And he will one time or other take you at the advantage, and
assault you when you are without your arms.

3 Mark what it is that Atheists and Infidels most object against Christianity;
but especially mark what it is which Satan makes most use of, against your
selves, to shake your faith: And there let your studies be principally bent;
that you may have particular armor to defend you against particular assaults:
And get such light by communication with wiser and more experienced men, as may
furnish you for that use; that no objection may be-made against your faith,
which you are not always ready to answer. This is the true sense of 1 Pet.
3.15. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an
answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with
meekness and fear.

Direct. 6. Mark well those works of God in the world, which are the plain
fulfilling of his Word.

God does not make such notable difference by his Judgments, as shall prevent
the great discoveries at the last, and make his Assize and final Judgment to
be unnecessary, by doing the same work before the time. But yet his Providence
do own, and bear witness to his Word: and he leaves not the world without some
present sensible testimonies of his sovereign government, to convince them, and
restrain them.

1. Mark how the state of the sinful world agrees to Gods description of it,
and how maliciously Godliness is every where opposed by them, and how notably
God still casts shame upon sinners; so that even in their prosperity and rage
they are pitied and contemned in the eyes of all that are wise and sober, and
in the next generation their names do rot, Psalm. 15.3, 4. Prove. 10.7. And it is
wonderful to observe, that sin in the general and abstract, is still spoken of
by all as an odious thing, even by them that will be damned rather than they
will leave it: And that Virtue and Godliness, Charity and Justice are still
praised in the world, even by them that abhor and persecute it.

2. And it is very observable, how most of the great changes of the world are
made? By how small, contemptible and unthought of mean^? Especially where the
interest of the Gospel is most concerned! The instance of the Reformation in
Luther's time, and many others nearer to our days, would show us much of the
conjunction of Gods works with his Word, if they were particularly and wisely
opened.

3. The many prodigies, or extraordinary events, which have fallen out at
several times, would be found to be of use this way, if wisely considered. A
great number have fallen out among us of late years, of real certainty, and of
a considerable usefulness: But the crafty enemy (who uses most to wrong Christ
and his Cause, by his most passionate, injudicious followers) prevailed with
some over-forward Minister of this strein, to publish them in many volumes,
with the mixture of so many falsehoods, and mistaken circumstances, as turned
them to the advantage of the Devil and ungodliness, and made the very mention
of Prodigies to become a scorn.

4. The strange deliverances of many of Gods servants in the greatest dangers,
by the most unlikely means, is a great encouragement to faith: And there are a
great number of Christians that have experience of such: The very manner of our
preservations is often such as forces us to say, It is the hand of God.

5. The notable answer, and grant of prayers, (of which many Christians have
convincing experience) is also a great confirmation to our faith, (of which I
have before spoken.)

6. The three sensible evidences formerly mentioned, compared with the
Scriptures, may much persuade us of its truth: I mean 1. Apparitions; 2.
Witches; 3. Satanical possessions or diseases, which plainly declare the
operation of Satan in them; of all which I could give you manifold and proved
instances. These, and many other instances of Gods providence, are great means
to help us to believe his Word (though we must not with Fanatical persons, put
first our own interpretation upon Gods works, and then expound his Word by
them; but use his works as the fulfilling of his Word, and expound his
Providence by his Precepts, and his Promises and Threats.

Direct. 7. Mark well Gods inward works of Government upon the soul; and you
shall find it very agreeable to the Gospel.

There is a very great evidence of a certain Kingdom of God within us: And as
he is himself a Spirit, so it is with the Spirit that he does most apparently
converse, in the work of his moral Government in the world. 1. There you shall
find a Law of duty, or an inward conviction of much of that obedience which you
owe to God. 2. There you shall find an inward mover, striving with you to draw
you to perform this duty. 3. There you shall find the inward suggestions of an
enemy, laboring to draw you away from this duty, and to make a godly life seem
grievous to you; and also to draw you to all the sins which Christ forbids.
4. There you shall find an inward conviction, that God is your Judge, and that
he will call you to account for your wilful violations of the Laws of Christ.

5. There you shall find an inward sentence past upon you, according as you do
good or evil.

6. And there you may find the sorest Judgments of God inflicted, which any
short of Hell endure. You may there find how God for sin does first afflict the
soul that is not quite forsaken, with troubles and affrightments, and some of
the feeling of his displeasure. And where that is long despised, and men sin on
still, he uses to with hold his gracious motions, and leave the sinner dull
and senseless, so that he can sin with sinful remorse, having no heart or life
to any thing that is spiritually good: And if yet the sinner think not of his
condition, to repent, he is usually so far forsaken as to be given up to the
power of his most brutish lust; and to glory impudently in his shame, and to
hate and persecute the servants of Christ, who would recover him; till he has
filled up the measure of his sin, and wrath be come upon him to the uttermost,
Ephesians. 4.18, 19. 1 These. 2.15, 16. being abominable, and disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate, Titus 1.15, 16. Besides the lesser penal
withdrawings of the Spirit, which Gods own servants find in themselves, after
some sins or neglects of grace.

7. And there also you may find the Rewards of Love and faithful duty; by many
tastes of Gods acceptance, and many comforts of his Spirit, and by his owning
the soul, and giving out larger assistance of his Spirit, and peace of
conscience, and entertainment in prayer, and all approaches of the soul to God,
and sweeter forecasts of life eternal. In a word, if we did but note Gods
dreadful Judgments on the souls of the ungodly in this age, as well as we have
noted our plagues and flames; and if Gods servants kept as exact observations
of their inward rewards and punishments, and that in particulars, as suited to
their particular sins and duties; you will see that Christ is King indeed, and
that there is a real Government according to his Gospel, kept up in the
consciences or souls of men (though not so observable as the rewards and
punishments at the last day.)

Direct. 8. Dwell not too much on sensual objects, and let them not come too
near your hearts.

Three things I here persuade you carefully to avoid: 1. That you keep your
hearts at a meet distance from all things in this world; that they grow not too
sweet to you, nor too great in your esteem: 2. That you gratify not sense it
self too much; and live not in the pleasing of your taste or lust: 3. That you
suffer not your imaginations to run out greedily after things sensitive, nor
make them the too frequent objects of your thoughts.

You may ask perhaps, what is all this to our faith? why, the life of faith is
exercised upon things that are not seen: And if you live upon the things that
are seen, and imprison your soul in the fetters of your concupiscence, and fill
your fancies with things of another nature, how can you be acquainted with the
life of faith? Can a bird fly that has a stone tied to her foot? Can you have
a mind full of lust, and of God at once? Or can that mind that is used to these
inordinate sensualities, be fit to relish the things that are spiritual? And
can it be a lover of earth, and fleshly pleasures, and also a Believer and
lover of Heaven?

Direct. 9. Use your selves much to think and speak of Heaven, and the
invisible things of Faith?

Speaking of Heaven is needful both to express your thoughts, and to actuate
and preserve them. And the often thoughts of Heaven, will make the mind
familiar there: And familiarity will assist and encourage faith: For it will
much acquaint us with those reasons and inducements of faith, which a few
strange and distant thoughts will never reach to. As he that converseth much
with a learned, wise, or godly man, will easilier believe that he is learned,
wise, or godly, than he that is a stranger to him, and only now and then sees
him afar off: So he that thinks so frequently of God and Heaven, till his
mind has contracted a humble acquaintance and familiarity, must needs believe
the truth of all that excellency which before he doubted of. For doubting is
the effect of ignorance: And he that knows most here, believes best.
Falsehood and evil cannot bear the light; but the more you think of them, and
know them, the more they are detected and ashamed: But truth and goodness love
the light; and the better you are acquainted with them, the more will your
belief and love be increased.

Direct. 10. Live not in the guilt of wilful sin: For that will many ways
hinder your belief.

1. It will breed fear and horror in your minds, and make you wish that it
were not true, that there is a day of Judgment, and a Hell for the ungodly,
and such a God, such a Christ, and such a life to come, as the Gospel does
describe: And when you take it for your interest to be an unbeliever, you will
hearken with desire to all that the Devil and Infidels can say: And you will
the more easily make your selves believe that the Gospel is not true, by how
much the more you desire that it should not be true. 2. And you will forfeit
the grace which should help you to believe; both by your wilful sin, and by
your unwillingness to believe: For who can expect that Christ should give his
grace to them, who wilfully despise him, and abuse it: Or that he should make
men believe, who had rather not believe? Indeed he may possibly do both these,
but these are not the way, nor is it a thing which we can expect. 3. And this
guilt, and fear, and unwillingness together, will all keep down your thoughts
from Heaven; so that seldom thinking of it, will increase your unbelief: and
they will make you unfit to see the evidences of truth in the Gospel, when you
do think of them, or hear them: For he that would not k^^w cannot learn. Ob^y
therefore according to the knowledge which you have, if ever you would have
more, and would not be given up to the blindness of Infidelity.

Direct. 11. Trust not only to your understandings, and think not that study is
all which is necessary to faith: But remember that faith is the gift of God,
and therefore pray as well as study.

Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thy own
understanding. It is a precept as necessary in this point as in any. In all
things God abhors the proud, and looks at them afar off, as with disowning
and disdain: But in no case more, than when a blind ungodly sinner shall so
overvalue his own understanding, as to think that if there be evidence of truth
in the mystery of faith, he is able presently to discern it, before or without
any heavenly illumination, to cure his dark distempered mind. Remember that as
the Sun is seen only by his own light; so is God our Creator and Redeemer.
Faith is the gift of God, as well as Repentance, Ephesians. 2.8. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
Apply your selves therefore to God by earnest prayer for it. As he, Mark 9.24.
Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. And as the Disciples, Luke 17.5.
Increase our faith. A humble soul that waits on God in fervent prayer, and
yet neglects not to study and search for truth, is much liker to become a
confirmed Believer, than ungodly Students, who trust and seek no further than
to their Books, and their perverted minds. For as God will be sought to for his
grace; so those that draw near him, do draw near unto the Light; and therefore
are like as children of Light to be delivered from the power of darkness: For
in his light we shall see the light that must acquaint us with him.

Direct. 12. Lastly, What measure of Light soever God vouchsafes you, labor
to turn it all into Love; and make it your serious care and business to know
God, that you may love him, and to love God so far as you know him.

For he that desires satisfaction in his doubts, to no better end, than to
please his mind by knowing, and to free it from the disquiet of uncertainty,
has an end so low in all his studies, that he cannot expect that God and his
grace should be called down, to serve such a low and base design. That faith
which is not employed in beholding the love of God in the face of Christ, on
purpose to increase and exercise our love, is not indeed the true Christian
Faith, but a dead opinion. And he that has never so weak a faith, and uses it
to this end, to know Gods amiableness, and to love him, does take the most
certain way for the confirmation of his faith. For Love is the closest
adherence of the soul to God, and therefore will set it in the clearest light,
and will teach it by the sweet convincing way of experience and spiritual
taste. Believing alone is like the knowledge of our meat by seeing it: And Love
is as the knowledge of our meat by eating and digesting it. And he that has
tasted that it is sweet, has a stronger kind of persuasion that it is sweet,
than he that only sees it; and will much more tenaciously hold his
apprehension: It is more possible to dispute him out of his belief, who only
sees, than him that also tastes and concocteth. A Parent and child will not
so easily believe any false reports of one another, as strangers or enemies
will; because Love is a powerful resister of such hard conceits. And though
this be delusory and blinding partiality, where Love is guided by mistake; yet
when a sound understanding leads it, and Love has chosen the truest object,
it is the naturally perfective motion of the soul.

And Love keeps us under the fullest influences of Gods Love; and therefore
in the reception of that grace which will increase our faith: For Love is that
act which the ancient Doctors were wont to call, the principle of merit, or
first meritorious act of the soul; and which we call, the principle of
rewardable acts. God begins and loves us first, partly with a Love of
complacency, only as his creatures, and also as in esse cognito, he foreseeth
how amiable his grace will make us; and partly with a Love of benevolence,
intending to give us that grace which shall make us really the objects of his
further Love: And having received this grace, it causes us to love God: And
when we love God, we are really the objects of his complacential Love; and when
we perceive this, it still increases our Love: And thus the mutual Love of God
and Man, is the true perpetual motion, which has an everlasting cause, and
therefore must have an everlasting duration. And so the faith which has once
kindled Love, even sincere Love to God in Christ, has taken rooting in the
heart, and lies deeper than the head, and will hold fast, and increase as Love
increases.

And this is the true reason of the stedfastness and happiness of many weak
unlearned Christians, who have not the distinct conceptions and reasonings of
learned men; and yet because their Faith is turned into Love, their Love does
help to confirm their Faith: And as they love more heartily; so they believe
more steadfastly, and perseveringly, than many who can say more for their faith.
And so much for the strengthening of your faith.

CHAP. IX. General Directions for exercising the Life of Faith.
HAving told you how Faith must be confirmed, I am next to tell you how it must
be used. And in this I shall begin with some General Directions, and then
proceed to such particular cases, in which we have the greatest use for Faith.

Direct. 1. Remember the necessity of Faith in all the business of your hearts
and lives, that nothing can be done well without it. There is no sin to be
conquered, no grace to be exercised, no worship to be performed, nor no acts of
mercy, or justice, or worldly business, to be well done without it, in any
manner acceptable to God. Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. You may as well go about your bodily work without your eyesight, as
about your spiritual work without Faith.

Direct. 2. Make it therefore your care and work to get Faith, and to use it;
and think not that God must reveal his mind to you, as in visions, while you
idly neglect your proper work. Believing is the first part of your trade of
life; and the practice of it must be your constant business. It is not living
ordinarily by sense, and looking when God will cast in the light of Faith
extraordinarily, which is indeed the life of Faith: Nor is it seeming to stir
up Faith in a Prayer or Sermon, and looking no more after it all the day: This
is but to give God a salutation, and not to dwell and walk with him: And to
give Heaven a complemental visit sometimes, but not to have your conversation
there, 2 Cor. 5.7, 8.

Direct. 3. Be not too seldom in solitary meditation. Though it be a duty which
melancholy persons are disabled to perform, in any set, and long, and orderly
manner; yet it is so needful to those who are able, that the greatest works of
Faith are to be managed by it. How should things unseen be apprehended so as to
affect our hearts, without any serious exercise of our thoughts? How should we
search into mysteries of the Gospel, or converse with God, or walk in Heaven,
or fetch either joys or motives thence, without any retired studious
contemplation? If you cannot meditate or think, you cannot believe. Meditation
abstracteth the mind from vanity, and lifts it up above the world, and
sets it about the work of Faith; which by a mindless, thoughtless, or
worldly soul, can never be performed, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. Phil. 3.20. Mat.
6.21. Col. 3.1, 3.

Direct. 4. Let the Image of the Life of Christ, and his Martyrs, and holiest
servants, be deeply printed on your minds. That you may know what the way is
which you have to go, and what patterns they be which you have to imitate;
think how much they were above things sensitive, and how light they set by all
the pleasures, wealth and glory of this world. Therefore the Holy Ghost does
set before us that cloud of witnesses, and catalogue of Martyrs, in Heb. 11.
that example may help us, and we may see with how good company we go, in the
life of Faith, Paul had well studied the example of Christ, when he took
pleasure in infirmities, and gloryed only in the Cross, to be base and
afflicted in this world, for the hopes of endless glory, 2 Cor. 11.30. and 12.5
9, 10. And when he could say, I count all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ -- that I may know
him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable to his death, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. No man will well
militate in the life of Faith, but he that follows the Captain of his
salvation, Heb. 2.10. who for the bringing of many Sons to glory (even those
whom he is not ashamed to call his Brethren) was made perfect, (as to
perfection of action or performance) by suffering: thereby to show us, how
little the best of these visible and sensible corporeal things, are to be
valued in comparison of the things invisible: and therefore as the General and
the soldiers make up one army, and militate in one militia; so he that
sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, Heb. 2.10, 11, 12.
Though that which is called the life of Faith in us, deserved a higher title in
Christ, and his faith in his Father, and ours, do much differ, and he had not
many of the objects, acts and uses of Faith, as we have who are sinners; yet in
this we must follow him as our great example, in valuing things invisible, and
vilifying things visible in comparison of them. And therefore Paul says [ I am
crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me;
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20.

Direct. 5. Remember therefore that God and Heaven, the unseen things are the
final object of true Faith: and that the final object is the noblest; and that
the principal use of Faith, is to carry up the whole heart and life from things
visible and temporal, to things invisible and eternal; and not only to comfort
us in the assurance of our own forgiveness and salvation.

It is an exceeding common and dangerous deceit, to overlook both this
principal object and principal use of the Christian Faith. 1. Many think of no
other object of it, but the death and righteousness of Christ, and the pardon
of sin, and the promise of that pardon: And God and Heaven they look at as the
objects of some other common kind of Faith. 2. And they think of little other
use of it, than to comfort them against the guilt of sin, with the assurance of
their Justification. But the great and principal work of Faith is, that which
is about its final object; to carry up the soul to God and Heaven, where the
world, and things sensible, are the terminus a quo, and God, and things
invisible, the terminus ad quem: And thus it is put in contradistinction to
living by fight, in 2 Cor. 5.6, 7. And thus mortification is made one part of
this great effect, in Romans 6. throughout, and many other places: and thus it is
that Heb. 11. does set before us those numerous examples of a life of Faith, as
it was expressed in valuing things unseen, upon the belief of the Word of God,
and the vilifying of things seen which stand against them. And thus Christ
tried the Rich man, Luke 18.22. whether he would be his Disciple, by calling
him to sell all, and give to the po^r, for the hopes of a treasure in Heaven.
And thus Christ makes bearing the Cross, and denying our selves, and forsaking
all for him, to be necessary in all that are his Disciples. And thus Paul
describes the life of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. by the contempt of the world,
and suffering afflictions for the hopes of Heaven: [ For our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal.] Our Faith is our victory over the
world, even in the very nature of it, and not only in the remote effect; for
its aspect and believing approaches to God and the things unseen, and a
proportionable recess from the things which are seen, is one and the same
motion of the soul, denominated variously from its various respects to the
terminus ad quem, and a quo.

Direct. 6. Remember, that as God to be believed in, is the principal and final
object of Faith; so the kindling of love to God in the soul, is the principal
use and effect of Faith: And to live by Faith, is but to love (obey and suffer)
by Faith. Faith working by Love, is the description of our Christianity, Gal.
5.6. As Christ is the Way to the Father, Joh. 14.6. and came into the world to
recover Apostate man to God, to love him, and be beloved by him; so the true
use of Faith in Jesus Christ, is to be as it were the bellows to kindle love;
or the burning-glass as it were of the soul, to receive the beams of the Love
of God, as they shine upon us in Jesus Christ, and thereby to inflame our
hearts in love to God again. Therefore if you would live by Faith indeed, begin
here, and first receive the deepest apprehensions of that Love of the Father;
Who so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: And by these
apprehensi^ns, stir up your hearts to the Love of God; and make this very
endeavor the work and business of your lives.

Oh that mistaken Christians would be rectified in this point! how much would
it tend to their holiness and their peace? You think of almost nothing of the
life of Faith; but how to believe that you have a special interest in Christ,
and shall be saved by him: But you have first another work to do: You must
first believe that common Love and Grace before mentioned, John 3.16. 2 Cor.
5.19, 20.14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. And you must believe your own interest
in this; that is, that God has by Christ, made to all, and therefore unto you,
an act of oblivion, and free deed of gift, that you shall have Christ, and
pardon, and eternal life, if you will believingly accept the gift, and will not
finally reject it. And the belief of this, even of this common Love and Grace,
must first persuade your hearts accordingly to accept the offer, (and then you
have a special interest) and withal, at the same time, must kindle in your
souls a thankful love to the Lord and fountain of this grace: and if you were
so ingenuous as to begin here, and first use your Faith upon the foresaid
common gift of Christ, for the kindling of love to God within you, and would
account this the work which Faith has every day to do; you would then find
that in the very exciting and exercise of this holy Love, your assurance of
your own special interest in Christ, would be sooner and more comfortably
brought about, than by searching to find either evidence of pardon before you
find your love to God; or to find your love to God, before you have labored to
get and exercise it.

I tell you, they are dangerous deceivers of your souls, that shall contradict
this obvious truth; that the true method and motive of man's first special love
to God, must not be by believing first Gods special love to us; but by
believing his more common love and mercy in the general act and offer of grace
before mentioned. For he that believes Gods special love to him, and his
special interest in Christ, before he has any special love to God, does
sinfully presume, and not believe. For if by Gods special love, you mean his
love of complacency to you, as a living member of Christ; to believe this
before you love God truly, is to believe a dangerous lie: and if you mean only,
Gods love of benevolence, by which he decrees to make you the objects of his
foresaid complacency, and to sanctify and save you; to believe this before you
truly love God, is to believe that which is utterly unknown to you, and may be
false for ought you know, but is not at all revealed by God, and therefore is
not the object of Faith.

Therefore if you cannot have true assurance or persuasion of your special
interest in Christ, and of your justification, before you have a special love
to God, then this special love must be kindled (I say not by a common Faith,
but) by a true Faith in the General Love and Promise mentioned before.

Nay, you must not only have first this special love; but also must have so
much knowledge, that indeed you have it, as you will have knowledge of your
special interest in Christ, and the love of God: for no act of Faith will truly
evidence special grace, which is not immediately and intimately accompanied
with true love to God our Father and Redeemer, and the ultimate object of our
Faith: Nor can you any further perceive or prove, the sincerity of your Faith
it self, than you discern in or with it, the Love here mentioned. For Faith is
not only an act of the Intellect, but of the Will also: And there is no
volition or consent to this or any offered good, which has not in it the true
nature of Love: and the intention of the end, being in order of nature, before
our choice or use of means; the intending of God as our end, cannot come behind
that act of Faith, which is about Christ as the chosen means or way to God.

Therefore make this your great and principal use of your Faith, to receive all
the expressions of Gods Love in Christ, and thereby to kindle in you a love to
God; that first the special true belief of Gods more common love and grace, may
kindle in you a special love, and then the sense of this may assure you of your
special interest in Christ; and then the assurance of that special interest,
may increase your love to a much higher degree: And thus live by Faith in the
work of Love.

Direct. 7. That you may understand what that Faith is which you must live by,
take in all the parts (at least that are essential to it) in your description;
and take not some parcels of it for the Christian Faith; nor think no^ that it
must needs be several sorts of Faith, if it have several objects; and hearken
not to that dull Philosophical subtilty, which would persuade you that Faith is
but some single physical act of the soul.

1. If you know not what Faith is, it must needs be a great hinderance to you,
in the seeking of it, the trying it, and the using it. For though one may use
his natural faculties, which work by natural inclination and necessity, without
knowing what they are; yet it is not so where the choice of the rational
appetite is necessary; for it must be guided by the reasoning faculty. And
though unlearned persons may have and use Repentance, Faith, and other graces,
who cannot define them; yet they do truly (though not perfectly) know the thing
it self, though they know not the terms of a just definition: and all defect of
knowing the true nature of Faith, will be some hinderance to us in using it.

2. It is a moral subject which we are speaking of; and terms are to be
understood according to the nature of the subject: therefore Faith is to be
taken for a moral act, which comprehends many physical acts: Such as is the
act of believing in, or taking such a man for my Physician, or my Master, or my
Tutor, or my King. Even our Philosophers themselves know not what does
individuate a physical act of the soul* (Nay, they are not agreed whether its
acts should be called physical properly, or not.) Nay, they cannot tell what
does individuate an act of sense; whether when my eye does at once see many
words and letters of my Book, every word or letter does make as many individual
acts, by being so many objects? And if so, whether the parts of every letter
also do not constitute an individual act; and where we shall here stop. And
must all these trifles be considered in our Faith? Assenting to the truths is
not one Faith (unless when separated from the rest) and consenting to the good,
another act: Nor is it one Faith to believe the promise, and another to believe
the pardon of sin, and another to believe salvation, and another to believe in
God, and another to believe in Jesus Christ; nor one to believe in Christ as
our Ransom, and another as our Intercessor, and another as our Teacher, and
another as our King, and another to believe in the Holy Ghost, etc. I deny not
but some one of these may be separated from the rest, and being so separated
may be called Faith; but not the Christian Faith, but only a material parcel of
it, which is like the limb of a man, or of a tree, which cut off from the rest,
is dead, and cease when separated to be a part, any otherwise than Logical (a
part of the description.)

The Faith which has the promise of salvation, and which you must live by,
has 1. God for the Principal Revealer, and his Veracity for its formal object.
2. It has Christ, and Angels, and Prophets, and Apostles, for the
sub-revealers. 3. It has the Holy Ghost by the divine attesting operations
before described, to be the seal and the confirmer. 4. It has the same Holy
Ghost for the internal exciter of it. 5. It has all truths of known divine
revelation, and all good of known divine donation by his Covenant, to be the
material general object. 6. It has the Covenant of Grace, and the holy
Scriptures, (and formerly the voice of Christ and his Apostles) or any such
sign of the mind of God, for the instrumental efficient cause of the object in
esse cognito: And also the instrumental efficient of the act. 7. It has the
pure Deity, God himself, as he is to be known and loved, inceptively here, and
perfectly in Heaven, for the final and most necessary material object. 8. It
has the Lord Jesus Christ, entirely in all essential to him, as God and Man,
and as our Redeemer or Savior, as our Ransom, Intercessor, Teacher and Ruler,
for the most necessary, mediate, material object. 9. It has the gifts of
Pardon, Justification, the Spirit of Sanctification or Love, and all the
necessary gifts of the Covenant, for the material, never-final objects. And all
this is essential to the Christian Faith, even to that Fath which has the
promise of pardon and salvation: And no one of these must be totally left out
in the definition of it, if you would not be deceived. It is Heresy, and not
the Christian Faith, if it exclude any one essential part: And if it include it
not, it is Infidelity: And indeed there is such a connection of the objects,
that there is no part (in truth) where there is not the whole. And it is
impiety if any one part of the offered good that is necessary, be refused. It
is no true Faith, if it be not a true composition of all these.

Direct. 8. There is no nearer way to know what true Faith is, than truly to
understand what your Baptismal Covenanting did contain.

In Scripture phrase, to be a Disciple, a Believer, and a Christian, is all
one, Acts 11.26. Acts 5.14. 1 Timothy 4.12. Matthew. 10.42. and 27.57. Luke 14.26,
27, 33. Acts 21.16. Joh. 9.28. And to be a Believer, and to have Belief or
Faith, is all one: and therefore to be a Christian, and to have Faith, is all
one. Christianity signifies either our first entrance into the Christian
State, or our progress in it. (As Marriage signifies either Matrimony, or the
Conjugal State continued in.) In the latter sense Christianity signifies more
than Faith; for more than Faith is necessary to a Christian. But in the former
sense, as Christianity signifies but our becoming Christians, by our
covenanting with God; so to have Faith, or to be a Believer, and internally to
become a Christian in Scripture sense, is all one; and the outward covenanting
is but the profession of Faith or Christianity: Not that the word Faith is
never taken in a narrower sense, or that Christianity, as it is our
heart-covenant or consent, contains nothing but Faith, as Faith is so taken
in the narrowest sense: But when Faith is taken (as ordinarily in Scripture)
for that which is made the condition of Justification and Salvation, and
opposed to Heathenism, Infidelity, Judaism, or the works of the Law, it is
commonly taken in this larger sense.

Faith is well enough described to them, that understand what is employed, by
the usual shorter description; as, that it is a believing acceptance of Christ,
and relying on him as our Savior, or for salvation: Or, a belief of pardon,
and the heavenly Glory as procured by the Redemption wrought by Christ, and
given by God in the Covenant of Grace: But the reason is, because all the rest
is connoted, and so to be understood by us, as if it were expressed in words: But
the true and full definition of it is this.

The Christian Faith which is required at Baptism, and then professed, and has
the promise of Justification and Glorification, is a true Belief of the Gospel,
and an acceptance of, and consent unto the Covenant of Grace: Particularly, a
believing that God is our Creator, our Owner, our Ruler, and our Chief Good;
and that Jesus Christ is God and man, our Savior, our Ransoms, our Teacher,
and our King; and that the Holy Ghost is the Sanctifier of the Church of
Christ: And it is an understanding, serious consent, that this God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, be my God and reconciled Father in Christ, my Savior, and
my Sanctifier; to justify me, sanctify me, and glorify me, in the perfect
knowledge of God, and mutual complacence in Heaven; which belief and consent
wrought in me by the Word and Spirit of Christ, is grounded upon the Veracity
of God as the chief Revealer, and upon his Love and Mercy as the Donor; and
upon Christ and his Apostles as the Messengers of God; and upon the Gospel, and
specially the Covenant of Grace, as the instrumental Revelation and Donation it
self: And upon the many signal operations of the Holy Ghost, as the divine
infallible attestation of their truth.

Learn this definition, and understand it thoroughly, and it may prove a more
solid useful knowledge (to have the true nature of Faith or Christianity thus
methodically printed on your minds) than to read over a thousand volumes in a
rambling and confused way of knowledge.

If any quarrel at this definition, because the foundation is not first set
down, I only tell him that no Logicians do judge of the Logical order of words
by the mere priority and posteriority of place. And if any think that here is
more than every true Christian does understand and remember, I answer, that
here is no more than every true Christian has a true knowledge of; though
perhaps every one have not a knowledge so methodical, explicit and distinct,
as to define Faith thus, or to think so distinctly and clearly of it, as others
do, or to be able by words to express to another, what he has a real
conception of in himself. There is first in the mind of man a conception of the
Object or Matter (by those words or means which introduce it) and next that
verbum mentis, or inward word, which is a distincter conception of the matter
in the mould of such notions as may be expressed; and next the verbum oris, the
word of mouth expresses it. Now many have the conception of the matter, long
before they have the verbum mentis, or logical notions of it: And many have the
verbum mentis, who by a hesitant tongue are hindered from oral expressions; and
in both, there are diverse degrees of distinctness and clearness.

Direct. 9. Turn not plain Gospel Doctrine into the Philosophical fooleries of
wrangling and ill-moulded wits; nor feign to your selves any new notions, or
offices of Faith, or any new terms as necessary, which are not in the holy
Scriptures.

I do not say, use no terms which are not in the Scriptures: for the Scriptures
were not written in English: Nor do I persuade you to use no other notions than
the Scriptures use; but only that you use them not as necessary, and lay not
too great a stress upon them. I confess new Heresies may give occasion for new
words (as the Bishops in the first Council of Nice thought:) And yet as Hilary
vehemently enveigheth against making new Creeds on such pretenses, and wishes
no such practice had been known (not excepting theirs at Nice) because it
taught the Heretics and contenders to imitate them: and they that made the
third Creed, might have the like arguments for it as those that made the
second; and he knew not when there would be any end; so I could wish that there
had been no new notions in the Doctrine of Faith, so much as used; for the same
reasons: And especially because that while the first inventers do but use them,
the next Age which follows them, will hold them necessary, and lay the
Churches communion and peace upon them.

For instance, I think the word [satisfaction] as used by the Orthodox, is of a
very sound sense in our Controversies against the Socinians: And yet I will
never account it necessary, as long as it is not in the Scriptures, and as long
as the words [ Sacrifice, Ransom, Price, Propitiation, Atonement, etc.] which
the Scripture uses, are full as good.

So I think that [ imputing Christ's Righteousness to us] is a phrase which the
Orthodox use in a very sound sense: And yet as long as it is not used by the
Spirit of God in the Scriptures; and there are other phrases enough, which as
well, or better, express the true sense, I will never hold it necessary.

So also the notions and phrases of [ Faith being the instrument of our
Justification] and [ Faith justifies only obj^ctively] and [ that Faith
justifies only as it receives Christ's blood, or Christ's Righteousness, or
Christ as a Priest] [that Faith is only one physical act: that it is only in
the understanding; or only in the will; that its only Justifying act is
Recumbency, or resting on Christ for Justification; that it is not an action,
but a passion, that all acts of Faith save one, and that one as an act, are the
works which Paul excludes from our Justification; and that to expect
Justification, by believing in Christ for Sanctification, or Glorification, or
by believing in him as our Teacher, or King, or Justifying Judge, or by
Repenting, or Loving God, or Christ, as our Redeemer, or by confessing our
sins, and praying for Pardon and Justification, etc. is to exp^ct Justification
by Works, and so to fall from Grace or true Justification; that he that will
escape this pernicious expectance of Justification by Works, must know what
that one act of Faith is by which only we are justified, and must expect
Justification by it only relatively (that is, not by it at all, but by Christ,
say some) or as an Instrument (say others) etc.

Many of these Assertions are pernicious errors; most of them false; and the
best of them are the unnec^ssary inventions of men's dark, yet busy wits, who
condemn their own Doctrine by their practice, and their practice by their
Doctrine; whilst they cry up the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and cry down
other men's additions, and yet so largely add themselves.

Direct. 10. Take heed lest parties and contendings tempt you to lay so much
upon the right notion or doctrines of Faith, as to take up with these alone as
true Christianity; and to take a dead Opinion, instead of the life of Faith.

This dogmatical Christianity cheateth many thousands into Hell, who would
scarce be led so quietly thither, if they knew that they are indeed no
Christians. It is ordinary, by the advantages of education, and converse, and
teachers, and books, and studies, and the custom of the times, and the
countenance of Christian Rulers, and for reputation, and worldly advantage,
etc. to fall into right opinions about Christ, and Faith, and Godliness, and
Heaven; and tenaciously to defend these in disputings; and perhaps to make a
trade of preaching of it: And what is all this to the saving of the soul, if
there be no more? And yet the case of many Learned Orthodox men, is greatly to
be pitied, who make that a means to cheat and undo themselves, which should be
the only wisdom and way to life; and know but little more of Christianity, than
to hold, and defend, and teach sound Doctrine, and to practice it so far as the
interest of the flesh will give them leave; I had almost said, so far as the
flesh it self will command them to do well, and sin it self forbids sin;
that it may not disgrace them in the world, nor bring some hurt or punishment
upon them.

Direct. 11. Set not any other Graces against Faith; as raising a jealousy
left the honoring of one, be a diminution of the honor of the other: But
labor to see the necessary and harmonious consent of all, and how all
contribute to the common end.

Though other graces are not Faith, and have not the office proper to Faith;
yet every one is conjunct in the work of our salvation, and in our pleasing and
glorifying God: Some of them being the concomitants of Faith, and some of them
its end, to which it is a means: Yea, oft-times the words [ Faith and
Repentance] are used as signifying much of the same works, the latter named
from the respect to the term from which, and the former from the respect to
part of the term to which the soul is moving: And Faith is often taken as
containing somewhat of Love and Desire in it; and he that will without any
prejudice and partiality study Paul where he opposes Faith and Works, as to
our Justification, shall find by his almost constant naming [ the Works of the
Law] or by the context and analysis, that indeed his chief meaning is to prove,
that we are justified by the Christian Religion, and must be s^ved by it, and
not by the Jewish* which the adversaries of Christianity then pleaded for, and
trusted to.

Direct. 12. Set not the helps of Faith as if they were against Faith; but
understand their several places and offices, and use them accordingly.

Do not like those ignorant self-conceited Heretics, who cry out, [ It is by
Believing, and not by Repenting, or Reading, or Hearing Sermons, or by Praying,
or by forbearing sin, or by doing good, that we are justified; and therefore it
is by Faith only that we are saved; the same which is sufficient for our
Justification, being sufficient for our salvation; seeing the Justified cannot
be condemned; and Justification and Salvation are both equally ascribed to
Faith without the works of the Law by the Apostle.] For we are justified only
by such a Faith, as is caused by Gods Word, and maintained and actuated by
Hearing, Reading, Meditation, Prayer and Sacraments; and as is accompanied by
Repentance, and works by Love, and is indeed the beholding of those invisible
and glorious motives, which may incite our Love, and set us on good works, and
obedience to our Redeemer. And he that by negligence omitteth, or by error
excludes any one of these, in the Life of Faith, will find that he has erred
against his own interest, peace and comfort, if not against his own salvation.
And that he might as wisely have disputed that it is his eyes only that must
see his way, and therefore he may travel without his legs.

Direct. 13. Take heed left a misconceit of the certainty of some common
Philosophical Opinions, should make you stagger in those Articles of Faith
which seem to contradict them.

Not that indeed any truths can be contrary one to another: For that which is
true in Philosophy, is contrary to no one truth in Theology: But Philosophers
have deceived themselves and the world, with a multitude of uncertainties and
falsities; and by straining them to subtle niceties, and locking them up in
uncouth terms, have kept the common people from trying them, and understanding
them; and thereby have made it their own prerogative explicitly to err, and
the peoples duty not to contradict them; but to admire that error as profound
parts of learning, which they cannot understand. And then their conclusions often
go for principles which must not be gainsayed, when they are perhaps either
false, or nonsense. And then when they meet with any thing in Scripture, which
crosses their opinions, the reputation of humane folly makes them despise the
wisdom of God. I have given you elsewhere some instances about the immortality
of the soul: They know not what Generation is; they do not know it: nor what
are the true principles and elements of mixed bodies; nor what is the true
d^fference between immaterial and material substances; with an hundred such
like: And yet some expect, that we should sacrifice the most certain useful
truths, to their false or uncertain useless suppositions, which is the true
reason why Paul says, Col. 2.8, 9, 10. Beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy, and vain deceit (not true Philosophy, which is the true knowledge
of the works of God, but the vain models which every Sect of them cried up)
after the tradition of men (that is, the opinions of the Masters of their
Sects) after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: For in him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him. See
Act. 17.18. It is Christ who is the kernel and summary of the Christian
Philosophy; who is therefore called The Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24, 30. both
because he is the heavenly Teacher of true Wisdom, and because that true Wisdom
consists in knowing him. And indeed even in those times, the several Sects of
Philosophers accounted much of each others principles to be erroneous; and the
Philosophers of these times, begin to vilify them all; and withal to confess
that they have yet little of certainty to substitute in the room of the
demolished Idols; but they are about their experiments, to try if any thing in
time may be found out.

Direct. 14. Especially take heed lest you be cheated into Infidelity, by the
Dominicans Metaphysical Doctrine, of the necessity of Gods Physical
predetermining promotion as the first total cause, to the being of every action
natural and free, not only in genere actionis, but also as respectively and
comparatively exercised on this object rather than on that.

I add this only for the learned, who are as much in danger of Infidelity as
others; and will use it to the greater injury of the truth. I will meddle now
with no other reasons of my advice, but what the subject in hand requires. If
God can, and do thus premove and predetermine the mind, will and tongue of
every liar in the world to every lie (or material falsehood) which ever they did
conceive or speak, there will be no certainty of the Gospel, nor of any Divine
Revelation at all: Seeing all such certainty is resolved into Gods Veracity:
that God cannot lie. And God speaks not to us, by any but a created voice:
and if he can thus predetermine others to those words which are a lie, rather
than to the contrary which are true, there would be no certainty, but he may do
so by Prophets and Apostles: and let them tell you what they will of the
greater certainty of Inspirations and Miracles, than of Predeterminations, it
will be found upon trial, that no man can prove, or make it so much as
probable, that any inspiration has more of a Divine Causation, than such a
premoving predetermination as aforesaid does amount to; much less so much more,
as will prove that one is more certain than the other.

This Doctrine therefore which undeniably (whatever may be wrangled) takes
down Christianity, and all belief of God or man, is not to be believed merely
upon such a Philosophical conceit, that every Action is a Being, and therefore
must in all its circumstances be caused by God. As if God were not able to make
a faculty, which can determine its own comparative act to this rather than to
that, by his sustentation, and universal precausation and concourse, without
the said predetermining premotion: When as an Action as such is but a modus
entis; and the comparative exercise of it, on this rather than on that, is but
a modus vel circumstantia modi. And they leave no work, for gracious
determination, because that natural determination does all the same thing
(equally to duty and sin) without it.

Direct. 15. Consider well how much all humane converse is maintained by the
necessary belief of one another, and what the world would be without it; and
how much you expect your selves to be believed: And then think how much more
belief is due to God.

Though sin has made the world so bad, that we may say, that all men are
liars, that is, deceitful vanity, and little to be trusted; yet the honesty of
those that are more virtuous, does help so far to keep up the honor of
veracity, and the shamefulness of lying, that throughout the world, a lie is in
disgrace, and truth in speech and dealing is well spoken of. And the remnants
of natural honesty in the worst, do so far second the true honesty of the best,
that no man is so well spoken of commonly in the world, as a man of truth and
trustiness, whose Word is his Law and Master, and never speaks deceitfully to
any: Nor no man is so commonly ill spoken of as a knave, as he that will lie,
and is not to be trusted: In so much, that even those debauched Ruffians, who
live as if they said in their hearts, There is no God, will yet venture their
lives in revenge against him that shall give them the lie. Perhaps you will
say, that this is not from any virtue, or natural Law, or honesty, but from
common interest, there being nothing more the interest of mankind, than that
men be trusty to each other. To which I answer, that you oppose things which
are conjunct: It is both: For all Gods natural Laws are for the interest of
mankind, and that which is truly most for our good, is made most our duty; and
that which is most our duty, is most for our good. And that which is so much
for the interest of mankind, must needs be good: If it were not for credibility
and trustiness in men, there were no living in families; but Masters and
Servants, Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives, would live together as
enemies: And neigbours would be as so many thieves to one another: There could
be no Society or Commonwealth, when Prince and people could put no trust in
one another: Nay, thieves themselves, that are not to be trusted by any others,
do yet strengthen themselves by confederacies, and oaths of secrecy, and gather
into troops and armies, and there put trust in one another. And can we think
that GOD is not much more to be trusted, and is not a greater hater of a lie?
and is not the fountain of all fidelity? and has not a greater care of the
interest of his creatures? Surely he that thinks that God is a liar, and not
to be trusted, will think no better of any mortal man or Angel (and therefore
trusts no one, and is very censorious) and would be thought no better of
himself, and therefore would have none believe or trust him: For who would be
better than his God?

Direct. 16. Consider also that Veracity in God is his nature or essence; and
cannot be denied without denying him to be God.

For it is nothing but his three Essentialities, or Principles, Power, Wisdom
and Goodness, as they are expressed in his Word or Revelations, as congruous to
his mind, and to the matter expressed. He that neither wants knowledge (to
know what to say and do) nor Goodness (to love truth, and hate all evil) nor
Power to do what he please, and to make good his word, cannot possibly lie;
because every lie is for want of one, or more of these, Heb. 6.18. Titus 1.12.
And there as it is said, that he cannot lie, and that it is impossible; so it
is called, a denying of himself, if he could be unfaithful, 2 Timothy 2.13. If we
believe not, yet be abides faithful, and cannot deny himself.

Direct. 17. Exercise Faith much in those proper works, in which self and sense
are most denied and overcome.

Bodily motions and labors which we are not used to, are done both
unskilfully, and with pain. If Faith be not much exercised in its warfare, and
victorious acts, you will neither know its strength, nor find it to be strong,
when you come to use it. It is not the easy and common acts of Faith, which
will serve turn, to try and strengthen it. As the life of sense is the
adversary which Faith must conquer; so use it much in such conflicts and
conquests, if you would find it strong and useful: Use it in such acts of
mortification and self-denial, as will plainly show, that it over rules sense:
Use it in patience and rejoicing in such sufferings, and in contentment in so
low and cross a state, where you are sure that sight and sense do not
contribute to your peace and joy: Use it not only in giving some little of your
superfluities, but in giving your whole two mites, even all your substance, and
selling all and giving to the poor, when indeed God makes it your duty: At
least in forsaking all for his sake in a day of trial. Faith never does work so
like it self, so clearly, so powerfully, and so comfortably, as in these
self-denying and overcoming acts, when it does not work alone, without the help
of sense to comfort us; but also against sense, which would discourage us, Luke
18.22, 23. and 14.26, 33. 2 Cor. 5.7.

Direct. 18. Keep a constant observation of Gods converse with your hearts, and
workings on them.

For as I said before, there are within us such demonstrations of a Kingdom of
God, in precepts, mercies, rewards and punishments, that he which well works
them, will have much help in the maintaining and exercising his belief, of the
everlasting Kingdom: Especially the godly, who have that Spirit there working,
which is indeed the very seal, and pledge, and earnest of life eternal, 2 Cor.
1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Gal. 4.5, 6. Romans 8.16, 17. There is so much of
God and Heaven in a true Believers heart, that (as we see the Moon and Stars
when we look down into the water, so) we may see much of God and Heaven within
us, if the heart it self be thoroughly studied.

And I must add; that Experiences here must be carefully recorded: and when God
fulfilleth promises to us, it must not be forgotten.

Direct. 19. Converse much with them that live by Faith, and fetch their
motives and comforts from the things unseen.

Converse has a transforming power. To converse with them that live all by
sense, and show no other desires, or joys, or sorrows, but what are fetched
from fleshly sensible things, is a great means to draw us downwards with them.
And to converse with them who converse in Heaven; and speak of nothing else so
comfortably or so seriously; who show us that Heaven is the place they travel
to, and the state that all their life does aim; and who make little of all the
wants or plenty, pains or pleasures of the flesh; this much conduces to make
us heavenly. As men are apt to learn and use the language, the motives, and the
employments of the Country and people where they live; so he that is most
familiar with such as live by Faith, upon things unseen, and take Gods promise
for full security, has a very great help to learn and live that life himself,
Heb. 10.24, 25. 1 These. 4.17, 18. Phil. 3.20, 21.

Direct. 20. Forget not the nearness of the things unseen, and think not of a
long continuance in this world; but live in continual expectation of your
change.

Distant things, be they never so great, do hardly move us: As in bodily
motion, the mover must be contiguous: And as our senses are not fit to
apprehend beyond a certain distance; so our minds also are finite, and have
their bounds and measure: And sin has made them much narrower, foolish and
(...)-sighted than they would have been. A certainty of dying (...) last,
should do much with us: But yet he that looks to live long on earth, will the
more hardly live by Faith in Heaven; when he that daily waits for his change,
will have easily the more serious and effectual thoughts of the world in which
he must live next, and of all the preparations necessary thereunto; and will
the more easily despise the things on earth, which are the employment and
felicity of the sensual, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. Phil. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 15.31.
As we see it in constant experience in men, when they see that they must
presently die indeed, how light then set they by the world? how little are they
moved with the talk of honor, with the voice of mirth, with the sight of meat,
or drink, or beauty, or any thing which before they had not power to deny? and
how seriously they will then talk of sin and grace, of God and Heaven, which
before they could not be awakened to regard? If therefore you would live by
faith indeed, set your selves as at the entrance of that world which faith
foreseeth, and live as men that know they may die to morrow, and certainly must
be gone ere long. Dream not of I know not how many years more on earth, which
God never promised you; unl^ss you make it your business to vanquish faith by
setting its objects at a greater distance than God has set them. Learn Christ's
warning to one and all, To watch, and to be always ready, Mark 13.33, 35, 37.
1 Pet. 4* 7. Mat. 24.44. Luke 12.40. He that thinks he has yet time enough,
and daylight before him, will be the apter to loiter in his work or Journey:
When every man will make haste when the Sun is setting, if he have much to do,
or far to go. Delays which are the great preventers of Repentance, and undoers
of the world, do take their greatest advantage from this ungrounded expectation
of long life. When they hear the Physician say, He is a dead man, and there is
no hope, then they would fain begin to live, and then how religious and
reformed would they be? whereas if this foolish error did not hinder them,
they might be of the same mind all their lives, and might have then done their
work, and waited with desire for the Crown; and said with Paul, For I am now
ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand: I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there
is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to them also that love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.

And so much for the General Directions to be observed by them that will live
by Faith: I only add, that as the well doing of all our particular duties,
depends most on the common health and soundness of the soul, in its state of
grace; so our living by Faith in all the particular cases after instanced, does
depend more upon these General Directions, than on the particular ones which
are next to be adjoined.

CHAP. I. An Enumeration of the Particular Cases in which especially Faith must
be used. 1. How to live by Faith on GOD.
THE General Directions before given must be practiced in all the Particular
Cases following, or in order to them: But besides them, it is needful to have
some special Directions for each Case. And the particular Cases which I shall
instance in are these: 1. How to exercise Faith on GOD himself: 2. Upon Jesus
Christ: 3. Upon the Holy Ghost: 4. About the Scripture Precepts and Examples:
5. About the Scripture Promises: 6. About the Threatenings: 7. About Pardon of
sin, and Justification: 8. About Sanctification, and the exercises of other
Graces; 9. Against inward vices and temptations to actual sin: 10. In case of
Prosperity: 11. In Adversity and particular Afflictions: 12. In Gods Worship,
public and private: 13. For Spiritual Peace and Joy: 14. For the World, and
the Church of God: 15. For our Relations: 16. In loving others as our selves:
17. About Heaven, and following the Saints: 18. How to die in Faith: 19. About
the coming of Christ to Judgment.

GOD is both the object of our knowledge, as he is revealed in Nature, and of
our Faith, as he is revealed in the holy Scriptures. He is the first and last
object of our Faith. It is life eternal to know him the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Ye believe in God, believe also in me; was
Christ's order in commanding and causing Faith, Joh. 14.1. Seeing therefore this
is the principal part of Faith (to know God, and live upon him, and to him) I
shall give you many (though brief) Directions in it.

Direct. 1. Behold the glorious and full demonstrations of the Being of the
Deity, in the whole frame of nature, and especially in your selves.

The great argument from the Effect to the Cause, is unanswerable. All the
caused and derived Beings in the world, must needs have a first Being for their
cause: All Action, Intellection and Volition; all Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
which is caused by another, does prove that the cause can have no less than the
total effect has. To see the world, and to know what a man is, and yet to deny
that there is a God, is to be mad. He that will not know that which all the
world does more plainly preach, than words can possibly express, and will not
know the sense of his own Being and faculties, does declare himself incapable
of teaching, Psalm. 14.1. and 49.12, 20. Isa. 1.2, 3. It is the greatest shame
that man's understanding is capable of, to be ignorant of God, 1 Cor. 15.34. and
the greatest shame to any Nation, Hos. 4.1. and 6.6. As it is the highest
advancement of the mind, to know him, and therefore the sum of all our duty,
Prove. 2.5. Hos. 6.6^ 2 Chronicles. 30.21, 22. Isa. 11.9. 2 Pet. 2.20. Romans 1.20, 28.
Joh. 17.3.

Direct. 2. Therefore take not the Being and Perfections of God, for
superstructures and conclusions, which may be tried, and made bow to the
interest of other points; but as the greatest, clearest, surest truths, next to
the knowledge of our own Being and Intellection: And that which all other (at
least, not the proper objects of sense) must be tried and reduced to.

When there is no right method or order of knowledge, there is no true and
solid knowledge. It is distraction, and not knowing, to begin at the top, and
to lay the foundation last, and reduce things certain to things uncertain. And
it is no wiselier done of Atheists, who argue from their apprehensions of other
things, against the Beings or Perfections of God. As when they say, [ There is
much evil in the world permitted by God; and there is death, and many
tormenting pains befall even the innocent bruits; and there are wars and
confusions, and ignorance and wickedness, have dominion in the earth: Therefore
God is not perfectly good; nor perfectly wise, and just, and powerful in his
government of the world.] The error in the method of arguing here, helps to
continue their blindness. That God is perfectly good, is prius cognitum:
Nothing is more certain than that he, who is the cause of all the derived
goodness in the whole Universe, must have as much or more than all himself:
Seeing therefore that Heaven and Earth, and all things, bear so evident a
witness to this truth, this is the foundation, and first to be laid, and never
more questioned, nor any argument brought against it. For all that possibly can
be said against it; must be a minus notis, from that which is more obscure.
Seeing then that it is most certain by sense, that calamities and evils are in
the world; and no less certain that there is a God, who is most perfectly good;
it must needs follow that these two are perfectly consistent; and that some
other cause of evil must be found out, than any imperfection in the chief good.
But as to the Being of things, and Order in the world, it follows not that
They must be as g^od and perfect as their Maker and Governor is himself: nor
one part as good and perfect in it self as any other. Because it was not the
Creatours purpose when he made the world, to make another God, that should be
equal with himself (for two Infinite Beings and Perfections, is a
contradiction.) But it was his will to imprint such measures of his own
likeness and excellencies upon the creatures, and with such variety, as his
wisdom saw fittest; the reasons of which are beyond our search: The Divine
Agency, as it is in him the Agent, is perfect: But the effect has those
measures of goodness which he was freely pleased to communicate.

And as I have given you this instance, to show the folly of trying the certain
foundation by the less certain notions or accidents in the world; so you must
abhor the same error in all other instances: Some wit may consist with the
questioning of many plain conclusions: But he is a fool indeed, who says,
There is no God, or doubts of his essential properties, Psalm. 14.1, 2. Romans
1.19, 20, 21.

Direct 3. Remember that all our knowledge of God, while we are in the body
here, is but enigmatical, and as in a glass; and that all words which man can
speak of God (at least except Being and Substance) are but terms bel^w him,
borrowed from his Image on the Creatures, and not s^gnifying the same thing
formal^y in God, which they signify in us.

If you think otherwise, you will make an Idol in your conception, instead of
God: And you will debase him, and bring him down to the condition of the
creature. And yet it does not follow that we know nothing of him, or that all
such expressions of God are vain, or false, or must be difused: For then we
must not think or talk of God at all. But we must speak of him according to the
highest notions, which we can borrow from the nobl^st parts of his Image;
confessing still, that they are but borrowed: And these must be used till we
come nearer, and see as face to face; and when that which is perfect is come,
then that which is imperfect shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13.10, 11, 12. And yet
it is (in comparison of darker revelations) as with open face that we behold as
in a glass the glory of the Lord; and it is a sight that can change us into the
same Image, as from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.

D^rect. 4. Abhor the furious ignorance, which brandeth every one with the
names of heresy or blasphemy, who differ from them in the use of some
unnecessary metaphor of God, when their different phrases tend not indeed to
his dishonor, and perhaps may have the same signification with their own.

When we are all forced to confess, that all our terms of God are improper or
metaphorical, and yet m^n will run those metaphors into numerous branches, and
carry them unto greater impropriety, and then rail at all as blasphemers that
question them; this practice is (though too common) a heinous sin in them, as
it has direful effects upon the Church. Should I recite the sad histories of
this iniquity, and show what it has done between the Greek and Latin
Churches, and between those called Orthodox and Catholic, and many through the
world that have been numbered with Heretics; it would be too large a subject
for our sorrow and complaints.

Direct. 5. Abhor presumptu^us curiosities in enquiring into the secret things
of God; much more in pretending to know them; and most of all in reviling and
contending against others upon those pretenses.

It is sad to observe abundance of seemingly learned men, who are posed in the
smallest creature which they study, yet talking as confidently of the
unsearchable things of God; yea and raving as furiously and voluminously
against all that contradict them, as if they had dwelt in the inaccessible
light, and knew all the order of the acts of God, much better than they know
themselves, and the motions of their own minds; or better than they can
anatomize a worm or a beast. They that will not presume to say, that they know
the secrets of their Prince, or the heart of any of their neighbors; yea they
that perceive the difficulty of knowing the state of a man's own soul, because
our hearts are a maze and labyrinth, and o^r thoughts so various and confused,
can yet give you so exact a Scheme of all Gods conceptions, that it shall be no
less than heresy to question the order of any part of it. They can tell you
what Idea's are in the mind of God, and in what order they lie; and how those
Idea's are the same unchanged about things that are changed; about things past,
and present, and to come; and what futurition was from Eternity, as in the Idea
of Gods mind; they can tell me in what order he knows things, and by what
means; and whether future contingents are known to him in their causes, or in
his decree, or in their coexistence in eternity: They can tell what Decrees he
has about Negatives; as that such a man shall not have Faith given him; that
millions of things possible shall not be, that you shall not be a plant, or a
beast, nor any other man, nor called by any other name, etc. And how all Gods
Decrees are indeed but One, and yet not only unconceivably numerous, but the
order of them as to priority and posteriority, is to be exactly defined and
defended, though to the detriment of charity and peace: As to sin, they can
tell you, whether he have a real positive Decree, de re eveniente, or only de
eventu rei, or only de propria permissione eventus, i. e. de non impediendo, i.
e. de non agendo; whether non agere need and have a positive act of Volition or
Nolition antecedent; Though they know not when they hear the sound of the wind,
either whence it comes, or whither it goes; yet know they all the methods of
the Spirit: They know how God as the first-mover, predetermineth the motions of
all Agents, natural and free, and whether his influence be upon the essence, or
faculty, or act immediately; and what that influx is. In a word, how
voluminously do they darken counsel by words without knowledge? As if they had
never read Gods large expostulation with Job (42 etc.) Deuteronomy. 29 29. The secret
things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which are revealed, unto
us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this Law.
Even an Angel could say to Manoah, Judge. 13.18. Why ask thou thus after my
name, seeing it is secret? No man has seen God at any time, (saving) the only
begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father; he has declared him, Joh.
1.18. And what he has declared we may know: But how much more do these men
pretend to know, than ever Christ declared? But who has known the mind of the
Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Romans 11.34.

Etiam vera de Deo loqui periculosum: Even things that are true should be
spoken of God, not only with reverence, but with great caution: And a wise man
will rather admire and adore, than boldly speak what he is not certain is true
and congruous.

Direct. 6. Let all your knowledge of God be practical; yea more practical than
any other knowledge; and let not your thoughts once use Gods Name in vain.

If it be a sin to use idle or unprofitable words, and especially to take Gods
Name in vain; it cannot be faultless to have idle unprofitable thoughts of God:
for the thoughts are the operations of the mind it self. There is no thought or
knowledge which ever comes into our minds, which 1. Has so great work to do;
and 2. Is so fit and powerful to do it, as the knowledge and thoughts which we
have of God. The v^ry renovation of the soul to his Image, and transforming it
into the Divine Nature, must be wrought hereby: The thoughts of his Wisdom,
must silence all our contradicting folly, and bring our souls to an absolute
submission and subjection to his Laws: The knowledge of his Goodness, must
cause all true saving Goodness in us, by poss^ssing us with the highest love to
God. The knowledge of his Power, must cause both our confidence, and our fear:
And the impress of Gods Attributes must be his Image on our souls. It is a
common (and true) observation of Divines, that in Scripture, words of God which
express his Knowledge, do imply his will and affections: (As his knowing the
way of the righteous, Psalm. 2.6. is his approving and loving it, etc.) And it
is as true, that words of our knowledge of God, should all imply affection
toward him. It is a grievous aggravation of ungodliness, to be a learned
ung^dly man: To profess to know God, and deny him in works, being abominable
and disobedient, and reprobate to every good work (though as orthodox and ready
in good words as others.) Titus 1.16.

A thought of God should be able to do any thing upon the soul. It should
partake of the Omnipotency and perfection of the blessed Object. No creature
should be able to stand before him, when our minds entertain any serious
thoughts of him, and converse with him. A thought of God should annihilat^ all
the grandeur and honors of the world to us; and all the pleasures and
treasures of the flesh; and all the power of temptations: what fervency in
prayer? what earnestness of desire? what confidence of faith? what hatred of
sin? what ardent love? what transporting joy? what constant patience should one
serious thought of God, possess the believing holy soul with?

If the thing known become as much one with the understanding, as Plotinus and
other Platonists thought, or if man were so far partaker of a kind of
deification, as Gibieuf and other Oratorians, and ^enedictus de Benedictis,
Barbanson, and other Fanatic Friars think, surely the knowledge of God should
raise us more above our sensitive desires and passions, and make us a more
excellent sort of persons, and it should make us more like those blessed
spirits, who know him more than we on earth; and it should be the beginning of
our eternal life, John 17.3.

Direct. 7. By Faith deliver up your selves to GOD, as your Creator, and your
Owner, and live to him as those that perceive they are absolutely his own.

The word [ GOD] does signify both Gods essence, and his three great Relations
unto man, and we take him not for our God, if we take him not as in these
Divine Relations. Therefore God would have Faith to be expressed at our
entrance into his Church, by Baptism; because a believing soul, does deliver up
it self to God: The first and greatest work of Faith, is to enter us sincerely
into the holy Covenant: In which this is the first part, that we take God for
our Owner, and resign up our selves to him, without either express or implicit
reserve, as those that are absolutely his own. And though these words are by
any hypocrite quickly spoken, yet when the thing is really done, the very heart
of sin is broken: For as the Apostle says, He that is dead is freed from sin,
Romans 6.7. Because a dead man has no faculties to do evil: So we may say, He
that is resigned to God as his absolute Owner, is freed from sin; because he
that is not his own, has nothing which is his own; and therefore has nothing
to alienate from his Owner. We are not our Own, we are bought with a price
(which is the second title of Gods propriety in us) and therefore must glorify
God in body and spirit as being his, 1 Cor. 6.20.

And from this Relation faith will fetch abundant consolation, seeing they that
by consent, and not only by constraint, are absolutely his, shall undoubtedly
be loved, and cared for as his Own, and used and provided for as his own: He
will not neglect his own, and those of his family, who will take us to be worse
than Infidels, if we do so, 1 Timothy 5.8.

Direct. 8. By Faith deliver up your selves to God, as your Sovereign Ruler,
with an absolute Resolution to learn, and love, and obey his Laws.

Though I have often and more largely spoken of these duties in other
Treatises, I must not here totally omit them, where I speak of that Faith in
God, which essentially consists in them. It is a narrow, and foolish, and
pernicious conceit of Faith, which thinks it has no object but promises and
pardon; and that it has nothing to do with God as our Sovereign Governor: And
it is too large a description of faith, which makes actual and formal
obedience to be a part of it: As Marriage is not conjugal fidelity and duty,
but it is a Covenant which obliges to it; and as the Oath of Allegiance is not
a formal obedience to the Laws, but it is a covenanting to obey them; and as
the hiring or covenant of a servant, is not doing service, but it is an entering
into an obligation and state of service: So Faith and our first Christianity,
is not strictly formal obedience to him that we believe in, as such: But it is
an entering of our selves by covenant into an obligation and state of future
obedience. Faith has Gods precepts for its objects as truly as his promises:
But his own Relation as our King or Ruler is its primary object, before his
precepts, Hos. 13.10. Psalm. 2.6. and 5.2. and 10.16. and 24.7, 8, 10. and 47.6,
7. and 89.18. and 149.2. Rev. 15.3. 1 Timoth. 1.17. Luke 19.27.

Direct. 9. By Faith acknowledge GOD as your total Benefactor, from him you
have, and must have all that is worth the having: And accordingly live in a
dependence on him.

Faith takes every good thing as a stream from this inexhausted spring, and as
a token of love, from this unmeasurable Love. It knows a difference in the
means and way of conveyance; but no difference as to the fountain; for all that
we receive is equally from the same original; though not sent to us by the same
hand. Faith should not take or look at any good abstractedly, as separated from
God; but ever see the streams as continued up to the fountain; and the fruit as
proceeding from the tree and roots: Remember still that he does illuminate you
by the Sun; and he does nourish you by your food (for you live not by bread
only, but by his Word and blessing;) and it is he that does teach you by his
Ministers, and protect you by his Magistrates, and comfort you by your friends:
You have that from one, which another cannot give you; but you have nothing
from any creature whatsoever; which is not totally from God: For though he
honor creatures to be his Messengers or Instruments, the benefit is equally
from him, when he uses an Instrument, and when he uses none. From him we have
our Being, and our Comforts, and all the means and hopes of our well-being; and
therefore our dependence must be absolutely on him: The blessings of this life,
and of that to come; all things which appertain to life and godliness, are the
gifts of his incomprehensible benignity. For it is natural to him, who is
infinitely good, to do good, when he does work ad extra; though when to
communicate, and in what various degrees is free to him, 1 Timothy 4.8. M^t. 6.33.
2 Pet. 1.3. Psalm. 145.14, 15. and 146.7. and 18.50. 1 Timothy 6.17. James 1.5. and
4.6. Jer. 5.24, 25.

Direct. 10. By Faith set your eye and heart most fixedly and devotedly on GOD,
as your ultimate end (which is your felicity, and much more.)

He takes not God for God indeed, who takes him not as his ultimate end: Nay,
he debaseth God, who placing his felicity in any thing else, does cleave to God
but as the means to such a felicity. But to make God our felicity is lawful and
necessary; but not to dream that this is the highest respect that we must have
to God, to be our felicity. To love him, and to be beloved by him; to please
him, and to be pleased in him, is our ultimate end; which though it be complex,
and contain our own felicity, yet does it, as infinitely supereminent, contain
the complacency of God, and God as the object of our Love, considered in his
own infinite perfections: For he is the Alpha and Omega, the first and the
last; and of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11.36. It is
the highest and noblest work of faith, to make our own Original to be our End,
and to set our love entirely upon God; and to see that we our selves are but
worms and vanity; capable of no higher honor, than to be means to please and
glorify God; and must not take down God so, as to love him only for our
selves. And he only who thus denies himself for God, does rightly improve
self-love, and seek the only exaltation and felicity, by carrying up himself to
God, and adhering to the eternal good, 1 Cor. 10.31. Luke 14.33. Mat. 16.25.
Mark 8.35.

Direct. 11. Distinguish these Relations of God, but divide them not; much less
set them in any opposition to each other; and remember that the effects of them
all are marvelously and harmoniously mixed; but undivided.

The effects of Gods Power, are always the effects also of his Wisdom and his
Goodness: And the effects of his Wisdom, are always the effects of his
Goodness and his Power: And the effects of his Goodness, are always the
effects of his Power and his Wisdom. The effects of his Dominion on his
rational subjects, are always the effects also of his Government and Love: And
the effects of his Government, are always the effects also of his Dominion and
Love: And the effects of his Love as Benefactor^* are always the effects of
his Dominion and Government. Though some one Principle, and some one Relation,
may more eminently appear in one work as others do in the other works. Disposal
is the effect of Propriety; but it is always a Regular and L^ving disposal of
the subjects of his Government. L^gislation and Judgment are the effects of
his Kingdom: Bu^ Dominion and Love have a hand in both, till Rebellion turn men
from subjection: Glorification is the highest effect of Love: But it is given
^^so by our Owner, as by one that may do as he list with his own and by our
Governor by the way of a Reward, Mat. 20.15. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Mat. 25.
throughout.

Direct. 12. Especially let Faith unvail to you the face of the Goodness of
God; and see that your thoughts of it be neither false nor low; but equal to
your thoughts of his Power and Understanding.

1. As our loss by sin, is more in the point of Goodness, than of Power or
Knowledge (The Devils having much of the two last, who have but little or
nothing of the first) so it is the Goodness of God which must be more studied
by a Believer, than his Power or his Wisdom, because the impress of it is more
necessary to us in our lapsed state.

2. They have false thoughts of Gods Goodness, who make it to consist only or
chiefly, in a communicative inclination ad extra, which we call Benignity: For
he was as Good from Eternity, before he made any creature, as he is since: And
his Goodness considered as essential in himself, and as his own perfection, is
infinitely higher than the consideration of it, as terminated on any Creature.
Man is denominated good from his adaptation to the will of God, and not God
chiefly from his adaptation to the commodity or will of man. And they do
therefore debase God, and deifie his creature, who make the creature the
ultimate end of GOD and it self; and not God the ultimate end of the creature.
And they might as well make the creature the Beginning also of it self and God:
(And yet this sottish notion takes much with many half-witted Novelists in
this Age, who account themselves the men of ingenuity.)

And they have also false thoughts of the Goodness of God, who think that there
is nothing of communicative Benignity in it at all. For all the good which God
does, he does it from the Goodness of his Nature: Thou art good, and do
good, Psalm. 119.68. And his doing good is usually expressed by the phrase of
being good to them: The Lord is good to all, Psalm. 145.9. Psalm. 25 8 and 86.5.

Object. But if communicative Benignity be natural to God as his Essential
Goodness is, then he must do good per modum naturae, and ad ultimum potentiae;
and then the world was from Eternity, and as good as God could make it.

Answ. 1. Those Christian Divines who do hold that the Universe was from
Eternity, and that it is as good as God can make it; do not yet hold that it
was its own original, but an eternal emanation from God, and therefore that God
who is the beginning of it, is the ultimate end, and eternally and voluntarily,
though naturally and necessarily produced it for himself, even for the pleasure
of his will: And therefore that Gods Essential Goodness as it is in it self, is
much higher than the same as terminated in, or productive of the Universe. And
that no mixed bodies which do oriri and interire, are generated and corrupted,
were from eternity; and consequently, that this present systeme called the
world, which is within our sight, was not from eternity: But that as spring and
fall does revive the plants, and end their transitory life; so it has been
with these particular systemes; the simpler and nobler parts of the Universe
continuing the same. And they held that the world is next to infinitely good;
and as good as it is possible to be without being God; and that for God to
produce another God, or an infinite good, is a contradiction: And that all the
baser, and pained, and miserable parts of the world, are best respectively to
the perfection of the whole, though not best in and to themselves; (As every
nuck and pin in a watch is necessary as well as the chief parts.) And that all
things set together, it is best that all things be as they are, and will be:
But of this the infinite Wisdom, who sees not only some little parts, but the
whole Universe at one perfect view, is the fittest Judge.

2. But the generality of Divines do hold the contrary, and say, that it is
natural to God to be the Alsufficient pregnant good; not only able to
communicate goodness, but inclined to it, as far as his perfection does
require; but not inclined to communicate in a way of natural constant
necessity, as the Sun shines, but in a way of liberty, when, and in what
degrees he pleases; which pleasure is guided by his infinite Understanding,
which no mortal man can comprehend; and therefore must not ask any further
reason of the first reason and will; but stop here, and be satisfied to find
that it is indeed Gods Will and Reason, which causes all things when and what
they are, and not otherwise. And that God has not made the Universe as good in
it self, as by his absolute Power he could have made it: But that it is best to
be as it is and will be, because it is most suitable to his perfect Will and
Wisdom. And this answer seems most agreeable to Gods Word.

And as you must see that your thoughts of Gods Goodness be not false; so also
that they be not diminutive and low. As no knowledge is more useful and
necessary to us; so nothing is more wonderfully revealed by God, than is his
amiable Goodness: For this end he sent his Son into flesh, to declare his Love
to the forelorn world, and to call them to behold it, and admire it, John 1 8,
9, 10. and 3.16. 1 John 3.1. Rev. 21.3. And as Christ is the chief glass of the
Fathers Love, on this side Heaven; so it is the chief part of the office of
Faith, to see Gods Love and Goodness in the face of Christ: Let him not reveal
his Love in vain, at so dear a rate, and in a way of such wonderful
condescension: Think of his Goodness, as equal to his greatness: And as you see
his greatness in the frame of the world; so his goodness in the wonderful work
of man's Redemption and Salvation: Let Faith beholding God in Christ, and daily
thus gazing on his goodness, or rather tasting it, and feasting on it, be the
very sum of all your Religion and your lives. This is indeed to live by Faith,
when it works by that Love, which is our holiness and life.

Direct. 13. Let not Faith overlook the Books of the Creation, and the
wonderful demonstrations of Gods Attributes therein.

Even such revelations of Gods goodness and fidelity as are made in Nature, or
the works of Creation, are sometimes in Scriptures made the objects of faith.
At least we who by the belief of the Scriptures, do know how the worlds were
made, Heb. 11.2, 3. must believingly study this glorious work of our great
Creator. All those admirations and praises of God as appearing in his works,
which David uses, were not without the use of faith. Thus faith can use the
world as a sanctified thing, and as a glass to see the glory of God in, while
sensual sinners use it against God to their own perdition, and make it an enemy
to God and them; so contrary is the life of Faith and of Sense. He has not the
heart of a man within him, who is not stricken with admiration of the Power,
and Wisdom and Goodness of the incomprehensible Creator, when he seriously
looks to the Sun and Stars, to Sea and Land, to the course of all things, and
to the wonderful variety and natures of the particular creatures. And he has
not the heart of a Believer in him, who does not think [O what a God is it whom
I am bound to serve, and who has taken me into his Covenant as his child! How
happy are they who have such a God, engaged to be their God and Happiness? And
how miserable are they who make such a God their revenging Judge and enemy?
Shall I ever again wilfully or carelessly sin against a God of so great Majesty?
If the Sun were an intellectual Deity, and still looked on me, should I
presumptuously offend him? Shall I ever distrust the power of him that made
such a world? Shall I fear a worm, a mortal man, above this great and terrible
Creator? Shall I ever again resist or disobey the word and wisdom of him, who
made and rules such a world? Does he govern the whole world, and should not I
be governed by him? Has he Goodness enough to communicate as he has done to
Sun and Stars to Heaven and Earth, to Angels and Men, and every wight? and has
he not Goodness enough to draw, and engage, and continually delight, this dull
and narrow heart of mine? Does the return of his Sun, turn the darksome night
into the lightsome day, and bring forth the creatures to their food and labor;
does its approach revive the torpid earth, and turn the congealed winter into
the pleasant spring, and cover the earth with her fragrant many-coloured Robes,
and renew the life and joy of the terrestrial inhabitants; and shall I find
nothing in the God who made and still continues the world, to be the life, and
strength, and pleasure of my soul? Psalm. 66.1. etc. Make a joyful noise unto
God, all ye Lands: sing forth the honor of his Name; make his praise glorious:
say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works? -- Come and see the works of
God: He is terrible in his doing toward the children of men. -- He rules by
his power for ever: his eyes behold the Nations: let not the rebellious exalt
themselves. O bless our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be
heard! who holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved,
Psalm. 86.8, 9, 10. Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord, neither
are there any works like unto thy works. All Nations whom thou have made shall
come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy Name: For thou art
great, and do wondrous things: thou art God alone, Psalm. 92.5, 6. O Lord how
great are thy works! thy thoughts are very deep, a brutish man knows not,
neither does a fool understand this.

Faith does not separate it self from natural knowledge, nor neglect Gods
Works, while it studyeth his Word; but says Psalm. 143.5. I meditate on all thy
Works: I muse on the work of thy hands. Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are
thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches;
so is the great and wide Sea, etc.

Nay, it is greatly to be noted, that as Redemption is to repair the Creation,
and the Redeemer came to recover the soul of man to his Creator, and Christ is
the way to the Father; so on the Lords day our commemoration of Redemption
includes and is subservient to our commemoration of the Creation, and the work
of the ancient Sabbath is not shut out, but taken in with the proper work of
the Lords day: and as Faith in Christ is a mediate grace to cause in us the
Love of God; so the Word of the Redeemer does not call off our thoughts from
the Works of the great Creator, but call them back to that employment, and fit
us for it by reconciling us to God.

Therefore it is as suitable to the Gospel Church at least, as it was to the
Jewish, to make Gods works the matter of our Sabbath praises, and to say, as
Psalm. 145.4, 5, 10. One generation shall praise thy works to another; and shall
declare thy mighty acts: I will speak of the glorious honor of thy Majesty,
and of thy wondrous works: And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible
acts, and I will declare thy greatness -- All thy works shall praise thee O
Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee, Psalm. 26.6, 7. I will wash my hands in
innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar O Lord, that I may publish with
the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works, Psalm. 9.12. I
will praise thee O Lord with my whole heart, I will show forth all thy
marvelous works.

Direct. 14. Let Faith also observe God in his daily Providence; and equally
honor him for the ordinary and the extraordinary passages thereof.

The upholding of the world is a continual causing of it; and differs from
creation, as the continued shining of a Candle does from the first lighting of
it. If therefore the Creation do wonderfully declare the Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness of God; so also does the conservation. And note that Gods ordinary
works are as great demonstrations of him in all his perfections, as his
extraordinary: Is it not as great a declaration of the Power of God, that he
cause the Sun to shine, and to keep its wondrous course from age to age, as if
he did such a thing but for a day or hour? and as if he caused it to stand
still a day? And is it not as great a demonstration of his knowledge also, and
of his goodness? Surely we should take it for as great an act of Love, to have
plenty, and health, and joy continued to us as long as we desired it, as for an
hour. Let not then that duration and ordinariness of Gods manifestations to us,
which is their aggravation, be looked upon as if it were their extenuation: But
let us admire God in the Sun and Stars, in Sea and Land, as if this were the
first time that ever we had seen them.

And yet let the extraordinarniess of his works have its effects also: Their
use is to stir up the drowsy mind of man, to see God in that which is unusual,
who is grown customary and lifeless in observing him in things usual. Pharaoh
and his Magicians will acknowledge God, in those unusual works, which they are
no way able to imitate themselves, and say, This is the finger of God, Exodus
8.19. And therefore miracles are never to be made light of, but the finger of
God to be acknowledged in them, whoever be the instrument or occasion, Luke
11.20.

There are frequently also some notable, though not miraculous Providence, in
the changes of the world, and in the disposal of all events, and particularly
of our selves, in which a Believer should still see God; yea see him as the
total cause, and take the instruments to be next to nothing; and not gaze all
at men as unbelievers do: but say, This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous
in our eyes, Psalm. 118.23. Sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done
marvelous things, Psalm. 98.1. Marvelous are thy works, and that my soul knows
right well, Psalm. 139.14.

Direct. 15. But let the chief study of Faith for the knowledge of God, be of
the face of Jesus Christ, and the most wonderful mystery of his Incarnation,
and our Redemption.

For God is no where else so fully manifested to man, in that Goodness, Love,
and Mercy, which it most concerns us to know; and the knowledge of which will
be most healing and sanctifying to the soul: But of this I must speak more in
the chapter next following.

Direct. 16. Let Faith make use of every mercy, not only to acknowledge God
therein, but to have a pleasant taste and relish of his Love.

For thus it is that they are all sanctified to Believers, and this is the holy
use of mercies: Remember that as in order to Understanding, your eyes and ears
are but the passages or inlets to your minds; and if sights and sounds went no
further than the senses, you would be no better, if not worse than beasts: So
also in order to Affection, the taste and sense of sweetness, or any other
pleasure, is to pass by the sense unto the heart; and what should it do there,
but affect the heart with the Love and Goodness of the giver. A beast tastes
as much of the sensitive sweetness of his food and ease as you do: But it is
the Believer who heartily says, How good is the Author and end of all this
mercy? whence is it that this comes? and whether does it tend? I love the Lord
because he has heard the voice of my supplication, Psalm. 116.1. O that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, Psalm. 145.15, 16. The eyes of all
things wait on thee: thou give them their meat in due season. Thou openest
thy hand, and satisfiest the desires of every living thing. He leaves not
himself without witness in that he does good, and gives us Rain from Heaven,
and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, Acts 14.17.
The near conjunction of soul and body, and the near relation of God and his
mercies, do tell us plainly, that every pleasure which touches the sense,
should touch the heart, and reach unto the soul it self; and that as the
creature is fitted to the sense, and God is suitable to the soul; so the
creature should be but Gods servant to knock and cause us to open the door to
himself, and the way of his communication and accession to the heart. Therefore
so great a judgment is threatened against the Israelites in their prosperity,
if they did not serve God with j^yfulness and gladness of heart, for the
abundance of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47. And therefore the days in which men were
to rejoice in God, with the greatest love and thankfulness, were appointed to
be days of feasting, that the pleasure of the bodily senses might promote the
spiritual pleasure and gratitude of the mind. 2 Chronicles. 19.21. and 29.30. Neh.
8.17. and 12.27. Esth. 9 17, 18, 19. Numb. 10.10.

Direct. 17. Let Faith feel Gods displeasure in every chastisement and
judgment.

For we must be equally careful that we despise them not, and that we faint not
under them, Heb. 12.5. They that pretend that it is the work of faith to see
nothing in any affliction but the love and benefit, do but set one act of faith
against another: For the same word which tells us, that it shall turn to a
true believers good, does tell us that it is of it self a natural evil, and
that as the good is from Gods Love, so the evil is from our sins, and his
displeasure; and that he would give us the good without the evil, if man were
without sin. He therefore that believes not that it is a castigatory
punishment for sin, is an unbeliever, as well as he that believes not the
promise of the benefit, Romans 5.12, 14, 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 11.30, 32. Jer. 5.25.
Micah 1.5. Amos 3.2.

Yea this opinion directly frustrateth the first end and use of all
chastisements which is to further men's Repentance for the evil of sin, by the
sense of the evil of punishment, and the notice of Gods displeasure manifested
thereby: And next to make us warnings to others, that they incur not the same
correction and displeasure as we have done. For he that says, there is no
penalty or evil in the suffering, nor no displeasure of God expressed thereby,
does contradict all this. But as it is a great benefit which we are to reap by
our corrections, even the furtherance of our Repentance and amendment; so it is
a great work of faith, to perceive the bitterness of sin, and the displeasure
of God in these corrections: of which more anon.

Direct. 18. Faith must hear the voice of God in all his Word, and in all the
counsel which by any one he shall send us.

When sense takes notice of nothing but a book, or of none but a man, faith
must perceive the mind and message of God. Not only in Preachers, 2 Cor. 5.19,
20. 1 These. 2.13. Titus 2.5. Heb. 13.7. but also in the mouth of wicked
enemies, when it is indeed the will of God which they reveal. And so David
heard the curse of Shimei, speaking to him the rebukes of God, for his sin in
the matter of V^iah, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11. And Paul rejoiced that Christ was
preached by men of envy and strife, who did it to add affliction to his bonds,
Phil. 1.18. Moses perceived the will of God in the counsel of Jethro, even in
as great a matter as the governing and judging of the people, Exodus 18.19. The
counsel of the ancients which Rehoboam forsook, was the counsel of God which be
rejected, 1 King. 12.8. David blessed God for the counsel of a woman, Abigail.
Whoever be the Messenger, a Believer should be acquainted with the voice of
God, and know the true significations of his will. The true sheep of Christ do
know his voice, and follow him, because they are acquainted with his Word; and
though the Preacher be himself of a sinful life, he can distinguish betwixt God
and the Preacher; and will not say, it is not the Word of God, because it
comes from a wicked mouth. For he has read, Psalm. 50.16. where God says to
the wicked, What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate instruction, and have cast my words behind thee: But he never read [to
the godly, says God, Why did thou hear a wicked Preacher?] He has read, The
Scribes and Pharisees fit in Moses chair, hear them, but do not as they do. But
he never read [Hear none that live not according to their doctrine.] An
unbeliever will not know Christ's Word, if a Judas be the Preacher of it: but a
Believer can read the commission of Judas, or at least can understand whose
counsel he delivers: and though he would be loath to choose a Judas, or to
prefer him before a holy man; yet if workers of iniquity do preach in Christ's
Name, he leaves it to Christ to say at Judgment, I know you not, Mat. 7.21,
22. Acts 1.17, 24.

Direct. 19. Faith must not look at God now and then, and leave the soul in
ordinary forgetfulness of him: but remember that he is always present, and
must make us rather forget them that are talking to us, or conversing with us,
than to forget the Lord.

Nothing is more the work of Faith, than to see him who is invisible, Heb.
11.27. And to live as one that still remembereth, that God stands by: To
think as one that knows that our thoughts are always in his sight, and to
speak and do as one that forgets not, that he is the constant and most
reverend witness of all. To hear, and pray, and live, and labor as if we saw
the God who employeth us, and will reward us, Matthew. 6.4, 6. Isa. 59.18. Rev.
20.12. Matthew. 16.27. Romans 2.6.

Direct. 20. Faith must lay the heart of man, to rest in the Will of God, and
to make it our chief delight to please him, and quietly to trust him whatever
comes to pass: And to make nothing of all that would rise up against him, or
entice us from him, or would be to us as in his stead.

Faith sees that it is the pleasing of the will of God, which is all our work,
and all our reward: And that we should be fully pleased in the pleasing of him:
And that there is no other rest for the soul to be thought on, but the will of
God: And it must content the soul in him alone, 2 These. 1.11. Col. 3.20. 1 Cor.
7.32. 1 These. 4.1. 2 Timothy 2.4. Heb. 11.6. Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. Heb. 13.16.
Psalm. 16.5. and 73.26. and 119.57. and 142.5.

As God is often called Jealous, especially over the heart of man; so faith
must make us jealous of our selves, and very watchful against every creature,
which would become any part of the felicity or ultimate object of our souls.
God is so great to a believing soul, that ease, and honor, and wealth, and
pleasure, and all men, high and low must be as dead and nothing to us, when
they speak against him, or would be loved, or feared, or trusted, or obeyed
before him, or above him: It is as natural to a true life of Faith on God, to
make nothing of the incroaching creature, as for our beholding the Sun, to make
nothing of a Candle. And thus is faith our victory over the world, 1 John 5.4.
Jer. 17.5. Isa. 2.22. 1 Cor. 15.28. Ephesians. 4.6. Col. 3.11.

CHAP. II. Directions how to live by Faith on Jesus Christ.
SO much is said already toward this in opening the grounds of Faith, as will
excuse me from being prolix in the rest: And the following parts of the Life of
Faith, are still supposed as subordinate to these two which go before.

Direct. 1. Keep still the true Reasons of Christ's Incarnation and Mediation
upon your mind (as they are before expressed) else Christ will not be known by
you as Christ. Therefore the Scriptures are much in declaring the reasons of
Christ's coming into the world, as to be a sacrifice for sin, to declare Gods
love and mercy to sinners; to seek and to save that which was lost; to destroy
the works of the Devil, etc. 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 John 3.8. Heb. 2.14. Luke 19.10.
Romans 5.10. 1 John 3.1. Gal. 4.4, 6, etc. Let this name or description of Christ
be engraven as in capital Letters upon your minds. THE ETERNAL WISDOM OF GOD
INCARNATE TO REVEAL AND COMMVNICATE HIS WILL, HIS LOVE, HIS SPIRIT TO SINFVL
MISERABLE MAN.

Direct. 2. See therefore that you join no conceit of Christ, which
dishonors God, and is contrary to this character, and to Gods design.

Many by mistaking the doctrine of Christ's Intercession, do think of God the
Father, as one that is all wrath and justice, and unwilling of himself to be
reconciled unto man: and of the second person in the Trinity, as more gracious
and merc^ful, whose mediation abateth the wrath of the Father, and with much
ado makes him willing to have mercy on us. Whereas it is the Love of God,
which is the original of our Redemption, and it was Gods loving the world,
which provoked him to give his Son to be their Redeemer, John 3.16. Romans 8.32.
And God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing to them
their trespasses, 2 Cor. 5.19. And therefore we still read of Christ's
reconciling man to God, and not the phrase of his reconciling God to man: Not
but that both are truly wrought by Christ's mediation; (For the Scripture
frequently speaks of Gods hating the workers of iniquity, and of his
vindictive Justice, and of that propitiating and atonement, which signifies
the same thing:) But the reason is, because the enmity began on man's part, and
not on Gods, by man's forsaking God, and turning his love from him to the
creature, and not by Gods forsaking man; and the change of man's state and heart
toward God, by true reconciliation, will make him again capable of peace with
God; and as soon as man is made an object fit for the complacency of God, it
cannot be but that God will again take complacency in him; so that the real
change must be only on man; and then that relative or denominative change which
must be on God, will thence immediately result.

Some also there be who gather from Christ's death, that God desired the
sufferings of Christ as pleasing to him in it self; as if he made a bargain
with Christ to sell so much mercy to man, for so much blood and pains of
Christ; and as if he so delighted in the blood of the innocent, that he would
the willinglyer do good to us, if he might first forsake and crucify Christ.
But this is to contradict Christ's business in the world, as if he who came from
Heaven to declare Gods Love, had come to declare him to delight in doing hurt;
and as if he who came to demonstrate Gods Justice, had come to show, that he
had rather punish the innocent, than the guilty: But the case is quite
otherwise: God does not delight in man's sufferings as such; no not of the
guilty, much less of the innocent: He desired not Christ's suffering for it
self: But as it was a convenient means, to demonstrate his Justice, and his
Holiness, and to vindicate the honor of his Government and Law, and to be a
warning to sinners, not to sin presumptuously; and yet to declare to them the
greatness of his Love.

And some are ready to gather from Christ's propitiation, that God is now more
reconcilable to sin, and so they blaspheme him as if he were unholy: As if he
made a smaller matter of our mis-doings, since he is satisfied for them by a
Mediator. And they are ready to gather, that God can now take complacency in
man, though he have no inherent holiness at all, because of the righteousness
of Christ imputed to him. And some take Gods imputation of Christ's
righteousness to us, to be a reputing us to be the persons, who our selves
fulfilled the Law in or by Christ; so that his very Attributes of Wisdom, and
Love, and Holiness, and Justice, and Mercy, etc. which Christ came purposely to
declare, are by some denied, blasphemed or abused, on pretense of extolling
Christ and our Redemption; as if we might sin that grace may abound, Romans 6.1,
2. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves also are found
sinners, is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid, Gal. 2.17.

Direct. 3. Distinguish between the common and the special benefits of man's
Redemption by Christ; and see how the latter do suppose the former; and set not
these parts against each other, which God in wisdom has joined together.

To pass by all other the great and notable common benefit, is the conditional
Covenant of grace; or the conditional pardon of sin, and gift of eternal life
to all without exception, John 3.16. Mark 16.15, 16. Romans 10.9. Mat. 6.14, 15.
Mat. 22.7, 8, 9. And this general conditional promise must be first preached;
and the preaching of this is the universal o^ common call and offer of grace:
And it must be first believed, as is before said. But the actual belief of it,
according to its true intent and meaning, does prove our actual personal title
to all the benefits which were before given but conditionally, John 3.16. 1
John 5.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20 21.

Direct. 4. Accordingly judge how far Redemption is common or special, by the
common and special benefits procured.

For no man can deny but it is so far common, as the benefits are common: that
is, so far as to procure and give to sinners a common conditional pardon as
aforesaid (as Dr. Twisse very often takes notice.) And no man can affirm, that
it is common to all, so far as absolutely or eventually to give them actual
pardon and salvation, unless they dream that all are saved. But that some
eventually and infallibly are saved, all confess: And we had rather think that
Christ and the good pleasure of God, is the chief differencing cause, than we
our selves.

Direct. 5. Set not the several parts of the Office of Christ against each
other; nor either depress or forget any one part, while you magnify and
meditate only on the other,

It is most ordinary to reduce all the Office of Christ, to the Prophetical,
Priestly, and Kingly part. (For it is more proper to call them three parts of
one Office, than three Offices:) But it is hard to reduce his Incarnation, or
his infant-humiliation, and his whole course of obedience, and fulfilling the
Law to any one, or all of these, totally. Though in some respect, as it is his
example, it is teaching, and as it is part of his humiliation, it may be called
a part of his sacrifice; yet as it is meritorious, obedience and perfection, it
belongs indeed to our High Priest, but not formally to his Priesthood: No nor
yet as he himself is the sacrifice for sin: For it is not an act of Priesthood
to be himself a sacrifice. But yet I think the common destribution intimates
to us that sense which contains the truth which we enquire after: For the
word Priesthood is applied to Christ in a peculiar notion, so as it is never
applied to any other; and therefore is taken more comprehensively, as including
all that good which he does for us (as good) by the way of Mediation with the
Father, and all his acts of Mediation with God; as the Prophetical and Kingly
parts, contain his other acts toward men. But yet a more plain and accurate
destribution should be made; in which it should be manifested also to what
heads his many other assumed titles of Relation are to be reduced: But this is
not a work for this place.

But that which now I advise you to avoid, i^ the error of them who look so
much at Christ's Mediation with God, that they scarce observe his work with man:
And the error of them who look so much at his work on man, that they overlook
his Mediation with God: And theirs that so observe h^s sacrifice, as to make
light of his continual intercession: or that observing both, make light of his
doctrine and example: Or that observe these so much as to make light of his
sacrifice and intercession: Or that extol his doctrine and example, and
overlook his giving of the Spirit to all his living members: Or that cannot
magnify any one of these, without depressing or extenuating some other. If
Christ's Kingdom be not divided, Mat. 12.25. sure Christ himself is not divided,
nor his works, 1 Cor. 1.13.

Direct 6. Still distinguish between Christ's work of Redemption, which he has
already wrought on earth, to constitute him our Mediatory Head, and that which
he was further to do for us in that Relation; that you may ground your faith on
the first as a foundation laid by him, and may seek after the second as that
which requires somewhat from your selves to your own participation.

The first part is commonly called the Impetration, the second the Application
(or rather, the Communication) As God did first do himself the work of
Creation, and thence result his Relations of our Owner, our Ruler, and our
Chief Good (or our Love, or End, or Benefactor;) so Christ first does the works
which make him our Redeemer toward God; and then he is also our Owner, our
Ruler, and our communicative Benefactor, hereupon. And this seems intimated
by those phrases, Heb. 5.8. and 2.9, 10. where he is said to learn obedience by
the things which he suffered, that is, as a subject exercised obedience, and so
learnt to know by experience what obeying is. And that ( the Captain of our
salvation was made perfect by sufferings, and for suffering death was crowned
with glory) because his sufferings did constitute him a perfect Captain or
Redeemer in performance; though before he was perfect in ability. As he that
undertaketh to redeem some Turkish gally-slaves by conquering their Navy, is
made a perfect Redeemer, or Conqueror, when he has taken the fleet, though
yet the prisoners are in his power, to release them on such terms at seem best
to him. And as a man is a perfect Surgeon, when (besides his skill) he is
furnished with all his instruments or salves (how costly soever) though yet the
cure is not done: Or as he that has ransomed prisoners is a perfect Ransomer,
when he has paid the price, though yet they are not delivered, nor have any
actual right themselves to claim deliverance by. I here mention this, because
the building upon that foundation, which is supposed to be already laid and
finished, and the seeking of the further salvation which yet we have no
possession of, nor perhaps any title to, are works so very different, that he
that does not discern the difference, cannot exercise the Christian faith:
Because it is to be necessarily exercised by two such different acts, or
different ways of acting and applying our selves to our Redeemer.

Direct. 7. Still think of Christ's nearness both to the Father and to us; and
so of our NEARNESS to God in and by him.

Our distance is the lamentable fruit of our Apostasy; which infers, our
fears, and estrangedness, and backwardness to draw near to God: It causes our
ignorance of him, and our false conceits of his will and works: it greatly
hinders both love and confidence: whereas the apprehension of our nearness to
God will do much to cure all these evils. As it is the misery of the proud,
that God looks on them as afar off, that is, with strangeness, and
abhorrence, and disdain, Psalm. 138.6. And accordingly they shall be far off
from the blessed ones hereafter, Luke 16.23. So it is the happiness of
Believers to be nigh to God, in Jesus Christ, who condescended to be nigh to
us; which is our preparation to be yet nearer to him for ever, Psalm. 148.14.
and 34.18. and 145.18. Ephesians. 2.13. It gives the soul more familiar thoughts
of God, who seemed before to be at an inaccessible distance; which is part of
the boldness of access and confidence mentioned, Ephesians. 3.12. and 2.18. Romans
5.2. Heb. 10.19. We may come boldly to the Throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. And it
greatly helps us in the work of Love, to think how near God is come to us in
Christ, and how near he has taken the humane nature unto him. When a sinner
looks at God only as in himself, and as he is estranged from the guilty, he
is amazed and confounded, as if God were quite out of the reach of our love;
but when he thinks how he has voluntarily come down into our flesh, that he
might be man, and be familiar with man, and what a wonderful marriage the
Divine Nature has made with the humane, this wonderfully reconcileth the heart
to God, and makes the thoughts of him more sweet and acceptable. If the life
of faith be a dwelling in God, and God in us, and a walking with God, 1 John
3.24. and 4.12, 15, 16. Ephesians. 3.17. Genesis 17.1. and 24.40. and 5.22. and 6.9.
Heb. 11.5. Then must we perceive our nearness to God: The just apprehension of
this nearness in Christ's Incarnation and Relation to us, is the chief means to
bring us to the nearness of love and heavenly conversation, Col. 3.1, 3, 4.

Direct. 8. Make Christ therefore the Mediation for all your practical thoughts
of God.

The thoughts of God will be strange to us through our distance, and terrible
through our guilt, if we look not upon him through the prospective of Christ's
humanity and cross. God out of Christ is a consuming fire to guilty souls. As
our acceptance must be through the Beloved, in whom he is well pleased; so our
thoughts must be encouraged with the sense of that acceptance; and every
thought must be led up to God, and emboldened by the Mediator, Mat. 3.17. and
17.5. and 12.18. Ephesians. 1.6. Heb. 2.9, 10, 12, 13, 17.

Direct. 9. Never come to God in prayer, or any other act of worship, but by
the Mediation of the Son; and put all your prayers as into his hand, that he
may present them to the Father.

There is no hoping for any thing from God to sinners, but by Christ: and
therefore there is no speaking to God but by him: not only in his Name, but
also by his Mediation: And this is the exercise of his Priesthood for us, by
his heavenly intercession, so much spoken of by the Holy Ghost in the Epistle
to the Hebrews: Seeing we have a great High Priest, that is passed into the
Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession: Let us
therefore come boldly to the Throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.14, 16.

Direct. 10. Hear every word of Scripture Precept; and Ministerial Exhortation
(consonant to the Scripture) as sent to us by Christ, and from the Father by
him, as the appointed Teacher of the Church.

Hear Christ in his Gospel and his Ministers, and hear God the Father in the
Son. Take heed of giving only a slight and verbal acknowledgement of the voice
of Christ, whilst you really are more taken with the Preachers voice, as if he
had a greater share in the Sermon, than Christ has. The voice in the holy
Mount, which Peter witnesses that he heard, 2 Pet. 1.17. was, This is my
Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, Mat. 17.5. And it shall
come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be
destroyed from among the people, Acts 3.23. When ye received the Word of God
which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the Word of men, but as it is in
truth the Word of God, which works effectually in you that believe, 1 These.
2.13. The Sheep will follow him, for they know his voice: a stranger they will
not follow, John 10.4, 5.

Direct. 11. Take every mercy from God as from the hand of Christ; both as
procured by his Cross, and as delivered by his Mediatory Administration.

It is still supposed that the giving of the Son himself by the Father to this
office, is excepted as presupposed. But all subsequent particular mercies, are
both procured for us, and given to us, by the Mediator. Yet is it nevertheless
from God the Father, nor does it evertheless, but the more fully signify his
love. But the state of sinners allows them no other way of communication from
God, for their benefit and happiness, but by one who is more near and capable
to God, who from him may convey all blessings unto them. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in things heavenly in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. He that spared not his own
Son, but gave him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things? Romans 8.32. Through the knowledge of him, the Divine Power gives us
all things that pertain to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. God has given us
eternal life, and this life is in his Son, 1 John 5.10, 11. All things are
delivered into his hand, Joh. 13.3. and 17.2. Therefore receive every
particular mercy for soul and body, as from the blood, and from the present
mediation of Christ, that you may rightly understand it, and have it as
sanctified and sweetened by Christ.

Direct. 12. Let Faith take occasion by every sin, to renew your sense of the
want of Christ, and to bring you to him, to meditate and grant you a renewed
pardon.

Therefore entertain not their mistake, who tell men that all sin, past,
present, and to come, is fully pardoned at once (whether it be before you were
born in Gods decree, or Christ's satisfaction, or at the time of your
conversion) nor theirs who teach that Christ pardons only sins before
conversion, but as for all that are committed afterward, he does prevent the
need of pardon, by preventing all guilt and obligation to punishment (except
mere temporal chastisement.) The preparation which Christ has made for our
pardon, is in it self sufficient, yea and effectual as to that end which he
would have it attain before our believing: But our actual pardon is no such
end: Nor can sin be forgiven before it be committed; because it is no sin.
Christ never intended to justify or sanctify us perfectly at the first
(whatsoever many say to the contrary, because they understand not what they
say) but to carry on both proportionably and by degrees, that we may have daily
use for his daily mediation, and may daily pray, Forgive us our trespasses.
There is no guilt on them that are in Christ, so far as they walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit; nor no proper condemnation by sentence or
execution at all; because their pardon is renewed by Christ, as they renew
their sins of infirmity: but not because he preventeth their need of any
further pardon.

Therefore as God made advantage of the sins of the world, for the honoring of
his grace in Christ, that grace might abound where sin abounded, Romans 5.12, 16,
17. So do you make advantage of your renewed sins, for a renewed use of faith
in Christ; and let it drive you to him with renewed desires and expectations of
pardon by his intercession: That Satan may be a loser, and Christ may have more
honor by every sin that we commit. Not that we should sin that grace may
abound; but that we may make use of abounding grace when we have sinned. It is
the true nature and use of Faith and Repentance to draw good out of sin it
self, or to make the remembrance of it to be a means of our hatred and
mortification of it, and of our love and gratitude to our Redeemer: Not that
sin it self does ( formally or efficiently) ever do any good: But sin
objectively is turned into good: For so sin is no sin; because to remember sin
is not sin. When David says, Psalm. 51.3. that his sin was ever before him, he
means not only involuntarily to his grief, but voluntarily as a meditation
useful to his future duty, and to stir him up to all that which afterward he
promises.

Direct. 13. In all the weaknesses and languishings of the new creature, let
Faith look up to Christ for strength.

For God has put our life into his hand, and he is our root, and has promised
that we shall live because he lives, John 14.19. Do not think only of using
Christ, as you do a friend when you have need of him; or as I do my pen, to
write, and lay it down when I have done: But as the branches use the Vine, and
as the members use the Head, which they live by; and from which when they are
separated, they die and wither, John 15.1, 2, 3, etc. Ephesians. 1.22. and 5.27,
30. and 4.4, 5, 12, 15, 16. Christ must even dwell in our hearts by Faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. that is, 1. Faith must be the means of Christ's dwelling in us by
his Spirit; and 2. Faith must so habituate the heart to a dependence upon
Christ, and to an improvement of him that objectively he must dwell in our
hearts, as our friend does whom we most dearly love; as that which we cannot
choose but always think on.

Remember therefore that we live in Christ, and that the life which we now live
is by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved us, and given himself for us,
Gal. 2.20. And his grace is sufficient for us, and his strength most manifested
in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. And that when Satan desires to sift us, he
prays for us that our faith may not fail, Luke 22.32. And that our life is
hid with Christ in God, even with Christ who is our life, Col. 3.3, 4. That he
is the Head, in whom all the members live, by the communication of his
appointed ligaments and joints, Ephesians. 4.14, 15, 16. Therefore when any grace
is weak, go to your Head for life and strength. If faith be weak, pray, Lord
increase our faith, Luke 17.5. If you are ignorant, pray him to open your
understandings, Luke 24.45. If your hearts grow cold, go to him by faith, till
he shed abroad the love of God upon your hearts, Romans 5.3, 4. For o^ his
fullness it is that we must receive grace for grace, J^hn 1.16.

Direct. 14. Let the ^hief and most diligent work of your faith in Christ be,
to inflame your hearts with love to God, as his Goodness and Love is revealed
to us in Christ.

Faith kindling Love, and working by it, is the whole sum of Christianity, of
which before.

Direct. 15. Let Faith keep the example of Christ continually before your eyes*
especially in those parts of it, which he intended for the contradicting and
healing of our greatest sins.

Above all others, these things seem purposely and specially chosen in the life
of Christ, for the condemning and curing of our sins; and therefore are
principally to be observed by faith.

1. His wonderful Love to God, to his Elect, and to his enemies: expressed in
so strange an undertaking, and in his sufferings, and in his abundant grace,
which must teach us, what fervours of love to God and man, to friends and
enemies must dwell and have dominion in us, 1 John 4.10. Rev. 1.5. Romans 5.8,
10. John 13.34, 35. and 15.13. 1 John 3.14.23.17. and 4.7, 8, 20, 21.

2. His full obedience to his Fathers will, upon the dearest rates or terms: To
teach us that no labor or cost should seem too great to us in our obeying the
will of God; nor any thing seem to us of so much value, as to be a price great
enough to hire us to commit any wilful sin, Romans 5.19. Heb. 5 8. Phil. 2 8. 1 Samuel 15.22. 2 Cor. 10.5, 6. Heb. 5 9. John 14.15. and 15.10. 1 John 2.3. and
3.22. and 5.2, 3. Rev. 22.14.

3. His wonderful contempt of all the Riches, and Greatness of the world, and
all the pleasures of the flesh, and all the honor which is of man, which he
showed in his taking the form of a servant, and making himself of no
reputation, and living a mean inferior life: He came not to be served (or
ministered to) but to serve: Not to live in state with abundance of attendants;
with provisions for every turn and use, which pride, curiosity, or carnal
imagination, takes for a convenience, or a decency, no nor a necessity: But he
came to be as a servant unto others; not as despising his liberty, but as
exercising his voluntary humility and love: He that was Lord of all for our
sakes, became poor to make us rich: He lived in lowliness and meekness: He
submitted to the greatest scorn of sinners; and even to the false accusations
and imputations of most odious sin in it self, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 12.1,
2, 3. Matthew. 26.55, 60, 61, 63, 66. and 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Matthew. 11.29, 30.
and 20.28. 2 Cor. 8.9. which was to teach us to see the vanity of the wealth
and honors of the world, and to despise the Idol of the ungodly, and to lay
that under our feet, which is nearest to their heart; and to be able without
impatiency, to be scorned, spit upon, buffeted and abused; to be poor, and of
no reputation among men; and though not to enslave our selves to any (but if we
can be free to use it rather, 1 Cor. 7.21.) yet to be the loving and voluntary
servants of as many as we can to do them good; and not to desire to have a
great retinue, and to be such voluntary burdens to the world, as to be served
by many, while we serve none; as if we (who are taught by Christ and Nature,
that it is more honorable to give than to receive, and to be helpful unto
many, than to need the help of many) would declare our impotency to be so
great, that (when every poor man can serve himself and others) we are (and had
rather be) so indigent, as not to live and help our selves, without the help of
many servants: yea scarce to undress and dress our selves, or to do any thing
which another can do for us, Only such persons are willing to eat, and drink,
and sleep for themselves, and to play, and laugh, and to sin for themselves;
but as to any thing that is good and useful, without their present sensitive
delight, they are not only unserviceable to the world, but would live like the
lame or dead, that must be moved and carried about by others. Among Christ's
servants, he that is the chief, must be the chief in service, even as a servant
unto all, Luke 22.26. Matthew. 23.11. And all by love must serve one another,
Gal. 5.13.

4. His submission unto death, and conquest of the natural love of life, for a
greater good, even the pleasing of God, and the Crown of Glory, and the good of
many in their salvation: To teach us that not only the pleasures of life, but
life it self must be willingly laid down, when any of these three ends require
it, Matthew. 20.28. John 10 11. and 15.13. 1 John 3.16. Joh. 10.17. Acts 20.24.
Matthew. 10.39. and 16.25. Mark 14.26. Phil. 2.30. 1 John 3.16. Rev. 12.11.

Direct. 16. Let Faith behold Christ in his relation to his universal Church,
and not unto your selves alone.

1. Because else you overlook his most honorable relation: It is more his
glory to be the Churches Head and Savior, than yours, Ephesians. 5.23. and 1.21,
22. And 2. You else overlook his chief design and work; which is for the
perfecting and saving of his body, Ephesians. 1.23. Col. 1.24.18. And 3. Else you
overlook the chief part of your own duty, and of your conformity to Christ,
which is in loving and edifying the body, Ephesians. 4.12, 16, Whereas if you see
Christ as the undivided and impartial Head of all Saints, you will see also all
Saints as dear to him, and as united in him; and you will have communion by
faith with them in him; and you will love them all, and pray for all, and
desire a part in the prayers of all (instead of carping at their different
indifferent manner, and forms, and words of prayer, and running away from them,
to show that you disown them.) And you will have a tender care of the unity,
and honor, and prosperity of the Church, and regard the welfare of particular
Brethren as your own, 1 Cor. 12. throughout, John 13.14, 34. and 15.12, 17.
Romans 13.8. stooping to the lowest service to one another, if it were the
washing of the feet; and in honor preferring one another, Romans 12.10. Not
judging nor despising, nor persecuting, but receiving and forbearing one
another, Romans 14. throughout, and 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8. Gal. 5.13. and 6.1, 2,
3. Ephesians. 4.2, 32. Col. 3.13. Edifying, exhorting, and seeking the saving of
one other, 1 These. 5.11. and 4.9, 18. Heb. 3.13. and 10.24. Not speaking evil
one of another, James 4.11. Much less biting and devouring one another, Gal.
5.15. But having compassion one of another, as those that are members one of
another, 1 Pet. 3.8. Romans 12.5.

Direct. 17. Make all your opposition to the temptations of Satan, the world
and the flesh, by the exercise of Faith in Christ.

From him you must have your weapons, skill and strength. It is the great work
of Faith, to militate under him, as the Captain of our salvation; and by virtue
of his precepts, example and Spirit to overcome as he has overcome. Of which
more anon.

Direct. 18. Death also must be entertained and conquered by Faith in Christ.

We must see it as already conquered by him, and entertain it as the passage to
him: This also will be after spoken to.

Direct. 19. Faith must believe in Christ as our Judge, to give us our final
Justification, and sentence us to endless life, Romans 14.9, 10. John 5.22, 24,
25.

Direct. 20. Lastly, Faith must see Christ as preparing us a place in Heaven,
and possessing it for us, and ready to receive us to himself. But all this I
only name, because it will fall in in the last Chapters.

CHAP. III. Directions to live by Faith on the Holy Ghost.
THis is not the least part of the life of Faith. If the Spirit give us Faith
it self, then Faith has certainly its proper work to do toward that Spirit
which gives it: And if the Spirit be the worker of all other grace, and Faith
be the means on our part, then Faith has somewhat to do with the Holy Ghost
herein. The best way that I can take in helping you to believe aright in the
Holy Ghost, will be by opening the true sense of this great Article of our
Faith to you, that by understanding the matter aright, you may know what you
are here both to do, and to expect.

Direct. 1. The name of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God, is used in Scripture
for the third person in the Trinity as constitutive, and as the third
perfective principle of operation; and most usually as operating ad extra, by
communication. And therefore many Fathers, and ancient Divines and Schoolmen,
say. That the Holy Ghost, the third person and principle is THE LOVE OF GOD;
which as it is Gods Love of himself, is a constitutive person or principle in
the Trinity; but as it is pregnant and productive, it is the third principle of
operation ad extra; and so that it is taken usually, for the pregnant,
operative Love of God.

And thus they suppose that the Divine POWER, INTELLECT and WILL (or Wisdom and
Love) are the three constitutive persons in themselves, and the three
principles of operation ad extra. To this purpose writes Origin, Ambrose and
Richardus the Schoolman; but plainlier and fullier Damascene and Bernard, and
Edmundus Cantuariensis, and Potho Prumensis cited by me in my Reasons of the
Christian Religion, page 372, 373, 374. Augustine only puts Memory for
Power, by which yet Campanella thinks he meant Power, (Metaphys. par. 2. l.
6. c. 12. art. 4. page 88.) what Caesarius and many other say de triplici
lumine, I pass by: The Lux Radii and Lumen, are thought a fit similitude by
many. But the Motion, Light and Heat, is a plain impression of the Trinity on
that noble element of fire. That holy man Ephraem Syrus in his Testament uses
the phrase (in his adjuration of his Disciples, and the protestation of his own
stedfastness in the doctrine of the Trinity against all Heresies) [ By that
three-named fire of the most holy Trinity] (or Divine Majesty as another Copy
has it) [ And by that infinite and sole, one Power of God; and by those three
subsistences of the intelligible (or intellectual) fire.] And as it is a most
great and certain truth, that this sacred Trinity of Divine Principles, have
made their impress communicatively upon the frame of nature, and most evidently
on the noblest parts, which are in excellency nearest their Creator; so it is
evident that in the creatures LOVE is the pregnant communicative principle: So
is Natural Love in Generation and friendly Love in benefiting others; and
spiritual Love, in propagating knowledge and grace, for the winning of souls.

What I said of the Scripture use of the word is found in 1 John 5.5, 6, 7, 8.
Heb. 9.14. 1 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. Romans 1.4. John 1.32, 33. and 3.5, 34. and 6.63.
Genesis 1.2. Job 33.4. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. Luke 4.18. Micah 3.8. Isa. 11.2. and 61.1.

Direct. 2. The more excellent measure of the Spirit given by Christ after his
ascension to the Gospel Church, is to be distinguished from that which was
before communicated; and this Spirit of Christ is it which our Christian Faith
has special respect to.

Without the Spirit of God, as the perfective principle, nature would not have
been nature, Genesis 1.2. All things would not have been good, and very good, but
by the communication of goodness: And without somewhat of that Spirit, there
would be no Moral Goodness in any of mankind: And without some special
operations of that Spirit, the godly before Christ's coming in the flesh, would
not have been godly, nor in any present capacity of glory: Therefore there was
some gift of the Spirit before.

But yet there was an eminent gift of the Spirit proper to the Gospel times,
which the former ages did not know; which is so much above the former gift,
that it is sufficient to prove the Verity of Christ.

For 1. There was use for the special attestation of the Father by way of
Power, by Miracles, and his Resurrection to own his Son. 2. The Wisdom and Word
of God incarnate, must needs bring a special measure of Wisdom to his
Disciples; and therefore give a greater measure of the Spirit for illumination.
3. The design of Redemption being the revelation of the Love of God, and the
recovery of our Love to him, there must needs be a special measure of the
Spirit of Love shed abroad upon our hearts. And in all these three respects,
the Spirit was accordingly communicated.

Quest. Was it not the Spirit of Christ which was in the Prophets, and in all
the godly before Christ's coming?

Answ. The Spirit of Christ is either that measure of the Spirit, which was
given after the first Covenant of Grace, as it differs from the state of man
in innocence, and from the state of man in his Apostasy and condemnation: And
thus it was the Spirit of Christ which was then given, so far as it was the
Covenant and Grace of Christ, by which men were then saved. But there was a
fuller Covenant to be made after his coming, and a fuller measure of Grace to
be given, and a full attestation of God for the establishment and promulgation
of this Covenant: And accordingly a fuller and special gift of the Spirit. And
this is called The Spirit of Christ, in the peculiar Gospel sense.

Quest. How is it said, Joh. 7.37. that the Holy Ghost was not yet given,
because Christ was not yet glorified?

Answ. It is meant of this special measure of the Spirit, which was to be
Christ's special witness and agent in the world. They had before that measure of
true grace, which was necessary to the salvation of Believers, before the
Incarnation and Resurrection of Christ, (which was the Spirit of Christ, as the
Light before Sunrising is the Light of the Sun;) and if they died in that
case, they would have been saved: But they had not the signal Spirit of the
Gospel, settled and resident with them, but only some little taste of it for
casting out Devils, and for Cures, at that time when Christ sent them by a
special mission to preach, and gave them a sudden special gift, Luke 9.1. and
10.17.

Quest. How is it said of those baptized Believers, Acts 19. that they had not
heard that there was a Holy Ghost?

Answ. It is meant of this eminent Gospel gift of the Holy Ghost, as he is the
great Witness and Agent of Christ; and not of all the graces of the Holy Ghost?

Quest. Was it before necessary to have an explicit belief in the Holy Ghost
as the third person in the blessed Trinity, and as the third principle of the
divine operations, and were the faithful then in Covenant with him?

Answ. Distinguish between the Person and the Name: No Name is necessary to
salvation; else none could be saved but men of one language: To believe in the
Holy Ghost under that Name, was not necessary to salvation (nor yet is) for he
that speaks and hears of him in Greek, or Latin, or Sclavonian, etc. may
be saved, though he never learnt the English tongue: But to believe in the
Energetical, or operative, or communicative Love of God, was always necessary
to salvation, considered in the thing, and not only in the Name: As it was to
believe in his Power and his Wisdom: And to believe which is the first, and
which the second, and which the third, is not yet of absolute necessity to
salvation; while they are coequal and coessential; and it was necessary to the
Jews to believe, that this Love of God did operate, and was communicated to the
faithful, not upon the terms of innocence, according to the first Covenant; but
to sinners that deserved death, and upon terms of mercy, through the Covenant
of Grace, which was made with lapsed man in order to his recovery, through a
Redeemer.

Direct. 3. All that is efficiently necessary to our salvation, in or of God,
is not objectively necessary to be known. And such a measure of the knowledge
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is necessary to save us, as is necessary
objectively to sanctify us under the efficiency of the said Spirit: And all
the rest is not of such necessity. And therefore as under the Gospel, the
Spirit is Christ's great Witness, as well as Agent in the world, it is more
necessary now to believe distinctly in the Holy Ghost in that relation, than it
was before Christ's coming in the flesh.

There is a great deal of the Divine Perfection, which causes our salvation,
unknown to us: As the Sun will shine upon us, and the wind will blow, and the
rain will fall, and the earth will bear fruits, whether we know it or not; so
our knowledge of it, is not at all necessary to any Divine Efficiency as such:
The Spirit by which we are regenerate, is like the wind that blows, whose
sound we hear, but know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes (no nor what
it is) John 3.6, 7, 8, 9. But all those things which are necessary to work
objectively and morally on the soul, do work in esse cognito; and the knowledge
of them is as necessary as the operation is. It was of absolute necessity to
the salvation of all, before Christ's coming, and among the Gentiles as well as
the Jews, that the Spirit should sanctify them to God, by possessing them with
a predominant Love of him in his Goodness; and that this Spirit proceed from
the Son or Wisdom of God: But it was not so necessary to them as it is now to
us, to have a distinct knowledge of the personality and operations of the
Spirit, and of the Son. And though now it is certain that Christ is the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, and no man comes to the Father, but by the Son, Joh.
14.6. Yet that knowledge of him, which is necessary to them that hear the
Gospel, is not all necessary to them that never hear it; though the same
efficiency on his part be necessary: And so it is about the knowledge of the
Holy Ghost* without which Christ cannot be sufficiently now known, and rightly
believed in.

Direct. 4. The presence or operation of the Spirit of God is casually the
spiritual Life of man, in his holiness: As there is no natural Being but by
influence from his Being; so no Life but by communication from his Life, and no
Light but from his Light, and no Love or Goodness, but from his Spirit of Love.

It is therefore a vain conceit of them, that think man in innocence had not
the Spirit of God: They that say, his natural rectitude was instead of the
Spirit, do but say, and unsay: for his natural rectitude was the effect of the
influx or communication of Gods Spirit: And he could have no moral rectitude
without it; as there can be no effect without the chief cause: The nature of
Love and Holiness cannot subsist, but in dependence on the Love and Holiness of
God: And those Papists who talk of man's state first in pure naturals, and an
after donation of the Spirit, must mean by pure naturals, man in his mere
essentials, not really, but notionally by abstraction distinguished, from the
same man at the same instant as a Saint; or else they speak unsoundly: For God
made man in moral dispositive goodness at the first; and the same Love or
Spirit, which did first make him so, was necessary after to continue him so. It
was never his nature to be a prime good, or to be good independently without
the influence of the prime good, Isa. 44.3. Ezekiel. 36.27. Job 26.13. Psalm.
51.10, 12. and 143.10. Prove. 20.27. Mal. 2.15. John 3.5, 6. and 6.63. and 7.39.
Romans 8.1, 5, 6* 9, 13, 16. 1 Cor. 6.11. and 2.11, 12. and 6.17. and 12.11, 13.
and 15.45. 2 Cor. 3.3, 17. Ephesians. 2.18, 22. and 3.16. and 5.9. Col. 1.8. Jude
19.

Direct. 5. The Spirit of God, and the Holiness of the soul may be lost,
without the destruction of our essence, or species of humane nature* and may be
restored without making us specifically other things.

That influence of the Spirit which gives us the faculty of a Rational
Appetite or Will, inclined to good as good, cannot cease, but our humanity or
Being would cease: But that influence of the Spirit, which causes our
adherence to God by Love, may cease, without the cessation of our Beings; as
our health may be lost, while our life continues, Psalm. 51.10. 1 These. 5.19.

Direct. 6. The greatest mercy in this world, is the gift of the Spirit, and
the greatest misery is to be deprived of the Spirit; and both these are done to
man by God, as a Governor, by way of reward and punishment oft-times:
Therefore the greatest reward to be observed in this world, is the increase of
the Spirit upon us, and the greatest punishment in this world is the denying or
withholding of the Spirit.

It is therefore a great part of a Christians wisdom and work, to observe the
accesses and assistances of the Spirit, and its withdrawings; and to take more
notice to God in his thankfulness of the gift of the Spirit, than of all other
benefits in this world: And to lament more the retiring or withholding of Gods
Spirit, than all the calamities in the world: And to fear this more as a
punishment of his sin: Lest God should say as Psalm. 81.11, 12. But my people
would not hearken to my voice, Israel would none of me: so I gave them up to
their own hearts lusts, to walk in their own counsels: And we must obey God
through the motive of this promise and reward, Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my
reproof; behold, I will power out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my
words to you, Joh. 7.39 He spoke this of the Spirit, which they that believe on
him should receive, Luke 11.13. God will give his holy Spirit to them that ask
it. And we have great cause when we have sinned, to pray with David, Cast me
not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Create in me
a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit in me. Restore to me the joy of
thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51.10, 11, 12. And
as the sin to be feared is the grieving of the holy Spirit, Ephesians 4.30. so the
judgment to be feared, is accordingly the withdrawing of it, Isaiah 63.10, 11.
But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit; therefore he was turned to be
their enemy, and fought against them. Then he remembered the days of old, Moses
and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them up -- Where is he that
put his holy Spirit within them? The great thing to be dreaded, is, lest [
those that were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost -- should fall away, and be no more
renewed by repentance -- Heb. 6.4 6.

Direct. 7. Therefore executive pardon or justification cannot possibly be any
perfecter than sanctification is: Because no sin is further forgiven, or the
person justified executively, than the punishment is taken off: and the
privation of the Spirit, being the great punishment, the giving of it, is the
great executive remission in this life.

But of this more in the Chapter of Justification following.

Direct. 8. The three great operations in m^n, which each of the three persons
in the Trinity eminently perform, are, Natura, Medicina, salus; the first by
the Creator, the second by the Redeemer, the third by the Sanctifier.

Commonly it is called Nature, Grace and Glory: But either the terms [ Grace
and Glory] must be plainlier expounded, or that distribution is not sound: If
by Grace be meant all the extrinsick medicinal preparations made by Christ; and
if by [ Glory] be meant only the Holiness of the soul, the sense is good: But
in common use those words are otherwise understood. Sanctification is usually
ascribed to the Holy Ghost: but Glorification in Heaven, is the perfective
effect of all the three persons in our state of perfect union with God, Romans
15.16. Titus 3.5, 6. But yet in the work of Sanctification it self, the Trinity
undividedly concur: And so in the sanctifying and raising the Church, the
Apostle distinctly calls the act of the Father, by the name of Operation; and
the work of the Son by the name of Administration, and the part of the Holy
Ghost by the name of Gifts, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. And in respect to these
sanctifying Operations of God, ad extra, the same Apostle distributeth them
thus, 2 Cor. 13.14. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God,
and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all: Where by God, seems to
be meant all the persons in the Trinity in their perfection; but especially the
Father as the Fountain of Love, and as expressing Love by the Son and the
Spirit; and by the Grace of Christ, is meant all that gracious provision he
has made for man's salvation, and the Relative application of it, by his
intercession, together with his mission of the holy Spirit. And by the
Communion of the Spirit is meant that actual communication of Life, Light and
Love to the soul it self, which is eminently ascribed to the Spirit.

Direct. 9. The Spirit it self is given to true Believers, and not only grace
from the Spirit.

Not that the Essence of God, or the person of the Holy Ghost, is capable of
being contained in any place, or removing to or from a place, by local motion:
But 1. The Holy Ghost is given to us Relatively, as our Covenanting Sanctifier
in the Baptismal Covenant: We have a Covenant-right to him, that is, to his
operations. 2. And the Spirit it self is present as the immediate Operator; not
so immediate as to be without Means, but so immediately as to be no distant
Agent, but by proximate attingency, not only ratione virtutis, but also ratione
suppositi, performs his operations: If you say, so he is present every where;
I answer, but he is not a present Operator every where alike. We are called the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, both because he builds us up for so holy a use,
and because he also dwells in us, 1 Cor. 6.19.

Direct. 10. By the sanctification commonly ascribed to the Holy Ghost, is
meant that recovery of the soul to God, from whom it is fallen, which
consists in our primitive Holiness, or devotedness to God, but summarily in
the Love of God, as God.

Direct. 11. And Faith in Christ is often placed as before it, not as if the
Spirit were no cause of Faith, nor as if Faith were no part of our saving
special grace; nor as if any had saving Faith before they had Love to God; but
because as Christ is the Mediator and way to the Father; so Faith in him is
but a mediate grace to bring us up to the Love of God, which is the final
perfective grace: And because, though they are inseparably complicate, yet some
acts of Faith go before our special Love to God in order of nature, though some
others follow after it, or go with it.

It is a question which seems very difficult to many, whether Love to God, or
Faith in Christ must go first (whether in time or order of nature.) For if we
say that Faith in Christ must go first, then it seems that we take not Faith
or Christ as a Means to bring us to God as our End; for our End is Deus amatus,
God as beloved; and to make God our End, and to love him, are inseparable. We
first love the good which appears to us, and then we choose and use the Means
to attain it; and in so doing we make that our End which we did love; so that
it is the first loved for it self, and then made our End. Now if Christ be not
used as a Means to God, or as our Vltimate End, then he is not believed in, or
used as Christ, and therefore it is no true Faith: And that which has not the
true End, is not the true act or grace in question, nor can that be any special
grace at all, which has not God for his Vltimate End: On both which accounts,
it can be no true Faith: The intentio finis, being before the choice or use of
means, though the assecution be after.

And yet on the other side, if God be loved as our End, before we believe in
Christ as the means, then we are sanctified before we believe. And then faith
in Christ is not the Means of our first special Love to God. And the
consequents on both parts are intolerable; and how are they to be avoided?

Consider here 1. You must distinguish betwixt the assenting or knowing act of
faith, and the consenting or choosing act of it in the will. 2. And between
Christ as he is a Means of Gods choosing and using, and as he is a means of our
choosing and using. And so I answer the case in these Propositions.

1. The knowledge of a Deity is supposed before the knowledge of Christ as a
Mediator: For no man can believe that he is a Teacher sent of God, nor a
Mediator between us and God, nor a Sacrifice to appease Gods wrath, who does
not believe first that there is a God.

2. In this belief or knowledge of God, is contained the knowledge of his
Essential Power, Wisdom and Goodness; and that he is our Creator and Governor,
and that we have broken his Laws, and that we are obnoxious to his Justice, and
deserve punishment for our sins. All this is to be known before we believe in
Christ as the Mediator.

3. Yet where Christianity is the Religion of the Country, it is Christ himself
by his Word and Ministers, who teaches us these things concerning God; But it
is not Christ as a Means chosen or used by us, to bring us to the Love of God;
(for no man can choose or use a Means for an End not yet known or intended:) but
it is Christ as a Means chosen and used by God, to bring home sinners to
himself: (even as his dying for us on the Cross was.)

4. The soul that knows all this concerning God, cannot yet love him
savingly, both because he wants the Spirit to effect it, and because a holy
sin-hating God, engaged in Justice to damn the sinner, is not such an object,
as a guilty soul can love: but it must be a loving and reconciled God that is
willing to forgive.

5. When Christ by his Word and Ministers has taught a sinner both what God is
in himself, and what he is to us, and what we have deserved, and what our case
is; and then has taught him, what he himself is as to his person and his
office, and what he has done to reconcile us to God, and how far God is
reconciled hereupon, and what a common conditional pardoning Covenant, he has
made and offers to all, and what he will be and do to those that do come in,
the belief of all this serio^sly (by the assenting act of the understanding) is
the first part of saving Faith, going in nature before both the Love of God,
and the consenting act of the Will to the Redeemer. (And yet perhaps the same
acts of faith in an uneffectual superficial measure, may go long before this in
many.)

6. In this assent our belief in God, and in the Mediator, are conjunct in
time and nature; they being Relatives here as the objects of our faith. It is
not possible to believe in Christ as the Mediator, who has propitiated God to
us, before we believe that God is propitiated by the Mediator; nor vice versa:
Indeed there is a difference in order of dignity and desirableness; God as
propitiated being represented to us as the End, and the Propitiator, but as the
Means: But as to the order of our apprehension or believing, there can be no
difference at all, no more than in the order of knowing the Father and the Son,
the Husband and Wife, the King and subjects: These Relatives are simul natura
and tempore.

7. This assenting act of Faith, by which at once we believe Christ to be the
Propitiator, and God to be propitiated by him, is not the belief that my sins
are actually pardoned, and my soul actually reconciled and justified; but it
includes the belief of the history of Christ's satisfaction, and of the common
conditional Covenant of Promise and Offer from God, viz. that God is so far
reconciled by the Mediator, as that he will forgive, and justify, and
glorify all that Repent and Believe, that is, that return to God by faith in
Christ; and offers this mercy to all, and entreats them to accept it, and
will condemn none of them but those that finally reject i^. (...) things are of
God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us
the Ministry of reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them; and has committed
to us the word of reconciliation: Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. So that it is at once the belief of
the Father as reconciled, and the Son as the Reconcil^r, and that according to
the tenor of the common conditional Covenant, which is the first assenting
part of saving Faith.

8. This same Covenant which reveals God as thus far reconciled by Christ,
does offer him to be further actualy and fully reconciled, and to justify and
glorify us, that is, to forgive, accept, and love us perfectly for ever. And
it offers us Christ to be our actual Head and Mediator, to procure and give
us all this mercy, by communicating the benefits which he has purchased
according to his Covenant-terms: so that as before the Father and the Son were
revealed to our assent together; so here they are offered to the Will together.

9. In this offer, God is offered as the End, and Christ as Mediator is
offered as the Means; therefore the act of the Will to God, which is here
required, is simple Love of complacency (with subjection, which is a consent to
obey) but the act of the Will to Christ, is called choice or consent, though
there be in it Amor Medii, the Love of that Means for its aptitude as to the
end.

10. This Love of God as the End and Consent to Christ as the Means, being not
acts of the Intellect, but of the Will, cannot be the first acts of Faith, but
do presuppose the first assenting acts.

11. But the assenting act of Faith, does cause these acts of the Will to God
and the Mediator. Because we believe the Truth and Goodness, we Consent and
Love.

12. Both these acts of the Will are caused by assent at one time, without the
least distance.

13. But here is a difference in order of Nature, because we will God as the
End, and for himself; and therefore first in the natural order of intention;
and we will Christ as the Means for that End, and therefore but secondarily.
Though in the Intellects apprehension and assent* there be no such difference;
because in the Truth, which is the Understandings object, there is no
d^fference, but only in the Goodness which is the Wills object: And as Goodness
it self is apprehended by the Understanding, ut vere bonum, there is only an
objective d^fference of dignity.)

14. Therefore as the Gospel revelation comes to us in a way of offer, promise
and covenant, so our Faith must act in a way of Acceptance and Covenanting with
God and the Redeemer and Sanctifier. And the Sacrament of Baptism is the
solemnizing of this Covenant on both parts. And till our hearts do consent to
the Baptismal Covenant of Grace, we are not Believers in a saving sense.

15. There is no distance of time between the Assent of Faith, and the first
true degree of Love and Consent: (Though an unsound Assent may go long before;
yet sound Assent does immediately produce Love and Consent;) and though a clear
and full resolved degree of consent may be some time afterward: And therefore
the soul may not at the first degree so well understand it self, as to be ready
for an open covenanting)

16. This being the true order of the work of Faith and Love, the case now
lies plain before those that can observe things distinctly, and take not up
with confused knowledge. (And no other are fit to meddle with such cases) viz
that the knowing or assenting acts of faith in God as reconciled (so far) and
in Christ as the reconciler, so far as to give out the offer or Covenant of
Grace, are both at once, and both go before the acts of the will, as the cause
before the immediate effect; and that this assent first in order of nature (but
at once in time) causes the will to love God as our End, and to consent to,
and choose Christ in heart-covenant as the means, and so in our covenant we give
up our selves to both: And that this Repentance and Love to God, which are both
one work called conversion, of turning from the creature to God, the one as
denominated from the terminus a quo, viz. (Repentance) the other from the
terminus ad quem (viz. Love) are twisted at once with true saving Faith. And
that Christ as the means used by God is our first Teacher, and brings us to
assent: And then that assent brings us to take God for our End, and Christ
for the Means of our actual Justification and Glory; so that Christ is not by
Faith chosen and used by us under the notion of a M^diatour or Means to our
first act of love and consent; but is a Means to that of the Fathers choosing
only; but is in that first consent chosen by us for the standing means of our
Justification and Glory, and of all our following exercise and increase of love
to God, and our sanctification; so that it is only the assenting act of faith,
and not the electing act, which is the efficient cause of o^ very first act of
Love to God, and of our first degree of sanctification; and thus it is that
Faith is called the seed and mother grace: But it is not that saving Faith
which is our Christianity, and the condition of Justification and of Glory,
till it come up to a covenant-consent of heart, and take in the foresaid acts
of Repentance and Love to God as our God and ultimate end.

The observation of many written mistakes about the order of the work of grace,
and the ill and contentious consequents that have followed them, has made me
think that this true and accurate decision of this case, is not unuseful or
unnecessary.

Direct. 12. The Holy Ghost so far concurred with the eternal Word, in our
Redemption, that he was the perfecting Operator, in the Conception, the
Holiness, the Miracles, the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Of his Conception it is said, Mat. 1.20. For that which is conceived in her,
is of the Holy Ghost. And verse. 18. She was found with child of the Holy Ghost.
And of his holy perfection, as it is said, Luke 2.52. that he increased in
wisdom, and stature, and favor with God and men, (meaning those positive
perfections of his humane nature (which were to grow up with nature it self,
and not the supply of any culpable or privative defects) so when he was
baptized, the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him, Luke
3.22. And Luke 4.1. it is said, Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, etc. Isa.
11.2. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding; the Spirit of counsel and might; the Spirit of knowledge, and
the fear of the Lord, and shall make him quick of understanding in the fear of
the Lord, etc. Joh. 3.34. For God gives not the Spirit by measure to him, Acts
1.2. After that he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments to the
Apostles whom he had chosen, Romans 1.4. And was declared to be the Son of God,
with power, according to the Spirit of Holiness (that is, the Holy Spirit) by
the resurrection from the dead, Mat. 12.28. If I cast out Devils by the Spirit
of God, etc. Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me; because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal, etc.
Isa. 61.1.

In all this you see how great the work of the Holy Spirit was upon Christ
himself, to fit his humane nature for the work of our redemption, and actuate
him in it; though it was the Word only which was made flesh, and dwelt among
us, John 1.3.

Direct. 13. Christ was thus filled with the Spirit, to be the Head or
quickening Spirit to his body: and accordingly to fit each member for its
peculiar office: And therefore the Spirit now given is called the Spirit of
Christ, as communicated by him.

Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of hi^,
Joh. 7.37. This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe should receive,
viz. it is the water of life, which Christ will give them. 1 Cor. 15.45. The
last Adam was made a quickening Spirit, Gal. 4.6. God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father, Phil. 1.19.
Through the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. See also Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and
3.17, 18, 19. and 2.18, 22. and 4.3, 12, 16. 1 Cor. 12, etc.

Direct. 14. The greatest extraordinary measure of the Spirit, was given by him
to his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, to be the seal of his own truth
and power, and to fit them to found the first Churches, and to convince
unbelievers, and to deliver his will on record in the Scriptures, infallibly to
the Church for future times.

It would be tedious to cite the proofs of this, they are so numerous; take but
a few, Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you (that is the commission) Mark 16.17. And these signs shall follow
them that believe, etc. Joh. 20.22. Receive ye the Holy Ghost, etc. 14.26. But
the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he will
teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I
have said unto you, Joh. 16.13. When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide
you into all Truth, etc. Heb. 2.4. God also bearing them witness, both with
signs, and w^nders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will.

Direct. 15. And as such gifts of the Spirit was given to the Apostles as their
^ffice required; so th^se sanctifying graces, or that spiritual Life, Light and
Love, are given by it to all true Christians, which their calling and salvation
does require.

John 3.5, 6. Except a man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that
which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, Heb. 12.14. Without holiness none shall
see God, Romans 8.8, 9, 10, 14. They that are in the flesh cannot please God: But
ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God
dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
See also v. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 7, etc. Titus 3.5, 6, 7. He saved us by the washing
of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior; that being justified by his
grace, we should be made heirs, according to the hope of eternal life. But the
testimonies of th^s truth are more numerous than I may recite.

Direct. 16. By all this it appears that the Holy Ghost is both Christ's great
witness objectively in the world, by which it is that he is owned of God, and
proved to be true; and also his Advocate or great Agent in the Church, both to
indite the Scriptures, and to sanctify souls.

So that no man can be a Christian indeed, without these three: 1. The
objective witness of the Spirit to the truth of Christ. 2. The Gospel taught by
the Spirit in the Apostles. 3. And the quickening, illuminating and sanctifying
work of the Spirit upon their souls.

Direct. 17. It is therefore in these respects that we are baptiz^d into the
Name of the Holy Ghost, as well as of the Father and the Son, it being his work
to make us thus both Believers and Saints; and his perfective work of our real
Sanctification, being as necessary to us as our Redemption or Creation, Matthew.
28.19, 2^. Heb. 6.1, 2, 4, 5, 6.

Direct. 18. Therefore as every Christian must look upon himself, as being in
special Covenant with the Holy Ghost, so be must understand distinctly what are
the benefits, and what are the conditions, and what are the duties of that part
of his Covenant.

The special Benefits are the Life, Light and Love before mentioned, by the
quickening illumination and sanctification of the Spirit; not as in the first
Act or Seed; for so they are presupposed in that Faith and Repentance which is
the Condition. But as in the following acts and habits, and increase of both,
unto perfection, Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the
Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins; and ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost; for the promise is to you and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, and to as many as the Lord our God shall call. See Acts
26.18. Ephesians. 1.18, 19. Titus 3.5, 6, 7.

The special condition on our parts, is our consent to the whole Covenant of
Grace* viz. To give up our selves to God as our Reconciled God and Father in
Christ, and to Jesus Christ as our Savior, and to the holy Spirit as to his
Agent, and our Sanctifier. There needs no other proof of this, than actual
Baptism as celebrated in the Church from Christ's days till now. And the
institution of it, Mat. 28.19. with 1 John 5.7, 8, 9. and 1 Pet. 3.21. with
John 3.5.

The special Duties afterward to be performed, have their rewards as aforesaid,
and the neglect of them their penalties; and therefore have the nature of a
Condition as of those particular rewards or benefits.

Direct. 19. The Duties which our Covenant with the Holy Ghost does bind us to,
are 1. Faithfully to endeavor by the power and help which he gives us, to
continue our consent to all the foresaid Covenant: And 2. To obey his further
motions, for the work of Obedience and Love: 3. And to use Christ's appointed
means with which his Spirit works: And 4. To forbear those wilful sins which
grieve the Spirit.

John 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you. v. 7. If ye abide in me, and my words
abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. v. 9.
Continue in my love, Col. 1.23. If ye continue in the Faith, etc. Jude 21. Keep
your selves in the Love of God. Heb. 10.25, 26. Not forsaking the assembling of
your selves together, etc. For if we sin wilfully, etc. of how much sorer
punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has done despite to the Spirit of
grace, v. 29. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 4 3^. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, 1
These. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit.

Direct. 20. By this it is plain, that the Spirit works not on man as a dead
thing, which has no principle of activity in it self; nor as on a naturally
necessitated Agent, which has no self-determining faculty of will; but as on a
living free self-determining Agent, which has duty of its own to perform for
the attaining of the end desired.

Those therefore that upon the pretense of the Spirits doing all, and our doing
nothing without him, will lie idle, and not do their parts with him, and say
that they wait for the motions of the Spirit, and that our endeavors will not
further the end, do abuse the Spirit, and contradict themselves; seeing the
Spirits work is to stir us up to endeavor, which when we refuse to do, we
disobey and strive against the Spirit.

Direct. 21. Though sometimes the Spirit work so efficaciously, as certainly to
cause the volition, or other effect which it moves to; yet sometimes it so
moves, as procures not the effect, when yet it gave man all the power and
help which was necessary to the effect; because that man failed of that
endeavor of his own, which should have concurred to the effect, and which he
was able without more help to have performed.

That there is such effectual grace, Acts 9. and many Scriptures with our great
experience tell us. That there is such mere necessary uneffectual grace
possible, and sometime in being, (which some call sufficient grace) is
undeniable in the case of Adam; who sinned not for want of necessary grace,
without which he could not do otherwise. And to deny this, blotteth out all
Christianity and Religion at one dash.

By all which it appears, that the work of the Spirit is such on man's will,
as that sometimes the effect is suspended on our concurrence; so that though
the Spirit be the total cause of its own proper effect, and of the act of man,
in its own place and kind of action; yet not simply a total cause of man's act
or volition; but man's concurrence may be further required to it, and may fail.

Direct. 22. Satan transformeth himself often into an Angel of Light, to deceive
men by pretending to be the Spirit of God: Therefore the spirits must be tried,
and not every spirit trusted, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. Mat. 24.4, 5, 11, 24. 1 John
3.7. Ephesians. 4.14. Revel. 10.3 8. 2 These. 3.2. 1 John 4.1, 3, 6.

Direct. 23. The way of trying the spirits, is to try all their uncertain
suggestions, by the Rule of the certain Truths already revealed in Nature, and
in the holy Scriptures: And to try them by the Scriptures, is but to try the
spirits, by the Spirit: the doubtful spirit, by the undoubted Spirit, which
indicted and sealed the Scriptures more fully, than can be expected in any after
revelation, 1 These. 1.21. Isa. 8.16, 20. 2 Pet. 1.19. John 5.39. Acts 17.11.
The Spirit of God is never contrary to it self: Therefore nothing can be from
that Spirit, which is contrary to the Scriptures which the Spirit indicted.

Direct. 24. When you would have an increase of the Spirit, go to Christ for
it, by renewed acts of that same Faith, by which at first you obtained the
Spirit, Gal. 3.3, 4. Gal. 4.6.

Faith in Christ does two ways help us to the Spirit: 1. As it is that
Condition upon which he has promised it, to whom it belongs to give us the
Spirit. 2. As it is that act of the soul which is fitted in the nature of it,
to the work of the Spirit: That is, as it is the serious contemplation of the
infinite Goodness and Love of God, most brightly shining to us in the face of
the Redeemer: and as it is a serious contemplation of that heavenly glory
procured by Christ, which is the fullest expression of the Love of God: and so
is fittest to kindle that Love to God in the soul, which is the work of the
Spirit. These are joined, Romans 5.1, 2, 5, 6. Being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ* By whom also we have access by
Faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God
-- The Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is
given to us. For when we were without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly -- God commended his Love to us, that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us -- So Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Let Christ dwell in your hearts by
Faith, and it would help you to be rooted and grounded in Love, and to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height; and to know the Love of Christ which passes knowledge, and so to be
filled with the fullness of God. If Faith be the way to see Gods Love, and Faith
be the way thereby to raise our Love to God, then Faith in Christ must needs be
the continual instrument of the Spirit, or that means which we must still use
for the increase of the Spirit.

Direct. 25. The works of the Spirit, next to the excitation of Life, Light and
Love, do consist in the subduing of the lusts of the flesh, and of the power of
all the objects of sense which serve it. Therefore be sure that you faithfully
serve the Spirit in this mortifying work, and that you take not part with the
flesh against it.

A great part of our duty toward the Holy Ghost, does consist in this joining
with him, and obeying him in his strivings against the flesh: And therefore it
is that so many and earnest exhortations are used with us, to live after the
Spirit, and not after the flesh; and to mortify the lusts of the flesh, and
the deeds of it by the Spirit; especially in Romans 8.1. to the 16. and in Gal.
5. throughout. and Romans 6. and 7. and Col. 3. Ephesians. 5.

Direct. 26. Take not every striving for a victory, n^r every desire of grace,
to be true grace it self; unless grace be desired as it is the lovely Image of
God, and pleasing to him, and be desired before all earthly things; and unless
you not only strive against, but conquer the predominant love of every sin.

There are many uneffectual desires and strivings which consist with the
dominion of sin. Many a fornicator, and glutton, and drunkard, has earnest
wishes that he could leave his sin, when he thinks of the shame and
punishment; and has a great deal of striving against it before he yields:
But yet he lives in it still, because his love to it is the predominant part
in him, Romans 6.2. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?
Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into
his death -- We are buried with him by Baptism -- Knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin: For he that is dead, is freed from sin. --
V. 12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey
it in the lusts thereof. -- V. 13. Neither yield your members servants of
unrighteousness unto sin -- For sin shall not have dominion over you -- Know ye
not that to whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to
whom ye obey? whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness,
Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. See Gal. 5.16, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. V. 24. and 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his. And let every one that
names the Name of Christ, depart from iniquity.

Object. But it is said, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit -- so
that ye cannot do the things which ye would.

Answ. That is, every true Christian would fain be perfect in Holiness and
Obedience, but cannot, because of the lustings of the flesh: But it does not
say or mean, that any true Christian would live without wilful gross, or
reigning sin, and cannot; that he would live without murder, adultery, theft,
or any sin which is more loved than hated, but cannot. We cannot do all that we
would; but it does not follow that we can do nothing which we would, or cannot
sincerely obey the Gospel.

Object. Paul says, Romans 7.15, 18. To will is present with me; but how to
perform that which is good I find not: and what I would, that I do not.

Answ. The same answer will serve. To will perfect Obedience to all Gods Laws,
was present with Paul; but not to do it. He would be free from every infirmity,
but could not: (And therefore could not be justified by the Law of Works.) But
he never says, that he would obey sincerely, and could not; or that he would
live without heinous sin, and could not. Indeed in his flesh he says, there
dwells no good thing; but that denies not his spiritual power (who so often
proposes himself as an example to be imitated by those that he wrote to.)
Thousands are deceived about their state, by taking every un^ffectual desire
and wish, and every striving before they sin, to be a mark of saving grace:
misunderstanding Mr. Perkins, and some others with him, who make a desire of
grace, to be the grace it self, and a combat^ against the flesh, to be a sign
of the renovation by the Spirit; whereas they mean only, such a desire of grace
as grace for the Love of God, as is more powerful than any contrary desires;
and such a combating as conquereth gross (or mortal) sin, and striveth against
infirmities. And of this, this saying is very true.

Direct. 27. Strive with your hearts when the Spirit is striveing with you: and
take the season of its sp^cial help; and make one gale of grace advantageous to
another.

This is a great point of Christian wisdom: The help of the Spirit is not at
our command: take it while you have it. Use wind and tide before they cease.
God will not be a servant to our slothfulness and negligence. As he that will
not come to the Church at the hour when the Minister of Christ is there, but
say, I will come another time, will have none of his teaching there; so he that
will not take the Spirits time, but say, I am not now at leisure, may be left
without its help, and taught by sad experience to know, that it is fitter for
man to wait on God, than for God to wait on man. More may be done and got at
one hour, than at another, when we have no such help and motions.

Direct. 28. Be much in the contemplation of the heavenly Glory; for there are
the highest objects, and the greatest demonstrations of Gods Love and Goodness;
and therefore in such thoughts we are most likely to meet with the Spirit with
whose nature and design they are so agreeable.

We fall in with the heavenly Spirit in his own way, when we set our selves to
be most heavenly. Heavenly thoughts are the work which he would set you on; and
the Love of God is the thing which he works you to thereby: And nothing will so
powerfully inflame the soul with the Love of God, as to think that we shall
live in his Love and Glory for ever more. Set your selves therefore to this
work, and it will be a sign that the Spirit sets you on it; and you may be sure
that he will not be behind with you, in a work which both he and you must do.
To this sense the Apostle bids us, pray in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. Because
though prayer must be from the Spirit, which is not in our power; yet when we
set our selves to pray, it is both a sign that the Spirit exciteth, and a
certain proof that he will not be behind with us, but will afford us his
assistance.

Direct. 29. Conve^se with those who have most of the Spirit, as far as you can
attain it.

And that is not those that are most for revelations or visions, or that
pretend to extraordinary illuminations, or that set the Spirit against the
Word; or that boast most of the Spirit, in contempt of others: But those who
are most humble, most holy, and most heavenly; who love God most, and hate sin
most. Converse with such as have most of the Spirit (of love and heavenliness)
is the way to make you more spiritual; as converse with learned men is the way
to learning: For the Spirit gives his graces in the use of suitable means, as
well as he does his common gifts, Jude 20, 21. Heb. 10.24, 25. and 3.13. Ephesians.
4.12, 15, 16.

Direct. 30. Lastly, The right ordering of the body it self is a help to our
spirituality. A clean and a cheerful body is a fitter instrument for the Spirit
to make use of, than one that is oppressed with crudities, or dejected with heavy
melancholy. Therefore especially avoid two extremes: 1. The satisfying the
lusts of the flesh, and clogging the body with excess of meat or drink, or
corrupting the fantasy with foolish pleasures: 2. And the addicting your
selves to distracting melancholy, or to any disconsolate or discontented
thoughts.

And from hence you may both take notice of the sense of all that fasting and
abstinence which God commands us, and of the true measure of it, viz. as it
either fitteth or unfitteth the body for our duty, and for our ready obedience
to the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection, lest by any means when I have preached to others, I myself should
be a cast away. Romans 13.12, 13, 14. Let us walk honestly as in the day; not in
rioting and drunk^nness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envying; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the
flesh, for lust. Pampering the body, and addicting our selves to the pleasing
of it, turns a man from spirituality into bruitishness; and savouring or
minding the things of the flesh, destroys both the relish and minding of the
things of the Spirit, Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8. And a sour discontented melancholy
temper, is contrary to that alacrity requisite in Gods service; and to those
which the Comforter is to work in us.

So much for living by Faith on the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. IV. Directions how to exercise Faith upon Gods Commandments, for Duty.
IT being presupposed that your Faith is settled about the truth of the
Scriptures in general (by the means here before and elsewhere more at large
described) you are next to learn how to exercise the Life of Faith about the
Precepts of God in particular; and herein take these helps.

Direct. 1. Observe well how suitable Gods Commands are to reason, and
humanity, and natural revelation it self; and so how Nature and Scripture do
fully agree, in all the precepts for primitive holiness.

This is the cause why Divines have thought it so useful to read Heathen
Moralists themselves, that in a Cicero, a Plutarch, a Seneca, an Antonius, an
Epictetus, etc. they might see what testimony nature it self yields, against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. See Romans 19, 20, etc. But of this I
have been larger in my Reasons of the Christian Religion.

Direct. 2. Observe well how suitable all Gods Commandments are to your own
good, and how necessary to your own felicity.

All that God commands you, is, 1. To be active, and use the faculties of
your souls, in opposition to Idleness: 2. To use them rightly, and on the
highest objects, and not to debase them by preferring vanity and sordid things,
nor to pervert them by ill doing. And are not both these suitable to your
natural perfection, and necessary to your good?

1. If there were one Law made, that men should lie or stand still all the day,
with their eyes shut, and their ears stopped, and their mouths closed, and that
they should not stir, nor see, nor hear, nor taste; and another Law that man
should use their eyes, and ears, and limbs, etc. which of these were more
suitable to humanity, and more easy for a ^ound man to obey (though the first
might best suit with the lame, and blind, and sick) and why should not the
goodness of Gods Law be discerned, which requires men to use the higher
faculties, the Reason, and Elective, and Executive Powers, which God has given
them? If men should make a Law, that no one should use his Reason to get
Learning, or for his Trade or business in the world, you would think that it
were an institution of a Kingdom of Bedlams, or a herd of beasts: And should
not you then be required to use your Reason faithfully and diligently in
greater things?

2. And if one Law were made, that every man that traveleth shall stumble and
wallow in the dirt, and wander up and down out of his way; and that every man
that eats and drinks, should feed on dirt, and ditch-water, or poison, etc.
And another Law, that all men should keep their right way, and live soberly,
and feed healthfully; which of these would fit a wise man best, and be easiest
to obey? or if one Law were made, that all Scholars shall learn nothing but
lies and errors; and another, that they shall learn nothing but truth and
wisdom, which of them would be more easy and suitable to humanity? (Though the
first might be more pleasing to some fools.) Why then should not the goodness
of Gods Laws be confessed, who does but forbid men learning the most pernicious
errors, and wandering in the maze of folly, and wallowing in the dirt of
sensuality, and feeding on the dung and poison of sin? Is the love of a harlot,
or of gluttony, drunkennenss* rioting, or gaming, more suitable to humanity,
than the Love of God, and Heaven, and Holiness, of Wisdom, Temperance, and
doing good? To a Swine or a Bedlam it may be more suitable; but not to one that
lives like a man. What did God ever forbid you, that was not hurtful to you?
And what did he ever command you, which was not for your benefit? either for
your present delight, or for your future happiness; for the healing of your
diseases, or the preventing them?

And if Reason can discern the goodness of Gods Laws to us, Faith can
acknowledge it with more advantage. For we can see by Faith, the goodness of
their Author, and the goodness of the reward and end, more fully than by reason
only: And a Believer has found by sad experience, how bad and bitter the ways
of sin are; and by sweet experience, how good and pleasant the ways of God
are. He has found that it is the way to peace, and hope, and joy, to deny his
lusts, and obey his Maker and Redeemer: And it is the way to terror and a
troubled soul, and a broken heart, to sin and to gratify his sensuality, Prove.
3.17. All her ways are pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Psalm.
119.165. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing can offend them.
Psalm. 37 37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of that man
is peace. Romans 14.17. Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, are
the Kingdom of God. Grace, Mercy and Peace are Gods entertainment of the
faithful soul, Titus 1.4. 1 Timothy 1.2. and 2 Timothy 1.2. 1 Cor. 1.3, etc. But
there is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Isa. 57.21. and 48.22. For the
way of peace they have not known. They have made them (...) paths; whosoever
goes therein, shall not know peace, Isa. 54.8.

Direct. 3. Mark well how those Commands of God, which seem not necessary for
your selves, are plainly necessary for the good of others, and for the public
welfare, which God must provide for as well as yours.

He is not your God only, but the God of all the world. And the welfare of
many, especially of Kingdoms and Societies, is more to be regarded than the
welfare (much more than the humouring or pleasing) of any one. You may think
that if you had leave to be fornicators, and adulterers, to be riotous, and
examples of evil, to be covetous, and to deceive, and steal, and lie, that it
would do you no harm: But suppose it were so, yet a little wit may serve to
show you, how pernicious it would be to others, and to societies. And Faith can
tell a true Believer, what is like to be the end: And that sin is a reproach to
any people, Prove. 14.34.

You may think perhaps that if you were excused from many duties of Charity and
Justice, in Ministry, Magistracy, or a more private state, it would be no harm
to your selves. But suppose it were so, must not others be regarded? If God
should regard but one, why should it fall to your lot rather than to another?
And why should any others be bound to use Justice or Charity to you any more
than you to them? There is no member of the body politic or ecclesiastic,
which will not receive more good to it self, by the Laws of Communion, if truly
practiced, than it can do to others. For you are but one who are bound to be
charitable and do good to others, and that but according to your own ability:
But it may be hundreds or thousands who may be all bound to do good to you. You
have the vital influences, and assistances of all the parts: you have the
prayers of all the Christians in the world.

Suppose that the Laws were made to secure your selves of your estate and
lives; but to leave the estates and lives of your children to the will of any
one that has a will to wrong them; would you be content with such kind of Laws
as these? And why should not others good be secured, as well as your
posterities? 1 Cor. 12.12, 14, 20, etc. Romans 12.4 5 and 16.2. 1 Cor. 10.17, 33.
Ephesians. 4.3, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16.

Di^ect. 4. The chief work of Faith is to make the obedience of Gods Commands
to be sweet and pleasant to us, by seeing still that intrinsecal goodness, and
the extrinsecal motives, and the eternal rewards, which may cause the soul to
embrace them with the dearest love.

They are much mistaken, who know no use for Faith but to comfort them, and
save them from Hell; the great work of Faith is to bring up the soul to
Obedience, Thankfulness and Love. Therefore i^ has to do with the Precepts, as
well as with the Promises; and with the Promises to sweeten the Precepts to us.
Believers are not called to the obedience of slaves; nor to be acted only by
the fear of pain; but to the obedience of redeemed ones and Sons; that Faith
may cause them to obey in Love; and the essential act of Love is complacency:
Therefore it is the work of Faith, to cause us to obey God with pleasure and
delight. Forced motives endure not long: They are accompanied with
unwillingness and weariness, which at last will sit down, when the fears do by
distance, delay or dullness, abate. Love is our Nature; but Fear is only a
servant to watch for us while we do the work of Love. As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are the Sons of God (and therefore will obey as Sons.) For we
have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but we have received the
Spirit of Adoption* whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans 8.14, 15. Christ suff^red
death to overcome the Devil that had the power of death, and to deliver us from
the fears of it, which was the bondage of our lives, Heb. 2.14, 15. That we
might serve God without f^ar, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of
our lives, Luke 1.74. There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out
fear, because fear has torment, 1 John 4.18. The meaning is, not only that the
Love of God casts out the fear of men, and persecution; but also that it
makes the fear of tormenting punishment, to become unnecessary to drive us to
obedience, so far as the Love of God and of obedience does prevail: He that
loves more to feast, than to fare hardly, to be rich, than to be poor, (and so
to be obedient and holy, than to be unholy) need not (so far) any fear of
punishment to drive him to it. Even as the Love of the world, as adverse to the
Love of God, is overcome by Faith, 1 John 2.15. and yet the Love of the world
as Gods creature, and as representing him, and sanctified to his service, is
but subordinate to the Love of the Father; so also Fear as adverse to Love, or
as disjunct from it, is cast out by it: But as it subserveth it in watching
against the enemies of Love, and is truly filial, it is a fruit of Faith, and
the beginning of wisdom.

Employ Faith therefore day by day, in looking into the Love of God in Christ,
and the Kingdom of Glory, the reward of obedience, and the beauties of
holiness, and the merciful conditions of filial obedience (when we have a
pardon of our infirmities, and are accepted in Christ) that so we may feel that
Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light, and his Commandments are not
grievous, Mat. 11.28, 29. 1 John 5.3. And when Faith has taught you to hunger
and thirst after righteousness, and to delight to do the will of God, Love
which is the end of Faith will satisfy you, Mat. 5.6. Psalm. 40.8.

Direct. 5. Take special notice how suitable a holy Law is to the nature of a
most holy God; and how much he is honored in that demonstration of his
holiness; and how odious a thing it would be to wish, that the most holy one
would have made for us an unholy Law.

Would you draw the picture of your friend like an Ape or a Monkey, or a
Monster? Or would you have the King pictured like a fool? Or would you have his
Laws written like the words of a Bedlam, or the Laws of Barbarians or
Cannibals? How much more intolerable were it to wish, that an unholy or
unrighteous Law, should be the product and impress of the most great, most wise
and holy God? This thought should make every Believer exceedingly in love with
the Holiness of Gods Commands, because they are the Appearance or Image of his
Holiness, and necessary to his honor, as he is the Governor of the world,
Romans 7.6, 7, 12. When Paul confesses that he could no more perfectly keep the
Law without sin, than a fettered prisoner can walk at liberty (for that is the
sense of the text) yet does he give the Law this honor, that it is holy, just
and good, and therefore he loves it, and fain would perfectly obey it, if he
could. See Psalm. 19.7, 12. etc. 119.72. and 37.31. and 1.2. Isa. 5.24, etc.

Direct. 6. Remember that both Promises, and Threatenings, and Gods Mercies, and
his Judgments, are appointed means to bring us to obey the Precepts; and
therefore obedience, which is their end, is highly to be esteemed.

It seems a great difficulty whether the Precept be for (...) Promise, or the
Promise for the Precept; which is the End, and which is the Means; whether
obedience be a means to attain the reward, or the reward be a means to procure
obedience: And the answer is as pleasant to our consideration, viz. that as the
works of the Trinity of persons, and of Gods Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness ad
extra are undivided; so are the effects of the one in Gods Laws, the effects
also of the other; and they are harmoniously and inseparably conjunct: so that
we must obey the Command, that we may attain the blessing of the Promise, and
be assured of it: And we must believe the Promise, and the Reward, that we may
be moved to obey the Precept: And when all is done, we find that all comes to
one; and in the end, the duty and the reward will be the same, when duty comes
to perfection: And that the reward which is promised is our perfection in that
Holiness, and Love, and Conformity to the Will of God, in which God does take
that complacency which is our ultimate end.

But if you look at the matter of obedience rather than the form, it sometime
consists in troublesome things, as suffering persecution, etc. which is less
desirable than the promised reward, which is but pleasing God, and obeying him,
in a more desirable and grateful matter, even in perfect Love for ever: And
therefore the more desirable must be considered to draw us to the less
desirable; and that consideration of the reward, (and not the possessing of it)
is the means to our obedience, not for the sake of the ungrateful matter, but
of the form and end, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12, and 6.1, 4. and 10.41, 42. 1 Cor. 9.17,
18. 1 Timothy 5.18. Heb. 11.6. and 10.35. and 11.26. Col. 3.24.

Direct. 7. Remember how much Christ himself has condescended, to be made a
Means or Mediator to procure our obedience to God.

And surely that must be an excellent end, which Christ himself became a means
to! He came to save his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. And to call sinners
to repentance, Luke 5.32. Mat. 9.13. Is Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid,
Gal. 2.17. For this end was he revealed, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil, 1 John 3.8. And he died to redeem and purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. Christ came as much to kill sin, as
to pardon it: Judge therefore of the worth of obedience by the nobleness and
dignity of the means.

Direct. 8. Remember still that the same Law which governs us, must judge us:
Let Faith see the sure and close connection between obedience and judgment.

If Faith do but speak aloud to a sluggish soul [Thou must be judged by the
same word which commands thee to watch and pray, and to walk in holiness with
God] it will much awaken the soul to duty: And if Faith do but say aloud to a
tempted sinner [The Judge is at the door, and thou must hear of this again, and
review sin when it will have another countenance] it will do much to kill the
force of the temptation, Romans 14.12. Phil. 4.17. Heb. 13.17. Mat. 12.36. 2 Pet.
3.11, 12.

Direct. 9. Be sure that your heart-subjection to God be fixed, that you may
live under the sense of his Authority.

For as Gods Veracity is the formal object of all Faith; so Gods Authority is
the formal object of all obedience. And therefore the deep ^enewed
apprehensions of his Majesty, his Wisdom, and absolute Authority, will make us
perceive that all things and persons must give place to him, and he to none;
and will be a constant spring within us, to move the will to a ready obedience
in particular cases, Mal. 1.6. Matthew. 23.8, 10. Jer. 5.22.

Direct. 10. Keep in memory some plain texts of Scripture for every particular
duty, and against every particular sin; which I would willingly here write
down, but that the book swells too big, and it is so plentifully done already
in most Catechisms, where they confirm all such commands with the texts of
Scripture cited to that use: As you may see in the Assemblies Catechism, with
the proofs, and more briefly in Mr. Tobias Ellis his English School, where a
text or more for every Article of Faith, and every duty, is recited for the use
of children. Gods Word which is the object and Rule of Faith, should be before
(...) eye of Faith in this great work of causing our obedience.

Direct. 11. Understand well the different nature and use of Scripture
examples; how some of them have the nature of a divine Revelation and a Law;
and others are only motives to obedience and others of them are evils to be
avoided by us.

1. To Moses and the Apostles of Christ, a special Commission was granted, to
one to settle the Tabernacle and its worship, and to the other, to settle the
orders of the Gospel Church. Christ sent them to teach all things, whatsoever
he commanded, Mat. 28.20. And he promised to be with them, and to send them the
Spirit to lead them into all truth, and to bring all things to their
remembrance. Accordingly they did obey this Commission, and settled the Gospel
Churches according to the will of Christ; and this many years before any of the
New Testament was written. Therefore these acts of theirs have the nature and
use of a divine Revelation and a Law. For if they were fallible in this, Christ
must break the foresaid Promise.

2. But all the Acts of the Apostles which were either about indifferent
things, or which were about forecommanded duties, and not in the execution of
the foresaid Commission, for which they had the promise of infallibility, have
no such force or interpretation. For 1. Their holy actions of obedience to
former Laws, are not properly Laws to us, but motives to obey Gods Laws: And
this is the common use of all other good examples of the Saints in Scripture:
Their examples are to be tried by the Law, and followed as secondary copies or
motives, and not as the Law it self, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even
as I also am of Christ. Heb. 6.12. Be followers of them, who through faith and
patience do inherit the promise. 1 Cor. 4.16. Phil. 3.17. 1 These. 1.6. and
2.16. and 3.7, 9. Heb. 13.7.

2. And the evil examples even of Apostles are to be avoided, as all other evil
examples recorded in the Scriptures are; such as Peter's denial of his Lord, and
the Disciples all forsaking him, and Peter's sinful separation and
dissimulation, and Barnabas's with him, Gal. ^. And the falling out of Paul and
Barnabas, etc.

3. And the history of indifferent actions, or those which were the performance
but of a temporary duty, are instructing to us, but not examples which we must
imitate. It is no divine Faith which forgeth an object or rule to it self.
Whatsoever example we will prove to be obligatory to us to imitate, we must
either prove, 1. That it was an execution of Gods own commission, which had a
promise of infallible guidance: Or 2, That it was done according to some former
Law of God, which is common to them and us. (As the first must be the revealing
of some duty extended to this age, as well as that.)

Direct. 12. Faith must make great use of Scripture examples, both for motive
and comfort, when we find their case to be the same with ours.

We cannot conclude that we must imitate them in extraordinary circumstances;
nor can we conclude that God will give every extraordinary mercy to us, which
he gave to them (as that he will make all Kings as he did David, or all
Apostles, or raise all as he did L^zarus now, etc.) nor that every Believer
shall have the same outward things, or shall have just the same degrees of
grace, etc. But we may conclude that we shall have all Gods promises fulfilled
to us, as they had to them; and shall have all that is suitable to our
condition. As David was pardoned upon repentance, so may others: I confessed,
and thou forgavest: For this shall every one that is godly pray to thee --
Psalm. 32.5, 6. Has God pardoned a Manasseh, a Peter, a Paul, etc. upon
repentance? so is he ready to do to us. Has he helped the distressed? has he
heard and pitied, even the weak in faith? so we may hope he will do by us,
Isa. 38.10, 11. Psalm. 116.3. Acts 27.20. Jonah 2.4. We have the same God, the
same Christ, the same Promise, if we have the same Faith, and pray with the
same Spirit, Romans 8.26. Heb. 4 15. Though we may not have just the same case,
or the same manner of deliverance. Therefore it is a mercy that the Scripture
is written historically: And therefore we should remember such particular
examples as suit our own case.

CHAP. V. Directions how to live by Faith upon Gods Promises.
THis part of the work of Faith is the more noble, because the eminent part of
the Gospel is the Promises, or Covenant of Grace; and it is the more necessary,
because our lapsed miserable state has made the Promises so necessary to our
use: The helps to be used herein are these:

Direct. 1. Consider that every Promise of God, is the expression of his
immutable will and counsel.

It is a great dispute among the Schoolmen, whether God be properly obliged to
us by his Promises: When the word [ obligation] it self is but a metaphor,
which must be cast away or explained, before the question can be answered: God
cannot be bound as man is, who transferreth a propriety to another from
himself: or makes himself a proper debtor in point of communicative Justice;
or may be sued at Law, and made to perform against his will. But it is a higher
obligation than all this which lies upon God. His Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
which are himself, do constitute his Veracity: And his very Nature is
immutable, and just; and therefore his Nature and Being, is the infallible
cause of the fulfilling of his Promises: He freely made them; but he
necessarily performs them: And therefore the Apostle says, that God that
cannot lie has promised eternal life, before the world began; which is either
[ promised according to his counsel which he had before the world began] or [
from the beginning of the world] Titus 1.2. Or as the word also signifies many
ages ago. And Heb. 6.17, 18. Wherefore God willing more abundantly to show to
the heirs of Promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath;
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fl^d for refuge, to lay hold upon the
hope set before us: which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast -- And therefore when the Apostle means, that Christ will not be
unfaithful to us, his phrase is, He cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. As if his
very Nature and Being consisted more in his truth and fidelity, than any mortal
man's can do.

Direct. 2. Understand the Nature and Reasons of Fidelity among men, viz. 1. To
make them conformable to God: And 2. To maintain all Justice, Order and Virtue
in the world. And when you have pondered these two, you will see that it is
impossible for God to be unfaithful: For 1. If it be a vice in the Copy, what
would it be in the Original! Nay, would not falsehood and perfidiousness become
our perfection, to make us like God? 2. And if all the world would be like a
company of enemies, Bedlams, bruits, or worse, if it were not for the remnants
of fidelity, it is impossible that the Nature or Will of God, should be the
pattern or original of so great evil.

Direct. 3. Consider what a foundation of his Promises God has laid in Jesus
Christ, and what a seal his blood and resurrection is unto them.

When it has cost Christ so dear to procure them, certainly God will not break
them. A Promise ratified in the blood of the Son of God, called the blood of
the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. and by his rising from the dead, can
never be broken. If the Law given by Moses, was firm, and a jot or tittle
should not pass away till all were fulfilled, much more the word and testament
of the Mediator of a better Covenant, 2 Cor. 1.20. All the Promises in him are
Yea and Amen; that is, they are asserted or made in him, and they are ratified,
and shall be fulfilled in him. Heb. 8.6. He has obtained a more excellent
Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was
established on better Promises. And those that are better, cannot be less sure.
It is the sure mercies of David, that are given us, by a Promise which is sure
to all the s^ed, Acts 13.34. Isa. 55.3. Romans 4.16.

Direct. 4. Consider well that it is Gods own interest to fulfill his Promises;
for he attaineth not that glory of his Love and Grace in the perfection of his
people till it be done, which he designed in the making of them.

And certainly God will not fail himself and his own interest. The happiness
will be ours, but it will be his everlasting pleasure to see his creatures in
their perfection. If he was so pleased after the Creation, to see them all
good, that he appointed a Sabbath of Rest, to celebrate the commemoration of
it; how much more will it please him to see all restored by Jesus Christ, and
brought up to that perfection which Adam was but in the way to when he sinned
and fell short of the Glory of God. He will not miss of his own design, nor
lose the everlasting complacency of his love.

Direct. 5. Consider how great stress God has laid upon the belief of his
Promises, and of how great use he has made them in the world.

If the intimation of another world and reward which we find in Nature; and the
Promise of it in Scriptures, were out of the world, or were not believed, and
so men had nothing but temporal motives to rule their hearts and lives by, O
what an odious thing would man be? and what a Hell would the world be? I have
elsewhere showed that the Government of the world is mainly steered by the
hopes and fears of another life, and could not be otherwise, unless man be
turned into far worse than a beast. And certainly those Promises cannot be
false, which God has laid so great a stress on, and the belief of which is of
so great moment. For the wise, and holy, and powerful God, neither needs a
lie, nor can use it to so great a work.

Direct. 6. Take notice how agreeable Gods Promises are to the Nature both of
God and man.

It is not only Gods Precepts that have a congruence to natural Reason, but his
Promises also. It is agreeable to the Nature of Infinite Goodness to do good:
And yet we see that he does not do to all alike. He makes not every creature
an Angel, nor a man: How then shall we discern what he intends to do by his
creatures, but by their several natures: The nature of every thing is fitted to
its use. Seeing therefore God has given man a nature capable of knowing,
loving and enjoying him, we have reason to think he gave it not in vain. And we
have reason to think that nature may be brought up to its own perfection; and
that he never intended to employ man all his days on earth, in seeking an end
which cannot be attained. And yet we see that some do unfit themselves for this
end, by turning from it, and following vanity: and that God requires every man
as a free Agent, to use his guidance and help aright, for his own preparation
to felicity. Therefore reason may tell us, that those who are so prepared by
the nearest capacity, and have a love to God, and a heavenly mind, shall enjoy
the Glory which they are fitted for. And it helps much our belief of Gods
Promise, to find that Reason thus discerns the equity of it: Yea to find that
a Cicero, a Seneca, a Socrates, a Plato, etc. expected much the like felicity
to the just, which the Scripture promises.

Direct. 7. Be sure to understand Gods Promises aright, that you expect not
that which he never promised, and take not presumption to be Faith.

Many do make promises to themselves by misunderstanding, and look that God
should fulfill them: and if any of them be not fulfilled, they are ready to
suspect the truth of God. And thus men become false Prophets to themselves and
others, and speak words in the Name of the Lord, which he has never spoken,
and incur much of the guilt, which God often charge on false Prophets, and such
as add to the Word of God. It is no small fault to father an untruth on God,
and to call that his Promise which he never made.

Direct. 8. Think not that God promises you all that you desire or think you
want, in bodily things.

It is not our own desires which he has made the measure of his outward gifts;
no nor of our own Opinion of our Necessity neither: else most men would have
nothing but riches, and health, and love, and respect from men; and few would
have any want, or pain, or suffering. But it is so much as is good 1. To the
common ends of Government, and the Societies with which we live. 2. And to our
souls, which God does promise to his own. And his Wisdom, and not their partial
conceits, shall be the Judge. Our Father knows what we need, and therefore we
must cast our care on him, and take not too particular nor anxious thoughts for
our selves, Mat. 6.24. to the end, 1 Pet. 5 7.

Direct. 9. Think not that God promises you all that you will ask; no not that
which he commands you to ask; unless it agree with his promising will, as
well as with his commanding will.

That promise of Christ, Ask and ye shall receive, etc. And whatsoever you ask
the Father in my Name, according to his will, he will give it you, are often
misunderstood: and there is some d^fficulty in understanding what Will of God
is here meant: If it be his Decreeing Will, that is secret, and the promise
gives us no sure consolation: If it be meant of his Promising Will, what use
is this general promise for, if we must have a particular promise also for all
that we can expect? If it be meant of his Commanding Will, the event
notoriously gainsayeth it: For it is most certain, that since the Church has
long prayed for the conversion of the Infidel world, and the reforming of the
corrupted Churches, etc. it is not yet done: And it is all Christians duty, to
pray for Kings, and all in Authority; and to ask that wisdom and grace for them
which God does seldom give them. And all Parents who are bound to pray for
grace for their children, do not speed according to their prayers.

Object. That is because that prayers for other men, suppose others to concur
in the qualifying conditions as well as our selves: But the promise is meant
only of whatsoever we ask for our selves as he commands, or for others who
are prepared as he requires. Answ. 1. If so, then the promise is not only made
to our praying as commanded. 2. It cannot be thought that our prayers for
Infidels, who must have preparing grace before they can be prepared, should be
thus suspended in their preparation of themselves. 3. It maybe a duty to pray
for many things for our selves too, which yet we shall not particularly
receive: As a Minister may pray for greater abilities for his work, etc.

Object. We pray not as commanded for any such things, if we pray not
conditionally for them. Answ. But still the difficulty is, What is the
condition to be inserted? whether it be, If God will? Or, If it be for our
good? Or, If it be for the universal good of the world? If it were the last,
then we might be sure of the salvation of all men, when we ask it; and the
second cannot be the condition when we pray for others: and if it be the first,
then it tells us that the commanding Will of God is not it which is
principally meant in the promise.

In this difficulty we must conclude, that the text respects Gods Will
comprehensively in all these three forementioned respects; but primarily his
promising Will in matters which fall under promise, and his decreeing Will in
things which he has thought meet to make no promise of: and then secondarily,
his commanding Will to us; but this extends not only to prayer it self, but
also to the manner of prayer, and to our conjunct and subsequent endeavors.
And so this meets and closes with the former Will of God: because we do not
pray according to his commanding Will, unless we do it with due respect to his
promising and decreeing Will. And so it is, as i^ it were said [ Of all those
things which God has promised or decreed, whatsoever you ask in my Name, in a
manner agreeable to his command and do second your prayers with faithful
endeavors; you shall obtain it; because neither his decrees or promises are
nakedly, or merely to give such a thing; but complicately to give it in this
way of asking.]

And as to the Objections in the beginning, I answer, 1. Where only Gods
decreeing Will is the measure of the matter to be granted, the text intends
not to us a particular assurance of the thing; but the comfort that we and our
prayers are accepted, and they shall be granted if it be not such a thing, as
God in his wisdom and eternal counsel, has secretly determined not to do. As
if you pray for the conversion of the Kingdom of China, of Japon, of Indostan,
of Tartary, etc.

And 2. Where Gods Promise has given us securi^y of the thing in particular;
yet this general promise, and our prayer, are neither of them in vain. For 1.
The general promise does both confirm our Faith in general, which is a help to
us in each particular case; and also it directs us to Christ as the means, in
whose name we are to ask all things of the Father; and assures us, that it is
for his sake that God does fulfill those particular promises to us. 2. And
prayer in his Name, is the condition, way or means of the fulfilling them.

It is a very common error among many praying persons, to think that if they
can but prove it their duty to ask such a thing, this promise tells them,
that they shall have it: But you see there is more necessary to the
understanding of it than so.

Direct. 10. Think not that God prom^seth you all that you do believe that you
shall receive, when you ask it; though it be with never so confident an
expectation.

This is a more common error than the former: Many think that if the thing be
but lawful which they pray for, much more if it be their duty to pray for it,
then a particular belief that they shall receive it, is the condition of the
promise, and therefore that they shall certainly receive it. As if they pray
for the recovery of one that is sick, or for the conversion of one that is
unconverted, and can but believe that it shall be done, they think God is then
obliged by promise to do it, Mark 9.23. If thou can believe, all things are
possible. And 11.23, 24. Whosoever shall say to this Mountain, Be thou removed,
etc. and shall not doubt in his heart, but believe, etc. Therefore I say unto
you, what things soever ye desire when ye pray* believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them.

Answ. The reason of this was, because they had a special promise of the gift
of miracles, as is expressed, Mark 16.17, 18. And even this text is such a
particular promise: For the spirit of miracles was then given to confirm the
Gospel, and gather the first Churches, and Faith was the condition of them: Or
the Spirit, when ever he would work a miracle, would first work an
extraordinary Faith to prepare for it. And yet if you examine well the
particular texts, which speak of this subject, you shall find that as it was
the doubt of the divine Authority of Christ's testimony, and of his own real
power* which was the unbelief of those times; so it was the belief of his
Authority and Power, which was the Faith required: and this is oftener
expressed than the belief of the event; and when the belief of the event is
extolled, it is because the belief of Christ's Power is contained in it. [ If
thou can believe, all things are possible, Ma^k 9.23. Not [all things shall
come to pass] Mat. 9.28. The blind men came to him, and Jesus said, Believe ye
that I am able to do this? They said unto him, yea Lord* Then touched (...)
their eyes, saying, according to your faith be it unto you. So the Centurions
faith is described as a belief of Christ's Power, Mat. 8.7, 8, 9, 10, So is it
in many other instances.

So that this text is no exception from the general Rule; but the meaning of it
is, Whatsoever promised thing you ask, not doubting, ye shall receive it: Or
doubt not of my enabling power, and you shall receive whatever you ask, which I
have promised you; and miracles themselves shall be done by you.

Object. But what if they had only doubted of Christ's Will? Answ. If they had
doubted of his will in cases where he never expressed his will, they could not
indeed have been certain of the event (for that is contrary to the doubt.) But
they could not have charged Christ with any breach of promise; and therefore
could not themselves have been charged with any unbelief. (For it is no
unbelief to doubt of that will which never was revealed.) But if they had
doubted of his revealed will concerning the event, they had then charged him
with falsehood, and had sinned against him, as ill as those who deny his power.

And the large experience of this our age, confuteth this foresaid error of a
particular belief: For we have abundance of instances of good people who were
thus mistaken, and have ventured thereupon to conclude with confidence, that
such a sick person shall be healed, and such a thing shall come to pass; when
over and over the event has proved contrary, and brought such confidence into
contempt, upon the failing of it.

Direct. 11. Think not that because some strong imagination brings some
promis^ to your minds, that therefore it belongs unto you, unless upon trial,
the true meaning of it do extend to you.

Many and many an honest, ignorant, melancholy woman, has told me what
abundance of sudden comfort they have had, because such a text was brought to
their minds, and such a promise was suddenly set upon their hearts; when as
they mistook the very sense of the promise, and upon true enquiry, ^t was
nothing to their purpose. Yet it is best not rather to contradict those
mistaken and ungrounded comforts of such persons: Because when they are godly,
and have true right to ^ounder comforts, but cannot see it; it is better that
they support themselves a while with such mistakes, than that they sink into
despair. For though we may not offer them such mistakes, nor comfort them by a
lie; yet we may permit that which we may not do (as God himself does.) It is
not at all times that we are bound to rectify other men's mistakes, viz. not
when it will do them more harm than good.

Many an occasion may bring a text to our remembrance which concerns us not,
without the Spirit of God. Our own imaginations may do much that way of
themselves. Try therefore what is the true sense of the text, before you build
your conclusions on it.

But yet if indeed God bring to your minds any pertinent promise, I would not
have you to neglect the comfort of it.

D^rect. 12. Think not that God has promised to all Christians the same
degrees of grace; and therefore that you may expect as much as any others have.

Object. But shall not all at last be perfect? and what can there be added to
perfection?

Answ. The perfection of a creature is to be advanced to the highest degree,
which his own specifical and individual nature are capable of: A beast may be
perfect, and yet not be a man: and a man may be perfect, and yet not be an
Angel. And Lazarus may be perfect, and yet not reach the degree of Abraham. For
there is, no doubt, a gradual difference between the capacities of several
individual souls, of the same species: As there is of several vessels of the
same metal, though not by such difference of corporal extension. And there is
no great probability that all the difference in the degrees of wit from the
Idiot to Achitophel, is founded only in the bodily organs; and not at all in
the souls. And it is certain, that there are various degrees of glory in
Heaven, and yet that every one there is perfect.

But if this were not so, yet it is in this life only that we are now telling
you, that all Christians have not a promise of the same degrees.

Object. But is not additional grace given by way of reward? And then have not
all a promise of the same degree which the best attain, conditionally if they
do as much as they for it?

Answ. O yes, objective; but not subjective; because all have not the same
natural capacity, nor are bound to the same degree of duty as to the condition
it self. As perfection in H^^ven is given by way of reward, and yet all shall
not have the same degree of perfection; so is it as to the degrees of grace on
earth. 2. All have not the same degrees of the first preventing grace given
them; and therefore it is most certain that all will not use the same degree of
industry for more: Some have but one talent, and some two, when some have five,
and therefore gain ten talents in the improvement, Mat. 25.

All must strive for the highest measure: and all the sincere may at last
expect their own perfection: But God breaks no promise, if he give them not
all as much as some have.

Direct. 13. Much less has God promised the same degree of common gifts to all.

If you never attain to the same measure of acuteness, learning, memory,
utterance, do not think that God breaks promise with you: Nor do not call
your presumption by the name of Faith, if you have such expectations. See 1
Cor. 12. throughout.

Direct. 14. God often promises the thing it self, when he promises the time
of giving it: Therefore do not take it to be an act of Faith, to believe a set
time, where God has set no time at all.

Many are the troubles of the righteous, but God will deliver them out of all,
Psalm. 37. But he has not set them just the time. Christ has promised to come
again and take us to himself, Joh. 14.1, 2.3. But of that day and hour knows
no man. God will give necessary comfort to his servants; but he best knows
when it is necessary: and therefore they must not set him a time, and say, Let
it be now, or thou breakest thy word. Patient wanting Gods own time, is as
needful as believing: Yea he that believes, will not make haste, Isa. 28.16.
Romans 2 7. 2 These. 3.5. James 5.7, 8. Heb. 6.12. and 10.36. and 12.1. James 5.7.
Revel. 13.10. and 14.12. 1 These. 1.3, 11.

Direct. 15. God often promises the thing, when he promises not either in
what manner, or by what instrument he will do it.

He may deliver his Church, and may deliver particular persons out of trouble;
and yet do it in a way, and by such means as they never dreamed of. Sometimes
he foretells us his means, when it is we that in duty are to use them. And
sometimes he keeps them unknown to us, when they are only to be used by
himself. In the Mount will the Lord be seen* but yet Abraham thought not of the
Ram in the Thicke^. The Israelites knew not that God would deliver them by the
hand of Moses, Acts 7.25.

Direct. 16. Take not the promises proper to one time or age of the Church, as
if they were common to all, or unto us.

There were many promises to the Israelites, which belong not to us, as well as
many precepts: The increase of their seed, and the notable prosperity in the
world which was promised them, was partly because that the motive should be
suited to the ceremonial duties, and partly because the eternal things being
not then so fully brought to light as now, they were the more to be moved with
the present outward tokens of Gods Love. And so the gift of the Spirit of
Miracles, and Infallibility, for writing and confirming Scriptures, was
promised to the first age, which is not promised to us.

Direct. 17. Take not any good man's observation in those times for an universal
promise of God.

For instance, David says, Psalm. 73. I have been young, and now am old; yet
did I never see the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. But
if he had lived in Gospel times, where God gives greater heavenly blessings
and comforts, and calls men to higher degrees of patience and mortification,
and contempt of the world, he might have seen many both of the righteous and
their seed begging their bread, though not forsaken; yea Christ himself asking
for water of a woman, John 4.

Direct. 18. Take heed of making promises to seem instead of precepts; as if
you were to do that your selves, which God has promised that he will do.

If God promise to deliver his Church, or to free any of his servants from
trouble or persecution, you must have a precept to tell you what is your own
duty, and what means you must use, before you m^st attempt your own
deliverance. What God will do, is one thing; and what you must do, is another.
This has been the strange delusion of the people that call themselves the
Fifth-Monarchy men in our times; who believing that Christ will set up
righteousness, and pull down Tyrants in the earth, have thought that therefore
they must do it by arms; and so have been drawn into many rebellions, to the
scandal of others, and their own ruin.

Direct. 19. Take heed of mistaking Prophecies for Promises; especially dark
Prophecies not understood.

Many things are foretold by God in Prophecies, which are men's sins: Herod, and
Pontius Pilate, and the people of the Jews, fulfilled Prophecies in the
crucifying of Christ: and all the persecutors and muderers of the Saints,
fulfill Christ's Prophecies; and so do all that hate us, And say all manner of
evil falsely against us for his sake, Mat. 5.11, 12. But the sin is never the
less for that. It is prophesied that the ten Kings shall give up their Kingdoms
to the beast; that in the last days shall come scoffers walking after their
own lusts; and in the last days shall be perilous times, etc. These are not
Promises, nor Precepts.

It has lamentably disturbed the Church of Christ, when ignorant
self-conceited Christians, who see not the difficulty, grow confident that they
understand many Prophecies in Daniel, the Revelations, etc. and thereupon found
their presumption (miscalled faith) upon their own mistakes, and then form
their prayers, their communion, their practice into such schism, and sedition,
and uncharitable ways, as the interest of their opinions do require (as the
Millenaries before mentioned have done in this generation.)

Direct. 20. Think not that all Gods Promises are made to mere sincerity; and
that every true Christian must be freed from all penal hurt, however they
behave themselves.

For there are further helps of the Spirit, which are promised only to our
diligence in attending the Spirit, and to the degrees of industry, and fervor,
and fidelity in watching, praying, striving, and other use of means. And there
are heavy chastisements which God threatens to the godly, when they misbehave
themselves: Especially the hiding of his face, and withholding any measure of
his Spirit. The Scripture is full of such threatenings and instances.

Direct. 21. Much less may you imagine that God has made any Promise, that all
the sins of true Believers shall work together for their good.

They misexpound Romans 8.28. who so expound it (as I have elsewhere showed.) For
1. The context confirms it to sufferings. 2. The qualification added [ to
them that love God] does show that the abatement of love to God, is none of the
things meant that shall work our good. 3. And it shows, that it is Love as
Love, and therefore not the least that is consistent with neglect and sin,
which is our full condition. 4. Experience tells us, that too many true
Christians may fall from some degrees of grace, and the Love of God, and die in
a less degree than they once had* and that less of holiness does not work for
their good. 5. And it is not a thing suitable to all the rest of Gods method in
the Scriptures, that he should assure all beforehand, that all their sins shall
work for their good. That he should command obedience so strictly, and promise
rewards so liberally, and threaten punishment so terribly, and give such
frightful examples as Solomon's, David's, and others are; and at the same time
say, Whatever sin thou committest inwardly or outwardly by neglecting my Love,
and Grace, and Spirit, by loving the world, by pleasing the flesh, as David
did, etc. it shall all be turned to do thee more good than hurt. This is not a
suitable means to men in our case, to keep them from sin, nor to cause their
perseverance.

Direct. 22. Understand well what Promises are universal to all B^lievers, and
what are but particular and proper to some few.

There are many particular Promises in Scripture, made by name, to Noah, to
Abraham, to Moses, to Aaron, to David, to Solomon, to Hezekiah, to Christ, to
Peter, to Paul, etc. which we cannot say are made to us. Therefore the Covenant
of Grace, which is the Universal Promise, (...) especially be made the ground
of our faith, and all other as they are branches and appurtenances of that, and
have in the Scripture some true signification, that they indeed extend to us.
For if we should believe that every Promise made to any Saint of God (as
Hannah, Sarah, Rebecca, Elizabeth, Mary, etc. do belong to us, we should abuse
our selves and God. And yet to us they have their use.

Direct. 23. It is of very great importance, to understand what Promises are
absolute, and which are suspended upon any condition to be performed by us, and
what each of those conditions it.

As the Promise to the Fathers that the Messiah should come, was absolute. God
g^ve not a Savior to the world, so as to suspend his coming on any thing to be
done by man. The not drowning of the world, was an absolute Promise made to
Noah: so was the calling of the Gentiles promised. But the Covenant of Promises
sealed in Baptism, is conditional: and therefore both parties, God and man, are
the Covenanters therein.

And in the Gospel the Promises of our first Justification and Adoption, and of
our after pardon, and of our Justification at Judgment, and of our additional
degrees of grace, and of our freedom from chastisements, have some difference
in the conditions, though true Christianity be the main substance of them all.
Mere Christianity, or true consent to the Covenant, is the condition of our
first Justification. And the continuance of this, with actual sincere
obedience, is the condition of non-omission, or of continuance of this state of
J^stification: And the use of prayer and other means, is a condition of our
further reception of more grace. And perseverance in true holiness with faith,
is the condition of our final Justification and Glorification (of which more
anon.)

Direct. 24. You can no further believe the fulfilling of any of these
conditional Promises, than you know that you perform the condition.

It is presumption, and not faith, for an impenitent person to expect the
benefit of those Promises, which belong to the penitent only: And so it is for
him that forgiveth not others, to expect to be forgiven his particular sins:
And so in all the rest of the Promises.

Direct. 25. But be sure that you ascribe no more to your selves, for
performing any condition of a Promise, than God does.

A condition as such is no cause at all of the performance of the Promise;
either natural or moral: only the nonperformance of the condition is a cause
of the nonperformance of the Promise: For the true nature of a condition as
such, is only to suspend the ben^fit. Though naturally a condition may be
meritorious among men; and for their own commodity (which God is not capable
of) they ordinarily make only meritorious acts to be conditions: As God also
does only such acts as are pleasing to him, and suited to their proper ends.
But this is nothing to a condition formally, which is but to suspend the
benefit till it be done.

Direct. 26. When you find a Promise to be common or universal, apply it as
boldly as if your name were written in it: and also when you find that any
particular Promise to a Saint is but a branch of that universal Promise to all
Saints; or to all that are in the same case, and find that the case and reason
of the Promise proves the sense of it to belong to you as well as them.

If it be said, that whosoever believes shall not perish, but have everlasting
life, John 3.16. You may apply it as boldly as if it were said, If thou John,
or Thomas be a Believer, thou shall not perish, but have everlasting life. As I
may apply the absolute Promise of the Resurrection to my self as boldly, as if
my name were in it, because it is all that shall be raised ( John 5.22, 24,
25.) 1 Cor. 15. So may I all the conditional promises of pardon and glory
conditionally [if I repent and believe.] And you may absolutely thence conclude
your certain interest in the benefit, so far as you are certain that you repent
and believe.

And when you read that Christ promises his twelve Apostles, to be with them,
and to reward their labors, and to see that they shall be no losers by him, if
they lose their lives, etc. You may believe that he will do so by you also. For
though your work be not altogether the same with theirs; yet this is but a
branch of the common Promise to all the faithful, who must all follow him on
the same terms of self-denial, Luke 14.26, 27, 33. Mat. 10. Romans 8.17, 18. And
on this ground the promise to Joshua is applied, Heb. 15. I will never fail
thee nor forsake thee, because it is but a branch of the C^venant common to all
the faithful.

Direct. 27. Be sure that you lay the stress of all your hopes on the Promises
of God, and venture all your happiness on them, and when God calls to it,
express this by forsaking all else for these hopes, that it may appear you
really trust Gods word, without any secret hypocritical reserves.

This is the true life, and work, and trial of faith: whether we build so much
on the Promise of God, that we can take the thing promised for all our
treasure, and the Word of God for our whole security.

As Faith is called a Trusting in God; so it is a practical kind of Trust; and
the principal trial of it, lies in forsaking all other happiness and hopes, in
confidence of Gods promise through Jesus Christ.

To open the matter by a similitude: Suppose that Christ came again on earth as
he did at his Incarnation, and should confirm his truth by the same miracles,
and other means; and suppose he should then tell all the Country, I have a
Kingdom at the Antipodes, where men never die, but live in perpetual
prosperity; and those of you shall freely possess it, who will part with your
own estates and Country, and go in a ship of my providing, and trust me for
your Pilot to bring you thither, and trust me to give it you when you come
there. My power to do all this, I have proved by my miracles, and my love and
will, my offer proves.] How now will you know whether a man believe Christ,
and trust this promise or not? why, if he believe and trust him, he will go
with him, and will leave all, and venture over the Seas whithersoever he
conducteth him, and in that ship which he prepares for him: But if he dare not
venture, or will not leave his present Country and possessions, it is a sign
that he does not trust him.

If you were going to Sea, and had several Ships and Pilots offered you, and
you were afraid left one were unsafe, and the Pilot unskilful, and it were
doubtful which were to be trufled; when after all deliberation you choose one,
and refuse the rest, and resolve to venture your life and goods in it, this is
properly called trusting it. So trusting in God, and in Jesus Christ, is not a
bare opinion of his fidelity, but a PRACTICAL TRUST* and that you may be sure
to understand it clearly, I will once open the parts of it distinctly.

Divines commonly tell us that Faith is an Affiance or Trust in God: and some
of them say that this is an act of the understanding, and some, that it is an
act of the will, and others say, that Faith consists in Assent alone, and
that Trust or Affiance is as Hope, a fruit of Faith, and not Faith it self: And
what Affiance it self is, is no small controversy (And so it is what Faith and
Christianity is, even among the Teachers of Christians.)

The plain truth is this: as to the name of Faith, it sometime signifies a
mere Intellectual Assent, when the object requires no more: And sometime it
signifies a practical Trust or Affiance, in the Truth or Trustiness of the
undertaker or promiser, that is, in his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, or honesty,
conjunct as expressed in his word; and that is, when the matter is practical,
requiring such a trust. The former is often called, The Christian Faith; because
it is the belief of the truth of the Christian Principles; and is the leading
part of Faith in the full sense. But it is the latter which is the Christian
Faith, What true Christian Faith is?
as it is taken, not secundum quid, but simply; not for a part* but the whole;
not for the opinion of men about Christ, but for Christianity it self, or that
Faith which must be professed in Baptism, and which has the promise of
Justification and Salvation.

And this Trust or Affiance is placed respectively on all the objects mentioned
in the beginning; on God as the first ^fficient foundation; and on God as the
ultimate end; as the certain full felicity, and final object of the soul: On
Christ as the Mediator, and as the secondary foundation, and the guide, and
the finisher of our faith and salvation; the chief sub revealer and performer:
On the Holy Ghost, as the third foundation; both revealing and attesting the
doctrine by his g^^ts: And on the Apostles and Prophets as his Instruments and
Christ's chief entrusted Messengers: And on the Promise or Covenant of Christ as
his Instrumental Revelation it self: And on the Scriptures as the authentic
Record of this Revelation and Promise. And the benefit for which all these are
trusted, is, recovery to God, or Redemption and Salvation, viz. pardon of sin,
and Justification, Adoption, Sanctification and Glorification; and all things
necessary hereunto.

This Trust is an act of all the three faculties: (for three understanding are)
even of the whole man: Of the vital power, the understanding and the will: and
is most properly called A practical Trust; such as trusting a Physician with
your life and health; or a Tutor to teach you; or a Master to govern and reward
you; or a Ship and Pilot (as aforesaid) to carry you safe through the dangers
of the Sea: As in this similitude; Affiance as in the understanding* is its
Assent to the sufficiency and fidelity of the Pilot and Ship (or Physician)
that I trust: Affiance in the will is the choosing of this Ship, Pilot,
Physician to venture my life with, and refusing all others; which is called
consent, when it follows the motion and offer of him whom we trust. Affiance
in the vital power of the soul, is the fortitude and venturing all upon this
chosen Trustee: which is, the quieting (in some measure) disturbing fears, and
the exitus or conatus, or first egress of the soul toward execution.

And whereas the quarrelling pievish ignorance of this age, has caused a great
deal of bitter, reproachful, uncharitable contention on both sides, about the
question, How far obedience belongs to faith? whether as a part, or end, or
fruit, or consequent? In all this it is easily discerned, that as all^giance or
subjection differ from obedience, and hiring my self to a Master, differs
from obeying him; and taking a man for my Tutor, differs from learning of
him; and Marriage differs from conjugal duty; and giving up my self to a
Physician, differs from taking his counsel and medicines; and taking a man
for my Pilot, differs from being conducted by him; so does our first Faith or
Christianity differ from actual obedience to the healing precepts of our
Savior. It is the covenant of obedience and consent to it, immediately
entering us into the practice: It is the seed of obedience; or the soul, or
life of it, which will immediately bring it forth, and act it. It is virtual,
but not actual obedience to Christ; because it is but the first consent to his
Kingly Relation to us; unless you will call it that Inception from whence all
obedience follows. But it may be actual (common) obedience to God, where he
is believed in and acknowledged before Christ: And all following acts of Faith
after the first, are both the root of all other obedience, and a part of it: as
our continued Allegiance to the King is: And as the Heart, when it is the first
formed Organ in nature, is no part of the man, but the Organ to make all the
parts, because it is solitary; and there is yet no man, of whom it can be
called a part; but when the man is formed, the heart is both his chief part*
and the Organ to actuate and maintain the rest.

Object. But Faith as Faith is not obedience.

Answ. Nor Learning as Learning is not obedience to your Tutor: Nor plowing as
plowing is not obedience to your Master: Or to speak more aptly, the
continuance of your consent, that this man be your Tutor as such, is not
obedience to him; but it is materially part of your obedience to your Father
who commands it; and your continued Allegiance or subjection as such, is not
obedience to your King; but as primarily it was the foundation or heart of
future obedience; so afterward it is also materially a part of your obedience,
being commanded by him to whom you are now subject. And so it is in the case of
Faith: and therefore true Faith and Obedience are as nearly conjoined as Life
and Motion; and the one is ever (...) in the other: Faith is for Obedience to
Christ's healing means, as trusting and taking a Physician, is for the using of
his counsel: and Faith is for love and holy obedience to God, which is called
our Sanctification, as trusting a Physician, is for health. Faith is implicit
virtual obedience to a Savior: and obedience to a Savior, is explicit
operating Faith or trust.

I. In the understanding, Faith in Gods Promises has all these acts contained
in it.

1. A belief that God is, and that he is perfectly powerful, wise and good.

2. A belief that he is our Maker, and so our Owner, our Ruler, and our chief
Good (initially and finally) delighting to do good, and the perfect
felicitating end and object of the soul.

3. A belief that God has expressed the benignity of his nature, by a Covenant
or Promise of life to man.

4. To believe that Jesus Christ, God and Man, is the Mediator of this
Covenant, Heb. 8 6. and 9.15. and 1^.24. procuring it, and entrusted to
administer or communicate the blessings of it, Heb. 5.9.

5. To believe that the Holy Ghost is the seal and witness of this Covenant.

6 To believe that this Covenant gives pardon of sin, and Justification and
Adoption, and further grace, to penitent Bel^evers; and Glorification to those
that persevere in true Faith, Love and O^edience to the end.

7. To believe that the Holy Scriptures or Word delivered by the A^ostles, is
the sure Record of this Covenant, and of the history and doctrine on which it
is grounded.

8. To believe that God is most perfectly regardful and faithful to fulfill this
Covenant, and that he cannot lie or break it, Titus 1.2. Heb. 6.17, 18.

9. To believe that you in particular are included in this Covenant, as well as
others, it being universal as conditional to all if they will repent and
believe, and no exception put in against you to exclude you, John 3.16. Mark
16.15, 16.

10. To believe or know that there is nothing else to be trusted to, as our
felicity and end instead of God; nor as our way instead of the Mediator, and
the foresaid means appointed by him.

II. In the Will, Faith or Trust has 1. A simple complacency in God as
believed to be most perfectly good as fore-described.

2. It has an actual intending and desiring of him as our end and whole
felicity to be enjoyed in Heaven, Gal. 5.6, 7. Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Col. 3.1,
3, 4. 1 Cor. 13. Heb. 11. Mat. 6.20, 21.

3. It is the turning away from, and refusing all other seeming felicity or
ends, and casting all our happiness and hopes upon God alone.

4. It is the choosing Jesus Christ as the only way and Mediator to this end;
with the refusing of all other, Job. 14.6. and trusting all that we are or hope
for upon his Mediation.

III. In the Vital Power, it is the casting away all inconsistent fears, and
the inward resolved delivering up the soul to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit
in this Covenant, entering our selves into a resolved war with the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, which in the performance will resist us* And thus Faith
or Trust is constituted and completed in the true Baptismal Covenant.

Direct. 28. In all this be sure that you observe the difference between the
truth of Faith, and the high degrees.

The truth of it is most certainly discerned by (as consisting in) [ THE
ABSOLVTE CASTING or VENTVRING not part, but ALL YOUR HAPPINESS and HOPES UPON
GOD and the MEDIATOR ONLY, and LETTING GO ALL WHICH IS INCONSISTENT WITH THIS
CHOICE and TRUST. This is true and saving Faith and Trust.

Pardon me that I sometime use the word VENTVRING ALL, as if there were any
uncertainty in the matter. I intend not by it to express the least uncertainty
or fallibility in Gods Promise: For Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but one
jot or tittle of his Word shall not pass, till all be fulfilled: But I shall
here add,

1. True Faith or Trust may consist with uncertainty in the person who
believes; if he believe and trust Christ but so far, that he can cast away all
his worldly treasures and hopes, even life it self upon that trust. Every one
is not an Infidel, nor an Hypocrite, who must say* if he speak his heart [ I am
not certain past all doubts, that the soul is immortal, or the Gospel true: but
I am certain, that immortal happiness is most desirable, and endless misery
most terrible* and that this world is vanity, and nothing in it worthy to be
compared, with the hopes which Christ has given us of a better life: And
therefore upon just deliberation I am resolved to let go all my sinful
pleasures, profits, and worldly reputation, and life it self, when it is
inconsistent with those hopes: And to take Gods Love for my felicity and end,
and to trust and venture absolutely all my happiness and hopes on the favor of
God, the mediation of Christ, and the Promises which he has given us in the
Gospel.]

I know I shall meet with abundance of Teachers and people, that will shake the
head at this doctrine as dangerous, and cry out of it as favoring unbelief,
that any one should have true saving Faith, who doubts, or is uncertain of
the immortality of the soul, or the tr^th of the Gospel! But I see so much in
hot-brained proud persons, to be pitied, and so much of their work in the
Church to be with tears lamented, that I will not by speech or silence favor
their brainsick, bold assertions, nor will I fear their phrenetick furious
censures. If it be not a mark of a wise and good Minister of Christ, to be
utterly ignorant of the state of souls, both his own, and all the peoples, then
I will not concur to the advancement of the reputation of such ignorance. It is
enough to pardon the great injury which such do to the Church of God, without
countenancing it. Though this one instance only now mind me of it, abundance
more do second it, and tell us, that there are in the Churches through the
world, abundance of Divines, who are first taught by a party which they most
esteem, what is to be held and said as orthodox, and then make it their work,
to contend for that orthodoxness which they were taught so to honor, even with
the most unmanly and unchristian scorns and censures; when as if they had not
been dolefully ignorant both of the Scriptures, and themselves, and the souls
of men, they would have known, that it is the fool that rages and is
confident, and that it was not their knowing more than others, but their
knowing less, which made them so presumptuous; and that they are themselves as
far from certainty as others, when they condemn themselves to defend their
opinions: Even like our late Perfectionists, who all lived more imperfectly
than others; but wrote and railed for sinless perfection, as soon as they did
but take up the opinion. As if turning to that opinion had made them perfect.
So men may pass the censure of hypocrisy and damnation upon themselves when
they please, by damning all as hypocrites, whose faith is thus far imperfect;
but they shall never make any wise man believe by it, that their own faith is
ever the more certain or perfect.

As far as I can judge by acquaintance with persons most religious, though
there be many who are afraid to speak it out, yet the far greater number of the
most faithful Christians, have but such a faith which I described, and their
hearts say [ I am not certain, or past all doubt, of the truth of our
immortality, or of the Gospel; but I will venture all my hopes and happiness,
though to the parting with life it self upon it.]

And I will venture to say it, as the truth of Christ, that he that truly can
do this, has a sincere and saving faith; whatsoever Opinionists may say
against it. For Christ has promised, that he that loses his life for his sake
and the Gospels, shall have life everlasting, Mat. 10.37, 38, 39, 42. and
16.25. and 19.29. Luke 18.30. And he has appointed no higher expressions of
faith, as necessary to salvation, than denying our selves, and taking up the
Cross, and forsaking all that we have; or in one word, than Martyrdom; and this
as proceeding from the Love of God, Luke 14.26, 27, 29, 33 Romans 8.17, 18, 28,
29, 3O, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

And it is most evident that the sincere have been weak in faith, Luke 17.5.
And the Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith, Mark 9.24. Lord I
believe, help thou my unbelief. Luke 7.9. I have not found so great faith, no
not in Israel. The weak faith was the more common.

2. And as true Faith or Trust may consist with doubts and uncertainty in the
subject; so may it with much anxiety, care, disquietment and sinful fear; which
shows the imperfection of our Faith. Shall ^e not much more clothe you, O ye
of little faith? Mat. 16.8. O ye of little faith, why reason you among your
selves, etc. Mat. 8.^6. Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Mat. 14.31.
Peter had a faith that could venture his life on the waters to come to Christ,
as confident of a miracle upon his command: But yet it was not without fear, v.
30. When he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; which caused Christ to say
[ O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?]

And you cannot say that this is only a hinderance in the applying act, and not
in the direct and principal act of faith: For Luke 24.21. we find some
Disciples at this pass [ But we trusted that it had been he, who should have
redeemed Israel.] And v. 25, 26. Christ says to them O fools, and slow of
heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken; ought not Christ to have
suffered these things, and to enter into his Glory? Luke 24.11. The words of
them who told the Apostles, that Christ was risen, seemed but as tales to them,
and they believed them not. And v. 41. While they believed not for joy, and
wondered, etc.

3. Nay, a weak faith may have such a swouning fit, as to fail extraordinarily
in an hour of temptation, so far as to deny Christ, or shrink from him in this
fear: so did Peter, and not only he, but all the Disciples forsook him, and
fled, Matthew. 26 56.

But yet he that according to the habituated state of his soul, has so much
Faith, and Love, as will cause him to venture life and all, upon the trust
which he has to the promises of the Gospel, has a true and saving faith.

And here I desire all doubting Christians, to lay by the common mistake in the
trying of their faith or trust in Christ, and to go hereafter upon surer
grounds. Many say, I cannot believe or trust Christ for salvation, for I am
full of doubts, and fears, and troubles; and surely this is not trusting God.
Ans. 1. The question is not, whether you trust him perfectly, so as to have no
fears, no troubles, no doubts: but whether you trust him sincerely, so far as
to venture all upon him in his way. If you can venture all on him, and let go
all to follow him, your faith is true and saving.

This would abundantly comfort many fearful troubled Christians, if they did
but understand it well: For many of them that thus fear, would as soon as any,
forsake all for Christ, and let go all carnal pleasures, and worldly things, or
any wilful sin whatsoever, rather than forsake him; and would not take to any
other portion and felicity than God, nor any other way than Christ, and the
Spirit of holiness, for all the temptations in the world: And yet they fear
because they fear; and doubt more because they doubt. Doubting soul, let this
resolve thee; suppose Christ and his way were like a Pilot with his Ship at
Sea: Many more promise to convey thee safely, and many persuade thee not to
venture, but stay at Land: But if thou have so much trust as that thou will go,
and put thy self, and all that thou have into this Ship, and forsake all other,
though thou go trembling all the way, and be afraid of every storm, and
tempest, and gulf; yet thou have true faith, though it be weak. If thy faith
will but keep thee in the Ship with Christ, that thou neither turn back again
to the flesh* and world; nor yet take another Ship and Pilot, (as Mahometanes,
and those without the Church) undoubtedly Christ will bring thee safe to Land,
though thy fear and distrust be still thy sin.

For the hypocrites case is always some of these: 1. Some of them will only
trust God in some smaller matter, wherein their happiness consists not: As a
man will trust one with some trifle which he does not much regard, whom yet he
thinks so ill of, that he cannot trust him in a matter of weight.

2. Some of them will trust God for the saving of their souls, and the life to
come (or rather presume on him, while they call it trusting him) but they will
not trust him with their bodies, their wealth, and honors, and fleshly
pleasures, or their lives. These they are resolved to shift for, and secure
themselves, as well as they can. For they know that for the world to come, they
must be at Gods disposal, and they have no way of their own to shift out of his
hands: whether there be such a life or no, they know not; but if there be, they
will cast their souls upon Gods mercy, when they have kept the world as long as
they can, and have had all that it can do for them. But they will not lose
their present part, for such uncertain hopes as they account them.

3. Some of them will trust him only in pretense and name, while it is the
creature which they trust indeed. Because they have learned to say, that God is
the disposer of all, and only to be trusted, and all creatures are but used by
his will; therefore they think that when they trust the creature, it is but in
subordination to God; though indeed they trust not God at all.

4. Some of them will trust God and the creature jointly; and as they serve God
and Mammon, and think to make sure of the prosperity of the body, and the
salvation of the soul, without losing either of them; so they trust in both
conjunctly, to make up their felicity. Some think when they read Christ's words,
Mark 10.24. How hard is it for them that trust in Riches, to enter into the
Kingdom of God?] that they are safe enough if that be all the danger; for they
do not trust in their riches, though they love them: He is a mad man they say,
that will put his trust in them. And yet Christ intimates it as the true
reason why few that have riches can be saved, because there is few that have
riches, who do not trust in them: You know that riches will not save your
souls; you know that they will not save you from the gr^ve, you know that they
will not cure your diseases, nor ease your pains: And therefore you do not
trust to riches, either to keep you from sickness, or from dying, or from Hell:
But yet you think that riches may help you to live in pleasure, and in
reputation with the world, and in plenty of all things, and to have your will,
as long as health and life will last; and this you take to be the chiefest
happiness which a man can make sure of: And for this you trust them. The fool
in Luke 12.19. who said, Soul, take thy ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou
have enough laid up for many years, did not trust his riches to make him
immortal, nor to save his soul: But he trusted in them, as a provision which
might suffice for many years, that he might eat, drink, and be merry, and take
his ease; and this he loved better, and preferred before any pleasures or
happiness which he hoped for in another world. And thus it is that all worldly
hypocrites do trust in riches: Yea the poorest do trust in their little poor
provisions in this world, as seeming to them surer, and therefore better than
any which they can expect hereafter. This is the way of trusting in uncertain
riches, (viz. to be their surest happiness) instead of trusting in the living
God, 1 Timothy 6.17. and 4.10. Psalm. 49.6. and 52.7.

But yet because the hypocrite knows, that he cannot live here always, but
must die, and his riches must be parted with at last, and hears of a life of
glory afterward, he would fain have his part in that too, when he can keep the
world no longer: And so he takes both together for his part and hope, viz. as
much bodily happiness as he can get in this world, and Heaven at last, when he
must die: not knowing that God will be all our portion and felicity, or none;
and that the world must be valued and used but for his sake, and in
subordination to him and a better world.

5. Yet some hypocrites seem to go further (though they do not) for they will
seem, even to themselves, to resign goods, and life, and all things absolutely
to the will of God. But the reason is, because they are secretly persuaded in
their hearts, that their resignation shall no whit deprive them of them; and
that God will never the more take it from them; but that they may possess as
much present corporal felicity, in a life of Religion, as if they lived in the
dangerous case of the ungodly: or at least, that they may keep so much, as not
to be undone or left to any great sufferings in the world; or at least, their
lives may not be called for. For they live in a time, when few suffer for
Christ; and therefore they see little cause to ^e^r that they should be of that
smaller number: and it is but being a little the more wise and cautelous, and
they hope they may escape well enough. And if they had not this hope, they would
never give up all to Christ. But like persons that will be liberal to their
Physician, they will offer a great deal, when they think he will not take it;
but if they thought he would take all that is offered, they would offer less.
Or as if a sick person should hear that such a Physician will give him no very
strong or loathsome Physic; and therefore when the Physician tells him [ I
will be none of your Physician unless you will absolutely promise to take every
thing which I shall give you.] He promises that he will do it; but it is only
because he supposes that he will give him nothing which is troublesome: And if
he find his expectation crossed, he breaks his promise, and ^aith, If I had
known that he would have used me thus, I would never have promised it him. So
hypocrites by promise give up themselves absolutely to God, and to b^ wholly at
his will, without excepting life it self: But their hearts do secretly except
it: For all this is because they doubt not but they may save their earthly
prosperity and lives, and be Christians too: And if once Christ call them to
suffer death for him, they show then what was the meaning of their hearts.

To reassume the former similitude; If Christ on earth should offer to convey
you to a Kingdom at the Antipodes, where men live for ever in glorious
holiness, if you will but trust him, and go in his Ship, and take him for your
Pilot: Here one says, I do not believe him that there is such a place, and
therefore I will not go (that is, the Infidel.) Another says, I like my merry
life at home, better than his glorious holiness (that is the open worldling and
profane.) Another says, I will live in my own Country, and on my own estate,
as long as I can, and when I find that I am dying* and can stay here no longer,
that I may be sure to lose nothing by him, I will take his offer. Another
says, I will go with him, but I will turn back again, if I find any dangerous
storms and gulfs in the passage. Another says, I will take another Ship and
Pilot along with me, lest he should fail me, that I may not be deceived.
Another says, I am told that the Seas are calm, and there is no danger in the
passage, and therefore I will absolutely trust him, and venture all; but when
he meets with storms and hideous waves, he says, This is not as I expected,
and so he turns back again. But another (the true Christian) says, I will
venture all, and wholly trust him: And so, though he is often afraid in dangers,
when he sees the devouring gulfs, yet not so fearful as to turn back, but on
he goes, come on it what will; because he knows that the place which he
goes to is most desirable, and mortality will soon end his old prosperity; and
he has great reason to believe his Pilot to be trusty.

By all this you may see, how it comes to pass that Christ who promises life
to Believers, does yet make self-denial, and forsaking all that we have, even
life it self, to be also necessary; and what relation self-denial has to
faith, Luke 14.26, 3^. Nearer by far than most consider. You may see here the
reason why Christ tried the rich man, Luke 18.22. with selling all, and
following him in hope of a reward in Heaven: And why he bid his Diciples, Luke
12.33. Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide your selves bags which wax not
old, a treasure in the Heavens which fails not -- And why the first
Christians were made a pattern of entire Christianity, by selling all, and
laying down at the Apostles feet; And Ananias and Saphira were the instances of
Hypocrisy, who secretly and lyingly kept back part: You see here how it comes
to pass, that all true Christians must be heart-martyrs, or prepared to die for
Christ and Heaven, rather than forsake him. You may plainly perceive that Faith
it self is an Affiance or Trusting in God by Christ, even a Trusting in God in
Heaven as our felicity, and in Christ as the Mediator and the Way; and that
this Trust is a venturing all upon him, and a forsaking all for God, and his
promises in Christ. And that it is one and the same Motion which from the
terminus a quo is called Repentance and forsaking all; and from the terminus ad
quem is called Trust and Love. They that are willing to see, may profit much by
this observation; and they that are not may quarrel at it, and talk against
that which their prejudice will not allow them to understand.

And by all this you may see also wherein the strength of Faith consists: And
that is 1. In so clear a sight of the evidences of truth as shall leave no
considerable doubtings, Mat. 21.21. So Abraham staggered not at the promise of
God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, Romans 4.

2. In so confirmed a Resolution to cleave to God and Christ alone, as leaves
no wavering, or looking back: that we may say groundedly with Peter, Though I
die, I will not deny thee; which doubtless signified then some strength of
faith: And as Paul, I am ready not only to be bound, but to die for the Name of
the Lord Jesus, Acts 21.13.

3. In so strong a fortitude of soul, as to venture and give up our selves, our
lives, and all our comforts and hopes into the hand of Christ, without any
trouble or sinful fears, and to pass through all difficulties and trials in the
way, without any distrust or anxiety of mind. These be the characters of a
strong and great degree of faith.

And you may note how Heb. 11. describes Faith commonly by this venturing and
forsaking all upon the belief of God. As in Noah's case, verse 7. And in
Abraham's leaving his Country, v. 8. And in his sacrificing Isaac, v. 17. And
in Moses forsaking Pharaoh's Court, and choosing the reproach of Christ, rather
than the pleasures of sin for a season, v. 24, 25, 26. And in the Israelites
venturing into the Red Sea, v. 29. And in Rebab's hiding the spies, which must
needs be her danger in her own Country. And in all those, who by faith subdued
Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of
Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword; out of
weakness were made strong -- O* hers were tortured, not accepting deliverance,
that they might obtain a better resurrection; and others had trial of cruel
mockings and scourgings; yea moreover of bonds and imprisonments; they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they
wandered about in Sheep skins, and Goat skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented, of whom the world was not worthy: They wandered in Deserts and
Mountains, and in Deus, and Caves of the earth. And in Heb. 10.32, 33, etc.
They endured a great fight of affliction; partly whilst they were made a gazing
flock, both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly whilst they became
companions of them that were so used -- And took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods; knowing in themselves that they had in Heaven a better and an enduring
substance. And thus, the just do live by faith; but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him, says the Lord. See also Romans 8.33, 36, 37
etc.

These are the Spirits descriptions of faith; but if you will rather take a
whimsical ignorant man's description, who can only toss in his mouth the name of
FREE GRACE, and knows not of what he speaks, or what he affirms, or what
that name signifies, which he cheateth his own soul with, instead of true Free
Grace it self, you must suffer the bitter fruits of your own delusion. For my
part I shall say thus much more, to tell you why I say so much, to help you to
a right understanding of the nature of true Christian Faith.

1. If you understand not truly what Faith is, you understand not what Religion
it is that you profess: And so you call your selves Christians, and know not
what it is. It seems those that said, Lord, we have eaten and drunken in thy
presence, and prophesied in thy Name, did think they had been true Believers,
Matthew. 7.21, 22.

2. To err about the nature of true Faith, will engage you in abundance of
other errors, which will necessarily arise from that; as it did them, against
whom James disputes, James 2.14, 15, etc. about Justification by Faith and by
Works.

3. It will damnably delude your souls, about your own state, and draw you to
think that you have saving Faith, because you have that fancy which you thought
was it. One comes boldly to Christ, Mat. 8.19. Master, I will follow thee
whithersoever thou go: But when he heard [ The Foxes have holes, and the
Birds have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head] we hear no
more of him. And another came with a [ Good Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life?] Luke 18.18. as if he would have been one of Christ's Disciples,
and have done any thing for Heaven. (And it is like that he would have been a
Christian, if Free Grace had been as large, and as little grace, as some now
imagine.) But when he heard [ Yet lackest thou one thing: sell all that thou
have, and distribute to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven: Come,
follow me] he was then very sorrowful, for he was very rich, Luke 18.21, 22,
23. Thousands cheat their souls with a conceit that they are Believers, because
they believe that they shall be saved by Free Grace, without the faith and
grace which Christ has made necessary to salvation.

4. And this will take off all those needful thoughts and means, which should
help you to the faith, which yet you have not.

5. And it will engage you in perverse disputes against that true faith which
you understand not: And you will think, that you are contending for Free Grace,
and for the Faith, when you are proud, knowing nothing, but sick or doting
about questions, which engender no better birth than strifes, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings, etc. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5.

6. Lastly, You can scarce more dishonor the Christian Religion, nor injure
God and our Mediator, or harden men in Infidelity, than by fathering your
ill-shapen fictions on Christ, and calling them the Christian or Justifying
Faith.

Direct. 29. Take not all doubts and fears of your salvation, to be the proper
effects and signs of unbelief: Seeing that in many they arise from the
misunderstanding of the meaning of Gods Promise, and in more, from the
doubtfulness of their own qualifications, rather than from any unbelief of the
Promise, or distrust of Christ.

It is ordinary with ignorant Christians to say, that they cannot believe,
because they doubt of their own sincerity and salvation: as thinking that it is
the nature of true faith, to believe that they themselves are justified, and
shall be saved; and that to doubt of this, is to doubt of the Promises, because
they doubtingly apply it. Such distresses have false principles bought many to.
But there are two other things besides the weakness of faith, which are usually
the causes of all this. 1. Many mistake the meaning of Christ's Covenant, and
think that it has no universality in it; and that he died only for the Elect,
and promises pardon to none but the Elect (no not on the condition of
believing.) And therefore thinking that they can have no assurance that they
are Elect, they doubt of the conclusion.

And many of them think that the Promise extends not to such as they, because
of some sin, or great unworthiness, which they are guilty of.

And others think that they have not that Faith and Repentance which are the
condition of the promise of pardon and salvation: And in some of these the
thing it self may be so obscure, as to be indeed the matter of rational
doubtfulness. And in others of them, the cause may be either a mistake about
the true nature and signs of Faith and Repentance; or else a timorous
melancholy causeless suspicion of themselves But which of all these soever be
the cause, it is something different from proper unbelief or distrust of God.
For he that mistaketh the extent of the Promise, and thinks that it belongs
not to such as he, would believe and trust it, if he understood it, that it
extends to him as well as others. And he that doubts of his own Repentance
and Faith, may yet be confident of the truth of Gods Promise to all true
penitent Believers.

I mention this for the cure of two mischiefs: The first is that of the
presumptuous Opinionist, who goes to Hell presuming that he has true saving
faith, because he confidently believes, that he himself is pardoned, and shall
be saved. The second is that of the perplexed fearful Christian, who thinks
that all his uncertainty of his own sincerity, and so of his salvation, is
properly unbelief, and so concludes that he cannot believe, and shall not be
saved. Because he knows not that faith is such a belief and trust in Christ,
as will bring us absolutely and unreservedly to venture our all upon him alone.

And yet I must tell all these persons, that all this while it is ten to one,
but there is really a great deal of unbelief in them which they know not: and
that their belief of the truth of the immortality of the soul, and the life to
come, and of the Gospel it self, is not so strong and firm, as their
never-doubting of it would intimate, or as some of their definitions of Faith,
and their Book-opinions and Disputes import. And it had been well for some of
them, that they had doubted more, that they might have believed, and been
settled better.

Direct. 30. Think often of the excellencies of the life of faith, that the
Motives may be still inducing you thereto.

As 1. It is but reasonable that God should be trusted; or else indeed we deny
him to be God, Psalm. 20 7.

2. What else shall we trust to? shall we deifie creatures, and say to a stock,
Thou art my Father? Jer. 2.27. Lam. 1.19. Shall we distrust God, and trust a
liar and a worm?

3. Trying times will shortly come; and then woe to the soul that cannot trust
in God! Then nothing else will serve our turns. Then cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the
Lord, he shall be like the barren wilderness, etc. Then none that trusted in
him shall be ashamed, Jer. 17.5, 6. Psalm. 25.3, 4. Psalm. 73.26, 27, 28.

4. Gods Alsufficiency leaves no reason for the least distrust: There is the
most absolute certainty that God cannot fail us, because his veracity is
grounded on his essential perfections.

5. No witness could ever stand up against the life of faith, and say that he
lost by trusting God, or that ever God deceived any.

6. The life of faith is a conquest of all that would distress the soul, and it
is a life of constant peace and quietness: Yea it feasteth the soul upon the
everlasting Joys. Though the mountains be removed; though this world be turned
upside down, and be dissolved; whether poverty or wealth, sickness or health,
evil report or good, persecution or prosperity befall us; how little are we
concerned in all this? and how little should they do to disturb the peace and
comfort of that soul, who believes that he shall live with God for ever. Many
such considerations should make us more willing to live by faith upon Gods
Promises, than to live by sense on transitory things.

Direct. 31. Renew your Covenant with Christ in his holy Sacrament, frequently,
understandingly, and seriously.

For 1. when we renew our Covenant with Christ, then Christ renews his
Covenant with us; and that with great advantage to our faith: 1. In an
appointed Ordinance which he will bless. 2. By a special Minister appointed to
seal and deliver it to us as in his Name. 3. By a solemn Sacramental
Investiture.

2. And our own renewing our Covenant with him, is the renewed exercise of
faith, which will tend to strengthen it, and to show us that we are indeed
Believers. And there is much in that Sacrament to help the strengthening of
faith: Therefore the frequent and right using of it, is one of Gods appointed
means, to feed and maintain our spiritual life; which if we neglect, we
wilfully starve our faith, 1 Cor. 11.26, 28, etc.

Direct. 32. Keep all your own promises to God and man*

For 1. Liars always suspect others. 2. Guilt breeds suspiciousness. 3. God
in justice may leave you to your distrust of him, when you will be perfidious
your selves. You can never be confident in God, while you deal falsely with him
or with others. The end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure heart, a
good conscience, and faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

Direct. 33. Labor to improve your belief of every promise, for the increase
of holiness and obedience: And to get more upon your souls that true Image of
God in his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, which will make it easy to you to
believe him.

1. The more the hypocrite seems to believe the promise, the more he boldly
ventureth upon sin, and disobeyeth the precept; because it was but fear that
restrained him; and his belief is but presumption abating fear. But the more a
true Christian believes, the more he flies from sin, and uses Gods means,
and studieth more exact obedience; and having these promises, labors to
cleanse himself from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. And receiving a Kingdom whih cannot be moved, me
must serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.28, 29.

2. The liker the soul is to God, the easier it will believe and trust him. As
faith causes holiness; so every part of holiness befriendeth faith. Now the
three great impressions of the Trinity upon us are expressed distinctly by the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.7. For God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of
Power, of Love, and of a sound mind, (...). Power, Love, and a sound mind or
understanding, do answer Gods nature as the face in the glass does answer our
face, and therefore cannot choose but trust him.

Direct. 34. Lay up in your memory particular pertinent and clear Promises, for
every particular use of faith.

The number is not so much; but be sure that they be plain and well understood,
that you may have no cause to doubt whether they mean any such thing indeed or
not. Here some will expect that I should do this for them, and gather them such
promises. Two things dissuade me from doing it at large: 1. So many Books have
done it already. 2. It will swell this Book too big: But take these few.

1. For forgiveness of all sins, and Justification to penitent Believers.

Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you, that through this man is preached unto
you the forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified, by faith, that is in me.

1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Heb. 8.12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
iniquities I will remember no more.

Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name,
whoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.

Luke 24.47. That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
Name to all Nations.

2. Promises of Salvation from Hell, and possession of Heaven.

John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. v.
18. He that believes on him is not condemned -- v. 36. He that believes on
the Son, has everlasting life, 1 John 5.11, 12. And this is the record that
God has given us, eternal life; and this is in his Son: He that has the Son,
has life --

Acts 26.18. before cited, 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners.

Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the utmost all that come to God by him.

Heb. 5.9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation to
all them that obey him.

Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.

John 10.9. By me if any man enter in, he shall be saved.

John 10.27, 28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
and I will give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish --

Romans 5.9, 10. Being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him -- Much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. See
Luke 18 30. John 4.14. and 6.27, 40, 47. and 12.50. Romans 6.22. Gal. 6.8. 1 Timothy
1.16.

3. Promises of Reconciliation, Adoption, and acceptance with God through
Christ.

2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given to us the ministry of reconciliation; to wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them, and
has committed to us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled unto God: For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

Romans 5.1, 2, 10. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have access by faith, into this grace
wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God -- When we were
enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son.

2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people -- I will receive you, and be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

John 1.12. As many as received him, to them give he power to become the Sons
of God; even to them that believe on his Name; which were born not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Acts 10.35. In every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him.

Ephesians. 1 6 He has made us accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 2.14, 16. Col. 1.20.

John 16.27. The Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and
believed that I came out from God.

4. Promises of renewed Pardon of sins after conversion.

1 John 2.12. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only,
but for the sins of the whole world.

Matthew. 6.14. Forgive us our trespasses -- For if we forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you --

James 5.15. If he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

Matthew. 12.31. I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Spirit --

Psalm. 103.3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities --

1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins --

5. Promises of the Spirit of Sanctification to Believers; and of divine
assistances of grace.

Luke 11.13. How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him.

John 7.37, 38, 39. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink: He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water: This he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him
shall receive --

John 4.10, 14. If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is -- thou would
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living waters --

Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh: and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes --

Ezekiel. 11.19 And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within
you --

Acts 2.38, 39 Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost: For the promise is to you, and to your children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

Gal. 4.6. And because you are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying, Abba Father.

Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my reproof; behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you;
I will make known my words unto you --

Romans 8.26 Likewise the Spirit helps our infirmities; for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intecerssion for us,
with groanings which cannot be uttered.

6. Promises of Gods giving his grace to all that truly desire and seek it.

Matthew. 5 6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be filled.

Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money: come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money
and without price -- Hearken diligently to me, and eat ye that which is good,
and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto
me; hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you -- v. 6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call upon him while he is
near --

Rev. 22.17. Let him that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the
water of life freely.

7. Promises of Gods giving us all that we pray for according to his promises
and will.

Mat. 7.7, 8, 11. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened to you: for every one that asks, receives; and
he that seeks finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened -- If ye
being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall
your Father which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask him?

Matthew. 6.6. Pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees
in secret, shall reward thee openly.

John 14.13, 14. and 15.16. and 16.23. John 15.7. If ye abide in me, and my
words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

1 John 5.14, 15. And this is the confidence which we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he
hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we
desired of him.

1 John 3.22. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight.

Prove. 15.8, 29. The prayer of the upright is his delight -- He hears the
prayer of the righteous.

1 Pet. 3.12. The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open to their prayers --

8. That God will accept weak prayers and groans, which want expressions, if
they be sincere.

Romans 8.26, 27. The Spirit helps our infirmities -- The Spirit it self makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered: And he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the spirit.

Gal. 4.6. -- Crying, Abba, Father.

Psalm. 77.3. I remembered God, and was troubled, and my spirit was overwhelmed
--

Psalm. 38.9. Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid
from thee.

Luke 18.14. God be merciful to me a sinner.

9. Promises of all things in general which we want, and which are truly for
our good.

Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and Shield: the Lord will give grace
and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

Psalm. 34.9, 10. O fear the Lord ye his Saints; for there is no want to them
that fear him -- They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.

Romans 8 28, 32 All things work together for good to them that love God -- He
that spared not his own Son, but gave him up for us all, how shall he not with
him also freely give us all things?

Matthew. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added to you.

2 Pet. 1.3. According as his divine power has given us all things that
pertain to life and godliness.

1 Timothy 4.8. But godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

10 Promises of a bl^ssing on them that sincerely hear and read Gods Word, and
use his Sacraments and other means.

Isa. 55.3. Incline your ear and come unto me; hear and your souls shall live.

Read the Eunuchs conversion, in Acts 8. who was reading the Scripture in his
Chariot.

1 Pet. 2.1. Laying aside all malice, and all guile and hypocrisy, and envies,
and evil speakings, as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that
ye may grow thereby.

Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein.

Psalm. 1.1, 2. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly -- But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he
meditate day and night.

Matthew. 7.24, 25. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I
will liken him to a wise man, that built his house upon a rock, etc.

Luke 8.21. Rather blessed are they that hear the Word of God and do it.

Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen that good part which shall not be taken from her.

Mark 4.23, 24. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear -- And unto you that
hear shall more be given --

Acts 11.14. Who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy household shall
be saved.

1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed to thy self and unto the doctrine, and continue
therein; for in doing this thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear
thee.

Psalm. 89.15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound! they shall walk
O Lord in the light of thy countenance; in thy Name shall they rejoice all the
day --

Heb. 4.12. The Word of God is quick and powerful, etc.

1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ?

Matthew. 18.20. For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there
am I in the midst of them.

Isa. 4.5. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion,
and upon her Assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night; for upon all the glory shall be a defense.

11. Promises to the humble, meek and lowly.

Matthew. 5.3, 4, 5. Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted. Blessed are
the meek; for they shall inherit the earth.

Matthew. 11.28, 29. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and
lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls: for my yoke is easy,
and my burden is light.

Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, and saves
such as be of a contrite spirit.

Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.

Isa. 57.15. For thus faith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
whose Name is holy, I dwell in height and holiness (or in the high and holy
place) with him also that is of a contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

Isa. 66.2. To this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word.

Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me: he has anointed me to preach
the Gospel to the poor: he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, and to set
at liberty them that are bruised --

James 4.6. He gives grace to the humble.

Matthew. 18.4. Whosoever shall humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Matthew. 23.12. He that shall humble himself shall be exalted.

James 4.10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you
up.

Prove. 3.34. He gives grace to the lowly.

12. Promises to the peaceable and peacemakers.

Matthew. 5.9. Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called the
children of God.

James 3.17, 18. The wisdom from above is first pure* then peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated -- And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of
them that make peace.

2 Cor. 13.11. Be perfect; be of good comfort; be of one mind; live in peace;
and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

Prove. 12.20. To the councillors of peace is joy.

Romans 15.33. and 16.20. Phil. 4.9. The God of peace shall be with you, etc.
shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly -- Grace and Peace are the blessing
of Saints.

13. Promises to the diligent and laborious Christian.

Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

Prove. 13.4. The soul of the diligent shall be made fat.

1 Cor. 15.58. Be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure; for if ye
do these things, ye shall never fail.

2 Pet. 1.5, 8. Giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, etc. For if these things be in you and abound, they make you that
you shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

2 Cor. 5.9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him.

Matthew. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added to you.

1 Cor. 3.8. Every man shall receive his own reward, according to his own
labor.

Matthew. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take
it by force. See Prove. 3.13, etc. and 4. to 14. and 6.20, etc. and 7.1, etc.
and 8, and 9. throughout.

14. Promises to the patient waiting Christian.

Heb. 6.11, 12. And we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence,
to the full assurance of hope unto the end, that ye be not slothful, but
followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises.

James 1.3, 4. Knowing that the trying of your faith works patience; but let
patience have its perfect work; that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing.

Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord; be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart; wait, I say, on the Lord.

Psalm. 37.7, 9, 34. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him -- Those that
wait on the Lord shall inherit the earth. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way;
and he shall exa^^ thee to inherit the Land.

Prove. 20 22. Wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee.

Isa. 30.18. Blessed are all they that wait for him.

Isa. 40.31. They that wait on the (...) renew their strength; they shall mount
up with wings as Eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and
not be faint.

Isa. 49.23. They shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

Lam. 3.25. The Lord is good to them that wait for him; to the soul that
seeks him. 26. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for
the salvation of the Lord.

Romans 8.25. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait
for it.

Gal. 5.5. For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by
faith.

2 These. 3.5. The Lord direct your hearts into the Love of God, and the patient
waiting for Christ.

Romans 2.7. To them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory,
honor and immortality, eternal life.

Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God,
ye may inherit the promise.

15. Promises to sincere Obedience.

Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in by the gate into the City.

John 3.22. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. v. 24. He
that keeps his Commandments, dwells in him, and he in him.

John 14.21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that
loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and manifest my self to him.

John 15.10. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I
have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love.

1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
Commandments of God. See Psalm. 112.1. and 119.6. Prove. 1.20, 21, 22, etc. Isa.
48.18. Psalm. 19.8, 9* etc.

Heb. 5.9. He became the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him.

Rev. 14.12. Here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the (...) of
Jesus.

1 John 5.3. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments.

Eccles. 12.13, 14. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God,
and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man; for God shall
bring every work unto judgment, etc.

Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

James 2.24. You see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only.

Romans 2.6, 7, 10. Who will render to every man according to his deeds: To them
who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life -- Glory, honor and peace to every man that works
good --

Acts 10.35. In every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him.

Romans 6.16. Of obedience unto righteousness.

1 John 3.7. He that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.

James 3.18. The fruit of righteousness is sown in peace.

Gal. 6.8. He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit ^^ap life
everlasting.

Romans 8.13. If by the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

16. Promises to them that love God.

Romans 8.28. All things work together for good to them that love God.

1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

James 1.12. He shall receive the Crown of life, which God has promised to
them that love him.

James 2.5. Rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which God has promised to
them that love him.

John 14.21. He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and will manifest my self to him.

Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me.

John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, and I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.

John 16.27. The Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and
believed --

17. Promises to them that love the godly, and that are merciful, and do the
works of love.

John 13.35. By this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye have
love one to another.

Gal. 5.6, 13, 22. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love -- By love serve one another;
for all the Law is fulfilled in one word; in this, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness -- Against such there is no Law.

Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love.

1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love
the brethren. 18. My little children, let us not love in word, nor tongue, but
in deed and in truth: And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall
assure our hearts before him.

1 John 4.7. Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God, and every
one that loves is born of God, and knows God -- v. 16. God is Love, and he
that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. v. 12. If we love one
another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us.

2 Cor. 9.7. God loves a cheerful giver. v. 6. He that sows bountifully,
shall reap bountifully --

Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Matthew. 10.41, 42. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous man, in the name
of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall
give to drink to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only in the name
of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.

Matthew. 25.34, 40, 46. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom --
Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me -- The righteous shall go into life
eternal.

Heb. 13.16. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.

Phil. 4.17. I desire fruit which may abound to your account.

2 Cor. 9.9. As it is written, He has dispersed abroad; he has given to the
poor; his righteousness remains for ever.

18. Promises to the poor and needy Christians.

Matthew. 6.30, 32, 33. If God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is,
and to morrow is cast into the Oven, (...) he not much more clothe (...) O ye
of little faith? Your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these
things. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added to you.

Heb. 13.5. Let your conversations be without covetousness, and be content with
such things as ye have: for he has said, I will never fail thee nor forsake
thee.

James 2.5. Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and
heirs of the Kingdom?

Psalm. 34.10. They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.

Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.

Psalm. 4.19. My God shall supply all your need.

Phil. 4.11, 12, 13, I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where,
and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry; both to
abound, and to suffer need.

Psalm 9.18. The needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor
shall not perish for ever.

19. Promises to the oppressed and wronged Christian.

Psalm. 12.5, 6, 7. For the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the
needy, now will I arise, says the Lord: I will set him in safety from him that
puffs at him -- Thou shall keep them O Lord, thou shall preserve them from
this generation for ever.

Psalm. 35.10. All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which
deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him; yea the poor and the
needy from him that spoileth him.

Psalm. 40.17. But I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks on me; thou art my
helper and deliverer.

Psalm. 42.2, 4, 12, 13. He shall judge thy people with righteousness; and thy
poor with judgment -- He shall judge the poor of the people; he shall save the
children of the needy; and shall break in pieces the oppressor. For he shall
deliver the needy when he cries; the poor also, and him that has no helper.
He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy: He
shall redeem their souls from deceit and violence, and precious ^^all their
blood be in his sight.

Psalm. 113.7. He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out
of the dunghill. See Isa. 25.3, 4, 5. and 14.30. Zech. 9.8. Isa. 51.13.

Eccles. 5.8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting
of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter: for he that
is higher than the highest, regards; and there be higher than they.

20. Promises to the persecuted who suffer for righteousness.

Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in Heaven: for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

Matthew. 10.28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul -- Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing, and one of
them shall not fall on the ground without your Father: But the very hairs of
your head are all numbered: Fear you not therefore; ye are of more value than
many Sparrows. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in Heaven -- v. 39. He that loses his life for my
sake, shall find it.

Matthew. 19.29. And every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my Names
sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

2 These. 1.4, 5, 6. Your patience and faith in all your persecutions and
tribulations which ye suffer, is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of
God, that ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also
suffer: seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled, rest with us -- when Christ
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe
--

Acts 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Read Romans 8.28. to the end, and Rev. 2. and 3d. and Heb. 11. and 12.

1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to
man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may
be able to bear it.

2 Timothy 2.9, 10, 11, 12. I suffer trouble as an evil doer unto bonds; but the
Word of God is not bound: I endure all things for the Elects sake -- It is a
faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him.

Romans 8.17, 18. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy
to be compared with the glory ready to be revealed on us.

2 Cor. 4.17. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for
us a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory.

1 Pet. 3.14, 15. But if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye: and be
not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. Read 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 18, 19. Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all grace, who has called us to his eternal glory by
Christ Jesus, after ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish
strengthen, settle you --

21. Promises to the faithful in dangers, daily and ordinary, or extraordinary.

Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him;
and delivers them. v. 17. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears and
delivers them out of all their troubles. v. 19, 20, 22. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord delivers him out of them all. He
keeps all his bones, nor one of them is broken. The Lord redeemeth the soul
of his servants; and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate.

Psalm. 91.1. He that dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall abide
under the tabernacle of the Almighty. v. 2, 3. I will say to the Lord, He is my
refuge and my fortress* my God, in him will I trust -- Surely he will deliver
thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome Pestilence -- v. 5.
Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night -- v. 11, 12, For he shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall
bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone, Read the
whole --

Psalm. 121.2, 3, 4, 5 6 7, 8. My help comes from the Lord, which made Heaven
and Earth. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; he that keeps thee will
not slumber -- The Lord is thy keeper; the Lord is thy shade upon thy right
hand: The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil; he shall preserve thy soul.
The Lo^d shall preserve thy going out, and coming in, from this time forth, and
even for ever more.

Psalm. 145.20. The Lord preserves all them that love him --

Psalm. 31.23 and 97.10. and 116.6. Prove. 2.8. Isa. 43.2. When thou passest
through the waters I will be with thee --

1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care on him; for he cares for you.

22. Promises f^r help against Temptations, to believers.

1 Cor. 10.13. before cited, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the
godly out of temptations.

Compare Matthew. 4. where Christ was tempted even to worship the Devil, etc.
with Heb. 4.15. and 2.18. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like
as we are, without sin -- Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
in things Godward for us -- For in that he himself has suffered b^ing
tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

James 1.2. My Brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations
(that is, by sufferings for Christ.) v. 12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life.

2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee: My strength is made perfect in
weakness.

Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.

1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist, steadfast in the faith: with v. 10.

James 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. Ephesians. 6.10, 11, etc.

Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the
Law, but under Grace.

John 16.33. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.

1 John 5.4. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

23. Promises to them that overcome and persevere.

Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which
is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

V. 11. He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death.

V. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will
give him a white stone, etc. V. 10. Be faithful unto death, and I will give
thee a Crown of life.

V. 26, 28 He that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I
give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron -- Even
as I received of my Father: and I will give him the morning star.

Rev. 3 5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and
I will not blot out his name out of the book of life; but I will confess his
name before my Father, and before his Angels. V. 12. Him that overcomes will I
make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: And I will
write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, New
Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God, and my new name.

V. 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit down with me on my Throne,
even as I overcame, and am set down with my Father on his Throne.

John 8.31. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed; and ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

Col. 1.22, 23. To present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his
sight; If ye continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and be not moved away
from the hope of the Gospel --

John 15.7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye
will, and it shall be done unto you.

Matthew. 10.22. He that endures to the end shall be saved.

24. Promises to believers in sickness and at death.

1 Cor. 11.32. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world.

Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 11. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges
every Son whom he receives: If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as
with Sons -- Shall we not be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live
-- But he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness: No
chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to them which are
exercised thereby.

James 5.14. Is any sick, let them send for the Elders of the Church -- The
prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he
have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

John 11.3. He whom thou love is sick --

Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. Blessed is the man that considers the poor: the Lord shall
deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord shall preserve him and keep him alive
-- The Lord will strengthen him upon the b^d of languishing: Thou will make all
his bed in his sickness.

2 Cor. 5.1, etc. For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon, with
our house which is from Heaven -- For we that are in us tabernacle do groan,
being burdened; not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that
mortality may be swallowed up of life. Now he that has wrought this for the
self same thing is God; who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit.
Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord. (For we walk by faith, not by sight) we are
confident I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord.

Phil. 1.20, 21, 23, Now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it
be by life or by death. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain -- I am
in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better.

Luke 23.43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Rev. 14.13. I heard a voice from Heaven, saying to me, write, Blessed are the
dead, which die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, that through death, he might destroy
him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; and deliver them who
through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

Psalm. 68.20. He that is our God, is the God of salvation, and to God the Lord
belong the issues from death.

2 Timothy 1.10. Who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality
to light by the Gospel.

1 Cor. 15.54. O death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory? The
sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the Law: but thanks be to
God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

25. Promises to persevering Believers, of the Resurrection unto life, and of
Justification in Judgment, and of Glorification.

1 Cor. 15. throughout. John 5.22, 24, 28, 29. He that hears my Word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life -- The hour is coming in the
which all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice, and shall come forth;
they that have done good, to the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil, to the resurrection of damnation.

John 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also.

Col. 3.1, 3, 4. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your affections on things
above, not on things on the earth: For ye are dead; and your life is hid with
Christ in God. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory.

2 These. 1.10. He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all
them that believe.

Matthew. 25 34, 46. Come ye blessed, etc. The righteous into life eternal.

John 12.26. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there
shall also my servant be. If my man serve me, him will my Father honor.

John. 14.1, 2, 3. Let not your heart be troubled -- In my Fathers house are
many mansions -- I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a
place for you, I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am,
there ye may be also.

John^ 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold the glory which thou have given me.

John 2.17. GO TO MY BRETHREN, and SAY UNTO THEM, I ASCEND TO MY FATHER, and
YOUR FATHER, TO MY GOD, and TO YOUR GOD.

1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world? Know ye not
that we shall judge Angels?

Acts 3.19. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall
send Jesus Christ --

Luke 14.14. Thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.

Let the Reader here take notice of that most important observation of Dr.
Hammond, that (...), the Resurrection, does often signify, in general [our
living in the next world, or our next state of life] in the Scriptures; and not
the last Resurrection only, unless it be called, The Resurrection of the flesh,
or of the body for distinction; or the context have before explained it
otherwise. By which 1 Cor. 15. and Christ's answer to the Sadducees, may be the
better understood.

26. Promises to the godly for their children, supposing them to be faithful in
dedicating them to God, and educating them in his holy ways.

Exodus 20. Commandment 2d. Showing mercy to thousands in them that love me, and
keep my Commandments.

Acts 2.39. For the promise is made to you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, etc.

Psalm. 37.26. His seed is blessed.

1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy.

Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a Hen gathers he chickens under her wings, and ye
would not.

Romans 11.11. Through their fall salvation is come to the Gentiles, 16, 17, 18,
etc. show, that they were broken off by unbelief, and we are graffed in, and
are holy as they were.

Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go and Disciple all Nations, baptizing them, etc.

Romans 4.16. That the promise might be sure to all the seed. And 9.8. The
children of the Promise are counted for the seed.

Matthew. 19.13, 14. Jesus said, suffer little children, and forbid them not to
come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

27. Promises to the Church, of its increase, and preservation, and perfection.

Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of the world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and
of his Christ.

Luke 1.33. He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom
there shall be no end.

Matthew. 13.31, 33. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a grain of Mustard Seed,
which a man took, and sowed in his field: which is indeed the least of all
seeds; but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becomes a
tree, so that the birds of the air lodge in the branches of it -- The Kingdom
of Heaven is like unto leven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of
meal, till the whole was levened.

John 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me.

Dan. 2.44. In the days of these Kings, shall the God of Heaven set up a
Kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not be left to
other people, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, and
it shall stand for ever.

Matthew. 16.18. Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.

Ephesians. 4.12, 16. For the perfecting of the Saints; for the work of the
Ministry; for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity
of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man; unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: that henceforth we may be no
more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine,
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive; but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things,
who is the head, Christ: from whom the whole body fitly joined together and
compacted, by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body to the
edifying of it self in Love.

Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the Word; that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or
any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish. Read Rev. 21,
and 22.

Matthew. 28.20. Lo, I am with you to the end of the world.

Matthew. 24.14. And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness to all Nations; and then shall the end come.

Matthew. 21.44. Whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

The obscure Prophetic passages I pass by.

So much for living by Faith on the Promises of God.

CHAP. VI. How Faith must be exercised on Gods Threatenings and Judgments.
THE exercise of Faith upon Gods Threatenings and Judgments, must be guided by
such rules and helps as these.

Direct. 1. Think not either that Christ has no Threatening penal Laws, or that
there are none which are made for the use of Believers.

If there were no penalties, or penal Laws, there were no distinguishing
Government of the world. This Antinomian fancy destroys Religion. And if
there be threats, or penal Laws, none can be expected to make so much use of
them as true Believers. 1. Because he that most believes them, must needs be
most affected with them. 2. Because all things are for them, and for their
benefit; and it is they that must be moved by them to the fear of God, and an
escaping of the punishment.

And therefore they that object, that Believers are passed already from death
to life; and there is no condemnation to them; and they are already justified,
and therefore have no use of threats or fears] do contrad^ct themselves: For it
w^ll rather follow Therefore they and they only do and will faithfully use the
threatenings in godly fears.] For 1. Though they are justified, and passed from
death to life, they have ever faith, in order of nature before their
Justification; and he that believes not Gods threatenings with fear, has no
true Faith. And 2. They have ever inherent Righteousness or Sanctification,
with their Justification: And this Faith is part of that holiness, and of the
life of grace which they are passed into. For this is life eternal, to know the
only true God, and Jesus Christ, John 17.3. And he knows not God, who knows
him not to be true. And this is part of our knowledge of Christ also, to know
him as the infallible Author of our Faith, that is, of the Gospel, which says
not only, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but also, He that
believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. And this is the record which God
gave of his Son, which he that believes not, makes him a liar; that God has
given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son: He that has the Son, has
life; and he that has not the Son, has not life, 1 John 5.12. Yea as he that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life; so he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36. And
therefore 3. The reason why there is no condemnation to us, is because
believing, not part only, but all this Word of Christ, we fly from sin and
wrath, and are in Christ Jesus, as giving up our selves to him, and walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit; being moved so to do both by the
promises and threats of God. This is plain English, and plain and necessary
truth, the greater is the pity, that many honest, well-meaning Antinomians
should fight against it, on an ignorant conceit of vindicating Free Grace: If
the plain Word of God were not through partiality over-lookt by them, they
might see enough to end the controversy in many and full expressions of
Scripture. I will cite but three more, Matthew. 10.28. and Luke 12.5. But fear
him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell; or when he has killed,
has power to cast into Hell; yea I say unto you, fear him. Does Christ thus
iterate that it is he that says it, and says it to his Disciples; and yet
shall a Christian say, it must not be preached to Disciples as the Word of
Christ to them?

H^b. 4.1. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into
his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.

Heb. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God, of things not seen as yet (that
is, of the deluge) moved with fear, prepared an Ark, to the saving of his
house; by the which be condemned the world* and became heir of the
righteousness which is by faith.

Note here how much the belief of Gods threatenings does to the constitution of
that faith which is justifying and saving.

Direct. 2. Judge not of Gods threatenings by the evil which is threatened, but
by the obedience to which the threatenings should drive us, and the evil from
which they would preserve us, and the order of the world which they preserve,
and the wisdom, and holiness, and justice of God; which they demonstrate.

When men think how dreadful a misery Hell is, they are ready to think hardly
of God, both for his threatening and execution; as if it were long of him, and
not of themselves, that they are miserable. And as it is a very hard thing to
think of the punishment it self with approbation; so is it also to think of the
threatening, or Law which binds men over to it; or of the Judgment which will
pass the sentence on them. But think of the true nature, use and benefits of
these threats or pena^ Laws, and true reason, and faith will not only be
reconciled to them; but see that they are to be loved and honored, as well as
feared. 1. They are of great use to drive us to obedience. And it is easier to
see the amiableness of Gods commands, than of his threats: And obedience to
these commands, is the holy rectitude, health and beauty of the soul. And
therefore that which is a suitable and needful means, to promote obedience, is
amiable and beneficial to us. Though Love must be the principle or chief spring
of our obedience; yet he that knows not that Fear must drive, as Love must
draw, and is necessary in its place to join with Love, or to do that which the
weaknesses of Love leave undone, does neither know what a man is, nor what Gods
Word is, nor what his Government is, nor what either Magistracy, or any civil,
or domestical Government is* and therefore should spend many years at School
before he turns a disputer.

2. They are of use to keep up order in the world; which could not be expected
if it were not for Gods threatenings. If the world be so full of wickedness,
rapine and oppressions, notwithstanding all the threatenings of Hell, what could
we expect it should be, if there were none such, but even as the suburbs of
Hell it self. When Princes, and Lords, and Rich men, and all those thieves and
rebels that can but get strength enough to defend themselves, and all that can
but hide their faults, would be under no restraints considerable, but would do
all the evil that they have a mind to do: Men would be worse to one another,
than Bears and Tigers.

3. Gods threatenings in their primary intention or use, are made to keep us
from the punishment threatened. Punishment is naturally due to evil doers: And
God declares it, to give us warning, that we may take heed, avoid it and
escape.

4. That which does so clearly demonstrate the Holiness of God, in his
righteous Government, his Wisdom and his Justice is certainly good and amiable
in it self. But we must not expect that the same thing should be good and
amiable to the wicked, who run themselves into it; which is good to the world,
or to the just about them, or to the honor of God. Assizes, Prisons and
Gallows are good to the Country, and to all the innocent, to preserve their
peace, and to the honor of the King and his Government; but not to murderers,
thieves or rebels, Isa. 26.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 48.11. and 9.16. and 89.14. and 97.2.
and 149.9. and 146.7. and 37.6, 28. Jude 6. and 15. Rev. 4.7. and 15.4. and
16.7. and 19.2. Eccles. 12.14.

Direct. 3. Judge of the severity of Gods threatenings, partly by the greatness
of himself whom we offend, and partly by the necessity of them for the
Government of the world.

1. Remember that sinning wilfully against the infinite Majesty of Heaven, and
refusing his healing mercy to the last, deserves worse than any thing against
a man can do, 1 Samuel 2.25.

2. And remember that even the threatening of Hell does not serve turn with most
of the world, to keep them from sinning and despising God: and therefore you
cannot say that they are too great. For that plaster draws not too strongly,
which will not draw out the thorn. If Hell be not terrible enough to persuade
you from sin, it is not too terrible to be threatened and executed: He that
should say, Why will God make so terrible a Law? and withal should say, As
terrible as it is I will venture on it, rather than leave my pleasures, and
rather than live a holy life; does contradict himself, and tells us, that the
Law is not terrible enough to attain its chief and primary end, with such as
he, that will not be moved by it, from the most sordid, base or brutish
pleasure.

Direct. 4. Remember how Christ himself, even when he came to deliver us from
Gods Law, did yet come to verify his threatening in the matter of it, and to be
a sacrifice for sin, and public demonstration of Gods Justice.

For this end was Christ manifested, to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John
3.5, 8. And the first and great work of the Devil was, to represent God as a
liar, and to persuade Eve not to believe his threatenings, and to tell her, that
though she sinned, she should not die. And though God so far dispensed with it,
as to forgive man the greatest part of the penalty, it was by laying it on his
Redeemer; and making him a sacrifice to his Justice: that his Cross might
openly confute the Tempter, and assure the world, that God is just, and that
the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. though eternal life be the gift of God
through Jesus Christ.

And he that well considers this, that the Son of God would rather stoop to
sufferings and death, than the D^vils reproach of Gods threatenings should be
made true, and than the Justice of God against sin should not be manifested,
will sure never think, that this Justice is any dishonor to the Almighty.

Direct. 5. Let this be your use of the threatenings of God, to drive you from
sin to more careful obedience, and to help you against the defects of love, and
to set them against every temptation when you are assaulted by it.

When a tempting bait is set before you, set Hell against it, as well as
Heaven; and say, Can I take this cup, this whore, this preferment, this gain of
Judas, with Hell, for my part instead of Heaven? If men threaten death,
imprisonment, or any other penalty; or if losses or reproaches be like by men
to be made your reward, remember that God threatens Hell, and ask whether this
be not the most intolerable suffering.

And if any Antinomian revile you for thus doing, and say [You should set only
Free Grace before you, to keep you from sinning, and not hell and damnation]
Tell him that it is Christ the Mediator of Free Grace, which has set Hell
before you in the Scripture, and not you: And that you do but consider of that
which Christ has set there before you to be considered of. Ask them whether it
be not God that prepared hell for the Devil and his Angels, and Christ himself
that will adjudge all impenitent sinners to it, Matthew. 25. And ask them why
Christ does so often talk of it in the Gospel, Matthew. 13. of the worm that
never dies, and the fire that never shall be quenched, Luke 19.27. Mark 16.16.
John 3.36. 2 These. 1.8* 9. etc. And whether they know why Fear was given to
man; and whether Christ mistook in all such commands, Luke 12.4. Heb. 11.7.
Heb. 4.1. And whether God has made any part of his Laws in vain.

If they say, that the Law was not made for a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1.9. Tell
them that the words are expounded, Gal. 5.23. Against such there is no Law. The
Law was not made to condemn and punish a righteous man; because he feared the
threatening of it, and so fell not under the condemnation. If you speak of the
Law of Christ, or any Law which supposes the subject righteous: There is no
Law can be pleaded against such to their damnation. That there is no Law
against them is but as Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them. And we grant
also, that in that measure as men's souls are habituated with love to God, and
duty, and hatred of sin, they need no Law to urge and threaten them; no more
than a loving wife need to have a Law to forbid her murdernig her husband, or
abusing him. But withal we know, that no man on earth is perfect in the
degrees of Love; and therefore all need Laws and fear.

Use all Gods penal Laws to the ends that he appointed them, to quicken you in
your obedience, and restrain you from yielding to temptations, and from
sinning, and then your own benefit will reconcile you to the Wisdom, Holiness,
and Justice of the Laws.

Direct. 6. Remember that all Christians have solemnly professed their own
consent, to the threats and punishments of the Gospel.

Though God will punish sinners whether they consent or not; and though none
consent to the execution upon themselves, when it comes to it; yet all that
profess Christianity do profess their consent to the condemning, as well as to
the justifying part of Gods Word. For every Christian professes his consent to
be governed by Christ; and therefore he professes his consent to be governed
by Christ's Laws: For if Christ be a King, he must have Laws: and if he govern
us at all, he governs us by Laws. And this is Christ's Law; He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned,
Mark 16.16. He that professes to be governed by Christ, professes his consent
to be governed by this very Law: and therefore he professes his consent to be
damned if he believe not. Christ told you that you must consent to both parts,
or to neither: and will you grudge at the severity of that Law which you have
professed your consent to? The curses of the Covenant ( Deuteronomy. 29.21.) were to
be repeated to the people of Israel; and they were expressly to say Amen to each
of them. For life and death were set before them; blessings and cursings, Deuteronomy.
30.1, 19. and not life and blessings alone. And so the Gospel which we are to
believe, contains though principally and eminently the Promises; yet
secondarily also the threatenings of Hell to impenitent unbelievers. And our
consent does speak our approbation.

Direct. 7. Observe that the belief of Christ's threatenings of damnation to
impenitent unbelievers, is a real part of the Christian saving Faith, and that
when ever it is joined with a true love and desire after holiness, it certainly
proves that the Promises also are believed, though the party think that he
does not believe them.

Note here 1. That I do not say, that all belief or fear of Gods threatenings is
saving Faith. But 2. That all saving Faith contains such a belief of the
threatenings. 3. And that many times poor Christians, who believe and tremble at
the threatenings, do truly believe the Promises, and yet mistake, and verily
think that they do not believe them. 4. But their mistake may certainly be
manifested, if their Faith do but work by a love and desire after holiness, and
the fruition of God.

For 1. It is evident that the same Gospel which says, He that believes shall
be saved; does say, He that believes not shall be damned. Therefore the same
faith believes both, 2. It is plain that the same formal object of faith,
which is Gods Veracity, will bring a man to believe one as well as the other,
if he equally know it to be a divine revelation: He that believes that All
that God says is true: and then believes that God says that All true
Believers shall be saved; must needs believe that this Promise is true. And he
that understands that Christ says, Unbelievers shall be damned; cannot but
find also that he says, True Believers shall be saved. And if he believe the
one, because it is the word of Christ; he does sure believe the other, because
it is the word of Christ. 3. Yea it is in many respects harder to believe Gods
threatenings, than his promises; partly because sinners are more unwilling that
they should be true; and they have more enmity to the threatening, than to the
promise; and partly because they commonly feign God to be such as they would
have him be, Psalm. 50. Thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy self, etc. And
partly because Gods Goodness being known to be his very essence, and all men
being apt to judge of Goodness, by the measure of their own interest, it is far
more obvious and facil to man's understanding, to conclude that some are saved,
than that some are damned; and that the penitent believers are saved, than that
the impenitent unbelievers are damned: We hear daily how easily almost all men
are brought to believe that God is merciful; and how hard it is to persuade
them of his damning Justice and severity. Therefore he that can do the harder,
is not unlike to do the easier.

And indeed it is mere ignorance of the true nature of faith, which makes
those whom I am now describing, to think that they do not believe Gods
Promises, when they believe his Threatenings. They think that because they
believe not that they themselves are pardoned, justified, and shall be saved,
that therefore they believe not the promise of God: But this is not the reason;
but it is because you find not the condition of the promise yet in your selves,
and therefore think that you have no part in the benefits: But its one thing to
doubt of your own sincerity, and another thing to doubt whether the promise of
God be true. Suppose that the Law do pardon a fellon if he can read as a Clerk;
and one that is a fellon be in doubt whether his reading will serve or not;
this is not to deny belief to the pardoning act of the Law. Suppose one promise
a yearly stipend to all that are of full one and twenty years of age, in the
Town or Country: To doubt of my age, is not to doubt of the truth of the
promise.

Object. But do not Protestant Divines conclude against the Papists, that
saving Faith must be a particular application of Christ and the Promise to
ourselves, and not only a general assent?

Answ. It is very true; and the closer that application is the better. But the
application which all sound Divines (in this point) require as necessary in
saving Faith, is neither an assurance, nor persuasion that your own sins are
already pardoned, or that they ever will be: But it is 1. A belief that the
Promise of pardon to all believers, is so universal, as that it includes you
as well as others, and promises and offers you pardon, and life, if you will
believe in Christ. 2. And it is a consent or willingness of heart that Christ
be yours, and you be his, to the ends proposed in the Gospel. 3. And it is a
practical Trust in his sufficiency, as choosing him for the only Mediator,
resolving to venture your souls, and all your hopes upon him: Though yet
through your ignorance of your selves, you may think that you do not this thing
in sincerity, which indeed you do, yea and much fear (through melancholy or
temptation) that you never shall do it, and consequently never shall be saved.

He that doubts of his own salvation, not because he doubts of the truth of
the Gospel; but because he doubts of the sincerity of his own heart, may be
mistaken in himself, but is not therefore an unbeliever (as is said before.)

If you would know whether you believe the Promises truly, answer me these
particular questions: 1. Do you believe that God has promised that all true
Believers shall be saved? 2. Do you believe that if you are or shall be a true
Believer, you shall be saved? 3. Do you choose or desire God as your only
happiness and end, to be enjoyed in Heaven, and Christ as the only Mediator to
procure it; and his holy Spirit as his Agent in your souls, to sanctify you
fully to the Image of God? Are you truly willing that thus it should be? And if
God be willing, will not you refuse it? 4. Do you turn away from all other
ways of felicity, and choose this alone, to venture all your hopes upon, and
resolve to seek for none but this; and to venture all on God and Christ, though
yet you are uncertain of your sincerity and salvation? why this makes up true
saving faith.

5. And I would further ask you; Do you fear damnation, and Gods wrath, or not?
If not, what troubles you? and why complain you? If you do, tell me then
whether you do believe Gods threatening, that he that believes not shall be
damned, or not? If you do not, what makes you fear damnation? Do you fear it,
and not believe that there is any such thing? If you do believe it, how can you
choose but believe also, that every true Believer shall be saved? Is God true in
his Threatenings, and not in his Promises? This must force you plainly to
confess, that you do believe Gods Promises, but only doubt of your own
sincerity, and consequently of your salvation; which is more a weakness in your
hope, than in your faith, or rather chiefly in your acquaintance with your self.

Direct. 8. Yet still dwell most upon Gods Promises in the exercise of love,
desire and thankfulness; and use all your fear about the threatenings, but in a
second place, to further and not to hinder the work of love.

Direct. 9. Let faith interpret all Gods Judgments, merely by the light of the
threatenings of his Word; and do not gather any conclusions from them, which the
Word affords not, or allows not. Gods Judgments may be dangerously
misunderstood.

CHAP. VII. How to exercise Faith about Pardon of sin and Justification.
THE practice of Faith about our Justification, is hindered by so many unhappy
controversies and heresies, that what to do with them here in our way, is not
very easy to determine: Should I omit the mention of them, I leave most that I
write for, either under that disease it self, or the danger of it, which may
frustrate all the rest which I must say: For the errors hereabout are swarming
in most quarters of the Land, and are like to come to the ca^s of most that are
studious of these matters: so that an antidote to most, and a vomit to the
rest, is become a matter of necessity, to the success of all our practical
Directions.

And yet many cannot endure to be troubled with difficulties, who are slothful;
and must have nothing set before them that will cost them much study; and many
peaceable Christians love not any thing that sounds like controversy or
strife (As others that are Sons of contention relish nothing else) But
averseness must give place to necessity. If the Leprosy arise, the Priest must
search it, and the Physician must do his best to cure it, notwithstanding their
natural averseness to it. Though I may be as averse to write against errors,
as the Reader is to read what I write, we must both blame that which causes
the necessity, but not therefore deny our necessary duty: But yet I will so far
gratify them that need no more, as to put the more practical Directions first,
that they may pass by the heap of errors ^^ter, if their own judgments
prevail not against their unwillingness.

Direct. 1. Understand well what need you have of pardon of sin, and
Justification, by reason of your guilt, and of Gods Law and Justice, and the
everlasting punishment which is legally your due.

1. It must be a sensible, awakening, practical knowledge of our own great
necessity, which must teach us to value Christ as a Savior, and to come to him
in that empty, sick and weary plight, as is necessary in those who will make
use of him for their supply and cure, Matthew. 9.12. and 11.28, 29. A superficial
speculative knowledge of our sin and misery, will prepare us but for a
superficial opinionative faith in Christ, as the remedy. But a true sense of
both, will teach us to think of him as a Savior indeed.

2. Original sin, and actual, the wickedness both of the heart and life, even
all our particular sins of omission and commission, and all their circumstances
and aggravations, are the first reason of our great necessity of pardon: And
therefore it cannot but be a duty to lay them to heart as particularly as we
can, to make that necessity, and Christ's redemption the better understood, Acts
2.37. Acts 2^.8, 9, etc.

3. The wrath of God, and the miseries of this life, and the everlasting
miseries of the damned in Hell, being the due effects or punishment of sin, are
the second cause of our necessity of pardon: And therefore these also must be
thought on seriously, by him that will seriously believe in Christ.

4. The Law of God which we have broken, makes this punishment our due, Romans
3. and 5. and 7. And the Justice of God is engaged to secure his own honor, in
the honor of his Law and Government.

Direct. 2. Understand well what Christ is and does, for the Justification of a
sinner, and how (not one only) but all the parts of his office are exercised
hereunto.

In the dignity of his person, and perfect original holiness of his natures,
divine and humane, he is fitly qualified for his work of our Justification and
Salvation.

His undertaking (which is but the Divine Decree) did from eternity lay the
foundation of all, but did not actually justify any.

His Promise, Genesis 3.15. and his new Relation to m^^ thereupon, did that to the
Fathers in some degree, which his after-incarnation and performance, and his
Relation thereupon, does now to us.

His perfect Obedience to the Law; yea to that Law of Mediation also peculiar
to himself (which he performed neither as Priest, or Prophet, or King, but as a
subject) was the meritorious cause of that Covenant and Grace which justifies
us, and so of our Justification. And that which is the meritorious cause here,
is also usually called the material, as it is that matter or thing which
meriteth our Justification; and so is called Our Righteousness it self.

As he was a sacrifice for sin, he answered the ends of the Law which we
violated, and which condemned us, as well as if we had been all punished
according to the sense of the Law: And therefore did thereby satisfy the
Lawgiver: and thereby also merited our pardon and Justification; so that his
Obedience as such, and his Sacrifice (or whole humiliation) as satisfactory by
answering the ends of the Law, are conjunctly the meritorious cause of our
Justification.

His New Covenant (which in Baptism, is made mutual by our expressed consent)
is a general gift or act of oblivion, or pardon, given freely to all mankind,
on condition they will believe and consent to it, or accept it, so that it is
Gods pardoning and adopting instrument: And all are pardoned by it
conditionally; and every penitent Believer actually and really. And this
Covenant or Gift is the effect of the foresaid merit of Christ, both founded
and sealed by his blood.

As he merited this as a mediating subject and sacrifice, so as our High Priest
he offered this sacrifice of himself to God.

And as our King, he being the Lawgiver to the Church, did make this Covenant
as his Law of grace, describing the terms of life and death: And being the
Judge of the world, does by his sentence justify and condemn men, as believers
or unbelievers, according to this Covenant: And also executes his sentence
accordingly (partly in this life, but fully in the life to come.)

As our Teacher, and the Prophet, or Angel of the Covenant, he does declare it
as the Fathers will, and promulgate and proclaim this Covenant and conditional
Pardon and Justification to the world; and send out his Ambassadors with it to
beseech men in his Name to be reconciled to God, and to declare, yea and by
sacramental investiture, to seal and deliver a Pardon and actual Justification
to Believers when they consent.

And as our Mediating High Priest now in the Heavens, he presents our
necessity, and his own righteousnesses and sacrifice as his merit^, for the
continual communication of all this grace, by himself, as the Head of the
Church, and Administrator of the Covenant.

So that Christ does justify us both as a subject meriting, as a sacrifice
meriting, as a Priest offering that sacrifice; as a King actually making the
Justifying Law, or enacting a general Pardon; as a King sententially and
executively justifying; as a Prophet or Angel of the Covenant promulgating it;
as King, and Prophet, and Priest, delivering a sealed Pardon by his Messengers:
And as the Priest, Head and Administrator communicating this with the rest of
his benefits. By which you may see in what respects Christ must be believed in
to Justification, if Justifying Faith were (as it is not) only the receiving
him as our Justifier: It would not be the receiving him as in one part of his
office only.

Direct. 3. Understand rightly how far it is that the righteousness of Christ
himself is made ours, or imputed to us, and how far not.

There are most vehement controversies to this day, about the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness; in which I know not well which of the extremes are in
the greater error, those that plead for it in the mistaken sense, or those
that plead against it in the sober and right sense: But I make no doubt but
they are both of them damnable, as plainly subverting the foundation of our
faith: And yet I do not think that they will prove actually damning to the
Authors, because I believe that they misunderstand their adversaries, and do
not well understand themselves, and that they digest not, and practice not what
they plead for, but digest and practice that truth which they doctrinally
subvert, not knowing the contrariety; which if they knew they would renounce
the error, and not the truth. And I think that many a one that thus
contradicts fundamentals, may be saved.

Some there be (besides the Antinomians) that hold that Christ did perfectly
obey and satisfy (not in the natural, but) in the civil or legal person of
each sinner that is elect (representing and bearing as many distinct persons as
are elect) so fully as that God does repute every Elect person (or say others,
every Believer) to be one that in Law sense, did perfectly obey and satisfy
Justice himself; and so imputes Christ's Righteousness and satisfaction to us,
as that which was reputatively or legally of our own performance, and so is
ours, not only in its effects, but in it self.

Others seeing the pernicious consequences of this opinion, deny all imputed
Righteousness of Christ to us, and write many reproachful volumes against it
(as you may see in Thorndikes last works and Dr. Gell, and Parker against the
Assembly, and abundance more.)

The truth is, Christ merited and satisfied for us in the person of a Mediator:
But this Mediator was the Head and Root of all Believers, and the second Adam,
the fountain of spiritual life; and the Surety of the New Covenant, Heb. 7.22.
1 Cor. 15.22, 45. and did all this in the nature of man, and for the sake and
benefit of man; suffering, that we might not suffer damnation, but not obeying
that we might not obey; but suffering and obeying that our sinful imperfection
of obedience might not be our ruin, and our perfect obedience might not be
necessary to our own Justification or Salvation, but that God might for the
sake and merit of this his perfect obedience and satisfaction, forgive all our
sins, and adopt us for his Sons, and give us his holy Spirit, and glorify us
for ever; so that Christ's Righteousness, both obediential and satisfactory, is
ours in the effects of it in themselves, and ours relatively for those effects,
so far as to be purposely given for us to that end; but not ours in it self
simply, or as if we were reputed the legal performers our selves, or might be
said in Law sense, or by divine estimation or imputation, to have our selves in
and by Christ fulfilled the Law, and suffered for our not fulfilling it (which
is a contradiction.)

As he that both by a price, and by some meritorious act, does redeem a
captive, or purchase pardon for a traitor, does give the money and merit in it
self to the Prince, and not to the Captive or Traitor himself. (He never saw
it, nor ever had propriety in the thing it self;) But the deliverance is the
Pris^ners, and not the Princes; and therefore it is given to the Prisoner, as
to the effects, though not in it self; in that it was given for him.

And because Christ suffered what we should have suffered (as to the value) to
save us from suffering, and our sins were the cause of our guilt of punishment,
and so the remote cause of the sufferings of Christ (his own sponsion being the
nearer cause) therefore it may be said truly that Christ did not only suffer
for our benefit, but in our stead or place; and in a larger and less strict and
proper sense, that he suffered in the person of a sinner, and as one to whom
our sins were imputed; meaning no more but that he suffered as one that by his
own consent undertook to suffer for the persons of sinners, and that as such an
undertaker only he suffered; and that thus our sins were imputed to him (not in
themselves, as if he were in Law sense the committer of them, or polluted by
them, or by God esteemed so to have been, but) as to the effects, that is, his
suffering; in that they were the occasion, and the remote or assumed cause of
his sufferings; as his Righteousness is imputed to us, as the meritorious cause
of our Pardon and Justification.

But he could not be said no not in so large a sense as this, to have obeyed in
our stead (considering it as obedience or holiness, but only as merit) because
he did it not that we might not obey, but that we might not suffer for
disobeying.

More of this will follow in the next Chapter.

Direct. 4. Understand well what guilt it is that Christ does remit in our
Justification; not the guilt of the fact, nor of the fault in it self, but the
guilt of punishment; and of the fault only so far as it is the cause of wrath
and punishment.

1. The guilt of fact, is in the reality or truth of this charge, that such a
fact we did or omitted: so far it is but Physically considered, and would not
come into legal consideration, were it not for the following relation of it.

2. The guilt of fault, reatus culpae, is the reality of this charge (or the
foundation of it in us) that we are the committers or omitters of such an
action contrary to the Law: or that our act or omission was really a crime or
fault.

3. The guilt of punishment, reatus poenae, vel ad poenam, is the foundation of
this charge, that we are by that Law which must judge us, condemnable, or
obliged to punishment (or it is our right) for the sins so committed.

Now Christ does not by justifying us, or pardoning us, make us either to be
such as really did not do the fact; or such as did not a culpable fact, no nor
such as did not deserve damnation, or to whom it was not due by the first Law
alone; but to be such who are not now at all condemnable for it, because the
new Law which we must be judged by, does absolve us, by forgiving us; not
making the fault no fault, nor causing God to think that Christ committed it,
and not we; or to esteem us to be such as never did commit it; but remitting
the punishment, and that dueness of punishment and obligation to it, which did
before result from the fault and Law together; and so the fault it self is
remitted as it is the foundation from whence that obligation to punishment
resulteth, respectively, but not simply, nor as a fault in it self at all.

When I say the punishment and the dueness of it to us, is forgiven, I mean not
only the punishment of sense, but of loss also: nor only the outward part,
which is executed by creatures, but especially the first and great penalty, of
Gods own displeasure with the person, and the withdrawing of his Spirit and
complacential love, and that which we may improperly call, his obligation in
Justice to condemn the sinner. There was upon God, before Christ's satisfaction
and our title to him, that which we may so call a legal or relative obligation
on God to punish us, because else he should have done contrary to the due ends
of Government, and so contrary to the Wisdom and Justice of a Governor, which
is not consistent with his perfection. But now the ends of Government are so
answered and provided for, that there is no such obligation on God to punish
us, but he may remit it without any dishonor at all; nay, with the honor of
his Wisdom and Justice. We are now non condemnandi, not condemnable, though we
are sinners. In Judgment we must confess the latter, and deny the former only.

Direct. 5. Understand well what sins Christ justifies men from, or forgiveth
to them, and what not: All sins which consist with true faith and repentance
(or true conversion to God in love, by faith in Christ) and all that went
before: But he forgiveth no man in a state of impenitency and unbelief, nor any
man's final impenitency and unbelief at all; nor any other sins, when those are
final; except it be with the common conditional forgiveness before mentioned;
or that absolute particular forgiveness of some present penalties, which saves
no man from damnation, Matthew. 12.31. Acts 26.18, Romans 8.1, 30. Acts 5.31. Acts
2.38, 39. Mark 16.16 John 3.16, 18, 36. 1 John 5.11, 12. Mark 4.1^. Matthew.
18.27, 32.

Direct. 6. Understand well the true nature of that Faith and Repentance, which
God has made the condition of our Justification. This is sufficiently opened
before; and the consulation of all the cavils against it, would be tedious and
unsavory here.

Direct. 7. Understand well the Covenant and Promise of Justification; and
measure your belief and expectations by that Promise.

Expect no other pardon, nor on any other conditions or terms than the Promise
does contain* For it is Gods pardoning act or instrument; and by it we must be
justified or condemned: And we know not but by it; whom God will justify.

Direct. 8. Keep always the assuring grounds of faith before your eyes, when
you look after pardon, that your faith may be firm, and powerful, and quieting;
especially consider the following grounds.

1. Gods gracious Nature proclaimed even to Moses, as abundant in mercy, and
forgiving iniquitys, transgressions and sins (to these, and upon those terms
that he promises forgiveness) though he will by no means clear the guilty
(that is, will neither take the unrighteous to be righteous; nor forgive them,
or acquire them in judgment, whom his Covenant did not first forgive.)

2. The merciful Nature and of our Redeemer, Heb. 2.17.

3. How deeply Christ harh engaged himself to show mercy, when he assumed our
nature, and did so much toward our salvation as he has done, Heb. 8, and 9.

4. That it is his very office and undertaking, which therefore he cannot
possibly neglect, Luke 19.10. and 2.11. John 4.42. Acts 5.31. and 13.23.

5. That God the Father himself did give him to us, and appoint him to this
saving office, John 3.16, 18. Acts 5.31. and 13.23. Yea God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing to them their trespasses, 2
Cor. 5.18, 19. And God made him sin (that is, a sacrifice for sin) for us who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him (that is,
might be the public instances of Gods merciful Justice, as Christ was of his
penal Justice; and this by a righteousness given us by God himself, and
purchased or merited for us by Christ, 2 Cor. 5.21. yea and be renewed in
holiness and righteousness according to his Image.

6. That now it is become the very interest of God, and of Jesus Christ himself
to justify us; as ever he would not lose either the glory of his grace, or the
obedience and suffering which he has performed, Isa. 53.19. Romans 5.12, 13, 18,
19, etc. Romans 4. throughout.

7. Consider the nearness of the Person of Christ, both to the Father and to
us, Heb. 1, and 2, and 3.

8. Think of the perfection of his sacrifice and merit, set out throughout the
Epistle to the Hebrews.

9. Think of the word of Promise or Covenant, which he has made, and sealed
and sworn, Heb. 6.17, 18. Titus 1.2.

10. Think of the great seal of the Spirit, which is more than a Promise, even
an earnest, which is a certain degree of possession, and is an executive pardon
(as after shall be declared) Romans 8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6.

11. Remember that Gods own Justice is now engaged for our Justification, in
these two respects conjunct: 1. Because of the fullness of the merits and
satisfaction of Christ: 2. And because of his Veracity which must fulfill his
promise, and his governing or destributive Justice, which must judge men
according to his own Law of Grace, and must give men that which he himself has
made their right, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. 1 John 5.9, 10, 11, 12.

12. Lastly, Think of the many millions now in Heaven, of whom many were
greater sinners than you; and no one of them (save Christ) came thither by the
way of innocence and legal Justification: There are no Saints in Heaven that
were not redeemed from the captivity of the Devil, and justified by the way of
pardoning grace, and were not once the heirs of death, John 3.3, 5. Romans 3, and
4.

Upon these considerations trust your selves confidently on the grace of
Christ, and take all your sins but as the advantages of his grace.

Direct. 9. Remember that there is somewhat on your own parts to be done, for
the continuing, as well as for the beginning of your Justification; yea
somewhat more than for the beginning; even the faithful keeping of your
baptismal Covenant, in the essentials of it; and also that you have continual
need of Christ, to continue your Justification.

Many take Justification to be one instantanious act of God, which is never
afterward to be done: And so it is, if we mean only the first making of him
righteous who was unrighteous: (As the first making of the world, and not the
continuance of it, is called Creation:) but this is but about the name: For the
thing it self, no doubt but that Covenant which first justified us, does
continue to justify us; and if the cause should cease, the effect would cease.
And he that requires no actual obedience, as the condition of our begun
Justification, does require both the continuance of faith, and actual sincere
obedience, as the condition of continuing, or not losing our Justification, (as
Davenant, Bergius, Blank, etc. have well opened, and I have elsewhere proved at
large.) As Matrimony gives title to conjugal privileges to the wife; but
conjugal fidelity and performance of the essentials of the contract is
necessary to continue them. Therefore labor to keep up your faith, and to
abide in Christ, and he in you, and to bring forth fruit, lest ye be branches
withered, and for the fire, John 15.2, 3, 7, 8, 9, etc.

And upon the former misapprehension, the same persons do look upon all the
faith which they exercise through their lives, after the first instantanious
act, as no justifying faith at all (but only a faith of the same kind) but to
what use they hardly know. Yea they look upon Christ himself, as if they had no
more use for him, either as to continue their Justification, or to forgive
their after-sins; when as our continued faith must be exercised all our lives
on the same Christ, and trust on the same Covenant, for the continuation and
perfection of that which was begun at the time of our Regeneration, Col. 1.23.
1 John 2.24. Heb. 3.6.12, 13. Heb. 6.11, 12. and 10.22, 23.

Direct. 10. Understand that every sin which you commit, has need of a renewed
pardon in Christ: and that he does me prevent your necessity of such pardon.
And therefore you will have constant need of Christ, and must daily come to God
for pardon by him; not only for the pardon of temporal chastisements, but of
everlasting punishments.

Of the sense of this, I shall say more anon: the proof of it is in the fore
recited Promises; and in all those texts of Scripture which tell us that death
is the wages of sin, and call us to ask pardon, and tell us on what terms it
may be had.

Direct. 11. Yet do not think that every sin does put you into a state of
condemnation again, or nullify your former Justification: For though the Law
of nature is so far still in force, as to make punishment by it your natural
due; yet the Covenant of Grace is a continually pardoning act, and according to
its proper terms, does dissolve the foresaid obligation, and presently remit
the punishment: and as its moral action is not interrupted; no more is our
justified state.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, etc. Romans 8.1. John
3.16, 18. 1 John 5.11, 12. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins, 1 John
2.1, 2. If we confess our sins, be is faithful and just to forgive us our sisn
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If all need of pardon had been
prevented by Christ, what use were there of his advocation for our future
forgiveness?

Direct. 12. Remember, that though unknown infirmities, and unavoidable ones,
have an immediate pardon, because the Believer has an habitual Faith and
Repentance; yet great and known sins must have actual Repentance, before the
pardon will be plenary or perfect; though the person is not in the mean time an
unregenerate nor unjustified person.

1. That great and known sins must have a particular repentance, appears, 1.
In that it is utterly inconsistent with the sincerity of habitual Repentance,
not to be actual, when sins are known, and come into our deliberate
remembrance. 2. By all those texts which require such repentance, confession
and forsaking, 1 John 2.1, 2. 1 John 1.9. Prove. 18.13. Psalm. 32. and 51. 2 Cor.
7.11. Rev, 2.5, 16. Luke 13.3, 5. Jam. 5.14, 15. Luke 6.37. and 11.4.
Repentance consists chiefly in forsaking sin; and if men forsake not such
known wilful sins, they are wicked men, and therefore are not pardoned.

2. That unavoidable frailties, and mere infirmities, and unknown faults, are
pardoned immediately to them that are truly godly, and have a general and
implicit Repentance, is plain, because else no man in the world could be saved;
because every man has such infirmities and unknown sins, 1 John 1.10.

3. Yet David himself is not put by his sin into a mere graceless state, and as
a person that has no former Justification; for he prays God not to take his
Spirit from him, and he was not deprived of the true love to God, which is the
character of Gods children: But he had incurred heinous guilt, and put himself
in the way toward utter damnation, and caused a necessity of a more particular
deep Repentance before he could be fully pardoned, than else he needed.

Before the world had a Savior, we were all so far unpardoned, that a
satisfying Sacrifice was necessary to our Justification: But afterward, all men
are so far pardoned, that only the Acceptance of what is purchased and freely
(though conditionally) given, is necessary to it. Before men are converted,
they are yet so far unpardoned, that (though no more Sacrifice be necessary,
yet) a total conversion and renovation, by turning from a life of sin to God by
Faith in Christ, is necessary to their actual justification, and forgiveness.
When a man is turned from a life of sin to God, and lives in the state of
grace, all his following sins, which consist with the loving of God and
holiness above the world and sinful pleasures, are so far forgiven immediately
upon the committing, that they need neither another Sacrifice, nor another
Regeneration, or Justification (quoad statum) but only an acting of that Faith
and Repentance, which habitually he has already. But the unknown errors and
faults of such godly persons are pardoned even without that actual repentance:
and infirmities, without forsaking of the sin overcomingly in practice. And so
every one lives and dies, in some degree of sinful defectiveness and
omission, of his love to God, and trust, and hope, and zeal, and desire, and
love to men, and care of his duty, and watchfulness, and fervency in prayer,
meditation, etc. And in some degree of sinful disorder in our ill governed
thoughts, and words, and affections, or passions, and actions: we are never
sinless till we die.

Direct. 13. Remember that you must neither think that every sin which is a
cause of Repentance, is a sufficient reason for you to doubt of your present
state of Justification; nor yet that no sin can be so great as to be a
necessary cause of doubting.

If every sin should make us doubt of our Justification, then all men must
always doubt: And then it must be because no sin is consistent with sincerity,
and the knowledge of sincerity; which is apparently false.

If no sin should cause our doubting, then there is no sin which is not
consistent both with sincerity, and with the knowledge of it; which is as
false, and much more dangerous to hold. 1. There are many sins that are utterly
inconsistent with true godliness; otherwise the godly were ungodly, and as bad
as others: And if you say that no godly man commiteth these, it is true; and
therefore it is true that he that commits them, is not a godly man, or
justified. And how shall a man know his godliness, but by his life as the
product of his inward graces? It is arguing from an uncertainty against a
certainty, to say, I am justified and godly, and therefore my wilful sins of
drunkenness, fornication, oppression, lying, mal^ce, etc. are consistent with
Justification: and it is arguing from a certain truth, against a doubted
falsehood, to say, I live in ordinary, wilful, heinous sin; therefore I am not
justified or sincere, Ephesians. 5.5, 6. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor
unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in
the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for
because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience, 1 Cor. 6 9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And such were some of you; but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, etc.

Romans 8.1, 13. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die, etc. Gal. 5.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

2. And there are many sins which consist with true grace, which will not
consist with the assurance of its sincerity. And that 1. From the nature of the
things; because the least degree of grace conjunct with, and clouded by the
greatest degree of sin which may consist with it, is not discernable to to him
that has it: He that is so very near a state of death, and so very like to an
unjustified person, can never be sure, in that case, that he is justified. 2.
And also God in Wisdom and Justice will have it so; that sin may not be
encouraged, nor presumption cherished, nor the comforts which are the reward of
an obedient child, be cast away on an incapable child in his stubborn
disobedience, Psalm. 51. and 32. and 77.

Therefore for a man that lives in grost sin, to say that he is sure that he
is justified, and therefore no sin shall make him question it; is but to
believe the Antinomian Devil transforming himself into an Angel of Light, and
his Ministers when they call themselves the Ministers of Righteousness; and to
deny belief to the Spirit of Holiness and Truth. And if a true Believer should
come very near such a state of death, common reason, and the due care of his
own soul, obliges him to be suspicious of himself, and to fear the worst, till
he have made sure of better, Heb. 6. and 3.10. Heb. 4.1. and 12, 13, 14. 1 Cor.
10. John 15.2, 7, 8, etc.

Direct. 14. Let not the persuasion that you are justified, make you more
secure and bold infinning, but more to hate it, as contrary to the ends of
Justification, and to the love which freely justified you.

It is a great mark of difference between true assurance, and blind
presumption, that the one makes men hate sin more, and more carefully to avoid
it; and the other causes men to sin with less reluctance, and remorse; because
with less feat.

Direct. 15. When the abuse of the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone,
and not by Works, does pervert your minds and lives, remember that all confess,
that we shall be judged according to our works (as the Covenant of Grace is the
Law by which we shall be judged:) And to be judged, is to be justified or
condemned.

I need not recite all those Scriptures to you, that say, that we shall be
judged, and shall receive according to what we have done in the body, whether
it be good or evil: And this is all that we desire you to believe, and live
accordingly.

Direct. 16. Remember still that Faith in Christ is but a means to raise us to
the Love of God, and that perfect Holiness is higher and more excellent than
the pardon of sin: And therefore desire faith, and use it, for the kindling of
love, and pardon of sin, to endear you to God, and that you may do so no more:
And do not sin, that you may have the more to be pardoned.

The end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. Romans 6.1, 2. Shall we continue in sin, that
grace may abound? God forbid: How shall they that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein? See Titus 3.5, 6, 7. Romans 5.1, 4, 5, 6. Romans 8.1, 4, 9, Gal.
4.6. and 5.24, 26. So much for those practical Directions, which are needful
for them that love not Controversy.

CHAP. VIII. The pernicious or dangerous Errors detected, which hinder the
work of Faith about our Justification; and the contrary Truths asserted.
THere is so much dust and controversy raised here to blind the eyes of the
weak, and to hinder the life of Faith; and so much poison served up under the
name of Justification and Free Grace, that I should be unfaithful if I should
not discover it, either through fear of offending the guilty, or of wearying
them that had rather venture upon deceit, than upon controversy. And we are
now so fortified against the Popish and Secinian extremes, and those whom I am
now directing to live by Faith, are so settled against them, that I think it
more necessary (having not leisure for both, and having done it heretofore in
my Confession) to open at this time the method of false doctrine on the other
extreme, which for the most part is it which constituteth Antinomianism, though
some of them are maintained by others.

And I will first name each error; and then with it, the contrary truth.

Error 1. Christ's suffering was caused by the sins of none, as the assumed
meritorious cause, or as they usually say, as imputed to him, or lying on him,
save only of the Elect that shall be saved.

Contr. The sins of fallen mankind in general, except those rejections of
Grace, whose pardon is not offered in the conditional Covenant, did lie on
Christ as the assumed cause of his sufferings.

See John 1.29. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. John 3.16, 17, 18, 19. Heb. 2.9. 1 Timothy
2.4, 5, 6. 1 John 2.2. 1 Timothy 4.10. 2 Pet. 2.2. See Paraeus in his Irenicon;
and Twisse vind. and alibi passim, saying as much; and Amyrald, Davenant,
Dallaeus, Testardu^ Usher, etc. proving it.

Error 2. Christ did both perfectly obey, and also make satisfaction for sin
by suffering, in the person of all the Elect in the sense of the Law, or Gods
account; so that his Righteousness of obedience and perfect holiness, and his
satisfaction, is so imputed to us, as the proprietaries, as if we our selves
had done it, and suffered it: not by an after donation in the effects, but by
this strict imputation in it self.

Contr. The contrary Truth is at large opened before, and in my confession.

Christ's satisfaction, and the merit of his whole obedience, is as effectual
for our pardon, justification and salvation, as if Believers th^mselves had
performed it; and it is imputed to them, in that it was done for their sakes,
and suffered in their stead, and the fruits of it by a free Covenant or
donation given them. But 1. God is not mistaken, to judge that we obeyed or
suffered when we did not. 2. God is no liar, to say, we did it, when he knows
that we did it not. 3. If we were not the actors and sufferers, it is not
possible that we should be made the natural subjects of the Accidents of
another body, by any putation, estimation or mis-judging whatsoever; no nor by
any donation neither. It is a contradiction, and therefore an impossibility
that the same individual Actions and Passions, of which Christ's humane nature
was the agent and subject so many hundred years ago, and have themselves now no
existence, should in themselves, I say, in themselves, be made yours now, and
you be the subject of the same accidents. 4. Therefore they can no otherwise be
given to us, but 1. By a true estimation of the reasons why Christ underwent
them, viz. for our sakes as aforesaid. 2. And by a donation of the effects or
fruits of them, viz. pardoning, and justifying, and saving us by them (on the
terms chosen by the Donor himself, and put into his Testament or Covenant) as
certainly (but not in the same manner) as if we had done and suffered them our
selves. 5. If Christ had suffered in our person reputatively in all respects,
his sufferings would not have redeemed us: Because we are finite worms, and our
suffering for so short a time, would not have been accepted instead of Hell
sufferings. But the person of the Mediator made them valuable. 6. God never
made any such Covenant with us [that he will justify us, and use us just as he
would have done, if we had our selves perfectly obeyed and satisfied.] They
that take on them to show such a Promise, must see that no wise man examine it.
7. God has both by his Covenant, and his Works, ever since confuted that
opinion; and has not dealt with us as he would have done, if we had been the
reputed doers and sufferers of it all our selves. For he has made conveyance
of the Benefits, by a pardoning and justifying Law, or Promise; and he gives
us additional pardon of renewed sins as we act them, and he adds threatenings
in his Law or Covenant; and he inflicteth penalties; yea some that are very
grievous, even the withholding of much of his Spirits help and grace; all
which are inconsistent with that conceit; nor would he so have used us, if we
had been perfectly innocent, and had fully satisfied for our sins our selves.
8. All men would have had present possession of Glory, if God had so reputed us
the perfect meriters of it. For his Justice would no more have delayed our
reward, than denied it. 9. All that are saved would have equal degrees of
holiness and happiness, as well as of righteousness, because all would equally
be reputed the perfect fulfillers of the Law. And as no penalty could ever be
justly inflicted on them here; so no degree of glory could be denied them
hereafter for their sin, or for want of perfect righteousness. 10. The opinion
of this kind of imputation, is a most evident contradiction in it self. For he
that is imputatively a satisfier for all his own sin, is therein supposed to be
a sinner: And he that is imputatively a perfect innocent fulfiller of the Law,
is thereby supposed to need no satisfaction to Justice for his sin, as being
imputatively no sinner. 11. By this all Christ's sacrifice and satisfaction is
made a work of needless supererrogation; yea unjust, or rather impossible. For
if we perfectly obeyed in him, he could not suffer for our disobedience. 12.
Hereby pardon of sin is utterly denied: for he that is reputatively no sinner,
has no sin to pardon.

If they say that God did first impute the satisfaction for sin, then there was
no room after for the imputation of perfect obedience. We cannot feign God to
receive all the debt, or inflict all the penalty, and then to say, now I will
esteem thee one that never did deserve it.

If they say that he does neither impute the obedience or the suffering to us
simply, and to all effects, but in tantum ad hoc, or secundum quid only: so
that we shall be pardoned for his suffering, and then judged worthy of Heaven
for his obedience: this is but to come up toward the truth before you are
aware, and to confess that neither of them is given us in it self, but in the
effects, as being it self paid to God to procure those effects.

But withal, the matter must be vindicated from their unfound inventions, and
it must be said, that Christ dyed not only for our sins of commission, but of
omission also; and that he that is pardoned both his sins of commission and
omission, is free from the punishment both of sense and loss; yea and is
reputed as one that never culpably omitted any duty; and consequently fell
short of no reward by such omission: so that there remains no more necessity
of Righteousness in order to a reward where the pardon is perfect, save only (
N. B.) to procure us that degree of reward which must be superadded to what we
forfeited by our sin; and which we never by any culpable omission deserved to
be denied. And thus much we do not deny that somewhat (even Adoption) which is
more than mere Pardon and Justification must confer on us. But withal, as we
hold not that the Sun must bring light, and somewhat else must first banish
darkness; that one thing must cure death, and another cause life; that
satisfaction must procure the pardon of sins of omission and commission, as to
the poenae damni and sensus, and make us esteemed and used as no sinners, and
then imputed obedience must give us right to that reward, which the poenae
damni, deprived us of; so (N. B.) we maintain that Christ's sufferings have
merited our eternal salvation, and our Justification and Adoption; and that his
obedience has merited our forgiveness of sin: And that both go together, the
merit of the one and of the other, to procure all that we receive, and that the
effects are not parcelled out as they have devised: Though yet we believe that
Christ's sufferings were paid to God, as for our sins, to satisfy Justice, and
that in the Passive Obedience, it is first satisfactory, and then and therefore
meritorious, and in the active it is merely meritorious.

13. And the maintainers of the contrary opinion, besides all the forementioned
evils, could never agree how much of Christ's Righteousness must be in their
sense imputed: some holding only the passive; a second sort the active and
passive; a third sort, the habitual, active and passive; a fourth sort, the
divine, the habitual, the active and the passive.

But of all these things there is so much written against them, by Cargius,
Vrsinus, Olevian, Piscator, Paraeus, Scultetus, Alstedius, Wendeline, Camero,
Bradshaw, Gataker, and many more, that I need not to add any more for
confutation.

Error 3. That no one shall suffer whose sins lay on Christ, and were suffered
for by him.

Contr. Many such shall suffer the sorer punishment, for sinning against the
Lord that bought them, and treading under foot the blood of the Covenant,
wherewith they were so far sanctified, as to be a people by their own Covenant
separated to God, Heb. 10.25, 26. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. 2 Pet. 2.2. Heb. 4.1. and
2.3. and 12.29.

Error 4. That no godly man (say some ( or Elect person, though ungodly (say
others) is ever punished by God, because Christ suffered all their punishment
himself.

Contr. Every godly man is chastened of God, and all chastisement is a fatherly
correcting punishment: And many justified persons are punished to their final
loss, by the denial of forfeited degrees of grace, and consequently of glory,
Heb. 12.7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 11.32. 1 These. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.30. But sad
experience is too full a proof. See my Confession.

Error 5. That God were unjust if he laid any degree of punishment on those
that Christ died for; or (say others) on the justified; because he should
punish one sin twice.

Contr. It is certain, that God punishes the Justified in some degree (much
more the Elect before conversion) and it is certain that God is not unjust.
Therefore it is certain that the ground of this accusation is false; for it was
not our deserved punishment it self, or the same which was due in the true
sense of the Law which Christ endured: but it was the punishment of a voluntary
sponsor, which was the equivalens, and not the idem that was due; and did
answer the ends of the Law, but not fulfill the meaning of the threatening;
which threatened the sinner himself, and not another for him: seeing then it was
a satisfaction, or sacrifice for sin, which God received for an atonement and
propitiation, and not a solution or suffering of the sinner himself in the
sense of the Law, the charge of injustice on God is groundless.

And no man can have more right to Christ's sufferings or benefits, than he
himself is willing to give: And it is not his own will (into whose hands all
power and judgment is committed) that we should be subject to no punishment
because he suffered for us.

Error 6. That the Elect are justified from eternity (say some) or from
Christ's death before they were born (say others) or before they believed (say
others.)

Against this I have said enough in many Volumes heretofore.

Error 7. That Faith justifies only in the Court of our own Consciences, by
making us to know that we were justified before.

Against this also I have said enough elsewhere.

Error 8. That sins to come, not yet committed, are pardoned in our first
Justification.

Contr. Sins to come are no sins: and no sins have no actual pardon: but only
the certain remedy is provided, which will pardon their sins as soon as they
are capable.

Error 9. Justification is not a making us just, but a sentence pronouncing us
just.

Contr. Justification is a word of so many significations, that he that does
not first tell what he means by it, will not be capable of giving or
receiving satisfaction.

And here once for all, I must entreat the Reader that loves not confusion and
error, to distinguish of these several sorts of Justification, as the chief
which we are to note.

Justification is either public by a Governor, or private by an equal or mere
Discerner: Justification is by God, or by Man. Justification by God is either
as he is Lawgiver, and above Laws, or as he is Judge according to his Laws: In
the first way God makes us just; by his Act of Oblivion, or pardoning Law, or
Covenant of Grace. In the second respect God does two ways justify and
forgive: 1. As a determining Judge: 2. As the Executioner of his Judgment. In
the former respect God does two ways justify us: 1. By esteeming us just. 2.
By public sentencing us just. As Executioner, he uses us as just, and as so
judged.

I pass by here purposely all Christ's Justification of us by way of apology or
plea; and all Justification by witnesses and evidences, etc. and all the
constitutive causes of our Righteousness, lest I hinder them whom I would help,
by using more distinctions than they are willing to learn. But these few are
necessary.

1. It is one thing for God to make us Righteous, by forgiving all our sins of
commission and omission, for the sake of Christ's satisfaction and obedience.

2. It is another thing for God to esteem us to be so Righteous when he has
first made us so.

3. It is another for God to sentence us Righteous as the Public Judge, by
Jesus Christ.

4. And it is another thing for God to take off all penalties and evils, and to
give us all the good which belong to the Righteous; and so to execute his own
Laws and Sentence. And he that will not distinguish of these senses or sorts of
Justification, shall not dispute with me.

And while I am upon this, I will give the Reader these two remarks and
counsels. 1. That he will not in disputing about Justification, with any sect,
begin the dispute of the Thing, till he has first determined and agreed of
their sense of the Word. And that he will not confound the Controversies de
nomine about the word, with those de re, about the matter. And that he will
remember in citing texts of Scripture, that Beza, and many of our best
Expositors, do grant to the Papists (as I heard Bishop Usher also do) that some
texts of Scripture do take the word [ Justifie] as they do, for Pardon and
Sanctification conjunctly: As Titus 3.7. 1 Cor. 6.11. Romans 8.30. three famous
texts; of which see Le Blank at large in his These. de nom. Justific. If the
controversy be only of the sense of a Text, handle it accordingly: If of the
matter, turn it not to words.

2. Note this Observation, that Sanctification it self, or the giving us the
Spirit, is a great act (though I say not the only) of executive Justification.
The withholding of the Spirit is the greatest punishment inflicted in this
life: and therefore the giving of the Spirit is the removal or executive
remiting of the greatest penalty: So that if pardon were only as Dr. Twisse
thought, a non-punire, a not punishing, then this were the most proper, as well
as plenary pardon in this life. But the truth is, that our Pardon and
Justification in Right goes first, which God effects by his Covenant-gift:
And then God esteems us just or pardoned, when by pardon he has made us
just: and if there be any sentence, or any thing equivalent before the day of
Judgment or death, he next sentenceth us Just; and lastly, he uses us as
just, that is, as pardoned (all sins of omission and commission) which is by
taking off all punishment both of pain (or sense) and loss; of which part the
giving of his Spirit, is the chief act on this side our Glorification.

Note therefore that thus far no Protestant can deny to the Papists, nor will
do, that Sanctification and Justification are all one, that is, that God having
pardoned us de jure, does pardon us executively, by giving us his forfeited
Spirit and Grace; and by all the communion which we have after with him, and
the comfort which we have from him.

And further let it be well noted, that the nature of this executive Pardon or
Justification (of which read Mr. Hotchkis at large) is far better known to us,
than the nature of Gods sentential Pardon and Justification: and therefore
there is less controversy about it. For what it is to forbear or take off a
punishment, is easily understood: But though most Protestants say, that
Justification is a sentence of God, they are not agreed what that sentence is.
Some think (truly) that our first Justification by Faith is but a virtual
sentence of the Law of Grace, by which we must be judged. Others say that by a
sentence is meant Gods secret mental estimation: Others say, that as Angels are
his executioners; so it is before them (where joy is said to be for a sinners
conversion) Luke 15. that does declare and sentence us pardoned and just.
Others think that there is no sentence but Gods notification of pardon to our
consciences, or giving us the sense or knowledge of it. Others think that there
is no sentence till death, or public Judgment. Others say that God does
sentence us just, though we know not where, nor how. And Mr. Lawson notes,
that (as all confess that God has no voice, but a created voice; and therefore
uses not words as we; unless what Christ as man may do in that we know not;
so) his sentence is nothing but his declaration that he esteems us pardoned
and just in title, which is principally, if not only, by his execution, and
taking off all penalties of sense and loss, and using us as pardoned in title:
and so that the giving of his Spirit, is his very sentence of Justification in
this life, as it is his declaration as aforesaid.

And doubtless executive pardon is the most perfect and complete, as being the
end and perfection of all the rest. Therefore God makes us just in title by.
Covenant-pardon; and therefore he sentenceth us as just, that he may take off
all penalty, and give us the felicity due to the righteous; and may use us as
those that are made just.

There is much truth in most of the foresaid opinions inclusively, and much
falsehood in their several exclusions of all the rest (unless their quarrel be
only de nomine, which of all these is fitliest called Justification. For 1.
There is no doubt but our pardon, or constituted Justification in
Covenant-title, is a virtual sentential Justification. 2. And there is no doubt
but God does esteem them just, that are first made just, and no other (because
he erreth not:) And that this estimation is sententia concepta, as distinct
from sententia prolata. 3. And it is certain that those Angels that must
execute his sentence, must first know it: And it is probable that the Joy
(...), in the presence of the Angels of God, does intimate that God uses
ordinarily to notify the conver^iod of a sinner to Angels (whether the joy
here be meant as Dr. Hammond and others think, Gods Joy signified to Angels, or
rather the Angels Joy, by their presence being, in Choro Angelorum, or among
them, that is, in them; or both.) 4. And it is granted that God does usually
give some notice of his pardon, at one time or other, more or less to a sinners
conscience (though that is too late, too uncertain, too low, and too unequal,
and too unconstant to be the great and famous Justification by Faith.) 5. And
it is clear, that till death or Judgment, there is no such solemn plenary
judicial sentence or declaration as there will be then. 6. And it is certain,
that at death and judgment, Christ as Man, a creature, can speak or express
himself, as the blessed creatures do to one another. 7 And its certain that God
has a way of expressing himself to creatures, which is beyond our present
understandings: But we may conceive of it by the similitude of Light, which in
the same instant reveals millions of things to millions of persons
respectively. (Though that is nothing to his present Justification of us by
Faith, unless as he reveals it to Angels.) 8. And it is certain, that at the
day of death and judgment, God will thus by an irresistible light, lay open
every man to himself, and to the world, which may be called his sentence,
differing from the execution; and that Christ in our nature will be our Judge,
and may express that sentence as aforesaid. 9. And it is certain, that Gods
actual taking off punishment, and giving the blessing which sin had deprived us
of, is a declaration of his mind, which may be called, an executive sentence,
and might serve the turn if there were no more: And that in Scripture, the
terms of [ Gods judging the world] does usually signify Gods executive
Government, rewarding and punishing: And that God does begin such execution in
this life: and that his giving the Spirit is thus his principal pardoning and
justifying act; and yet that this is but part, and not the whole of our present
executive pardon: and that glorification in this sense is the highest and
noblest Justification or Pardon; when God gives us all that sin had forfeited
(But yet we deny not that Glorification is somewhat more than an executive
pardon, so far as any more is then given us, than we did forfeit by our sins.)

I must desire the Reader not to forget all this explication of the nature of
Justification, because it will be supposed to the understanding of all before
and after.

Error 10. That the justified or regenerate never incur any guilt or
obligation to any punishment, but only temporal corrections; and therefore need
no pardon at all of any sin, at least, since regeneration, as to the
everlasting punishment; because Christ dyed to prevent that guilt, and
consequently the necessity of any such pardon.

Contr. This is before explained. Christ died to procure us that pardoning
Covenant, which (on its own terms) will pardon every sin of the Justified when
they are committed; but not to prevent the need of pardon. Otherwise Christ
should not satisfy for any sins after regeneration, nor bear them in his
sufferings at all: For his satisfaction is a bearing of a punishment, which in
its dignity and usefulness is equivalent to our deserved, or ( to be deserved)
punishment. Now if we never do deserve it, Christ cannot bear that in our
stead, which we never deserve: As the preventing of the sin or reatus culpae
proves that Christ never suffered for that sin prevented, because it is
terminus diminuens, and is no sin; so is it in preventing the desert of
punishment. And as for Correction Christ does inflict so much as is good for
us; and therefore did not die to prevent it. But of this Controversy I have
said more at large elsewhere.

Error 11. That Justification by Faith is perfect at the first instant; though
Sanctification be imperfect.

Contr. Against this Error read Mr. George Hopkins book of salvation from sin;
showing how Justification and Sanctification are equally carried on.

It is granted that at our first true faith, we are pardoned all the sins that
ever we committed before, as to the eternal punishment: And so we are converted
from them all: But (as our Sanctification is imperfect, so) our Pardon is yet
imperfect in many respects: For 1. We are still liable to death, which is the
wages of sin, though it be so far conquered as not to hinder our salvation:
Henoch and Elias went to Heaven without it, Romans 5 12, 14, 17, 21. Genesis 3.16,
17, 19. 1 Cor. 15.21, 26. 2. We are still liable to many penal chastisements in
this life; which though they do us good by accident, are yet the fruits of sin,
no father chastising a faultless child, but doing him good in another way. 3.
There are many sins yet left uncured, which though as sins, they are our own
only, yet as an evil not cured, are also penal: I am sure that the not-giving
of more of his Spirit and Grace is penal. Therefore till our grace be perfect,
we are not perfectly delivered from the penal fruits of sin, and therefore not
perfectly justified and pardoned. 4. That Pardon and Justification is not
perfect, which has so many conditions, and of such a nature for its
continuation, as ours now has: As to say, you shall lose your justified state,
unless you fight and overcome, in mortification, sufferings, perseverance. etc.
He that has a title to an estate, which is held by such a tenure, and would be
lost if he should fail in such conditions, has not so perfect a title, as he
that is past all such conditions. 5. That pardon which is only of sins past,
while there are thousands more hereafter to be pardoned (or else we should yet
perish) is not so perfect as that Pardon and Justification in the conclusion of
our lives, when all sin that ever will be committed is forgiven absolutely. 6.
The kind of our present Justification is imperfect; it being but in
Covenant-title, and some part of execution; the full and pe^f^ct sentence and
execution, being at the day of Judgment.

I leave them therefore to say [ Christ's Righteousness imputed to us is
perfect; therefore we are as perfectly just and justified as Christ] who know
not what Imputation here is; nor that Christ's personal Righteousness is not
given to us as proprietors, in it self, but in the effects; and who know not
the difference between believing and blaspheming, and making our selves as so
many Christ's to our selves; and that know not what need they have of Christ, or
of Faith, or Prayer, or of any holy endeavor for any more Pardon, and
Righteousness or Justification, than they have already: Or who think that
David in his Adultery and Murder was as perfectly pardoned and justified as he
will be in Heaven at last: And in a word, who know not the difference between
Earth and Heaven.

Error 12. That Christ justifies us only as a Priest: Or (say others) only as
obeying and satisfying.

Contr. Christ merited our Justification in his state of humiliation, as the
Mediator subjected to the Law, and perfectly obeying it, and as a sacrifice for
sin. But this is not justifying us. Christ offered that sacrifice as the High
Priest of the Church or world: But this was not justifying us. Christ made us
the New Covenant as our King, and as the great Prophet of the Father or Angel
of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. And this Covenant gives us our pardon and title to
impunity, and to life eternal; And Christ as our King and Judge does justify
us by a Judiciary Sentence, and also by the execution of that sentence: so that
the relations most eminently appear in our Justification, are all excluded by
the foresaid error.

Error 13. That we are justified only by the first act of Faith; and all our
believing afterward to the end of our lives, are no justifying acts at all.

Contr. Indeed if the question be only about the Name of Justifying, if you
will take it only for our first change into a state of righteousness by pardon,
it is true. But the following act^ of Faith are of the same use and need to the
continuing of our Justification, or state of Righteousness, as the first act
was for the beginning of it.

Error 14. That the continuance of our Justification needs no other
conditions to be by us performed, than the continuance of that Faith on which
it was begun.

Contr. Where that first Faith continues, there our Justification does
continue: But that Faith never continues without sincere obedience to Christ;
and that obedience is part of the condition of the continuance, or not losing
our Justification (as is proved before, and at large elsewhere) The Faith which
in Baptism we profess, and by which we have our first Justification or
Covenant-right, is an accepting of Christ as our Savior and Lord to be obeyed
by us in the use of his saving remedies; and we there vow and covenant future
obedience. And as our marriage to Christ, or Covenant-making, is all the
condition of our first right to him and his benefits, without any other good
works or obedience; so our Marriage-fidelity, or Covenant keeping, is part of
the condition of our continuance herein, or not losing it by a divorce, John
15. Col. 1.23. etc.

Error 15. That Faith is no condition of our part in Christ, and our
Justification, but only one of Gods gifts of the Covenant, given with Christ
and Justification.

Error 16. That the Covenant of Grace has no conditions on our part, but only
donatives on Gods part.

Error 17 That if the Covenant had any conditions, it were not free. And that
every condition is a meritorious cause, or at least some cause.

Contr. All these I have confuted at large elsewhere, and proved 1. That Faith
is a proper condition of those benefits which God gives us by the conditional
Covenant of Grace; but not of all the benefits which he any other way gives
us. It was not the condition of his giving Christ to live and die for us; nor
of his giving us the Gospel, or this Covenant it self; nor of his giving us
Preachers, or of the first motions of his Spirit; nor was Faith the condition
of the gift of Faith ^^^elf; because all these are not given us in that way, by
that Covenant, but absolutely, as God shall please.

2. That some Promises of God of the last mentioned gifts, have no condition:
The promises of giving a Savior to the world; and the promise of giving and
continuing the Gospel in the world; and of converting many by it in the world,
and of making them Believers, and giving them new hearts, and bringing them to
salvation, etc. have no conditions. But these are promises made, some of them
to Christ only, and some of them to fallen mankind, or the world in general, or
predictions what God will do by certain men unborn, unnamed, and not described,
called the Elect. But all this gives no title to Pardon, or Justification, or
Salvation to any one person at all.

Remember therefore once for all, that the Covenant which I still mean, by the
Covenant of Grace, is that which God offers men in Baptism, by the acceptance
whereof we become Christians.

3. That Gods gift of a Savior, and New Covenant to the world, are so free as
to be without any condition: But Gods gift of Christ with all his benefits of
Justification, Adoption, etc. to individual persons, is so free as to be
without and contrary to our desert; but not so free as to be without any
condition: And that he that will say to God [Thy grace of pardon is not free if
thou will not give it me, but on condition that I accept it, yea or desire it,
or ask it] shall prove a contemner of grace, and a reproacher of his Savior,
and not an exalter of free grace. There is no inconsistency for God to be the
giver of grace to cause us to believe and accept of Christ, and yet to make a
deed of gift of him to all on condition of that Faith and acceptance; no more
than it is inconsistent to give Faith and Repentance, and to command them: of
both which the objecters themselves do not seem to doubt. For he makes both
his command, and his conditional form of Promise to be his chosen means (and
most wisely chosen) of working in us the thing commanded.

4. That a condition as a condition is no cause at all, much less a meritorious
cause: But only the nonperformance of it suspendeth the donation of the
Covenant, by the will of the Donor: Or r^^her it is the Donors will that
suspendeth it till the condition be done. And some conditions signify no more
than a term of time: and some (in the matter of them, and not in the form) are
a not-demeriting, or not-abusing the Giver, or not-despising the gift: and some
among men are meritorious. And with God every act that is chosen by him to be a
condition of his gift, is pleasing to him, for some special aptitude which it
has to that office. This is the full truth, and the plain truth about
conditions.

Error 18. There is no degree of pardon given to any that are not perfectly
justified, and that shall not be saved: But the giving of the Spirit so far as
to cause us to believe and repent, is some degree of executive pardon:
Therefore we are justified before we believe.

Contr. There is a great degree of pardon given to the world, before
conversion, which shall yet justify and save none but Believers: Gods giving a
Savior to the world, and a New Covenant, and in that an universal conditional
pardon; yea his giving them teaching, exhortations and offers of free grace;
and his giving them life and time, and many mercies which the full execution of
the Law would have deprived them of, is a very great degree of pardon. God
pardoned to mankind much of the penalty which sin deserved, even presently
after the first transgression, in the prom^se made to Adam, Genesis 3.15. Many
texts of Scripture (which partial men for their opinions sake do pervert) do
speak magnificently of a common pardon, which must be sued out, and made
particular upon our believing. The world was before under so much impossibility
of being saved by any thing that they could do, that they must have procured
all to be done first which Christ has done and suffered for them; which was
utterly above their power. They that were actually obliged to bear the pains of
death, both temporal, spiritual and eternal, are now so far redeemed, pardoned
and delivered, that all the merit and satisfaction necessary to actual
forgiveness, is made for them by another, and no one of them all shall perish
for want of a Sacrifice made and accepted for them; and an universal
conditional pardon is enacted, sealed, and recorded, and offered and urged on
all to whom the Gospel comes; and nothing but their obstinate, wilful refusal
or neglect, can deprive them of it: And this is so great a degree of pardon,
that it is called often by such absolute names, as if all were done; because
all is done which concerns God as Legislator or Covenant maker, to do, before
our own Acceptance of it.

Suppose a Prince redeem all his captive subjects from the Turkish slavery, and
one half of them so love their state of bondage, or some harlot or ill company
there (yea if all of them do so, till half of them are persuaded from it) that
they will not come away. It is no improper nor unusual language to say that he
has redeemed them, and given them a release, though they would not have it.
That may be given to a man, which he never has, because he refuses to accept
it; when the Donor has done all that belongs to him in that relation of a
Donor; though perhaps as a Perswader he might do more.

This is the sense of Heb. 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins (or made
purgation of our sins) he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
that is, when he had become a sacrifice for sin, and sealed the Covenant by his
blood.] For actual personal pardon was not given by him before our acceptance.

This is the plain sense of 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. God was in Christ reconciling
the world to himself, not imputing to them their trespasses (that is,
purchasing and giving them a pardoning Covenant) and has committed to us the
word, and ministry of reconciliation: Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God.

John 1.29, 36. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world;
(that is, as a sacrifice for sin.) As Heb. 9.26. Once in the end of the world
he has appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself: (Though the
sacrifice as offered only, does not actually and fully pardon it.) The same as
Heb. 10.12. After he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on
the right hand of God.

So Matthew. 18.27, 32. He forgave him the debt -- I forgave thee all that debt
-- viz. conditionally, and as David forgave Shimei.

Psalm. 78.38. He forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not; that is, he
forgave the temporal punishment, and suspended the execution of eternal
punishment, giving them yet more time and offers of repentance and of further
mercy. And so he forgave Ahab and Nineve upon their humiliation, Numb. 14.19.
Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according to the greatness
of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt until now.

So Psalm. 85.2, 3. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have
covered all their sins: thou have taken away all thy wrath -- Turn us O God of
our salvation, and cause thine anger to cease: will thou be angry with us for
ever? So that they are two palpable errors here asserted by the objecters, viz.
that there is no degree of pardon to such as are not saved; and that we are
justified, when ever we have any degree of pardon. We may be so far pardoned as
to have grace given us effectually to believe, and yet our Justification, or
the Covenant-forgiveness of eternal punishment, is in order of nature after our
believing, and not before it.

Error 19. That our natures are as far from being able to believe in Christ,
as from being able to fulfill the Law of works, and to be justified by it; they
being equally impossible to us; and as much help is necessary to one as to the
other.

Contr. To be justified by the Law of works, when we have once broken it, is a
contradiction, and a natural impossibility; as it is to be at once a sinner,
and no sinner. But so it is not for a sinner to believe in Christ: The
impossibility is but moral at most; which consists not in a want of natural
faculties or power, but in the want of a right d^sp^sition, or willingness of
mind.

And to fulfill the Law of God, and to be perfect for the future, is surely a
far higher degree of spiritual grace and excellency, than to be a poor, weak,
sinful believer, d^siring to fulfill it. Therefore our sinful natures are much
farther off from perfection than from faith.

3. And though the same Omnipotency do all Gods works (for all Gods Power is
Omnipotency) yet it is not equally put forth, and manifested in all his works:
The moving of a feather, and the making of the world, are both works of
Omnipotency; but not equal works or exertions of it.

4. And it is certain that in verum natura, there is such a thing as a proper
Power given by God, to do many things that never are done, and that necessary
grace (which some call sufficient) which is not eventually effectual: for such
Adam had (such Power, and such necessary grace or help) to have forborne his
first sin, which he did not forbear. And no man can prove that no final
unbelievers, have had such power and help to have bel^eved, a^ Adam had to have
stood. But it is certain that we (...) such powers and necessary grace, to have
perfectly (...) all the Law.

Error 20. That Faith justifies as an instrument and only so.

Of this I have written at large heretofore. An instrument properly so called,
is an efficient cause: Faith is no efficient cause of our Justification;
neither Gods instrument, nor ours: for we justify not our selves
instrumentally: The known undoubted instrument of our Justification, is Gods
Covenant or deed of gift; which is his pardoning act: They that say it is not a
Physical but a Moral instrument, either mean that its morally called an
instrument, that is, reputatively, and not really; or that it is indeed a moral
instrument, that is, effects our Justification morally. But the latter is
false; for it effects it not at all: and the former is false: for as there is
no reason; so there is no Scripture to prove that God reputeth it to be what it
is not.

All that remains to be said is that indeed Faith in Christ is an act whose
nature partly (that is, one act of it) consists in the Acceptance of Christ
himself who is given to us for our Justification and Salvation, by a Covenant
which makes this believing-acceptance its condition. And so this accepting-act
in the very essence of it, is such as some call a receiving instrument (or a
passive) which is indeed no instrument, but an act metaphorically called an
instrument (And in disputes metaphors must not be used without necessity; and
to understand them properly is to err.) So that such an improper instrument of
Justification Faith is, as my trusting my Physician (and taking him for my
Physician) is the instrument of my cure: And as my trusting my self to the
conduct of such a Pilot, is the instrument of my safe voyage; or as my trusting
my Tutor is the instrument of my learning; or rather as a woman's
marriage-consent is the instrument of all the wealth and honor which she has
by her husband. Indeed marriage may be better called the instrument of it; that
is, not her own consent (which is properly the receiving condition) but the
consent and actual marriage by her husband: For he is the giver. And so the
Covenant is Gods justifying instrument, as signifying his donative consent; and
Baptism is the instrument of it, by solemn investiture or tradition; as the
delivering of a Key, is the instrumental delivery of the house.

The case then is very plain to him that is but willing to understand, viz.
that Faith in its essence, is besides the assenting acts, an accepting of an
offered Savior for our Justification, Sanctification and Salvation, and a
trusting in him: That this act of Faith being its essence, is the most apt for
the use that God in his Covenant has appointed it unto: because he will give
us a Savior freely, but yet not to be refused and neglected, but to be
thankfully and honorably received and used: That this special aptitude of
Faith, or its very essence, is the reason why it is chosen to be the condition
of the Testament or Gift: That this same essence and aptitude, is that which
some call its Receptive or Passive Instrumentality: That this essence and
aptitude is not the nearest reason why we are justified by it; for then Faith
as Faith, and as such an act or w^rk of ours should justify, and that ex opere
operato; and that without or against Gods will. For if Gods will have
interposed, the signifier of that will must needs be the chief and nearest
reason: Therefore this act so apt b^ing by God made the condition of the Gift
or Covenant, i^s nearest and chief interest (I will not call it causali^y) in
our Justification, i^ this office of a condition. Therefore in a word, we are
justified by Faith directly as, or because it is the conditio praestita, the
performance of the condition of the Justifying act; and it was by God made the
condition, because it was in its nature m^st apt thereto; which aptitude may be
metaphorically called its Receptive Instrumentality: And that thus as it
accepts Christ for Justification, Adoption, Sanctification and Glorification;
so it is first the metaphorical instrument of our part in Christ; and but
consequently the metaphorical instrument of our title, to pardon, the Spirit
and Heaven; and in no tolerable sense at all (how figurative soever) is it any
instrument of Gods sentence of Justification (which yet is all the
Justification acknowledged by the usual defenders of Instrumentality) saving as
it may be said to give us a right to it, by giving us constitutive
Justification in the pardon of our sins.

And the Scripture never says that Faith justifies us, nor calls it
Justifying Faith; but that we are justified by Faith, and most commonly [ of
Faith] for the usuallest phrase is (...), ex fide, as it is ex operibus, when
Justification by works is denied; which is not the mere Instrumentality of
works.

So that here is a double error; 1. That Faith justifies as a true and proper
instrument: 2. And no other way.

Error 21. That Faith causes Justification, as it causes Sanctification; as
much and as properly.

Contr. Faith causes not Justification at all, but only is the condition of
it: But Faith causes the acts of other graces by a proper efficiency;
believing is a proper efficient cause of the wills volition, complacency,
consent, (though but a moral efficient, because the liberty of the will
forbids the Intellect to move it per modum naturae.) And the wills consent
produces other acts, and physically exciteth other graces: Because to love,
and desire, and fear, and seek, and obey, are acts of our own souls, where one
may properly cause another: But to justify or pardon is an act of God: and
therefore Faith equally procures our right or title to Justification and to
Sanctification and Glorification; but it does not equally effect them, 2 Cor.
7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit,
perfecting holiness, etc. Not let us pardon and justify our selves. James 4.8.
Cleanse your hearts you sinners, etc. Isa. 1. Wash you, make you clean, put
away the evil of your doings; (not your guilt and punishment.) So only Christ
cleanses us from all sin and unrighteousness, 1 John 1.7, 9. Jude 21. Keep
your selves in the Love of God. John 15. Abide in me. etc. 1 John 5.18. He that
is begotten of God, keeps himself, etc.

Error 22. That the Faith by which we are justified, is not many physical acts
of the soul only, but one.

Error 23. That it is only an act of one faculty of the soul.

Contr. The contrary is fully opened before, and proved at large elsewhere, and
through the Scripture. Faith is (as Davenant well notes) the act of the whole
man: I was wont to say of both faculties, I now say of the three faculties
which constitute the soul of man, the Potestative, the Intellective and the
Volitive. And the Assent it self is many acts (as acts are physically specified
by their objects) as is showed. It is one moral act or work of the soul: Like
trusting a man as my Physician, which is a fiducial consent that he be my
Physician, in order to the use of his remedies: O^ as taking a man to be your
Prince, Husband, Tutor, Master, etc. where he that will tell people that taking
signifies but one physical act, would be ridiculous. And he that will tell
people that only one physical act of one faculty is it that they must look to
be justified by, will be much worse than ridiculous.

Error 24. That we are justified by Faith, not as it receives Christ's person,
but his benefits or righteousness.

Contr. The contrary is before and after proved (and insisted on by Dr. Preston
at large.) Indeed we receive not Christ's person it self physically; but his
person in the office and relation of our Savior; as we must choose what person
shall be our Physician, before we take his medicines, or receive our health;
but it is only a consent that he and no other, be our Physician, which we call
the taking of his person. And so it is here.

Error 25. That it is one act of Faith which gives us right to Christ, and
another to his righteousness, and another to his teaching, and another to his
Spirit, and another to Adoption, and to Heaven, etc. and not the same.

Contr. This is 1. Adding to the Word of God, and that in a matter near our
chiefest comfort and safety. Prove it, or affirm it not. 2. It is corrupting,
and perverting, and contradicting the Word and Covenant of God, which unitedly
makeeth the same Faith (without any such distinction) the condition of all the
Covenant-gifts, Mark 16.16. John 3.16, etc.

Error 26. That though the same Faith which justifies does believe in him as
a Teacher, as a King and Judge, etc. yet it justifies us only quatenus
receptio justitiae, as it is the receiving of Christ's Righteousness.

Contr. See in my Dispute of Justification, my Confutation of this Assertion in
Mr. Warner. Properly Faith justifies not at all; but we are justified of or by
it as a condition by the tenor of Gods deed of gift. And so far as it is the
condition in that gift, so far we are justified by it. But it is one entire
Faith in Christ, which is the condition, without such distinction; therefore we
are so justified by it. 2. According to that Rule, there must be as many acts
of Faith, as there are benefits to be received, and the title to be ascribed to
each one accordingly. 3. The natural relation of the act to the object, shows
no more but what the nature or essence of that Faith is, and not how we come to
be justified by it. 4. The sense contains this false Proposition [ Haec fides
qua talis, or quae fides justificat: Faith as Faith, or as this Faith in
specie, justifies (which some call the ( To credere) For it is the essence of
Faith which they call its Reception of Christ's Righteousness. 5. The true
passive Reception of Righteousness and Pardon, is that of the person, as he is
the terminus of the donative or justifying act of the Covenant: To receive
Pardon properly, is to be pardoned: But our Active Receiving or Consent, is but
the condition of it; and there is no proof or reason that the condition should
be so parcelled. 6. Yet if by your quatenus you intend no more than the
description of the act of Faith as essentially related to its subsequent
benefit, and not at all to speak of its conditional nearest interest in our
Justification, the matter were less. 7. But the truth is, that if we might
distinguish where God does not distinguish, it were much more rational to say,
that taking Christ for a true Messenger of God, and a Teacher, and Sanctifier,
and King, has a greater hand in our Justification, than taking him to justify
us (supposing that all be present.) Because the common way and reason of
conditions in Covenants is, that somewhat which the party is willing of, is
promised upon condition of something which he is unwilling of, that for the one
he may be drawn to consent unto the other: As if the Physician should say [If
you will take me for your Physician, and refuse none of my medicines, I will
undertake to cure you.] Here it is supposed that the Patient is willing of
health, and not willing of the Medicines, but for healths sake; and therefore
consenting to the Medicines (or receiving this man to be his Physician as a
p^escriber of the Medicines) is more the condition of his cure, than his
consenting to the cure it self, or receiving the Physician as the cause of his
health: So here it is supposed that condemned sinners are already willing to be
justified, pardoned and saved from punishment, but not willing to repent and
follow the teaching and counsel of a Savior; and therefore that Pardon and
Justification is given and offered them, on condition that they accept of, and
submit to the teaching and government of Christ, and of salvation from their
sins: But the truth is, we must not presume beyond his revelation, to give the
reasons of Gods institutions: We are sure that the entire Belief in Christ, and
accepting of himself as our perfect Savior in order to all the ends of his
Relation, is made by God in his Covenant, the condition of our title to the
benefits of his Covenant conjunctly: And it is not only the believing in Christ
for pardon that as such is the condition of pardon; nor is any one act the
condition of any benefit, but as it is a part of that whole Faith which is
indeed the condition.

The occasion of their error is, that they consider only what it is in Christ
the object of Faith which justifies, sanctifies, etc. and they think that the
act only which is exercised on that object must do it; which is a gross
mistake: Because Faith is not like taking of money, jewels, books, etc. into
ones hand, which is a physical act which takes possession of them: But it is a
Jus or Debitum, a Right and Relation which we are morally and passively to
receive, as constituting our first Justification and Pardon; and as the
condition of this we are to take Christ for our Savior, which is but a
physicial active metaphorical receiving, in order to the attainment of the said
passive proper receiving (For recipere proprie est pati.)

If an Act be passed, that all Traitors and Rebels, who will give up themselves
to the Kings Son, as one that has ransomed them, to be taught and ruled by
him, and reduced to their obedience, and to be their general in the wars
against his enemies; shall have pardon, and lands, and honors, and further
rewards after this service; here the Prince himself does deliver them by his
ransom, and enrich them by his lands, and honor them by his honor or power,
etc. But their act of giving up themselves to him under the notion of a
Ransomer, does no more to their deliverance, than their giving up themselves to
him under the notion of a General or Ruler, etc. Because it does not free them
as it is such an act, but as it is an act made the condition of his gift.

And note that I have before proved, that even as to the object Christ
justifies us in all the parts of his office.

Error 27. That believing in God as God and our Father in Christ, is not an
act of Justifying Faith, but only a consequent or concomitant of it.

Contr. 1. No doubt but God must some way be believed in, in order of nature,
before Christ can be believed in (as is proved) who can believe that Christ is
the Son and Messenger of God? who believes not that there is a God? Or that
Christ reconcileth us to God, before he believe that he is our offended God and
Governor. 2. But to believe in God as the end of our Redemption; to whose love
and savor we must be restored by Faith in Christ, and who pardons by the
Son, is as essential an act of Justifying Faith, as our belief in Christ.

Object. But not quatenus justificantis, not of Faith as justifying.

Answ. If by [ as justifying] you mean [ not as effecting Justification] it is
a false supposition: There is no such Faith. If you mean [ not as the condition
of Justification] it is false: It is as essential a part of it as the
condition. If you mean [ not as Faith is denominated Justifying from the
consequent benefit] its true, but impertinent: For the same may be said of
Faith in Christ; it is not called [ Faith in Christ] as it is called (by you)
Justifying. And yet I may add, that in the very physical nature of it, Belief
in God as our God and End, is essential to it: As consenting to be healed is
essential to consenting to the Physician: and consenting to be reconciled is
essential to our consenting to a Mediation for that end: Because the respect to
the end is essential to the Relation consented to.

All the Faith described Heb. 11. in all those instances, has special
essential respect to God.

So has Abraham's faith, Romans 4.3. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness -- v. 5. To him that works not, but believes on him
(on God) that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for righteousness --
v. 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin -- v. 17. Before
him whom he believed, even God who quickens the dead -- v. 20. He staggered
not at the Promise of God -- Being fuly persuaded, that what he had promised,
he was also able to perform. v. 21, 22. And therefore it was imputed to him for
righteousness. Now it was not written for his sake alone that it was imputed to
him, but for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him who
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.

Abundance such testimonies are obvious in Scripture; but this being as plain
as can be spoken, he makes his own Faith, who refuses to believe it. Our
Faith in God as God has as much hand in our Justification, as our Faith in
Christ as Mediator.

But the form of the Baptismal Covenant which the Church ever used, fully
proves it as is aforesaid, though to answer all ignorant cavils against it, as
an unnecessary tediousness I pass by.

Error 28. The belief of Heaven, or the life to come, is no essential part of
Justifying Faith as such.

Contr. The last answer to this Error is sufficient: Heaven is the everlasting
vision and love of God; and therefore we are justified by believing it, though
not it alone: It is essential to our Savior, to save and bring us to the
fruition of God.

Error 29. That Justifying Faith is a believing that I am justified, or elect,
and shall be saved by Christ.

Error 30. That this Faith is a full assurance, or persuasion at least,
excluding doubting.

Contr. 1. We are justified by believing and accepting God for our God, and
Christ for our Savior, that we may be justified; and not by believing that we
are justified. 2. It is false, and ever will be, that any of the praesciti (as
Austin and Prosper call them) or the Non-Elect, are elect, or justified, or
will be saved: But the Non-Elect are commanded and bound to believe with that
same kind of Faith by which we are justified: Therefore to believe that they
themselves are elect, justified, and shall be saved, is not that kind of Faith
by which we are justified. No men are bound by God on pain of damnation to
believe a lie, nor damned for not believing it. 3. Assurance of personal
pardon, is the happiness but of few true Christians in this life: And where it
is, it is only an effect or consequent participating of Faith: See Mr. Hickman
on this subject.

Error 31. The meaning of that Article of our Creed [I believe the remission
of sins] is, I believe that my own sins are forgiven to me personally.

Contr. Though worthy Mr. Perkins, and other ancient Divines have too much
countenanced this exposition, it is false. The meaning of that Article is but
this [ I believe that a sufficient provision for pardon is made by Christ, both
for sins before regeneration, and after-fault which shall be repented of; and
that a pardoning Covenant is made to all, if they will repent and believe; and
to me as well as others, and I accept of that gracious offer, and trust in that
Covenant in Christ.]

Its dangerous misexpounding Articles of the Creed.

Error 32. At least it is an act of Divine Belief to believe that I am elect,
and justified, and shall be saved.

Contr. Many have been a great scandal or snare to harden the Papists by
asserting this. But the truth is, it is but a rational conclusion from two
premises; the one of which is of Divine Revelation, and the other of inward
experience; and all that is capable of being a controversy to the judicious,
is only de nomine, whether logically the conclusion be to be denominated from
the more debile of the premises, or from both by participation, as being both
an act of Faith, and of Reason, secundum quid, and of neither simpliciter. But
it is commonly concluded, that the more debile of the premises must denominate
the conclusion: And it is certain de re, that the conclusion can be no more
certain than it.

Object. But when the Scripture says, He that believes shall be saved; it is
equipollent to this, [ I John believe, and therefore I shall be saved.]

Answ. A gross deceit. That I believe, is no where in the Scripture: If it be,
does the Scripture say, that all men believe, or only some? If some, does it
name them, or notify them by any thing but the marks by which they must find
it in themselves?

Object. But he that believes may be as sure that he believes, as that the
Scripture is true.

Answ. But not that he is sincere, and exceeds all hypocrites and common
believers: At least there are but few that get so full an assurance hereof.

Object. The Spirit witnesses that we are Gods children: And to believe the
Spirit, is to believe God.

Answ. The Spirit is often called in Scripture, the witness, and pledge, and
earnest, in the same sense; that is, it is the evid^nce of our right to Christ
and life. If any man have not his Spirit, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. And
hereby we know that he dweleth in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. As
the Spirits Miracles were the witness of Christ, Heb. 2.3, etc. objectively, as
evidence is called witness. 2. And withal the Spirit by illumination and
excitation helps us to see it self as our evidence. 3. And to rejoice in this
discovery. And thus the Spirit witnesses our adoption. But none of these are
the proper objects of a Divine Belief. 1. The objective evidence of holiness in
us, is the object of our rational self-acquaintance, or conscience only. 2. The
illuminating grace by which we see this, is not a new Divine Testimony, or
proper Revelation, or Word of God; but the same help of grace by which all
other divine things are known. And all the Spirits grace for our understanding
of divine Revelations are not new objective Revelations themselves; requiring a
new act of Faith for them. A word or proper Revelation from God is the object
of divine belief; otherwise every illuminating act of the Spirit for our
understanding Gods Word, would be it self a new word, to be believed, and so in
infinitum.

Error 33. Doubting of the life to come, or of the truth of the Gospel, will
not stand with saving Faith.

Contr. It will not stand with a confirmed Faith; but it will with a sincere
Faith. He that doubts of the truth of the promise, so far as that he will not
venture life and soul, and all his hopes and happiness, temporal and eternal
upon it, has no true Faith: But he that doubts, but yet so far bel^eveth the
Gospel, as to take God for his only God and portion, and Christ for his only
Savior, and the Spirit for his Sanctifier, and will cast away life, or all
that stand in competition, has a true and saving Faith; as is before proved.

Error 34. That Repentance is no condition of Pardon or Justification; for
then it would be equal therein with Faith.

Contr. I have elsewhere at large proved the contrary from Scripture.
Repentance has many acts as Faith has. To repent (as it is the change of the
mind) of our Atheism, Idolatry, and not loving God, and obeying him, is the
same motion of the soul denominated from the terminus a quo, as Faith in God,
and Love to God is denominated from the terminus ad quem: This is Repentance
toward God. Repenting of our Infidelity against Christ, is the same motion of
the soul as believing in Christ, only one is denominated from the object-turned
from, and the other from the object-turned to. By which you may see that some
Repentance is the same with Faith in Christ; and some is the same with Faith in
God; and some is the same with Love to God; and some is but the same with the
leaving of some particular sin, or turning to some particular fore-neglected
duty. And so you may easily resolve the case how far it is the condition of
Pardon, Repentance, a^ it is a return to the Love of God, as he is our God, and
End, and All, is made the final condition of further blessings as necessary in
and of it self as the end of Faith in Christ: And Repentance of Infidelity, and
Faith in Christ is made the Mediate or Medicinal Condition. As consenting to be
friends with your Father or King after a rebellion; and consenting to the
Mediation of a friend to reconcile you, are both conditions, one (the more
noble) de fine, and the other de mediis: or as consenting to be cured, and
consenting to take Physic. They that will or must live in the darkness of
confusion, were best at least hold their tongues there, till they come into
distinguishing light.

Error 35. That all other acts of Faith in Christ (as our Lord, or Teacher, or
Judge) or of Faith in God, or the Holy Ghost; all confessing sin, and praying
for pardon, and repenting and forgiving others, and receiving Baptism, etc. are
the works which Paul excludes from Justification: And one act of faith only
being the Justifying Instrument, he that looks to be justified by any of all
these, besides that one act, does look for Justification by Works, and
consequently is fallen from grace.

Contr. This is not only an addition to Gods Word and Covenant [not to be used
by them that judge it unlawful to add a form or ceremony in his worship) but it
is a most dangerous invention to wrack men's consciences, and keep all men under
certain desperation. For whilst the world stands, the subtilest of these
Inventers of new doctrines will never be able to tell the world, which is that
one sole act of Faith, by which they are justified, that they may escape
looking for a legal Justification by the rest: whether it be believing in
Christ's Divinity, or Humanity, or both; or in his Divine, or Humane, or
Habitual Righteousness, or his Obedience as a subject, or his Sacrifice, or his
Priesthood offering that Sacrifice, or his Covenant and Promise of Pardon and
Justification, or in God that gives him and them; or in his Resurrections, or
in Gods present sentential or executive Justification; or in his final
sentential Justification, etc. No man to the end of the world shall know which
of these, or any other is the sole justifying act; and so no man can escape
being a legal adversary to grace. Unhappy Papists, who by the contrary extreme,
have frightened or disputed us into such wild and scandalous inventions. Of
this see fully my Disput. of Justification, against the worthy and excellent
Mr. Anthony Burgess.

Error 36. That our own Faith is not at all imputed to us for Righteousness,
but only Christ's Righteousness received by it.

Contr. The Scripture no where says, that Christ or his Righteousness, or his
Obedience, or his Satisfaction is imputed to us: And yet we justly defend it,
as is before explained, and as Mr. Bradshaw and Grotius de satisfact, have
explained it. And on the other side, the Scripture often says, that Faith is
imputed for Righteousness, and shall be so to all that believe in God that
raised Christ (Romans 4.) And this these objectors peremptorily deny. But
expounding Scripture amiss, is a much cleanlier pretense for error than a flat
denial of its truth. And a true Exposition is better than either.

The same God who has given us a Savior to satisfy legal Justice, and to
merit our Justification against the charge that we are condemnable by the Law
of Works; has thought meet to convey our title to this Christ and
Justification, by the Instrumentality of a new Covenant, Testament, or
pardoning Act; in which (though he absolutely give many antecedent mercies,
yet) he gives these and other Rights, by a conditional gift, that as the
Reward of Glory should have invited man to keep the Law of Nature and his
Innocence; so the Reward should be a moving means to draw men to believe. So
that there is a condition to be performed by our selves (through grace) before
we can have the Covenant right to Justification. Now when that is performed,
Christ then is our only Righteousness (as aforesaid) by which we must answer
the charge of breaking the first Law, and being condemnable by it. But we can
lay no claim to this Righteousness of Christ, till we first prove that we are
our selves inherently righteous, against the charge of being impenitent
Unbelievers. This false accusation we must be just^fied against by our own
Faith and Repentance; that we may be justified by Christ, against the true
accusation of sinning against the Law, and thereby being condemnable by it. Now
as to our Legal Righteousness, or Prolegal rather, by which this last must be
avoided, it is [ only the merits of Christ, given to us in its fruits, in the
New Covenant, even the merits of his obedience and sacrifice.] But our Faith it
self is the other Righteousness, which must be found in our persons to entitle
us to this first: And this being it, and being all (in the sense aforesaid)
that is made the condition of our pardon by the New Covenant; therefore God is
said to impute it it self to us for a Righteousness, because that condition
makeeth it so; and to impute it to us for our Righteousness, that is, as all
that now by this Covenant he requires to be personally done by us, who had
formerly been under a harder condition, even the fulfilling of the Law by
innocence, or suffering for sin; because he that does not fulfill nor satisfy,
as is said, yet if he believe, has a right to the Justification merited by
Christ, who did fulfill and satisfy. This is easy to be understood as
undoubted truth by the willing; and the rest will be most contentious, where
they are most erroneous.

Error 37. That sincere obedience, and all acts of Love, Repentance, and Faith
save one, do justify us only before men; and of that speaks St. James, chapter 2.

Contr. I must refer the Reader to other Books, in which I have fuly confuted
this. How can men judge of the acts of Repentance, Faith, Love, etc. which are
in the heart? And James plainly speaks of Gods imputing Righteousness to
Abraham, James 2.21, 23. And how should men justify Abraham for k^lling his
only Son? And how small a matter is Justification by man, when we may be saved
without it?

2. Sincere Obedience to God in Christ, is the condition of the continuance, or
not losing our Justification here, and the secondary part of the condition of
our final sentential and executive Justification.

Error 38. That our inherent Righteousness before described, has no place of
a condition in our Justification in the day of Judgment.

Contr. The Scriptures fully confuting this, I have elsewhere cited. All those
that say, we shall be judged according to our works, etc. speak against it: For
to be judged, is only to be justified or condemned: So Rev. 22.14. Matthew. 25,
etc.

Error 39 That there is no Justification at Judgment to be expected, but only
a declaration of it.

Contr. The Decisive sentence and declaration of the Judge, is the most proper
sense or sort of Justification, and the perfection of all that went before. If
we shall not be then justified, then there is no such thing as Justification by
Sentence: Nay, there is no such thing as a day of Judgment; or else all men
must be condemned. For it is most certain that we must be justified, or
condemned, or not-judged.

Error 40. That no man ought to believe that the conditional Covenant, Act or
Gift of Justification, belongs to him as a member of the lost world; or as a
sinner in Adam; because God has made no such gift or promise to any but to the
Elect.

Contr. This is confuted on the by before.

Error 41. That though it be false that the non-elect are elect, and that
Christ dyed for them, yet they are bound to believe it; every man of himself,
to prove that they are elect.

Contr. This is confuted on the by before. God binds, or bids no man to
believe a lie.

Error 42. That we must believe Gods Election, and our Justification, and the
special Love of God to us, before we can love him with a special Love: Because
it will not cause in us a special love, to believe only a common love of God,
and such as he has to the wicked and his enemies.

Contr. No man can groundedly believe the special Love of God to him, nor his
own Election or Justification, before he has (yea before he find in himself) a
special love to God. Because he that has no special love to God, must believe
a lie if he believe that he is justified, or that ever God revealed to him that
he is elect, or specially beloved of God: and no man has any evidence or proof
at all of his election, and Gods special love, till he have this evidence of
his special love to God. Till he know this, he cannot know that any other is
sincere.

2. They that deny or bl^spheme Gods common love to fallen man, and his
universal pardoning Covenant, do their worst to keep men from being moved to
the special Love of God by his common Love: But when they have done their
worst, it shall stand as a sure obligation. Is there not reason enough to bind
men to love God above all, even as one that yet may be their happiness in his
own infinite Goodness, and all the revelations of it by Christ, and in his so
loving the world, as to give his only Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. And in his giving a free pardon
of all sin to mankind, and offering life eternal to them, so that none but the
final refusers shall lose it, and entreating them to accept it, etc? Is not all
this sufficient in reason to move men to that love of God, if the Spirit help
them to make use of Reason (as he must do what Reasons soever are presented to
them) unless men think that God does not oblige them by any kindness which they
can possibly reject? or by any thing which many others do partake of?

Yet here note, that Gods common love to man, I do not mean, any which he has
to Reprobates, under the consideration of final despisers of his Antecedent
Love: But of that Antecedent Love it self, which he has showed to lost mankind
in Christ.

And note also, that I do not deny but that Love of God in some men may be
true, where their own presumption that God has elected them, and loved them
above others, before they had any proof of it, was an additional motive: But
this is man's way, and not Gods.

Error 43. That trusting to any thing, save God and Jesus Christ, for our
salvation, is sin and damnable.

Contr. Confusion cheateth and choaketh men's understanding. In a word, to trust
to any thing but God, and Christ, and the holy Spirit, for any of that which is
the proper part of God, of Christ, of the Spirit, is sin and damnable. But to
trust to any thing or person, for that which is but his own part, is but our
duty. And he that prays, and reads, and hears, and endeavors, and
looks to be never the better by them, nor trusts them for their proper
part, will be both heartless and formal in his work.

And I have showed before, that the Scripture, the Promise, the Apostles, the
Minister, and every Christian and honest man, has a certain trust due to them
for that which is their part, even in order to our salvation. I may trust only
to the skill of the Physician, and yet trust his Apothecary, and the Boy that
carries the Medicine for their part.

Error 44. That it is sinful, and contrary to free grace, to look at any thing
in our selves, or our own inherent righteousness, as the evidence of our
Justification.

Contr. Then no man can know his Justification at all. The Spirit of Holiness
and Adoption in our selves, is our earnest of salvation, and the witness that
we are Gods children, and the pledge of Gods love; as is proved before. This is
Gods seal, as God knows who are his; so he that will know it himself, must
depart from iniquity, when he names Christ. If God sanctify none but those
whom he justifies, then may the sanctified know that they are justified. Has
God delivered in Scripture so many signs or characters of the justified in vain?

Object. The witness of the Spirit only can assure us.

Ans. You know not what the witness of the Spirit is; or else you would know
that it is the Spirit making us holy, and possessing us with a filial love of
God, and with a desire to please him, and a dependence on him, etc. which is
the witness, even by way of an inherent evidence (and helping us to perceive
that evidence, and take comfort in it.) As a childlike love, and a pleasing
obedience, and dependence, with a likeness to the F^ther, is a witness, that
is, an evidence which is your child.

Error 45. That it is sinful to persuade wicked men to pray for Justification,
or any grace, or to do any thing for it; seeing their prayers and doings are
abominable to God, and cannot please him.

Contr. Then it is sinful to persuade a wicked man from his wickedness: Praying
and obeying, is departing from wickedness. He that prays to be sanctified
indeed, is repenting and turning from his sin to God. We never exhort wicked
men to pray with the tongue, without the desire of the heart. Desire is the
soul of prayer, and words are but the body: We persuade them not to dissemble:
But as Peter did Simon, Acts 8. Repent and pray for forgiveness. And if we may
not exhort them to good desires (and to excite and express the best desires
they have) we may not exhort them to conversion, Isa. 55.6, 10. Seek the Lord
while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near. Let the wicked
forsake his way, etc. You see there that praying is a repenting act; and when
we exhort them to pray, we exhort them to repent and seek God.

Object. But they have no ability to do it.

Ans. Thus the Devil would excuse sinners, and accuse God. Thus you may put by
all Gods commands, and say, God should not have commanded them to repent,
believe, love him, obey him, nor love one another, nor forbear their sins; for
they have no ability to do it. But they have their natural faculties, or
powers, and they have common grace; and Gods way of giving them special grace,
is by meeting them in the use of his appointed means; and not by meeting them
in an Alehouse, or in sinful courses. (However a soul may be met with in his
persecuting, and God may be found of them that sought him not; yet that is not
his usual, nor his appointed way.) Can any man of reason dream that it is not
the duty of a wicked man to use any means for the obtaining of grace, or to be
better; nor to do any thing toward his own recovery and salvation? Nature and
Scripture teach men as soon as they see their sin and misery, to say, What must
I do to be saved? As the re^^nting Jews, and Paul, and the Jailer (...)* Acts
2.37. and Acts 8. and 16.

The prayers of a wicked man as wicked, are abominable; that (...) ^oth his
wicked prayers, and his praying to quiet and s^rengthen himself in his
wickedness, or praying with the tongue without the heart. The prayers which
come from a common faith, and common good desires are better than none, but
have no promise of Justification. But the wicked must be exhorted both to this,
and more, even to repent, desire and pray sincerely.

Error 46. It is sinful, and against free grace, to think that any works or
actions of our own, are rewardable; or to say, that they are meritorious,
though it be nothing but rewardableness that is meant by it.

Contr. The Papists have so much abused the word merit, by many dangerous
op^nions about it, that it is now become more unmeet to be used by us than it
was in ancient times, when the Doctors and Churches (even Austin himself) did
commonly use it. But if nothing be meant by it, but rewardableness, or the
relation of a duty to the reward as freely promised by God (as many Papists
themselves understand it, and the ancient Fathers generally did) he that will
charge a man with error in doctrine for the use of an inconvenient word, is
uncharitable and perverse; especially when it is other men's abuse, which has
done most to make it inconvenient. The merit of the cause is a common phrase
among all Lawyers, when there is commutative meriting intended. I have fully
showed in my Confession, that the Scripture frequently uses the word [ worthy]
which is the same or full as much: And a subject may be said to merit
protection of his Prince; and a scholar to merit praise of his Master, and a
child to deserve love and respect from his Parents, and all this in no respect
to commutative Justice, wherein the Rewarder is supposed to be a gainer at all;
but only in governing distributive Justice, which gives every one that which
(by gift or any way) is his due. And that every good man, and every good
action, deserves praise, that is, to be esteemed such as it is. And that there
is also a comparative merit, and a not meriting evil: As a Believer may be said
not to deserve damnation by the Covenant of Grace, but only by (or according
to) the Law of Nature or Works.

But to pass from the word merit (which I had rather were quite disused,
because the danger is greater than the benefit) the thing signified thus by it,
is past all dispute, viz. that whatever duty God has promised a Reward to,
that duty or work is Rewardable according to the tenor of that promise: And
they that deny this, deny Gods Laws, and Government, and Judgment, and his
Covenant of Grace, and leave not themselves one promise for faith to rest upon:
So certainly would all these persons be damned, if God in mercy did not keep
them from digesting their own errors, and bringing them into practice.

Error 47. God is pleased with us only for the righteousness of Christ, and
not for any thing in our selves.

Contr. This is sufficiently answered before. He blasphemeth God, who thinks
that he is no better pleased with holiness than with wickedness; with well
doing, than with ill doing. They that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans
8.6, 7. but the spiritual and obedient may. Without faith it is impossible to
please him, because unbelievers think not that he is a Rewarder, and therefore
will not seek his reward aright: But they that will please him, must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb.
11.6. They forget not to do good and distribute, because with such sacrifices
God is well pleased, Heb. 13. And in a word, it is the work of all their lives
to labor, that whether living or dying they may be accepted of him, 2 Cor.
5.8, 9. and to (...) ^uch, and to do those things as are pleasing in his sight.
Nay, (...) add that as the glory of God, that is, the glorious demonst^^^ion or
appearance of himself in his works, is materially the ultimate end of man; so
the pleasing of himself in this his glory shining in his Image and Works, is
the very apex, or highest formal notion of this ultimate end of God and of man,
as far as is within our reach.

No man's works please God out of Christ, both because they are unsound and bad
in the spring and end, and because their faultiness is not pardoned. But in
Christ, the persons and duties of the godly are pleasing to God, because they
have his Image, and are sincerely good, and because their former sins, and
present imperfections are forgiven for the sake of Christ (who never reconciled
God to wickedness.

Error 48. It is m^rcenary to work for a reward, and legal to set men on doing
for salvation.

Contr. It is legal or foolish to think of working for any reward, by such
meritorious works as make the reward to be not of grace, but of debt, Romans 4.4.
But he that makes God himself, and his everlasting love to be his reward, and
trusts in Christ the only reconciler, as knowing his guilt and enmity by sin;
and labors for the food which perishes not, but endures to everlasting
life; and lays up a treasure in Heaven, and makes himself friends of the
Mammon of unrighteousness, and lays up a good foundation for the time to
come, laying hold upon eternal life, and striverh to enter in at the strait
gate, and fights a good fight, and finisheth his course for the Crown of
Righteousness, and suffers persecution for a reward in Heaven, and prays in
secret that God may reward him, and always abounds in the work of the Lord,
because his labor is not in vain in the Lord, and endures to the end, that he
may be saved, and is faithful to the death, and overcomes, that he may receive
the Crown of Life: this man takes Gods way, and the only way to Heaven; and
they that thus seek not the reward (being at the use of reason) are never like
to have it.

Error 49. It is not lawful for the justified to pray for the pardon of any
penalties, but temporal.

Contr. The ground of this is before overthrown.

Error 50. It is not lawful to pray twice for the pardon of the same sin;
because it implies unbelief, as if it were not pardoned already.

Contr. It is a duty to pray often and continuedly for the pardon of former sins:
1. Because pardon once granted must be continued; and therefore the continuance
must be prayed for: If you say, It is certain to be continued, I answer, then
it is as certain that you will continue to pray for it (and to live a holy
life.) 2. Because the evils deserved, are such as we are not perfectly
delivered from, and are in danger of more daily. And therefore we must pray for
daily executive pardon, that is, impunity; and that God will give us more of
his Spirit, and save us from the fruit of former sin: Because our right to
future impunity is given before all the impunity it self. 3* And the complete
Justification from all past sins, is yet to come at the day of Judgment. And
all this, (besides that some that have pardon, know it not) may and must be
daily prayed for.

Error 51. The Justified must not pray again for the pardon of the sins before
conversion.

Contr. What was last said confuteth this.

Error 52. No man at all may pray for pardon, but only for assurance: For the
sins of the Elect are all pardoned before they were born: and the non-elect
have no satisfaction made for their sins, and therefore their pardon is
impossible.

Contr. Matthew. 6. Forgive us our trespasses etc.

These consequences do but show the falsehood of the antecedents.

Error 53. No man can know that he is under the guilt of any sin; because no
man can know but that he is elect, and consequently justified already.

Contr. No infidel, or impenitent person is justified.

Error 54. Christ only is covenanted with by the Father, and he is the only
Promiser as for us, and not we for our selves.

Contr. Christ only has undertaken to do the work of Christ; but man must
undertake, and promise, and covenant, even to Christ himself, that (by the help
of his grace) he will do his own part. Or else no man should be baptized. What
a Baptism and Sacramental Communion do these men make? He that does not
covenant with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, has no right to the benefits
of Gods part of the Covenant. And no man (at age) can be saved that does not
both promise and perform.

Error 55. We are not only freed from the condemning sentence of the Law; but
freed also from its commands.

Contr. We are not under Moses Judaical Law, which was proper to their Nation,
and their Proselites: Nor are we under a necessity or duty, of laboring after
perfect obedience in our selves, as the condition of our Justification or
Salvation; but to renounce all such expectations. Nor will the Law of Works it
self ever justify us (as some affirm) as having perfectly fulfilled it by
another: But we are justified against its charge, and not by it, by the
Covenant of Grace, and not of Works. But perfect obedience to all the Law of
Nature, and all the Commands of Christ, is still our duty, and sincere
obedience is necessary to our salvation. All our duty is not supererrogation.

Error 56. When a man doubts whether he be a Believer or penitent, he must
believe that Christ repented and believed for him.

Contr. Christ never had sin to repent of; and it is not proper to say one
repents of another sin; Christ believed his Father; but had no use for that
faith in a Mediator which we must have. He that repents not, and believes
not himself, shall be damned: Therefore you may see how Christ repented and
believed for us.

Error 57. A man that trusts to be justified at the day of Judgment,
against the charge of unbelief, impenitency and hypocrisy, by his own faith,
repentance and sincerity, as his particular subordinate Righteousness, and not
by Christ's Righteousness imputed only sins against free grace.

Contr. Christ's Righteousness is imputed or given to none, nor shall justify
any that are true Unbelievers, Impenitent or Hypocrites: Therefore if any such
person trust to be justified by Christ, he deceives him. If the (...) be, Thou
art an Infidel or impenitent, it is frivolous to say, But Christ obeyed,
suffered, or believed, or repented for me. But he that will then be justified
against that charge, must say, and say truly, I truly believed, repented and
obeyed.

Error 58. There is no use for a Justification against any such false
accusation before God, who knows all men's hearts.

Contr. 1. You might as well say, There is no use of judging men according to
what they have done, when God knows what they have done already. 2. We are to
be justified by God before men and Angels, that Christ may be glorified in his
Saints, and admired in all them that believe, because the Gospel was believed
by them, 2 These. 1.10, 11. And not only the mouth of iniquity may be stopped,
and open false accusations confuted; but that the prejudices and heart-slanders
of the wicked may be refelled, and our righteousness be brought forth as the
light, and our judgment as the noon day: That all the false judgments and
reproaches of the wicked against the just may be confounded; and they may
answer for all their ungodly sayings, and hard speeches (as Henoch prophesied)
against the godly: and that they that speak evil of us, because we run not with
them to all excess of riot, may give an account to him who is ready to judge
the quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4.4, 5. And that all may be set straight which
men made crooked, and hidden things be all brought to light.

3. And we must be better acquainted with the ingenuity of the great accuser of
the Brethren, before we can be sure that he who belyed God to man, will not
belly man to God; seeing he is the Father of lies, and did so by Job, etc.

4. But we m^st not think of the day of Judgment, as a day of talk between
God, and Satan, and Man; but as a day of DECISIVE LIGHT or manifestation. And
so the case is out of doubt. The Faith, Repentance and Sincerity of the just
will be there manifest, against all former or latter, real or vertual calumnies
of men or devils to the contrary.

5. But above all let it be marked, that nothing else can be matter of
controversy to be decided. That Christ has obeyed, and suffered, and
satisfied for Believers sins, and made a testament or covenant to pa^^^n all
true Believers, will be known to the accuser, and past all doubt. The day of
Judgment is not to try Christ's obedience and sufferings, nor to decide the
case whether he fulfilled the Law, and satisfied for sin, or made a pardoning
Covenant to Believers: But whether we have part in him or not, and so are to be
justified by the Gospel Covenant, through his merits against the Legal
Covenant: And whether we have fulfilled the conditions of the pardoning
Covenant or not. This is all that can be then made a Controversy; this is the
secrets of men's heart and case that must be opened before the world by God.
However we doubt not, but the glory of all will redound to Christ, whose merits
are unquestioned.

6. Note also, that Christ will be the Judge on supposition of his merits, and
not the party to be tried and judged.

7. Note also, that we are to be judged by the New Covenant or Law of Liberty,
and therefore it is the condition of that Covenant (as made with us) which is
to be enquired after.

8. Note also that Christ himself in Matthew. 25. (and every where) when he
describes the day of Judgment, does not at all speak of any decision of such
a controversy, as whether he was the Lamb of God, who took away the sins of
the world? or whether he did his part or not; but only whether men did their
parts or not, and showed the sincerity of their love to God and him, by
venturing all for him, and owning him in his servants, to their cost and
hazard. And the fruit of Christ's part is only mentioned as a presupposed thing*
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you -- For I was
hungry, etc. The Preparation (in Gods Decree and Christ's merits) is
unquestioned, and so is the donation to all true Believers; therefore it is the
case of their Title to this gift, and of the condition or evidence of their
title, which is here tried and decided.

Lastly, Note that upon the decision, in respect of both together (Christ's
Merits and Covenant as supposed, and their own true Faith, and Love, as
manifested decisively) they are called Righteous, v. 46. The Righteous into
life eternal.

So much to take the stumbling blocks out of the way of Faith, about Free Grace
and Justification, which the weakness of many well meaning erroneous men has
laid there of late times, to the great danger or impediment of weak Believers.

Isa. 57.14. Take up the stumbling block out of the way of my people.

Levit. 19.14. Thou shall not put a stumbling block before the blind, but shall
fear thy God.

CHAP. IX. How to live by Faith, in order to the exercise of other graces and
duties of Sanctification, and Obedience to God. And first of the Doctrinal
Directions.
WE cannot by Faith promote Sanctification, unless we understand the nature and
reasons of Sanctification. This therefore must be our first endeavor.

The word [ Sanctified] does signify that which is separated to God from
common uses.] And this separation is either by God himself (as he has
sanctified the Lords day, etc.) or by man's dedication; either of persons to a
holy office; and so the Ministers of Christ are sanctified in their Ordination
(which is a Consecration) and their self-dedication to God. (And it is high
sacrilege in themselves, or any other, that shall alienate them unjustly from
their sacred calling and work.) Or of things to holy uses; (as places and
utensils may be sanctified: Or it may be a dedication of persons to a holy
state, relation and use; as is that of every Christian in his Baptism* and this
is either an external dedication; and so all the baptized are sanctified and
holy, or an internal Dedication, which if it be sincere, it is both actual and
habitual; when we both give up our selves to God in Covenant, and are also
disposed and inclined to him; and our hearts are set upon him; yea and the life
also consists of the exercise of this disposition, and performance of this
covenant. This is the Sanctification which here I speak of. And so much for the
name.

The doctrinal Propositions necessary to be understood about it, are these
(more largely and plainly laid down in my Confession, Chap. 3.)

Prop. 1. So much of the appearance or Image of God as there is upon any
creature, so much it is good and amiable to God and man.

Object. God loves us from eternity, and when we were his enemies; not because
we were good, but to make us better than we were.

Answ. Gods Love (and all Love) consists formally in complacency. God has no
complacency in any thing but in good; or according to the measure of its
goodness: From eternity God foreseeing the good which would be in us, loved us
as good in esse cognito; and not as actually good, when we were not. When we
were his enemies, he had a double love to us (or complacency) the one was for
that natural good which remained in us as we were men, and repairable, and
capable of being made Saints. The other was for that foreseen goods in esse
cognito, which he purposed in time to come, to put upon us. This complacency
exceeded not at all the good which was the object of it: But with it was joined
a will and purpose to give us grace and glory hereafter; and thence it is
called, A Love of Benevolence: Not but that complacency is the true action of
Love; and Benevolence, or a purpose to give benefits, is but the fruit of it.
But if any will needs call the Benevolence alone by the name of Love, we deny
not in that sense that God loves Saul a persecutor, as well as Paul an
Apostle; in that his purpose to do him good is the same.

Object. God loves us in Christ, and for his righteousness, and not only for
our own inherent holiness.

Answ. 1. The Benevolence of God is exercised toward us in and by Christ; and
the fruits of his Love are Christ himself, and the mercies given us with
Christ, and by Christ. And our Pardon, and Justification, and Adoption, and
Acceptance is by his meritorious righteousness: And it is by him that we are
possessed with Gods Spirit, and renewed according to his Image, in Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Holiness: And all this relative and inherent mercy we have
as in Christ, related to him, without whom we have nothing: And thus it is that
we are accepted and beloved in him, and for his righteousness. But Christ did
not die or merit to change Gods Nature, and make him more indifferent in his
Love to the holy and the unholy, or equally to the more holy, and to the less
holy. But his complacency is still in no man further than he is made truly
amiable in his real holiness, and his relation to Christ, and to the Father.
(The Doctrine of Imputation is opened before.) John 16.27. The Father himself
loves you, because ye have loved me, and believed, etc. And 14.21. He that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father -- As God loved us with the love of
benevolence, and so much complacence as is before described before we loved him
(1 John 4.10. Ephesians. 2.4.) so he now loves us complacentially for his Image
upon us, and so much of his grace as is found in us; and also for our relation
to his Son, and to himself, which we stand in by this grace: But as he loves
not Saul a persecutor, under the notion of a fulfiller of his Law in Christ; so
neither does he love David in his sin, under the notion of one that is without
sin, and perfect, as having fulfilled the Law in Christ: But so loves him in
Christ, as to pardon his sin, and make him more lovely in himself, by creating
a clean heart, and renewing a right spirit within him, for the sake of the
satisfaction and merits of Christ.

Prop. 2. Holiness is Gods Image upon us, and that which was our primitive
amiableness, Col. 3.10.

Prop. 3. The loss of Holiness, was the loss of our amiableness, and our state
of enmity to God.

Prop. 4. Holiness consists in 1. Our resignation of our selves to God as our
Owner, and submission to his Providence: 2. And our subjection to God as our
Ruler; and obedience to his Teaching and his Laws: 3. And in Thankfulness and
Love to God as our Chief Good, efficiently and finally.

Prop. 5. Love is that final perfective act, which implies and comprehends
all the rest; and so is the fulfilling of the Law, and the true state of
sanctification, Romans 13.10. Matthew. 22.37. Mark 12.33. 1 John 7.16.

Prop. 6. Heaven it self, as it is our ultimate end and perfection, is but our
perfect Love to God maintained by perfect vision of him, with the perfect
reception of his Love to us.

Prop. 7. Therefore it was Christ's great business in the world, to destroy the
works of the Devil, and to bring us to this perfect Love of God.

Prop. 8. Accordingly the greatest use of Faith in Christ is to subserve and
kindle our Love to God.

Prop. 9. This it does two special ways: 1. By procuring the pardon of sin,
which forfeited the grace of the Spirit; that so the Spirit may kindle the Love
of God in us: 2. By actual beholding the Love of God, which shines to us most
gloriously in Christ, by which our Love must be excited, as the most suitable
and effectual means, John 3.1. and 4.10.

Prop. 10. Our whole Religion therefore consists of two parts: 1. Primitive
Holiness, restored and perfected: 2. The restoring and perfecting means: Or 1.
Love to God, the final and more excellent part: 2. Faith in Christ, the mediate
part. Faith causing Love, and Love caused by Faith, 1 Cor. 12. last, and 13.
Romans 8.35. Ephesians. 6.23. 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 These. 3.5. 1 Cor. 2.9. and 8.3. Romans
8.28. James 1.12. and 2.5. 1 Pet. 1.8.

Prop. 11. Repentance toward God, is the souls return to God in Love; and
Regeneration by the Spirit, is the Spirits begetting us to the Image and Nature
of God our heavenly Father, in a heavenly Love to him: So that the Holy Ghost
is given us to work in us a Love to God, which is our sanctification, Romans 5.5.
Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 13.14. 1 John 4.16.

Prop. 12. When Sanctification is mentioned as a gift consequent to Faith, it
is the Love of God as our Father in Christ, and the Spirit of Love, that is
principally meant by that Sanctification.

Prop. 13. The pardon of sin consists more in forgiving the poenam damni, the
forfeiture and loss of Love, and the Spirit of Love, than in remitting any
corporal pain of sense. And the restoring of Love, and the Spirit of Love, and
the perfecting hereof in Heaven, is the most eminent part of our executive
Pardon, Justification and Adoption. Thus far Sanctification is Pardon it self,
Romans 8.15, 16, 17. Gal. 4 6. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. Titus 3.6, 7. Titus 2.13, 14.
Romans 6. Romans 8.4, 10, 13.

Prop. 14. The pardon of the pain of sense, is given us as a means, to the
executive pardon of the pain of loss, that is, to put us in a capacity, with
doubled obligations and advantages to Love God, Luke 7.47.

Prop. 15. Sanctification therefore being better than all other pardon of sin,
as being its end; we must value it more, and must make it our first desire to
be as holy as may be, that we may need as little forgiveness as may be, and in
the second place only desire the pardon of that which we had rather not have
committed; and not make pardon our chief desire, Romans 6, and 7, and 8.
throughout, Gal. 5.17. to the end.

Prop. 16. Holiness is the true Morality; and they that prefer the preaching,
and practice of Faith in Christ, before the preaching and practice of Holiness,
and slight this as mere morality, do prefer the means before the end, and
their physic before their health: And they that preach or think to practice
Holiness, without Faith in Christ, do dream of a cure without the only
Physician of souls. And they that preach up Morality as consisting in mere
justice, charity to men, and temperance, without the Love of God in Christ, do
take a branch cut off and withered, for the tree.

Some ignorant Sectaries cry down all Preaching, as mere morality, which does
not frequently toss the name of Christ, and Free Grace.

And some ungodly Preachers, who never felt the work of Faith or Love to God in
their own souls, for want of holy experience, savor not, and understand not
holy Preaching; and therefore spend almost all their time, in declaiming
against some particular vices, and speaking what they have learned of some
virtues of sobriety, justice or mercy. And when they have done, cover over
their ungodly unbelieving course, by reproaching the weaknesses of the former
sort, who cry down Preaching mere morality. But let such know, that those
Ministers and Christians, who justly lament their lifeless kind of Preaching,
do mean by morality, that which you commonly call Ethics in the Schools, which
leaves out not only Faith in Christ, but the Love of God, and the
Sanctification of the Spirit, and the heavenly Glory. And they do not cry down
true morality, but these dead branches of it, which are all your morality: It
is not morality it self inclusively that they blame, but mere morality, that
is, so much only as Aristotle's Ethics teach, as exclusive to the Christian
Faith and Love. And do you think with any wise men (or with your own
consciences long to find it a cloak to your Infidel or unholy hearts and
doctrine, to mistake them that blame you, or to take advantage of that
ignorance of others? The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God
the Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, do shut up your Liturgy by way
of Benediction; but it is almost all shut out of your Sermons, unless a few
heartless customary passages: And when there is nothing less in your preaching,
than that which is the substance of your Baptismal Covenant and Christianity,
and your customary Benediction; you do but tell the people what kind of
Christianity you have, and what Benediction: that is, that you are neither
truly Christians, nor Blessed.

True Morality, or the Christian Ethics, is the Love of God and man, stirred
up by the Spirit of Christ, through Faith; and exercised in works of Piety,
Justice, Charity and Temperance, in order to the attainment of everlasting
happiness, in the perfect vision and fruition of God. And none but ignorant or
brainsick Sectaries, will be offended for the Preaching of any of this
Morality. Luke 11.42. W^ to you Pharisees; for ye tithe Mint and Rue -- and
pass over Judgment and the Love of God: These ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone.

CHAP. X. The Practical Directions to live by Faith, a life of Holiness or Love.
Direct. 1. TAke Jesus Christ as a Teacher sent from Heaven; the best and
surest revealer of God and his Will unto mankind.

All the Books of Philosophers are sapless and empty, in comparison of the
teaching of Jesus Christ; they are but enquiries into the nature of the
creatures, and the lowest things, most impertinent to our happiness or duty: Or
if they rise up to God, it is but with dark and unpractical conjectures, for
the most part of them: and the rest do but grope and fumble in obscurity. And
their learning is mostly but useless speculations, and striving about words and
sciences falsely so called, which little tend to godly edifying. It is Christ
who is made wisdom to us, as being himself the wisdom of God. If you knew but
where to hear an Angel, you would all prefer him before Aristotle or Plato, or
Cartesius, or Gassendus; how much more the Son himself? He is the true Light,
to lighten every man that will not serve the Prince of darkness. Christians
were first called Christ's Disciples* and therefore to learn of him the true
knowledge of God, is the work of every true Believer, John 17.^. Acts 3.23.
John 8.43, 47. and 10.3, 27. and 12.47. and 14.24. Matthew. 17.5.

Direct. 2. Remember that Christ's way of Teaching is; 1: By his Word, 2. His
Ministers; 3. And his Spirit conjunct, and the place for his Disciples is in
his Church.

1. His Gospel written is his Book which must be taught us. 2. His Ministers
office is to teach it us. 3. His Spirit is inwardly to illuminate us that we
may understand it. And he that will despise or neglect either the Scripture,
Ministry or Spirit, is never like to learn of Christ.

Direct. 3. Look on the Lord Jesus, and the work of man's Redemption by him, as
the great designed Revelation of the Fathers Love and Goodness; even as the
fabric of the world is set up to be the Glass or Revelation (eminently) of his
Greatness.

Therefore as you choose your Book for the sake of the Science or subject which
you would learn; so let this be the designed, studied, constant use which you
make of Christ, to see and admire in him the Fathers Love. When you read your
Grammar, if one ask you, why? you will say it is to learn the language which it
teaches; and he that reads Law Books, or Philosophy, or Medicine, it is to
learn Law, Philosophy or Physic: so whenever you read the Gospel, meditate on
Christ, or hear his Word; if you are asked why you do it? be able to say, I do
it to learn the Love of God, which is no where else in the world to be learnt
so well. No wonder if Hypocrites have learned to mortify Scripture, Sermons,
Prayers, and all other means of grace; yea all the world which should teach
them God; and to learn the letters, and not the sense: But it is most pitiful
that they should thus mortify Christ himself to them; and should gaze on the
glass, and never take much notice of the face even of the Love of God which he
is set up to declare.

Direct. 4. Therefore congest all the great discoveries of this Love, and set
them all together in order; and make them your daily study, and abhor all
doctrines or suggestions from men or devils, which tend to disgrace, diminish
or hide this revealed Love of God in Christ.

Think of the grand design it self; the reconciling and saving of lost mankind:
Think of the gracious nature of Christ; of his wonderful condescension in his
incarnation in his life and doctrine, in his sufferings and death; in his
miracles and gifts: Think of his merciful Covenant and Promises; of all his
benefits given to his Church; and all the privileges of his Saints; of pardon
and peace, of his Spirit of Holiness, of preservation and provision, of
resurrection and justification, and of the life of glory which we shall live
for ever. And if the Faith which looks on all these, cannot yet warm your
hearts with love, nor engage them in thankful obedience to your Redeemer,
certainly it is no true and lively Faith.

But you must not think narrowly and seldom of these mercies; not hearken to
the Devil or the doctrine of any mistaken Teachers, that would represent Gods
Love as veiled or ecclipsed; or show you nothing but wrath and flames. That
which Christ principally came to reveal, the Devil principally striveth to
conceal, even the Love of God to sinners; that so that which Christ principally
came to work in us, the Devil might principally labor to destroy; and that is,
our love to him that has so loved us.

Direct. 5. Take heed of all the Antinomian Doctrines before recited, which, to
extol the empty Name and Image of Free Grace, do destroy the true principles
and motives of holiness and obedience.

Direct. 6. Exercise your Faith upon all the holy Scriptures, Precepts,
Promises and Threatenings, and not on one of them alone. For when God has
appointed all conjunctly for this work, you are unlike to have his blessing, or
the effect, if you will lay by most of his remedies.

Direct. 7. Take not that for Holiness and Good Works, which is no such thing;
but either man's inventions, or some common gifts of God.

It greatly deludeth the world, to take up a wrong description or character of
Holiness in their minds. As 1. The Papists take it for Holiness, to be very
observant in their adoration of the supposed transubstantiated Host; to use
their relics, pilgrimages, crossings, prayers to Saints and Angels,
anointings, Candles, Images, observation of meats and days, penance, auricular
confession, praying by numbers and hours on their beads, etc. They think their
idle ceremonies are holiness, and that their hurtful austerities, and
self-afflictings (by rising in the night, when they might pray as long before
they go to bed) (and by whipping themselves) to be very meritorious parts of
Religion. And their vows of renouncing marriage and propriety, and of absolute
obedience, to be a state of perfection.

2. Others think that Holiness consists much in being rebaptized, and in
censuring the Parish-Churches and Ministers as Null, and in withdrawing from
their communion; and in avoiding forms of prayer, etc.

3. And others (or the same) think that more of it consists in the gifts of
utterance, in praying, and preaching, than indeed it does; and that those only
are godly, that can pray without book (in their families, or at other times)
and that are most in private meetings; and none but they.

4. And some think that the greatest parts of Godliness, are the spirit of
bondage to fear; and the shedding of tears for sin; or finding that they were
under terror, before they had any spiritual peace and comfort; or being able
to tell at what Sermon, or time, or in what order, and by what means they were
converted.

It is of exceeding great consequence, to have a right apprehension of the
Nature of Holiness, and to escape all false conceits thereof. But I shall not
now stand further to describe it, because I have done it in many Books,
especially in my Reasons of the Christian Religion, and in my [ A Saint, or a
Bruit] and in a Treatise only of the subject called The character of a sound
Christian.

Direct. 8. Let all Gods Attributes be orderly and deeply printed in your
minds; (as I have directed in my book called, The Divine Life.) For it is that
which must most immediately form his Image on you. To know God in Christ is
life eternal, John 17.3.

Direct. 9. Never separate reward from duty, but in every religious or obedient
action, still see it as connext with Heaven. The means is no means but for the
end; and must never be used but with special respect unto the end. Remember in
reading, hearing, praying, meditating in the duties of your callings and
relations, and in all acts of charity and obedience; that All this is for
Heaven. It will make you mend your pace, if you think believingly whither you
are going, Heb. 11.

Direct. 10. Yet watch most carefully against all proud self-esteeming thoughts
of proper merit as obliging God; or as if you were better than indeed you are.
For Pride is the most pernicious vermin that can breed in gifts or in good
works. And the better you are indeed, the more humble you will be, and apt to
think others better than your self.

Direct. 11. So also in every temptation to sin, let Faith see Heaven open, and
take the temptation in its proper sense, q. d. [ Take this pleasure instead of
God: sell thy part in Heaven for this preferment or commodity: cast away thy
soul for this sensual delight.] This is the true meaning of every temptation to
sin, and only Faith can understand it. The Devil easily prevails, when Heaven
is forgotten and out of sight; and pleasure, commodity, credit and preferment,
seem a great matter, and can do much, till Heaven be set in the balance
against them; and there they are nothing, and can do nothing, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17.

Direct. 12. Let Faith also see God always present. Men dare do any thing when
they think they are behind his back; even truants and eye-servants will do well
under the Masters eye: Faith seeing him that is invisible ( Heb. 11.) is it
that sanctifies heart and life. As the Attributes of God are the seal which
must make his Image on us; so the apprehension of his presence sets them on,
and keeps our faculties awake.

Direct. 13. Be sure that Faith make Gods acceptance your full reward, and set
you above the opinion of man.

Not in self-conceitedness, and pride of your self-sufficiency, to set light by
the judgment of other men: (That is a heinous sin of it self, and doubled when
it is done upon pretense of living upon God alone.) But that really you live so
much to God alone, as that all men seem as nothing to you, and their opinion of
you, as a blast of wind, in regard of any felicity of your own, which might be
placed in their love or praise: Though as a means to Gods service, and their
own good, you must please all men to their edification, and become all things
to all men, to win them to God, Gal. 1.10, 11. Romans 15.1, 2. Prove. 11.30. 1
Cor. 9.22. and 10.33. yea and study to please your Governors as your duty,
Titus 2.9. But as man-pleasing is the Hypocrites work and wages; so must the
pleasing of God be ours, though all the world should be displeased, Matthew. 6.1,
2, 3, 5, 6, etc. 2 Timothy 2.4. 1 Cor. 7.32. 1 These. 4.1. 2 Cor. 5.8, 9. 1 These.
2.4. 1 John 3.22.

Direct. 14. Let the constant work of Faith be, to take you off the life of
sense, by mortifying all the concupiscence of the flesh, and over-powering all
the objects of sense.

The neerness of things sensible, and the violence and unreasonableness of the
senses and appetite, do necessitate Faith to be a conflicting grace. Its use is
to illuminate, elevate and corroborate Reason, and help it to maintain its
authority and government. The life of a Believer is but a conquering warfare
between Faith and Sense, and between things unseen, and the things that are
seen. Therefore it is said, that they th^^ are in the flesh cannot please God;
because the flesh b^ing the predominant principle in them, they most savor and
mind the things of the flesh; and therefore they can do more with them, than
the things of the Spirit can do, when both are set before them, Romans 8.5, 6, 7,
8.

Direct. 15. Let Faith set the example, first of Christ, and next of his
holiest servants, still before you.

He that purposely lived among men in flesh, a life of holiness and patience,
and contempt of the world, to be a pattern or example to us, does expect that
it be the daily work of Faith to imitate him; and therefore that we have this
Copy still before our eyes. It will help us when we are sluggish, and sit down
in low and common things, to see more noble things before us. It will help us
when we are in doubt of the way of our duty; and when we are apt to favor our
corruptions: It will guide our minds, and quicken our desires, with a holy
ambition and covetousness to be more holy: It will serve us to answer all that
the world or flesh can say, from the contrary examples of sinning men: If any
tell us what great men, or learned men think, or say, or do, against Religion,
and for a sinful life; it is enough, if Faith do but tell us presently, what
Christ, and his Apostles, and Saints, and Martyrs, have thought, and said, and
done to the contrary, Mat. 11.28, 29. 1 Pet. 2.21. John 13.15. Phil. 3.17. 2
These. 3.9. 1 Timothy 4.12. Ephesians. 5.1. Heb. 6.12. 1 These. 1.6. and 2.14.

Direct. 16. Let your Faith set all graces on work in their proper order and
proportion; and carry on the work of holiness and obedience in harmony; and not
set one part against another, nor look at one while you forget or neglect
another.

Every grace and duty is to be a help to all the rest: And the want or neglect
of any one, is a hinderance to all: As the want of one wheel or smaller
particle in a clock or watch, will make all stand still, or go out of order.
The new creature consists of all due parts, as the body does of all its
members. The soul is as a musical instrument, which must neither want one
string, nor have one out of tune, nor neglected, without spoiling all the
melody. A fragment of the most excellent work, or one member of the comliest
body cut off, is not beautiful: The beauty of a holy soul and life, is not only
in the quality of each grace and duty, but much in the proportion, feature and
harmony of all. Therefore every part has its proper armor, Ephesians. 6.11, 12,
13* 14. And the whole armor of God must be put on: Because all fullness
dwells in Christ; we are complete in him, as being sufficient to communicate
every grace. Epaphras labored always fervently in prayers for the Colossians,
that they might stand perfect and complete in all the Will of God, Col. 4.12.
James 1.4. Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing. We often comfort our selves, that though we want the
perfection of degrees, yet we have the perfection of parts, or of integrity.
But many are fain to prove this only by inferring, that he that has one grace,
has all; but as to the discerning and orderly use of all, they are yet to seek.

CHAP. XI. Of the Order of Graces and Duties.
BEcause I find not this insisted on in any Writers for the peoples
instruction, as it ought, I will not pass over so needful a point without some
further advertisement about it. I will therefore show you, 1. What is the
compleatness and the harmony to be desired: 2. What are our contrary defects
and distempers: 3. What are the causes of them, and what must be the cure: 4.
Some useful Inferences hence arising.

I. He that will be complete and entire, must have all these Graces and Duties
following.

1. A solid and clear understanding of all the great, the needful and practical
matters of the sacred Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.16. (And if he have the
understanding of the Scripture languages, and the customs of those times, and
other such helps, his understanding of the Scripture will be the more complete,
Acts 26.3. If he have not, he must make use of other men's.)

2. A settled well grounded Belief of all Gods supernatural Revelations (as
well as the knowledge of natural verities.)

3. Experience to make this knowledge and belief to be satisfactory, powerful
and firm. Especially the experience of the Spirits effectual operations in our
selves, by the means of this word, Romans 5.4. and 8.9. Gal. 4.6.

4. The historical knowledge of the Scripture matters of fact, and how God in
all ages (since Scripture times) has fulfilled his Word, both promises and
threatenings, and what Christ, and Satan, Grace and Sin, have been doing in the
world. Therefore the Scripture is written so much by way of history; and
therefore the Jews were so often charged to tell the history of Gods works to
their children, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 6, 7, 11. Exodus 12.29. Deuteronomy. 26.22. Josh. 4.6,
21, 22. and 22* 24, 27. Therefore the writing of Church History is the duty of
all ages, because Gods Works are to be known, as well as his Word: And as it is
your forefathers duty to write it, it is the childrens duty to learn it (or
else the writing it would be vain.) He that knows not what state the Church
and world is in, and has been in, in former ages, and what God has been doing
in the world, and how error and sin have been resisting him, and with what
success, does want much to the completing of his knowledge.

5. And he must have prudence to discern particular cases; and to consider of
all circumstances, and to compare things with things, that he may discern his
duty, and the seasons and manner of it; and may know among inconsistent seeming
duties, which is to be preferred; and when and what circumstances or accidents
do make any thing a duty which else would be no duty or a sin; and what
accidents make that a sin which without them would be a duty. This is the
knowledge which must make a Christian entire or complete.

2. And in his Will there must be 1. A full resignation and submission to the
Will of God his Owner; and a full subjection and obedience to the Will of God
his Governor; yielding readily, and constantly, and resolut^ly to the commands
of God, as the Scholar obeys his Master, and as the second wheel in the clock
is moved by the first: And a close adhering to God as his chief Good, by a
Thankful Reception of his Benefits; and a desirous seeking to enjoy, and
glorify him, and please his Will: In a word, loving him as God, and taking our
chiefest complacency in pleasing him; in loving him, and being loved of him.

2. And in the same will there must be a well regulated Love, to all Gods
works, according as he is manifested or glorified in them: To the humanity of
our Redeemer; to the glory of Heaven, as it is a created thing; to the blessed
Angels, and perfected spirits of the just, to the Scripture, to the Church on
earth, to the Saints, the Pastors, the Rulers, the holy Ordinances, to all
mankind, even to our enemies; to our selves, our souls, our bodies, our
relations, our estates, and mercies of every rank.

3. And herewithall must be a hatred of every sin in our selves and others: Of
former sin, and present corruption, with a penitential displicence and grief;
and of possible sin, with a vigilance and resistance to avoid it.

3. And in the Affections there must be a vivacity and sober fervency,
answering to all these motions of the Will; in Love, Delight, Desire, Hope,
Hatred, Sorrow, Aversation and Anger; the complexion of all which is godly Zeal.

4. In the vital and executive Power of the soul, there must be a holy
activity, promptitude and fortitude, to be up and doing, and to set the
sluggish faculties on work; and to bring all knowledge and volitions into
practice, and to assault and conquer enemies and difficulties. There must be
the Spirit of Power (though I know that word did chiefly then denote the Spirit
of Miracles, yet not only) and of Love, and of a sound mind.

5. In the outward members there must be by use a habit of ready obedient
execution of the souls commands: As in the tongue a readiness to pray, and
praise God, and declare his Word, and edify others; and so in the rest.

6. In the senses and appetite, there must by use be a habit of yielding
obedience to Reason; that the senses do not rebel and rage, and bear down the
commands of the mind and will.

7. Lastly, In the Imagination there must be a clearness or purity from
filthiness, malice, covetousness, pride and vanity; and there must be the
impressions of things that are good and useful; and a ready obedience to the
superior faculties, that it may be the instrument of holiness, and not the
shop of temptations and sin, nor a wild, unruly, disordered thing.

And the harmony of all these must be as well observed as the matter: As

1. There must be a just Order among them: every duty must keep its proper
place and season.

2. There must be a just proportion and degree: some graces must not wither,
whilst others alone are cherished: nor some duties take up all our heart and
time, whilst others are almost laid by.

3. There must be a just activity and exercise of every grace.

4. And a just conjunction and respect to one another, that every one be used
so as to be a help to all the rest.

I. The Order 1. Of Intellectual graces and duties, must be this. 1. In order
of Time, the things which are sensible are known before the things which are
beyond our sight, and other senses.

2. Beyond these the first thing known both for certainly and for excellency,
is, that there is a God.

3. This God is to be known as one Being in his three Essential Principles,
Vital Power, Intellect and Will.

4. And these as in their Essential Perfections, Omnipotency, Wisdom and
Goodness (or Love.)

5. And also in his perfections called Modal and Negative, etc. (as Immensity,
Eternity, Independancy, Immutability, etc.)

6. God must be next known in his Three Personalities* as the Father, the Word,
or Son, and the Spirit.

7. And these in their three Causalities; efficient, dirigent and final.

8. And in their three great works, Creation, Redemption, Sanctification (or
Perfection) producing Nature, Grace and Glory, or our Persons, Medicine, and
Health.

9. And God who created the world, is thereupon to be known in his Relations to
it; as our Creator in Unity, and as our Owner, Ruler, and Chief Good
(efficient, dirigent and final) in a Trinity of Relations. You must know how
the Infinite Vital Power of the Father, created all things by the Infinite
Wisdom of the Word, or Son, and by the Infinite Goodness and Love of the holy
Spirit (As the Son redeemed us as the eternal Wisdom, and Word Incarnate, sent
by the eternal Vital-Power of the Father, to reveal and communicate the eternal
Love in the Holy Ghost: And as the Holy Ghost does sanctify and perfect us, as
proceeding and sent from the Power of the Father, and the Wisdom of the Son, to
shed abroad the Love of God upon our hearts, etc.)

10. Next to the knowledge of God as Creator, is to be considered the World
which he created, and especially the Intectellual Creatures; Angels, or
heavenly Spirits, and Men. Man is to be known in his person or constitution
first, and afterward in his appointed course, and in his end and perfection.

11. In his constitution is to be considered, 1. His Being or essential parts:
2. His Rectitude or Qualities: 3. His Relations, 1. To his Creator; And 2. To
his fellow creatures.

12. His essential parts are his soul and body: His soul is to be known in the
Unity of its Essence, and Trinity of essential faculties (which is its natural
Image of God.) Its essence is a Living Spirit: Its essential faculties are 1. A
Vital Activity, or Power: 2. An Understanding: 3. A Will.

13. His Rectitude, which is Gods Moral Image on him, consists 1. In the
promptitude and fortitude of his Active Power: 2. In the Wisdom of his
Understanding: 3. In the Moral Goodness of his Will, which is its Inclination
to its End, and Readiness for its Duty.

14. Being created such a creature, by a mere resultancy from his Nature, and
his Creator, he is related to him as his Creature; and in that Unity is the
subsequent Trinity of Relations: 1. As we are Gods Propriety, or his Own: 2.
His Subjects: 3. His Beneficiaries and Lovers: all comprised in the one title
of his children. And at once with these Relations of man to God, it is that God
is as before related to man, as his Creator, and as his Owner, Ruler, and Chief
Good.

15. Man is also related to his fellow creatures, below him, 1. As their Owner,
2. Their Ruler, 3. Their End under God: which is Gods Dominative or Honorary
Image upon man, and is called commonly our Dominion over the creatures: So that
by mere Creation, and the Nature of the creatures there is constituted a state
of communion between God and Man, which is 1. A Dominion, 2. A Kingdom, 3. A
Family or Paternity. And the whole is sometime called by one of these names,
and sometime by the other, still implying the rest.

16. Gods Kingdom being thus constituted, his Attributes appropriate to these
his Relations follow: 1. His Absoluteness as our Owner: 2. His Holiness, Truth
and Justice as our Ruler: 3. And his Kindness, Benignity and Mercy as our
Father or Benefactor.

17. And then the Works of God as in these three Relations follow; which are 1.
To Dispose of us at his pleasure as our Owner: 2. To govern us as our King: 3.
To love us, and do us good, and make us perfectly happy as our Benefactor and
our end.

18. And here more particularly is to be considered, 1. How God disposed of
Adam when he had new made him: 2. How he began his Government of him: And 3.
What Benefits he gave him, and what he further offered or promised him.

19. And as to the second, we must 1. Consider the Antecedent part of Gods
Government, which is Legislation and then (herafter) the consequent part; which
is 1. Judgment, 2. Execution. And Gods Legislation is 1. By making our Natures
such as compared with objects, Duty shall result from this Nature so related:
2. Or else by Precept or Revelation from himself, besides our Natures. 1. The
Law of Nature is fundamental and radical in our foresaid Relations to God
themselves, in which it is made our natural duty, 1. To submit our selves
wholly to God, and his disposal, as his own: 2. To obey his commands: 3. And to
receive his mercies, and thankfully to return them, and to love him. But though
(as Gods essential principles, and his foresaid Relations, are admirably
conjunct in their operations ad extra; so) our Relative obligations are
conjunct, yet are they so far distinguishable, that we may say, that these
which conjunctly make our Moral duty, yet are not all the results of our
Relation to a Governor, as such; but the second only; and therefore that only
is to be called the Radical Law in the strict sense, the other two being the
Moral results of our Rectitude. The duty of subjection and obedience in
general, arising from our Natures related to our Creator, is the radical
governing Law of God in us. But yet the same submission, and gratitude, and
love, which are primarily our duty from their proper foundations, are
secondarily made also the matter of our subjective duty, because they are also
commanded of God. 2. The particular Laws of Nature are 1. Of our particular
duties to God; or of Piety: 2. Or of our duties to our selves and others: 1.
Acts of Justice, 2. And of Charity. These Laws of Nature are 1. Unalterable;
and that is, where the nature of our persons, and of the objects, which are the
foundations of them are unalterable, or still the same: 2. Or mutable, when the
Nature of the things which are its foundation, is mutable. As it is the
immutable Law of immutable nature, that we love God as God, and that we do all
the good we can, etc. because the foundation of it is immutable: But e. g. the
Law against Incest was mutable in nature: For nature bound Adams children to
marry each other; and nature binds us since (ordinarily) to the contrary: 2.
The revealed Law to Adam was superinduced. The parts of Gods Law must also here
be considered. 1. The introductive Teaching part (for Gods teaching us, is part
of his ruling us) and that is, Doctrines, History and Prophecy. 2. The
Imperative part, commands to do, and not to do. 3. And the sanctions or motive
parts in Law and execution, which are 1. Promises of Beneficial Rewards: 2.
Threatenings of hurtful penalties.

20. Gods Laws being thus described in general, and those made to Adam thus in
particular, the next thing to be considered, is man's behavior in breaking
those Laws; which must be considered in the Causes, and the Nature of it, and
the immediate effects and consequents.

21. And next must be considered Gods consequent part of Government as to Adam,
viz. his judging him according to his Law.

22. And here comes in the Promise, or the first edition of the New Covenant,
or Law of Grace; which must be opened in its parts, original and end.

23. And then must be considered Gods execution of his sentence on Adam, so far
as he was unpardoned; and so upon the world, till the end.

24. And next must be considered Gods enlargements and explications of his
Covenant of Grace, till Christ's Incarnation.

25. And next, men's behavior under that explained Covenant.

26. And Gods sentence and execution upon them thereupon.

27. Then we come to the fullness of time, and to explain the work of Redemption
distinctly. And 1. Its Original, the God of Nature giving the world a Physician
or a Savior: 2. The Ends: 3. The constitutive Causes: Where 1. Of the Person
of the Redeemer, in his Essence, as God and Man, and in his perfections, both
essential, and modal, and accidental.

28. And 2. Of the fundamental works of our Redemption (such as Creation was to
the first Administration) viz. (his first Undertaking, Interposition, and
Incarnation, being all presupposed.) 1. His perfect Resignation of himself to
his Father, and submission to his disposing Will: 2. His perfect subjection and
obedience to his Coverning Will: 3. His perfect Love to him: 4. And the
suffering by which he expressed all these. The three first meriting of
themselves; and the last meriting as a satisfactory Sacrifice, not for it self,
but for its usefulness to its proper ends.

29. From this Offering once made to God, Christ acquired the perfecter title
of a Savior, or Redeemer, or Mediator, which one contained this Trinity also
of Relations toward Man: 1. Their Owner: 2. Their Ruler: 3. Their Benefactor:
The Father also as the first principle of Redemption, acquiring a second title
(besides the first by Creation) to all these: and toward God, Christ
continues the Relation of a heavenly Priest.

30. In order to the works of these Relations for the future, we must consider
of Christ's exaltation; 1. Of his Justification and Resurrection: 2. Of his
Ascension and Glorification: And 3. Of the delivering of All Power, and All
Things into his hands.

31. The work of Redemption thus fundamentally wrought, does not of it self
renew man's nature; and therefore puts no Law of Nature into us of it self,
as the Creation did: And therefore we must next proceed to Christ's
Administration of this office, according to these Relations; which is 1. By
Legislation or Donation; enacting the New Covenant (where this last and perfect
edition of it is to be explained; the Preceptive, the Promisory and the Penal
parts, with its effects, and its differences from the former Edition, and from
the Law of Nature and of Works.

32. And 2. By the promulgation or publication of this Covenant or Gospel to
the world, by calling special Officers for that work, and giving them their
commission, and promising them his Spirit, his Protection, and their Reward.

33. And here we come to the special work of the Holy Ghost; who is 1. To be
known in his Essence and Person, as the third in Trinity, and the eternal Love
of God: 2. And as he is the grand Advocate or Agent of Christ in the world,
where his works are to be considered 1. Preparatory, on and by Christ himself:
2. Administratory: 1. Extraordinary, on the Apostles and their helpers: 1.
Being in them a spirit of extraordinary Power, by gifts and miracles: 2. Of
extraordinary Wisdom and Infallibility, as far as their commission-work
required: 3. And of extraordinary Love and Holiness. 2. By the Apostles, 1.
Extraordinarily convincing and bringing in the world: 2. Settling all
Church-Doctrines, Officers and Orders which Christ had left unsettled (bringing
all things to their remembrance which Christ had taught and commanded them; and
guiding them in the rest.) 3. Recording all this for posterity in the holy
Scriptures. 2. His Ordinary Agency 1. On Ministers, 2. By sanctification on all
true Believers is after to be opened.

34. And here is to be considered the Nature of Christianity in fieri: Faith
and Repentance in our three great Relations to our Redeemer, as we are his Own,
his (Disciples and) Subjects, and his Beneficiaries; with all the special
benefits of these Relations as antecedent to our duty; and then all our duty in
them as commanded: And then the benefits after to be expected (as in promise
only.)

35. Next must distinctly be considered, the preaching, and converting, and
baptizing part of the ministerial Office; 1. As in the Apostles: 2. And in
their successors to the end; with the nature of Baptism, and the part of
Christ, and of the Minister, and of the baptized in that Covenant.

36. And then the description of the universal Church, which the baptized
constitute.

37. Next is to be described the state of Christians after Baptism: 1.
Relative, 1. In Pardon, Reconciliation, Justification, 2. Adoption. 2.
Physical, in the Spirit of Sanctification.

38. Where is to be opened 1. The first sanctifying work of the Spirit: 2. Its
after-helps and their conditions. 3. All the duties of Holiness, primitive and
medicinal toward God, our selves and others.

39. Our special duties in secret: reading, meditation, prayer, etc.

40. Our duties in Family Relations and Callings.

41. Our duties in Church Relations; where is to be described the nature of
particular Churches, their work and worship, their ministry, and their members,
with the duties of each.

42. Our duties in our Civil Relations.

43. What temptations are against us, as be to be overcome.

44. Next is to be considered the state of Christians and Societies in the
world: How far all these duties are performed; and what are their weaknesses
and sins.

45. And what are the punishments which God uses in this life.

46. And what Christians must do for pardon and reparation after falls, and to
be delivered from those punishments.

47. Of Death, and the change which it makes, and of our special preparation
for it.

48. Of the coming of Christ, and the Judgment of the great day.

49. Of the punishment of the wicked impenitent in Hell.

50. And of the blessedness of the Saints in Heaven, and the everlasting
Kingdom.

These are the Heads, and this is the Method of true Divinity, and the order in
which it should lie in the understanding of him that will be complete in
knowledge.

II. And as this is the Intellectual Order of knowledge; so the order which all
things must lie in at our hearts and wills, is much more necessary to be
observed: 1. That nothing but GOD be loved as the infinite simple good, totally
with all the heart, and finally for himself: And that nothing at all be loved
with any Love, which is not purely subordinate to the Love of God, or which
causes us to love him ever the less.

2. That the blessed person of our Mediator, as in the Humane Nature
glorified, be loved above all creatures next to God: Because there is most of
the Divines Perfections appearing in him.

3. That the heavenly Church or Society of Angels and Saints be loved next to
Jesus Christ, as being next in excellence.

4. That the Universal Church on earth be loved next to the perfect Church in
Heaven.

5. That particular Churches and Kingdoms be next loved; and where ever there
is more of Gods Interest and Image, than in our selves, that our Love be more
there, than on our selves.

6. That we next love our selves, with that peculiar kind of love which God
has made necessary to our duty, and our happiness and end; with a
self-preserving, watchful, diligent love; preferring our souls before our
bodies, and spiritual mercies before temporal, and greater before less.

7. That we love our Christian Relations with that double Love which is due to
them as Christians and Relations; and love all Relations according to their
places, with that kind of Love which is proper for them, as fitting us to all
the duties which we must perform to them.

8. That we love all good Christians as the sanctified members of Christ, with
a special Love according to the measure of Gods Image appearing on them.

9. That we love every visible Christian (that we cannot prove has
unchristened himself by apostasy or ungodliness) with the special Love also
belonging to true Christians, because he appears such to us: But yet
according to the measure of that appearance, as being more confident of some,
and more doubtful of others.

10. That we love our intimate suitable friends that are godly with a double
Love, as godly and as friends.

11. That we love Neighbors and civil Relations, with a Love which is suitable
to our duty toward them (to do to them, as we would have them do to us; which
is partly meant by loving them as our selves.)

12. That we love all mankind, even Gods enemies, much more our own, as they
are men; for the dignity of humane nature, and their capacity to become holy
and truly amiable.

13. That all means be chosen according to the end (which is to be preferred
before other ends) and their suitableness and fitness for that end (as they are
to be preferred before other means.)

III. And the order of practice is, 1. That we be sure to begin with God alone,
and proceed to God in the creature, and end in God alone.

It is the principal thing to be known for finding out the true method of
Divinity and Religion, that (as in the great frame of Nature; so) in the frame
of Morality, the true motion is circular: From (...) the efficient by God, the
Dirigent to God, the final Cause of all; therefore as God is the first spring
or cause of motion; so the creature is the Recipient first, and the Agent
after, in returning all to God again.

Therefore mark, that our receiving Graces are our first graces in exercise;
and our receiving duties are our first duties; and then our returning graces
and duties come next; in which we proceed from the lesser to the greater, till
we come up to God himself.

Therefore in point of practice, the first thing that we have to do, is to
learn to know God himself as God and our God, and to live as from him, and upon
him as our Benefactor, from our hearts confessing that we have nothing but from
him, and shall never be at rest but with him, and in him, as our ultimate end;
and therefore to set our selves to seek him as our end accordingly; which is
but to seek to love him, and be beloved by him, in the perfection of knowledge
and d^light.

2. The whole frame of means appointed by God for the attainment of this end,
must be taken together, and not broken asunder; as they have all relation each
to other. And 1. The whole frame of Nature must be looked on as the first great
means appointed to man in innocence, for the preservation and exercise of his
holiness and righteousness: 2. And the Covenant or Law positive, as conjoined
unto this: 3. And the Spirit of God, communicated only for such a mere
sufficiency of necessary help, as God saw meet to one in that condition. And
though these means (the Creatures, and the Spirit of the Creator in that
degree) be not now sufficient for lapsed man; yet they are still to be looked
on as delivered into the hand of Christ the Mediator, to be used by him on his
terms, and in order to his blessed ends.

2. But it is the frame of the recovering and perfecting means* which we are
now to use: And in this frame 1. Christ the Mediator is the first and
principal; and the Author of our Faith, or Religion; and therefore from his
Name it is called Christianity. He is ^ow the first means used on Gods part for
communicating mercy unto man; and the first in dignity to be received and used
by man himself; but not the first in Time, because the means of revealing him
must go first.

2. The second means in dignity (under Christ) is the operation of the Holy
Spirit as sent or given by the Redeemer: which Spirit being as the soul of
outward means (which are as the body) is given variously in a suitableness to
the several sorts of means (of which more anon.)

3. The outward means for this Spirit to work by and with, have been in three
degrees: 1. The lowest degree, is the world or creatures (called The Book of
Nature) alone: 2. The second degree was the Law and Promises to the Jews and
their forefathers (together with the Law of Nature.) 3. The third and highest
degree of outward means, is the whole frame of Christian Institutions, adjoined
to the Book of Nature, and succeeding the foresaid Promises and Law.

Every one of these has a sufficiency in its own kind, and to its proper use.
1. The Law of Nature is sufficient in its own kind, to reveal a God in his
Essential Principles and Relations; and to teach man the necessity now of some
supernatural Revelations and Institutions; and so to direct him to enquire
after them ( what and where they be.)

2. The Promises and Jewish Law (of Types, etc.) was sufficient in its own
kind, to acquaint men that a Savior must be sent into the world, to reveal the
Will of God more fully, and to be a sacrifice for sin, and to make
reconciliation between God and man, and to give a greater measure of the
Spirit, and to renew men's souls, and bring them to full perfection, and to the
blessed fruition of God. The Jewish Scriptures teach them all this, though it
tell them not many of the Articles of our Christian Belief.

3. The Christian Gospel is sufficient in its own kind, to teach men first to
believe aright, in the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and then to love and live
aright.

When I say that each of these is sufficient in its own kind, the meaning is,
not that these outward means are of themselves sufficient without the Holy
Spirit; for that were to be sufficient not only in suo genere, but in alieno
vel in omni genere; not only for its own part and work; but for the Spirits
part also: But other causes being supposed to concur, it is sufficient for its
own part: As my Pen is a sufficient Pen, though it be not sufficient to write
without my hand.

Now the measure of the Spirits concourse with all these three degees of means
is to be judged of by the nature of the means, and by Gods ends in appointing
them, and by the visible effects. And whereas the world is full of voluminous
contentions about the doctrine of sufficient and effectual grace, I shall here
add thus much in order to their agreement. 1. That certainly such a thing there
is, or has been, as is called sufficient not-effectual grace: By sufficient
they mean so much as gives man all that Power which is necessary to the
commanded act (or forbearance) so that man could do it without any other grace
or help from God (which supposes that man's will in the Nature of it, has such
a vital, free, self-determining power, that (sometimes at least) it can act, or
not act, when such bare power is given to it) and sometimes does, and sometimes
does not. But the word [ necessary] is more proper than [ sufficient:] The
latter being applicable to several degrees, but [ nec^ssary] signifies that
degree, without which the Act cannot be performed.

That there is such a thing, is evident in Adams case, who had that grace which
was necessary to his forbearing the first sin (or else farewell all Religion.)
And there are few men will deny but that all men have still such a degree of
help for many duties which they do not perform; and against many sins which
they do not forbear; (as to forbear an oath, or a lie, or a cup of drink, to go
to Church when they go to an Alehouse, etc.) Such a thing therefore there is,
and such a power man's will has to do or not do, when such a degree only of
help is given.

Therefore we have reason enough to suppose 1. That such a degree of the
Spirits help is given under the bare Teachings of the Creature, or to them that
have no outward light but natural revelation, as is necessary to the foresaid
ends and uses of that Light or Means, that is, to convince man that there is a
God, and what he is, as aforesaid, and that we are his subjects and
ben^ficiaries, and owe him our chi^fest love and service, and to convince them
of the need of some further supernatural revelation. Not that every one has
this measure of spiritual help; for some by abusing the help which they have,
to learn the Alphabet of Nature, or to practice it, do forfeit that help which
should bring them into Natures higher forms. But so much as I have mentioned of
the help of the Spirit is given to those that do not grossly forfeit it by
abuse, among the Pagans of the world: And so much multitudes have attained.

2. And so much of the Spirit was given ordinarily to the Jews, as was
sufficient to have enabled them to believe in the Messiah to come, as
aforesaid; if they did not wilfully reject this help.

3. And so much seems to be given to many that hear the Gospel, and never
believe it; or that believe it not with a justifying Faith, is as sufficient to
have made them true Believers, as Adams was to have kept him from his fall. For
seeing it is certain that such a sufficient uneffectual grace there is, we have
no reason to conceit that God does any more desert his own means now, than he
did then; or that he makes Believing a more impossible condition of
Justification under the Gospel, to them that are in the nearest capacity of it
(before effectual grace) than he made perfect obedience to be to Adam. The
objections against this are to be answered in due place, and are already
answered by the Dominicans at large.

4. The outward means of grace under Christ are all one frame, and must be used
in harmony as follows.

1. The Witness and Preaching of Christ and his Apostles, was the first and
chief part; together with their settling the Churches, and recording so much as
is to be our standing Rule in the holy Scriptures, which are now to us the
chief part of this means.

2. Next to the Scriptures, the Pastoral Office and Gifts, to preserve them,
and teach them to us, is the next principal part of this frame of means. In
which I comprehend all their office [Preaching for conversion, baptizing,
preaching for confirmation and edification of the faithful, praying and
praising God before the Church; administering the body and blood of Christ in
the Sacrament of communion; and watching over all the flock, by personal
instruction, admonition, reproofs, censures and absolutions.

3. The next part (conjunct with this) is the communion of the faithful in the
Churches.

4. The next is our holy society in Christian families, and
family-instructions, worship and just discipline.

5. The next is our secret duties between God and us alone: As. 1. Reading, 2.
Meditation, and self examination, 3. Prayer and thanksgiving, and praise to God.

6. The next part is our improvement of godly men's intimate friendship, who may
instruct, and warn, and reprove, and comfort us.

7. The next is the daily course of prospering Providence and Mercies, which
express Gods Love, and call up ours; (as provisions, protections,
preservations, deliverances, etc.)

8. The next is Gods castigations (by what hand or means soever) which are to
make us partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.9, 10.

9. The next is the examples of others; 1. Their graces and duties: 2. Their
faults and falls: 3. Their mercies: And 4. Their sufferings and corrections. 1
Cor. 10.1, 10, 11.

10. And lastly, Our own constant watchfulness against temptations* and
stirring up Gods graces in our selves. These are the frame of the means of
Grace, and of our receiving duties.

2. The next in order to be considered, is the whole frame of our returning
duties, in which we lay out the talents which we receive, which lie in the
order following.

1. That we do what good we can to our own souls: that we first pluck the beam
out of our own eyes, and set that motion on work at home, which must go
further: Therefore all the foregoing means were primarily for this effect;
(though not chiefly and ultimately for this end.)

2. Next we must do good according to our power to our near Relations.

3. And next to our whole Families, and more remote Relations.

4. And next, them to our Neighbors.

5. And next, to Strangers.

6. And lastly, To Enemies, of our selves and Christ.

7. But our greatest duties must be for public Societies, viz. 1. For the
Commonwealth (both Governors and People,) 2. And for the Church.

8. And the next part (in intention and dignity) must be for the whole world
(whose good by prayer and all just means we must endeavor.)

9. And the next for the honor of Jesus Christ our Mediator.

10. And the highest ultimate temination of our returning duties, is the pure
Deity alone.

For the further opening to you the Order of Christian Practice, take these
following Notes or Rules.

1. Though receiving duties (such as hearing, reading, praying, faith, etc.) go
first in order of nature and time, before expending, or returning duties, so
that the motion is truly circular; yet we must not stay till we have received
more, before we make returns to God of that which we have already: But every
degree of received grace, must presently work toward God our end: and as there
is no intermission between my moving of my hand and pen, and its writing upon
this paper; so must there be no intermission between Gods beams of Love and
Mercy to us, and our reflections of Love and Duty unto him. Even as ths veins
and arteries in the body lie much together, and one does often empty it self
into the other, for circulation, and not stay till the whole mass has run
through all the vessels of one sort (veins or arteries) before any pass into
the other.

2. The internal returns of Love are much quicker than the return of outward
fruits. The Love of God shed or streamed forth upon the soul, does presently
warm it to a return of Love: But it may be some time before that Love appear in
any notable useful benefits to the world, or in any thing that much glorifieth
God and our Profession. Even as the heat of the Sun upon the earth or trees, is
suddenly reflected; but does not so suddenly bring forth herbs, and buds, and
blossoms, and ripe fruits.

3. All truly good works must have one constant Order of intention (which is
before opened; God must be first intended, then Christ, then the universal
Church in Heaven and Earth, etc.) But in the order of operation and execution,
there may be a great difference among our duties: As God appoints us to lay
out some one way, and some another. Yet ordinarily, as the emitted beams begin
from God, and dart themselves on the soul of man; so the reflected beams begin
upon, or from our hearts, and pass toward God (though first beloved and
intended) by several receptacles, before they bring us to the perfect fruition
of him.

4. Therefore the order of Loving (or complacency) and the order of doing good
(or Benevolence) is not the same. We must Love the universal Church better than
our selves: But we cannot do them sincere service, before we do good to our
selves. And our nearest Relations must be preferred in acts of Beneficence
before many whom we must love more.

5. When two goods come together (either to be Received, or to be Done) the
greater is ever to be preferred; and the choosing or using of the lesser at that
time, is to be taken for a sin. I lately read a denial of this, in a
superficial satyr; but the thing it self, if rightly understood, is past all
doubt with a rational man. For 1. Else good is not to be chosen and done as
good, if the best be not to be preferred. 2. Else almost all wicked omissions
might be excused: I may be excused for not giving a poor man a sh^lling
(whatever his necessity be) because I give him a farthing: No doubt but Dives,
Luke 16. did good at such a rate as this at least: and else a man might be
excused from saving a drowning man, if he save his horse that while, etc. A
quatenus ad summum valet consequentia, in the case of desiring and doing good.
But then mark the following explications.

6. That is not always to be accounted the greatest good, which is so only in
regard of the matter simply considered: But that is the greatest good, which is
so consideratis considerandis, all things considered and set together.

7. When God does peremptorily tie me to one certain duty, without any
dispensation or liberty of choice, that duty at that time is a greater good and
duty, than many others which may be greater in their time and place. A duty
materially lesser, is formally (and by accident materially) greater in its
proper season. Reaping, and baking, and eating, are better than plowing, and
weeding the Corn; as they are nearer to the end: But plowing, and weeding are
better in their season. To make pins or points, is not materially so good a
work as to pray: But in its season (as then done) it is better: And he that is
of this trade, may not be praying when he should be about his trade: Not that
he is to prefer the matter of it, before praying; But praying is to keep its
time, and may be a sin when it is out of time. He that would come at midnight
to disturb his rest, to present his service to his Lord or King, would have
little thanks for such unseasonable service.

8. He that is restrained by a lower calling, or any true restraining reasons,
from doing a good which is materially greater, yet does that which is greatest
unto him. Ruling and Preaching are materially a greater good, than threshing or
digging; and yet to a man whose gifts and calling restrain him from the former
to the latter, the latter is the greatest good.

9. Good is not to be measured principally by the Will or Benefit of our
selves, or any creature; but by 1. The Will of God in his Laws: And 2. By the
interest of his pleasedness and glory: But secondarily, humane interest is the
measure of it.

10. It follows not that because the greatest good is ever to be preferred,
that therefore we must perplex and distract our selves, in cases of difficulty,
when the balance seems equal: For either there is a difference, or there is
none: And if any, it is discernable, or not. If there be no difference, there
is room for taking one, but not for choosing one: If there be no discernable
difference, it is all one to us, as if there were none at all: If it be
discernable by a due proportion of enquiry, we must labor to know it, and
choose accordingly: If it be not discernable in such time, and by such measure
of enquiry, as is our duty, we must still take it as undiscernable to us. If
after just search, the weakness of our own understandings leave us doubting, we
must go according to the best understanding which we have, and cheerfully go on
in our duty, as well as we can know it, remembering that we have a gracious God
and Covenant, which takes not advantage of involuntary weaknesses, but
accepts their endeavors, who sincerely do their best.

11. Mere spiritual or mental duties require most labor of the mind; but
corporal duties (such as the labors of our calling) must have more labor of
the body.

12. All corporal duties must be also spiritual (by doing them from a spiritual
principle, to a spiritual end, in a spiritual manner:) But it is not necessary
that every spiritual duty be also corporal.

13. The duties immediately about God our end, are greater than those about any
of the means (caeteris paribus.) And yet those that are about lower objects,
may be greater by accident, and in their season: As to be saving a man's life is
then greater than to be exciting the mind to the acting of Divine Love or Fear:
But yet it is God the greatest object then, which puteth the greatness upon the
latter duty; both by commanding it, and so making it an act more pleasing to
him: and because that the Love of God is supposed to be the concurring spring
of that Love to man, which we show in seeking their preservation.

14. Our great duty about God our ultimate end, can never be done too much,
considered in it self, and in respect to the soul only; we cannot so love God
too much: And this Love so considered, has no extreme, Matthew. 22.37.

15. But yet even this may by accident, and in the circumstances be too much:
As 1. In respect to the bodies weaknesses; if a man should so fear God, or so
love him, as that the intenseness of the act, did stir the passions, so much as
to bring him to distraction, or to disorder his mind, and make it unfit for
that or any other duty: 2. Or if he should be exciting the Love of God, when he
should be quenching a fire in the Town, or relieving the poor that are ready to
perish. But neither of these is properly called, A loving God too much.

16. The duties of the heart, are in themselves greater and nobler than the
actions of the outward man, of themselves abstractedly considered. Because the
soul is more noble than the body.

17. Yet outward duties are frequently, yea most frequently, greater than heart
duties only; because in the outward duty it is to be supposed that both parts
concur (both soul and body.) And the operations of both, is more than of one
alone: and also because the nobler ends are attained by both together more than
by one only: For God is loved, and man is benefited by them. As when the Sun
shines upon a tree, or on the earth, it is a more noble effect, to have a
return of its influences, in ripe and pleasant fruits, than in a mere sudden
reflection of the heat alone.

18. All outward duties must begin at the heart, and it must animate them all*
and they are valued in the sight of God, no further than they come from a
rectified will, even from the Love of God and Goodness: However without this,
they are good works materially, in respect to the Receiver: He may do good to
the Church, or Commonwealth, or Poor, who does none to himself thereby.

19. As the motion is circular from God to man, and from man to God again
(Mercies received; and Duties and Love returned) so is the motion circular
between the heart and the outward man: The heart moving the tongue and hand,
etc. and these moving the heart again; (partly of their own nature, and partly
by divine reward:) The Love of God and Goodness produces holy thoughts, and
words, and actions; and these again increase the Love which did produce them,
Gal. 5.6.13. Heb. 6.10. Heb. 10.24. 2 John 6. Jude 21.

20. The Judgment must be well informed before the Will resolve.

21. Yet when God has given us plain instruction, it is a sin to cherish
causless doubts and scruples.

22. And when we see our duty before us, it is not every scruple that will
excuse us from doing it: But, when we have more conviction that it is a duty,
then that it is none, or that it is a sin, we must do it, notwithstanding those
mistaking doubts. As if in Prayer or Alms-deeds you should scruple the
lawfulness of them, you ought not to forbear, till your scruples be resolved,
because you so long neglect a duty: Else folly might justify men in
ungodliness and disobedience.

23. But in things merely indifferent, it is a sin to do them doubtingly;
because you may be sure it is no sin to forbear them, Romans 14.23. 1 Cor. 8.13,
14.

24. An erring Judgment intangleth a man in a necessity of sinning (till it be
reformed) whether he act or not* according to it. Therefore if an erring person
ask, What am I bound to? the true answer is, to lay by your error, or reform
your Judgment first, and then to do accordingly* and if he ask an hundred times
over [But what must I do in case I cannot change my Judgment?] the same answer
must be given him, [ God still binds you to change your Judgment, and has
given you the necessary means of information; and therefore he will not take up
with your supposition, that you cannot: His Law is a fixed Rule, which tells
you what you must believe, and choose, and do: And this Rule will not change,
though you be blind, and say, I cannot change my mind. Your mind must come to
the Rule, for the Rule will not come to your perverted mind: Say what you will,
the Law of God will be still the same, and will still bind you to believe
according to its meaning.]

25. Yet supposing that a man's error so entangleth him in a necessity of
sinning, it is a double sin to prefer a greater sin before a lesser: For though
no sin is an object of our choice, yet the greater sin is the object of our
greater hatred and refusal; and must be with the greater fear and care avoided.

26. An erring Conscience then, is never the voice or messenger of God, nor are
we ever bound to follow it; because it is neither our God, nor his Law, but
only our own Judgment which should discern his Law. And mis-reading or
misunderstanding the Law, will not make a bad cause good, though it may excuse
it from a greater degree of evil.

27. The judicious fixing of the Wills, Resolutions, and especially the
increasing of its Love, or complacency and delight in good, is the chief thing
to be done in all our duties, as being the heart and life of all, Prove.
23.26.12. and 4.23. and 7.3. and 22.17. and 3.1, 2, 3. and 4.4, 21. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
Psalm. 37.4. and 40.8. and 119.16, 35, 70, 47. and 1.2. Isa. 58.14.

28. The grand motives to duty, must ever be before our eyes, and set upon our
hearts, as the poise of all our motions and endeavors: (As the travelers home
and business, is deepest in his mind, as the cause of every step which he
goes.)

29. No price imaginable must seem great enough to hire us to commit the least
known sin, Luke 12.4. and 14.26, 28, 33. Mat. 10.39* and 16.26.

30. The second great means (next to the right forming of the heart) for the
avoiding of sin, is to get away from the temptations, baits and occasions of
it. And he that has most grace, must take himself to be still in great danger,
while he is under strong temptations and allurements, and when sin is brought
to his hands, and alluring objects are close to the appetite and senses.

31. The keeping clean our Imaginations, and commanding our Thoughts, is the
next great means for the avoiding sin: and a polluted fantasy, and ungoverned
thoughts are the nest where all iniquity is hatched, and the instruments that
bring it forth into act.

32. The governing of the senses is the first means to keep clean the
Imagination. When Acha^ sees the wedge of gold, he desires it, and then he
takes it. When men wilfully fill their eyes with the objects which entice them
to lust, to covetousness, to wrath; the impression is presently made upon the
fantasy; and then the Devil has abundance more power to renew such
imaginations a thousand times, than if such impressions had been never made.
And it is a very hard thing to cleanse the fantasy which is once polluted.

33. And the next notable means of keeping out all evil Imaginations, and
curing lust and vanity of mind, is constant laborious diligence in a lawful
calling, which shall allow the mind no leisure for vain and sinful thoughts; as
the great nourisher of all foul and wicked thoughts, is Idleness and Vacancy,
which inviteth the tempter, and gives him time and opportunity.

34. Watchfulness over our selves, and thankful accepting the watchfulness,
fault-findings, and reproofs of others,, is a great part of the safety of our
souls, Mat. 26.41. and 25, 13. Mark 13.37. Luke 21.36. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1 These.
5.6.2 Tim. 4.5. Heb. 12.17. 1 Pet. 4.7.

35. Affirmative Precepts, bind not to all times; that is* no positive duty is
a duty at all times. As to preach, to pray, to speak of God, to think of holy
things, etc. it is not always a sin to intermit them.

36. All that God commands us to do, is both a Duty and a Means; it is called
a Duty in relation to God the efficient Lawgiver, first: and it is a Means
next in relation to God the end, whose work is done, and whose will is pleased
by it. And we must always respect it in both these notions inseparably. No
Duty is not a Means; and no true Means is not a Duty; but many seem to man to
have the aptitude of a Means, which are no duty but a sin; because we see not
all things, and therefore are apt to think that fit, which is pernicious.

37. Therefore nothing must be thought a true Means to any good end, which God
forbids: For God knows better than we.

38. But we must see that the negative or prohibition be universal, or indeed
extends to our particular case: and then (and not else) you may say that
negatives bind to all times.

39. Nothing which is certainly destructive to the end, and contrary to the
nature of a Means, is to be taken for a Duty. For it is certain that Gods
Commands are for edification, and not for destruction, for good, and not for
evil.

40. Yet that may tend to present inferior hurt, which ultimately tends to
the greatest good. Therefore it is not some present or inferior incommodity
that must cause us to reject such a means of greater future good.

41. Whatsoever we are certain God commands, we may be certain is a proper
Means, though we see not the aptitude, or may think it to be destructive;
because God knows better than we: But then we must indeed be sure that it is
commanded hic and nunc, in this case and place, and time, and circumstances.

42. It is one of the most needful things to our innocence, to have Christian
wisdom to compare the various accidents of those duties and sins which are such
by accident; and to judge which accidents do preponderate. For indeed the
actions are very few which are absolutely and simply duties or sins in
themselves considered, without those accidents which qualify them to be such:
Accidental duties and sins are the most numerous by far: And in many cases the
difficulty of comparing the various accidents, and contrary motives, is not
small,

43. Therefore it is, that (as in Physic and Law Cases, etc. the common people
have greatest need of the advice of skilful Artists, to help them to judge of
particular Cases, taking in all the circumstances, which their narrow
understandings cannot comprehend; which is more of the use of Physicians and
Lawyers, than to read a public Lecture of Physic, or of Law, so) the Office
of the Church-Guides, or Bishops, is of so great necessity to the people, in
every particular Church: And that not only for public Preaching, but also to
be at hand, to help the people, who have recourse unto them in all such cases,
to know in particular what is duty, and what is sin.

44. And therefore it is (besides other reasons) that the Office of the Bishops
or Pastors of the Churches, must in all the proper parts of it, be done only by
themselves, or men in that Office, and not per alios, by men of another Office:
And therefore it is, that bare titles or authority will not serve the turn,
without proportionable or necessary abilities or gifts; because the work is
done by personal fitness; and cases and difficulties can no more be resolved,
nor safe counsel given for the soul in matters of Morality, by men unable, than
for the body or estate, in points of Physic, or of Law. (As the Lord Verulam
in his Considerations of Ecclesiastical Government has well observed.)

45. In such cases where duty or sin must be judged of by compared accidents;
the nature of a Means, or the interest of the End, is the principal thing to be
considered: And that which will evidently do more harm than good, is not to be
judged a duty (in those circumstances) but a sin: as if the question were
whether Preaching be at this time, in this place, to this number, to these
individuals, a duty: If it appear to true Christian prudence, that it would be
like to do more hurt than good, it is a sin at that time, and not a duty: and
yet Preaching in due season, as great a duty still. So if the question were,
whether secret prayer be at this hour or day, a duty: If true reason tell you,
that it is like to hinder, either family prayer, or any other greater good, it
is not at that time a duty: Or if the question be, whether reproof or personal
exhortation of a sinner be now a duty: If true reason tell me, that it is like
to do more harm than good, it is not a duty then, but accidentally a sin: For
we must not cast pearls before Swine, nor give that which is holy unto Dogs,
lest they tread it under foot, or turn again and all to rend us. And there is a
time when Preachers that are persecuted in one City, must fly to another; and
when they must shake off the dust of their feet, for a witness against the
disobedient, and turn away from them. (The imprudent people can easily discern
this when it is their own case, but not when it is the Preachers case; so
powerful is self-love and partiality) Mat. 7.6, 7. Mat. 10.14. and 23.34. and
10.23. The reason of all this is 1. Because God appoints all Means for the
End: 2. And because the Law by which in such cases we must be ruled, is only
general; as, Let all things be done to edification; as if he should say, Fit
all your actions, which I have not given you a particular peremptory Law for,
to that good which is their proper end.] 1 Cor. 14.5* 12.3, 26.17. 2 Cor. 10.8.
and 12.19. and 13.10. 1 Cor. 10.23. Ephesians. 4.12, 16, 29. 1 Timothy 1.4. Romans 15.2.
1 Cor. 12.7.

46. Public Duties, ordinarily, must be preferred before private: And that
which is for the good of many, before that which is for the good of one only.

47. Yet when the private necessity is more pressing, and the public may be
omitted at that time with less detriment, the case does alter. As also when
that one that we do good to is more worth than the many, in order to the honor
of God, or the more public good of the whole society: or when it is one that
by special precept, we are obliged to prefer in our beneficence

48. Civil Power is to be obeyed before Ecclesiastical, in things belonging to
the Office of the Magistrate: and Ecclesiastical before the Civil, in things
proper to the Ecclesiastical Gvoernours only. And Family Power before both, in
things proper to their cognizance only. But what it is that is proper to each
power, I shall tell them when I think they are willing to know, and it will do
more good than harm to tell it them.

49. The supreme Magistrate is ever to be obeyed before his Inferiors: because
they have no power but from him; and therefore have none against him (unless he
so give it them.)

50. No Humane Authority is above Gods, nor can bind us against him; but it is
all received from him, and subordinate to him.

51. No Humane Power can bind us to the destruction of the society which it
governs; because the public or common good, is the end of Government.

52. The Laws of Kings, and the Commands of Parents, Masters and Pastors (in
cases where they have true Authority) do bind the soul primarily, as well as
the body, secondarily: But not as the primary, but the secondary bond. It is a
wonderful and pitiful thing, to read Divines upon this point [Whether the Laws
of men do bind the conscience?] what work they have made as in the dark, when
the case is so very plain and easy? some are peremptory that they do not bind
conscience; and some that they do; and some calling their adversaries the
Idolizers of men; and others again insinuating that they we guilty of treason
against Kings, who do gainsay them; when surely they cannot differ if they
would.

1. The very phrase of their question is nonsense, or very unfit. Conscience
is but a man's knowledge or judgment of himself as he is obliged to his duty and
the effects; and consequently, of the obligations, which lie upon him.

It is a strange question, whether I am bound in knowledge of my self: But it
were a reasonable question, whether I be bound to know; or whether I know that
I am bound. It is the whole man, and most eminently the Will, which is bound by
Laws, or any Moral Obligations. The man is bound.

But if by conscience, they mean the soul, it is a ridiculous question: For no
bonds can lie upon the body immediately, but Cords or Iron, or such like
materials. The soul is the first obliged, or else the man is not morally
obliged at all.

If the sense of the question be, whether it be a Divine or a Religious
obligation, which men's commands do lay upon us* The answer is easy: 1. That
Man is not God; and therefore as humane it is not Divine. 2. That Man's
Government is Gods institution, and Men are Gods Officers; and therefore the
obligation is Religious, and Instrumentally or Mediately Divine. Either men's
Laws and Commands do bind us or not: If not, they are no Laws, nor
authoritative Acts: If they do bind, either it is primarily by an authority
originally in themselves that made them (and then they are all gods: And then
there is no God.) Or else it is by derived authority. If so, God must be the
Original (or still the Original must be God.) And then is the high way any
plainer than the true answer of this question, viz. That Princes, Parents, etc.
have a governing or Law-giving power from God, in subordination to him; and
that they are his Officers in governing: And that all those Laws which he has
authorized them to make do bind the soul, that is, the man, immediately as
humane, and instrumentally or mediately as Divine, or as the bonds of God. As
my Covenant bind my self to conscience, (if you will so speak, rather than that
they bind my conscience) so do men a Laws also bind me. You may as well ask
whether the writing of my pen, be its action or mine; and be an animate, or
inanimate act; which is soon resolved.

53. To conclude these Rules, as the just impress of the Spirit, and Image of
God upon the soul, is Divine Life, Light and Love, communicated from God by
Jesus Christ, by the holy Spirit, to work in us and by us for God (in the soul
and in the world) and by Christ to bring us up at last, to the sight and
fruition of God himself; so this Trinity of Divine principles, must be
inseparably used, in all our internal and external duties toward God or men;
and all that we do must be the work of Power and of Love, and of Wisdom or a
sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.

II. Having been so large in opening the Order of our Duties, I must be briefer
than our case requires, in telling you our Disorders, or contrary disease. O
what a humbling sight it would be, if good Christians did but see the pitiful
con^^sions of their minds and lives. They find little melody in their Religion,
because there is little harmony in their apprehensions, affections or
conversations. If the displacing one wheel or pin in a clock, will so much
frustrate the effect, it is a wonder that our tongues or lives do ever go true,
which are moved by such disordered parts within: that were it not that the
Spirit of grace does keep an order where it is essential to our Religion
(between the End and the Means, etc.) we should be but like the parts of a
watch pulled in pieces, and put up together in a bag. But such is Gods mercy,
that the body may live when many smaller veins are obstructed; so that the
Master vessels be kept clear.

I. There are so few Christians that have a true method of Faith or Divinity in
their understandings, even in the great points which they know disorderly, that
it is no wonder if there be lamentable defectiveness and deformity, in those
inward and outward duties, which should be harmoniously performed, by the light
of this harmonious truth. And no Divine in the world can give you a perfect
Scheme of Divinity in all the parts; but he is the wisest that comes nearest
to it. Abundance of Schemes and Tables you may see, and all pretending to
exactness: But every one palpably defective and confused; even those of the
highest pretenders that ever I have seen. And one error or disorder usually
introduces, in such a Scheme, a confusion in all that follows as dependant
on it.

Some confound Gods Attributes themselves (nay who does not:) They confound the
Three great Essential Principles, with all the Attributes, by similitude called
Modal and Negative: and they use to name over Gods Attributes, like as they put
their money or chess-men into a bag, without any method at all.

Some confound Gods Primary Attributes of Being, with his Relations, which are
subsequent to his Works, and with his Relation-Attributes.

Some confound his several Relations to man, among themselves; and more do
confound his Works, as they flow from these various Relations.

The great works of the Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and their several
designs, significations, and effects, are opened obscurely and in much
confusion.

The Legislative Will of God de debi^^ institutive, (which is it that
Damascene, Chrysostom, and the Schoolmen mean by his Antecedent will, if they
speak properly) which ever goes before man's actions (duties or sins, or as the
Fathers called them merits or demerits) is confounded by many with the acts of
his Judgment and Execution (called his consequent Will, because it ever
presupposes men's precedent actions:) Or, his works, as Lawgiver, Judge and
Executioner, are often confounded.

And so are the Orders of his Precepts, Promises, and penal Threats, and the
Conditions of his Promises: and the order of his Precepts among themselves; and
of his Promises as one respects another.

And our Relations to God, and the several respective duties of those
Relations, are ordinarily much confounded.

The work of the Holy Ghost (as we are baptized into the belief of him) is
poorly, lamely and disorderly opened, to the encouraging of the carnal on one
hand, or the Enthusiasts on the other.

Law and Gospel, and Covenant and Covenant; words and works; the precepts of
Christ, and the operations of the Spirit, are seldom thought on in their proper
place and order, and differences.

In a word, Consectaries are confounded with principles: Nature, Medicine, and
Health; the precepts and parts of Primitive Sanctity, with the precepts and
means of M^dicinal Grace; the End and the Means; yea nothing more usually than
words and things are confounded and disordered by the most (that I say not by
us all.)

The circular motion of grace, from God, and by God, and to God, and in man the
receiving duties as distinct from the improving duties; and these, as
communicative and dispercing unto man, from those ascendent unto God, partly in
the fruits, and partly in the exaltation of the mind it self, these are not to
be found, nor abundance more which I pass by, in any just harmonious Scheme.

II. And O what confusion is in our Hearts or Wills, and lameness, and defect
as well as confusion; which must needs be the cons^quent of a lame and confused
understanding. It is so great, that I am not willing to be so tedious as to
open it at large.

III. And the confusion in our practices, taking it in, and expressing it, will
show you your heart-confusion of it self. But to open this also would be long;
and the regular order before laid down, will show you our disorders without any
further enumerations or instances.

Only some of our lameness and partialities, contrary to entire and complete
Religiousness, I shall briefly mention, because I think it to be of no small
need, to the most, even of the more zealous part of Christians.

1. In our Studies and Meditations, we are partial and defective: we search
hard perhaps for some few Truths, with the neglect of many hundred more.

2. In our Z^al for Truth, we are often as partial, greatly taken with some one
or few, which we think we have suddenly and happily found out, and see more
into than others do; or in which we think we have some singular or special
interest* and in the mean time little affected with abundance of Truths of
greater clearness and importance, and of more daily usefulness, because they
are things that all men know, and common unto you with the most of Christians.

3. In your love to the godly, and your charity, in expressions, and in your
daily prayers, what lameness and partiality is there? Those that are near you,
and conversant with you, you remember; and perhaps those in the Kingdom, or
Country where you dwell: Or at least those of your own society, opinions and
party. But when it comes to praying for the world, and all the Church abroad;
and when it comes to the loving of those that differ from you, what partiality
do you show?

4. In the course of duties to God and man, how rare is that person that does
not quite omit, or slubber over some duty as if it were nothing, while he does
with much earnestness prosecute another? One that is much in receiving duties
for themselves (as hearing, reading, meditating, praying) can live all the week
with quietness of conscience, without almost any improving duties, or doing any
good to others: as if they were made for themselves alone. And some Ministers
lay out themselves in Preaching, as if they were all for the good of others;
but pray as little, and do as little about their own heart, as if they cared
not for themselves at all; or else were good enough already.

Some are constant in Church-duties, perhaps with some superstitious
strictness; but in family duties how neglective are they? They are for very
strict discipline in the Church, and cannot communicate with any that wear not
the same badge of sanctity which they affect: But in their families, what
profaneness, carelessness and confusion is there? They can have family
communion with the most ungodly servants, that will but be profitable to them.
Dumb Ministers are their scorn; but to be dumb Parents and Masters to their
children and servants, they can easily bear. Formal preaching and praying in
the Church they exclaim against; but how formally do they pray at home, and
catechize and instruct their family? If a Magistrate should forbid them to
pray, or catechize, or instruct their families, they would account him an
impious, odious persecutor* but they can neglect it ordinarily when none
forbids them, and never lay any such accusation on themselves.

Some are much for the duties of Worship in private; but negligent of public
Worship: and some are diligent in both, that make little scruple of living idly
without a Calling, or doing the works of their Callings deceitfully and
unprofitably. They are censorious of one that is negligent in Gods Worship, but
censure not themselves (nor love to be censured by others) for being idle and
negligent servants to their Masters; and omitting many an hours work, which was
as truly their duty as the other. Yea when they are told of such duties as they
love not (as obedience, labor, charity, patience, mortifying the flesh, etc.)
their consciences are just as senseless, or as prejudiced, or quarrelsom, as
the consciences of other men are against Religious exercises.

5. And in our reformation and resisting sins of commission, shell lameness and
partiality is common with the most. He that is most tender of a sin which is in
common disgrace among the godly, is little troubled at as great a one which
has got any reputation among them by the advantage of some errors. In
England, through Gods mercy, the profanation of the Lords day, is noted as a
heinous sin. But beyond Sea where it is not so reputed, how ordinarily is it
committed? Many would condemn Joseph, if they had heard him swear by the life
of Pharaoh, because through Gods mercy, swearing is a disgraced sin. But how
ordinarily do the dividing sort of Christians, rashly or falsely censure men
behind their backs that differ from them* upon unproved hearsay, and gladly
take up false reports, and never shed a tear for many such slanders, back
b^^ings and wrongs* Many (...) one that would take an oath or curse for a
certain sign of an ungodly person yet make little of a less disgraceful way of
evil speaking, and of a pi^vish unpleasable disposition; and when they are in
patient of a censure, or a soul word, are patient enough with their impatiency.

And it deserves tears of blood to think how little the sins of selfishness
and pride are mortified in most of the forwardest Christian (even in them that
go in mean attire.) How much they love and look to be esteemed, to be taken
notice of, to be well thought of, and well spoken of? How ill they bear the
least contempt, neglect or disrespect? How abundantly they overvalue their own
understandings? and how wise they are in their own conceits? and how hardly
they will think ill of their most false or foolish apprehensions? and how
proudly they disdain the judgments of wiser men, from whom if they had
humility, they might learn perhaps twenty years together, and yet not reach the
measure of their knowledge? and what a strange difference there is in their
judging of any case, when it is another, and when it is their own?

And among how few is the sin of flesh-pleasing sensuality mortified? abundance
take no notice of it, because it is hid, and can be daily exercised in a less
disgraceful way. If they be rich, they can enjoy that which is their own; and
they can cleanlily do as Dives did, Luke 16. and take their good things here.
Having enough laid up for many years, they think they may take their case, and
eat, drink, and be merry, without rebuke, Luke 12.19, 10. They that are the
most zealous in strict opinions, and modes of Worship, can live as Sodom did,
in pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, and use meat for their
lusts, and make provision for the flesh, to satisfy those lusts, and yet never
seem to themselves, nor those about them to offend; much less to do any thing
that is grossly evil, Ez^k 16.49. Psalm. 78.18, 30. Romans 13 13, 14. They drink
not till they are drunk, they eat not more in quantity than others; they labor
as far as need compels them; and this they think is very tolerable. And
because the Papists have turned the just subduing of the flesh, into hurtful
austerities, or formal mockeries, therefore they are the more hardened in their
flesh pleasing way. They take but that which they love, and that which is their
own, and then they think that the fault is not great: and what Christ meant by
Dives his being clothed in purple and silk, and faring sumptuously every day,
they never truly understood: Nor yet what he means by the poor in spirit,
Matthew. 5.3. which is not (at least only or chiefly) a sense of the want of
grace, but a spirit suited to a life of poverty, contrary to the love of money,
and of fullness, and luxury, and pride: When we are content with necessaries,
and eat and drink for health more than for pleasure, or for that pleasure only
which does conduce to health: and when we will be at no needless superfluous
cost upon the (...), but ^h^se the cheapest food and raiment which is
sufficient to our lawful ends; and use not our appetites, and sense, and
fantasy to such delight and satisfaction as either increases lust, or
corrupts the mind, and hinders it from spiritual duties and delights, by
hurtful delectation or diversion: nor bestow that upon our selves, which the
poor about us need to supply their great necessities. This is to be poor in
spirit; and this is the life of abstinence and mortification, which these
sensual professors will not learn. Nay, rather than their throats shall not be
pleased, if they be children in their Parents Families, or Servants, they will
steal for it, and ^^ke that which their Parents and Masters (they know) do not
consent to, nor allow them: And they are worse thieves than they that steal for
hunger and mere necessity; because they steal to satisfy their appetites and
carnal lusts; that they may fare better than their superiors would have them.
And yet perhaps be really conscientious and religious in many other points, and
never humbled for their fleshly minds, their gluttony and thievery; especially
if they see others fare better than they: and they quiet their consciences, as
the most ungodly do, with putting a hansome name upon their sin, and calling
it, taking, and not stealing, and eating, and drinking, and not fullness of
bread, or carnal gulosity. Abundance of such instances of men's partiality in
avoiding sin, I must omit, because it is so long a work.

6. Yea in the inward exercise of Graces, there are few that use them
completely, entirely, and in order; but they neglect one, while they set
themselves wholly about the exercise of another; or perhaps use one against
another. Commonly they set themselves a great while upon nothing so much as
laboring to affect their hearts with sorrow for sin, and meltingly, to weep in
their confessions (with some endeavors of a new life.) But the Love of God,
and the thankful sense of the mercy of Redemption, and the rejoicing hopes of
endless Glory, are things which they take but little care about: and when they
are convinced of the error of this partiality, they next turn to some
Antinomian whimsie, under the pretense of valuing Free Grace; and begin to give
over per^ile^s (...) and the care* and watchfulness against sin* and diligence
in a holy fruitful life, and say that they were long enough Legal^sts, and knew
not Free Grace, but looked all after doing, and something in themselves; and
then they could have no peace; but now they see their error, they will know
nothing but Christ. And thus that narrow foolish soul cannot use Repentance
without neglecting Faith in Christ; and cannot use Faith, but they must neglect
Repentance; yea set Faith and Repentance, Love and Obedience in good works,
like enemies or hindrances against each other: They cannot know themselves and
their sinfuln^ss, without forgetting Christ and his righteousness: And they
cannot know Christ, and his Love, and Grace, without laying by the knowledge or
resistance of their sin. They cannot magnify Free Grace, unless they may have
none of it, but lay by the use of it as to all the works of holiness, because
they must look at nothing in themselves* They cannot magnify Pardon and
Justification, unless they may make light of the sin and punishment which they
deserve, and which is pardoned, and the charge and condemnation from which they
are justified: They cannot give God thanks for remitting their sin, unless they
may forbear confessing it, and sorrowing for it. They cannot take the Promise
to be free, which gives Christ and pardon of sin, if it have but this
condition, that they shall not reject him: Nor can they call it the Gospel,
unless it leave them masterless and lawless; whereas there is indeed no such
thing as Faith without Repentance, nor Repentance without Faith: No love to
Christ without the keeping of his Commandments; nor no true keeping of the
Commandments without Love: No Free Grace without a gracious sanctified heart
and life; nor no gift of Christ and Justification, but on the condition of a
believing acceptance of the gift; and yet no such believing but by Free Grace:
No Gospel without the Law of Christ and Nature; and no mercy and peace but in a
way of duty. And yet such Bedlam Christians are among us, that you may hear
them in pangs of high conceited zeal, insulting over the folly of one another,
and in no wiser language, than if you heard one lunatic person say, I am for
health, and not for medicine; and another, I am for medicine, and not for the
taking of it; and another, I am for the Physic, and not for the Physician; and
another, I am for the Physician, and not the Physic; and another, I am for the
Physic; but not for health. Or as, if they contended at their meats, I am for
meat, but not for eating it, and I am for putting it into my mouth, but not for
chewing it; or I am for chewing it* but not for swallowing it; or I am for
swallowing it, but not for digesting it; or I am for digesting it, but not for
eating it, etc.

Thus is Christ divided among a sort of ignorant proud Professors: and some are
for his Sacrifice, and some for his Intercession, some for his Teaching, and
some for his Commands, and some for his Promises; some for his Blood, and some
for his Spirit; some for his Word, and some for his Ministers, and his Church;
and when they have made this strange proficiency in wisdom, every party claim
to be this Church themselves; or if they cannot deny others to be parts with
them of the Mystical Church, yet the true ordered Political disciplined Church
is among them, the matter of their claim and competition, and one says, It is
we, and the other, no but it is we; and the Kitchen, and the Cole-house, and
the Sellar go to Law, to try which of them is the House. Thus when they have
divided Christ's garments among them, and pierced, if not divided himself, they
quarrel rather than cast lots for his coat.

7. I perceive this Treatise swells too big, or else I might next show you,
how partial men are in the sense of their dangers.

8. And in the resisting of Temptations; he that scapeth sensuality, fears
not worldliness; or he that fears both, yet falls into Heresy or Schism;
and he that scapeth errors, falls into fleshly sins.

9. And what partial regard we have of Gods mercies.

10. And how partial we are as to our Teachers, and good Books.

11. And also about all the Ordinances of God, and all the the helps and means
of grace.

12. And how partial we are about good works, extolling one, and senseless of
another; and about the opportunities of good. In a word, what l^me
apprehensions we have of Religion, when men are so far from setting all the
parts together in a well-ordered frame, that they can scarce forbear the
dividing of every part into particles: and must take the food of their souls as
Physic, even like Pills which they cannot get down, unless they are exceeding
small.

III. The Causes of this Calamity I must for brevity but name.

1. The natural weakness of man's mind, does make him like a narrow-mouthed
bottle that can take in but a little at once, and so must be long in learning
and receiving.

2. The natural laziness and impatience of men, will not give them leave to be
at such long and painful studies, as compleatness of knowledge does require.

3. The natural pride of men's hearts will not give them leave to continue so
long in a humble sense of their emptiness and ignorance, nor to spend so many
years in learning as Disciples: but it presently persuades them that their
first apprehensions are clear and right, and their knowledge very considerable
already; and they are as ready to dispute and censure the ignorance of their
Teachers, if not to teach others themselves, as to learn.

4. The poverty and labors of many, allow them not leisure to search and study
so long and seriously, as may bring them to any comprehensive knowledge.

5. The most are not so happy as to have judicious, methodical and laborious
Teachers, who may possess them with right principles and methods, but deliver
them some truths, with great defectiveness and disorder themselves; and perhaps
by their weakness tempt the people into pride, when they see that they are
almost as wise as they.

6. Most men are corrupted by company and converse with ignorant e^roneous, and
self-conceited men, and hearing others (perhaps that are very zealous) make
something of nothing, and make a great matter of a little one, and extolling
their own poor and lame conceits, they learn also to think that they are
something when they are nothing, deceiving themselves, Gal. 6.3, 4.

7. Most Christians have lost the sense of the need and use of the true
Ministerial Office, as it consists in personal counsel and assistance,
besides the public Teaching; and most Ministers by neglecting it, teach them
to overlook it.

8. Every man has some seeming Interest in some one Opinion, or Duty, or Way,
above the rest; and selfishness causes him to reel that way that interest
leads him.

9. Education usually possesses men with a greater regard of some one opinion,
duty, way or party, than of the rest.

10. The reputation of some good men does fix others upon some particular ways
or notions of theirs above others.

11. Present occasions and necessities sometime do urge us harder to some means
and studies, than to others: especially for the avoiding of some present evil,
or easing of some present trouble; and then the rest are almost laid by.

12. Some Doctrines deeplier affect us in the hearing, than others; and then
the thoughts run more on that, to the neglect of many thing as great.

13. Perhaps we have had special experience of some Truths and Duties, or Sins,
more than others; and then we set all our thoughts about those only.

14. Usually we live with such as talk most of some one duty, or against some
one sin, more than all the rest; and this does occasion our thoughts to run
most in one stream, and confine them by hearing and custom to a narrow channel.

15. Some things in their own quality, are more easy and near to us, and more
within the reach of sense. And therefore as corporal things, because of their
sensibility and nearness, do possess the minds of carnal men, instead of things
spiritual and unseen; even so Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas; this good Preacher,
and that good Book, and this Opinion, and that Church-society, and this or that
Ordinance, do possess the minds of the more carnal narrow sort of Christians,
instead of the harmony of Christian truth, and holy duty.

16. Nature it self as corrupted, is much more against some truths, and against
some duties, internal and external, than against others. And then when those
that it is less averse to, are received, men dwell on them, and make a Religion
of them, wholly or too much, without the rest. As when some veins are stopped,
all the blood is turned into the rest; or when one part of the mould is stopped
up, the metal all runs into the rest, and makes a defective vessel: Or when
one part of the seal is filled up before, it makes a defective impression on
the wax. Therefore the duties of inward self-denial, humility, mortification,
and heavenliness, are almost left out in the Religion of the most.

17. Temptations are ever more strong and violent against some duties, than
against others, and to some sins, than to others.

18. Most men have a memory, which more easily retains some things than
others: especially those that are best understood, and which most affect them.
And grace cannot live upon forgotten truths.

19. There is no man but in his Calling, has more frequent occasion for some
graces and duties, and uses them more, and has more occasions to interrupt
and divert his mind from others.

20. The very temperature of the body inclines some all to fears and grief,
and others to love and contentedness of mind: and it vehemently inclines some
to passion, some to their appetite, some to pride, and some to idleness, and
some to lust; when others are far less inclined to any of them: And many other
providential accidents, do give men more helps to one duty, than to another,
and puts many upon the trials, which others are never put upon: And all this
set together is the reason that few Christians are entire or complete, or
escape the sin and misery of deformity; or ever use Gods graces and their
duties, in the order and harmony as they ought.

IV. I shall be brief also in telling you what Inferences to raise from hence
for your instruction.

1. You may learn hence how to answer the question, whether all Gods Graces
live and grow in an equal proportion in all true Believers. I need to give you
no further proof of the negative, than I have laid down before: I once thought
otherwise; and was wont to say, as it is commonly said, that in the habit they
are proportionable, but not in the act. But this was because I understood not
the difference between the particular habits, and the first radical power,
inclination or habit (which I name that the Reader may choose his title, that we
may not quarrel about mere words.) The first Principle of Holiness in us, is
called in Scripture, The Spirit of Christ or of God: In the unity of this are
three essential principles, Life, Light and Love; which are the immediate
effects of the heavenly or divine influx upon the three natural faculties of
the soul, to rectify them, viz. on the Vital Power, the Intellect and the
Will: And are called the Spirit, as the Sunshine in the room is called, the
Sun: Now as the Sunshine on the earth and plants, is all one in it self as
emitted from the Sun, Light, Heat and Moving force concurring, and yet is not
equally effective, because of the difference of Recipients; and yet every
vegetative receives a real effect of the Heat and Motion at the least; and
sensitives also of the Light; but so that one may (by incapacity) have less of
the heat, and another less of the motion, and another less of the Lght; so I
conceive that Wisdom, Love and Life (or Power) are given by the Spirit to every
Christian: But so that in the very first Principle or effect of the Spirit, one
may have more Light, another more Love, and another more Life: Bus this it
accidental from some obstruction in the Receiver; otherwise the Spirit would be
equally a Spirit of Power (or Life) and of Love, and of a sound mind (or Light.)

But besides this New Moral Power, or Inclination, or Universal Radical Habit,
there are abundance of particular Habits of Grace and Duty, much more properly
called Habits, and less properly called the Vital or Potential Principles of
the New Creature: There is a particular Habit of Humility, and another of
Peaceableness, of Gentleness, of Patience, of Love to one another, of Love to
the Word of God; and many habits of Love to several truths and duties: a habit
of desire, yea many, as there are many different objects desired; there is a
habit of praying, of meditating, of thanksgiving, of mercy, of chastity, of
temperance, of diligence, etc. The acts would not vary as they do, if there
were not a variety and disposition in these Habits; which appear to us only in
their acts. We must go against Scripture, reason, and the manifold hourly
experience of our selves, and all the Christians in the world, if we will say
that all these graces and duties are equal in the Habit in every Christian. How
impotent are some in bridling a passion, or bridling the tongue, or in
controlling pride and self-esteem, or or in denying the particular desires of
their sense, who yet are ready at many other duties, and eminent in them. Great
knowledge is too often with too little charity or zeal; and great zeal and
diligence often with as little knowledge. And so in many other instances.

So that if the Potentiality of the radical graces of Life, Light and Love, be
or were equal, yet certainly proper and particular habits are not.

But here note further, 1. That no grace is strong where the radical graces,
Faith and Love are weak: As no part of the body is strong, where the Brain and
Heart are weak; (yea or the naturals, the stomach and liver.)

2. The strength of Faith and Love is the principal means of strengthening all
other graces; and of right performing all other duties.

3. Yet are they not alone a sufficient means, but other inferior graces and
duties may be weak and neglected, where Faith and Love are strong; through
particular obstructing causes. As some branches of the tree may perish when the
root is sound; or some members may have an Atrophie, though the brain and heart
be not diseased.

4. That the three Principles, Life, Light and Love, do most rarely keep any
disproportion; and would never be disproportionable at all, if some things did
not hinder the actings of one more than the other, or turn away the soul from
the influences and impressions of the Spirit more as to one than to the rest.

2. Hence you may learn, That the Image of God is much clearlier and
perfectlier imprinted in the holy Scriptures, than in any of our hearts. And
that our Religion objectively considered, is much more perfect, than
subjectively in us. In Scripture, and in the true doctrinal method our Religion
is entire, perfect and complete. But in it, it is confused, lame and lamentably
imperfect. The Sectaries that here say, None of the Spirits works are
imperfect, are not to be regarded: For so they may as well say, that there are
none infants, diseased, lame, distracted, poor, or monsters in the world;
because none of Gods works are imperfect. All that is in God is God, and
therefore perfect; and all that is done by God is perfect as to his ends, and
as it is a part in the frame of his own means to that end which man
understands not: But many things are imperfect in the receiving subject. If
not, why should any man ever seek to be wiser or better than he was in his
infancy, or at the worst.

3. Therefore we here see that the Spirit in the Scripture is the Rule by which
we must try the Spirit in our selves, or any other. The Fanatics or
Enthusiasts, who ra^l against us, for trying the Spirit by the Scriptures, when
as the Spirit was the Author of the Scriptures, do but rave in the dark, and
know not what they say. For the Essence of the Spirit is every where; and it is
the effects of the Spirit in both which we must compare: The Spirit is never
contrary to it self: And seeing it is the Sunshine which we here call the Sun,
the question is but, where it shines most? whether in the Scripture, or in our
hearts? The Spirit in the Apostles indicted the Scriptures, to be the Rule of
our faith and life unto the end: The Spirit in us does teach and help us to
understand and to obey those Scriptures. Was not the Spirit in a greater
measure in the Apostles, than in us? Did it not work more completely, and unto
more infallibility in their writing the Scriptures, than it does in our
Understanding, and obeying them? Is not the seal perfect, when the impression
is often imperfect? Does not the Master write his Copy more perfectly, than his
Scholars imitation is, though he teach him, yea and hold his hand? He that
knows not the Religious distractions of this age, will blame me for troubling
the Reader with the confutation of such dreams: But so will not they that have
seen and tasted their effects.

4. Hence we may learn that he that would know what the Christian Religion is
indeed (to the honor of God, or their own just information) must rather look
into the Scripture to know it, than into Believers. For though in Believers it
be more discernable in the kind (as men's lives are more conspicuous than Laws
and Precepts, and the impress than the seal, etc.) yet it is in the Laws or
Scriptures more complete and perfect, when in the best of Christians (much more
in the most) it is broken, maimed and confused.

5. This tells us the reason why it is unsafe to make any men (Popes, or
Councils, or the holiest Pastors, or strictest people) the Rule either of our
faith or lives. Because they are all imperfect and discordant, when the
Scripture is concordant and complete. He that is led by them, may err, when as
the Scripture has no error. And yet it is certain, that even the imperfect
knowledge and grace of faithful Pastors and companions, is of great use to
those that are more imperfect than they, to teach them the Scriptures, which
are more perfect than they all.

6. Hence we see why it is, that Religion brings so much trouble, and so
little comfort to the most, or too many that are in part Religious. Because it
is lame and confused in them. Is it any wonder that a d^splaced bone is
painful? or that a disordered body is sick, and has no great pleasure in life?
or that a disordered or maimed watch or clock, does not go right? O what a life
of pleasure should we live, if we were but such as the Scripture does require!
and the Religion in our hearts and lives were fully agreeable with the Religion
described in the Word of God.

7. And hence we see why most true Christians are so querulous, and have
always somewhat to complain of and lament; which the senseless, or
self-justifying hypocrites overlook in themselves. No wonder if such diseased
souls complain.

8. And hence we see why there is such diversity and divisions among Believers,
and such abundance of Sects and Parties, and Contentions, and so little Unity,
Peace and Concord. And why all attempts for Unity take so little in the Church.
Because they have all such weakness, and distempers, and lameness, and
confusedness, and great disproportions in their Religion. Do you wonder why he
lives not in peace, and concord, and quietness with others, who has no better
agreement in himself? and no more composedness and true peace rt home? Men's
grace and parts are much unequal.

9. And hence we see why there are so many scandals among Christians, to the
great dishonor of true Christianity, and the great hinderance of the
conversion of the Infidel, Heathen and ungodly world: What wonder if some
disorder, falsehood, and confusion appear without, in words and deeds, when
there is so much ever dwelling in the mind?

10. Lastly, Hence we may learn what to expect from particular persons, and
what to look for also publicly, in the Church, and in the world. He that
knows what man is, and what godly men are, but as well as I do, will hardly
expect a concordant uniform building to be made of such discordant and uneven
materials; or that a set of strings, which are all, or almost all out of tune,
should make any harmonious melody; or that a number of Infants should
constitute an Army of valiant men; or that a company that can scarce spell, or
read, should constitute a learned Academy. God must make a change upon
individual persons, if ever he will make a great change in the Church. They
must be more wise, and charitable, and peaceable Christians, who must make up
that happy Church state, and settle that amiable peace, and serve God in that
concordant harmony as all of us desire, and some expect.

CHAP. XII. How to use Faith against particular sins?
THE most that I have to say of this, is to be gathered from what went before,
about Sanctification in the general. And because I have been so much longer
than I intended, you must bear with my necessary brevity in the rest.

Direct. 1. When temptation sets actual sin before you, or inward sin keeps
up within, look well on God and sin together. Let Faith see Gods Holiness and
Justice, and all that Wisdom, Goodness and Power, which sin despises. And one
such believing sight of God, is enough to make you look at sin, as at the Devil
himself; as the most ugly thing.

Direct. 2. Set sin and the Law of God together; and then it will appear to be
exceeding sinful; and to be the crooked fruit of the tempting Serpent. You
cannot know sin, but by the Law, Romans 7.14, etc.

Direct. 3. Set sin before the Cross of Christ: Let Faith sprinkle his blood
upon it, and it will die and wither. See it still as that which killed your
Lord; and that which pierced his side, and hanged him up in such contempt; and
put the gall and vinegar to his mouth.

Direct. 4. Forget not the sorrows and fears of your conversion (if you are
indeed converted:) Or (if not) at least the sorrows and fears which you must
feel if ever you be converted. God does purposely cast us into grief and
terrors, for our former sins, that it may make us the more careful to sin no
more, lest worse befall us: If the pangs of the new birth were sharp and
gr^^vous to you, why will you again renew the cause, and drink of those bitter
waters? R^member what a mad and sad condition you were in while you lived
according to the flesh, and how plainly you saw it when your eyes were opened?
And would you be in the same condition again? Would you be unsanctified, and
unjustified, and unpardoned, and unsaved? Every wilful sin is a turning
backward, toward the state of your former captivity and misery.

Direct. 5. When Satan sets the bait before you, let Faith always set Heaven
and Hell before you, and take all together, the end with the beginning. And
think when you are tempted to lie, to steal, to deceive, to lust, to pride, to
gulosity or drunkenness, etc. what men are now suffering for these same sins?
and what all that are in Hell and in Heaven do think of them? Suppose a man
offered you a cup of wine, and a friend tells you, I saw him put poison into
it, and therefore take heed what you do.] If the offerer were an enemy, you
would hardly take it. The world, and the flesh, and the devil, are enemies:
when they offer you the delights of sin, hear Faith, and it will tell you,
there is poison in it; there is sin, and hell, and Gods displeasure in it.

Direct. 6. Let Faith keep you under the continual apprehensions of the Divine
Authority and Rule; that as a child, a servant, a scholar, a subject, does
still know that he is not masterless, but one that must be ruled by the will or
Law of his superior; so may you always live with the yo^k of Christ upon your
necks, and his bridle in your mouths: Remembering also that you are still in
your Masters eye.

Direct. 7. Remember still that it is the work of Faith to overcome the world,
and the flesh, and to overruled your sense and appetite; and to make nothing of
all that would stand up against your heavenly interest; and to crucify it by
the Cross of Christ Gal. 6.14. and 5.24. Romans 8.1, 9, 10, 13. Set Faith
therefore upon its proper work; and when you live by Faith, and walk after the
Spirit, you will not live by sight, nor walk after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.7.

Direct* 8. It is also the work of Faith to take off all the masks of sin, and
open its nakedness, and shame, and cast by all shifts, pretenses, and excuses.
When Satan says, It is a little one, and the danger is not great, and it will
serve thy pleasure, profit, or preferment; Faith should say, Does not God
forbid it? There is no dallying with the fire of God: Be not deceived, man; God
will not be mocked! Whatsoever a man sows, that shall be also reap: If you
sow to the flesh, of the flesh you shall reap corruption, Gal, 6. When Satan
says, Ye shall not die: and when the sinner with Adam hides himself, Faith
will call him out to Judgment, and say, What have thou done? Have thou eaten of
the fruit which God forbade?

Direct. 9. Let Faith still keep you busied in your Masters work. Nothing
breeds and feeds sin so much as idleness of mind and life: Sins of omission
have this double mischief, that they are the first part of Satan's game
themselves, and they also bring in sins of commission. When men are not taken
up with good, they are at leisure for temptations to entice them; and they set
open their doors to the tempter, and tell him he may speak with then when he
will. Wanton thoughts, and covetous thoughts, may dwell there when better
thoughts are absent. But when you are so wholly taken up with your duty
(spiritual or corporal) and so constantly and industriously busy in your
proper work, sin cannot enter, nor Satan find you at leisure for his service.

Direct. 10. Let Faith make Gods service pleasant to you, and lose not your
delight in G^d and godliness, and then you will not relish sinful pleasures.
You will find no need of such base delights, when you live on the foretast of
Angelical pleasures. You will not be easily drawn to steal a morsel of dung or
poison from the Devils table, while you daily feast your souls on Christ: or to
steal the Onions of Egypt, when you dwell in a Land that flows with milk and
honey. But while you keep your selves in the wilderness, you will be tempted to
look back again to Egypt. The great cause of men's sinning, and yielding to the
temptations of forbidden pleasures, is because they are negligent to live upon
the pleasures of Believers.

Direct. 11. Take heed of the beginnings, if ever you would escape the sin. No
man becomes stark naught at the first step. He that begins to take one
pleasing unprofitable cup or bit, intends not drunkenness and gluttony in the
grossest sense: But he has set fire in the thatch, though he did not intend to
burn his house; and it will be harder to quench it, than to have forborne at
first. He that begins but with lascivious dalliance, speeches or embraces,
thinks not to proceed to filthy fornication: But he might better have secured
his conscience, if he had never meddled so far with sin. Few ruinating damning
sins, began any otherwise than with such small approaches, as seemed to have
little harm or danger.

Direct. 12. If ever you will escape sin, keep off from strong temptations and
opportunities. He that will be still near the fire or water, may be burnt or
drowned at last. No man is long safe in the midst of danger, and at the next
step to ruin. He that lives in a Tavern or Alehouse, had need to be very
averse to tippling. And he that sits at Dives table, had need to be very
averse to gulosity: And he that is in the least danger of the fire of lust,
must keep at a sufficient distance, not only from the bed, and from immodest
actions, but from secret company and opportunities of sin, and from a
licentious ungoverned eye and imagination. This caused Christ to say, How hard
it is for the Rich to be saved? because they have a stronger fleshly interest
to keep them from Christ and godliness, which must be denied; and because their
sin has plentiful provision, and the fire of concupiscence wants no fuel,
and it is a very easy thing to them still to sin, and always a hard thing to
avoid it: And man's sluggish nature will hardly long either hold on in that
which is hardly done, or forbear that which is still hard to forbear. Good must
be made sweet and easy to us, or else we shall never be constant in it.

Direct. 13. If you find any difficulty in forsaking any disgraceful sin,
cherish it not by secrecy, but 1. Plainly confess it to your bosom friend: And
2. If that will not serve, to others also, that you may have the greater
engagements to forbear.

I know wisdom must be used in such confessions, and they must be avoided when
the hurt will prove greater than the good. But fleshly wisdom must be no
councellor, and fleshly interest must not prevail, Secrecy is the nest of sin,
where it is kept warm, and hidden from disgrace: Turn it out of this nest, and
it will thd sooner perish. Gods eye and knowledge should serve turn: but when
it will not, let man know it also, and turn one sin against another, and let
the love of Reputation help to subdue the love of Lust. Opening a sin (yea or a
strong temptation to a sin) does lay an engagement in point of common credit in
the world, upon them that were before under the divine engagements only. It
will be a double shame to sin when once it is known. And as Christ speaks of a
right hand, or eye, so may I of your honor in this case; it is better go to
Heaven with the shame of a penitent confession, than to keep your honor till
you are in Hell. The loss of men's good opinion is an easy price, to prevent
the loss of your salvation, Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins shall not
prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. So 1 John
1.9, 10. James 5.15, 16.

Direct. 14. Especially take heed of heinous sins, called mortal, because
inconsistent with sincerity.

Direct. 15. And take heed of those sins which your selves or others that fear
God are in greatest danger of: Of which I will speak a little more distinctly.

CHAP. XIII. What sins the best should most watchfully avoid? and wherein the
infirmities of the upright d^ffer from mortal sins?
Q^est. WHat sins are religious people who fear sin, most in danger of? and
where must they set the strongest watch?

Answ. 1. They are much in danger of those sins, the temptations to which are
near, and importunate, and constant, and for which they have the greatest
opportunities: They have senses and appetites as well as others: And if the
bait be great, and always as at their very mouths, even a David, a Solomon, a
Noah, is not safe.

2. They are in danger of those sins which they little think of; for it is a
sign that they are not forewarned and fortified; nor have they overcome that
sin; for victory here is never got at so cheap a rate: especially as to inward
sins: If it have not cost you many a groan, and many a days diligence, to
conquer selfishness, pride and appetite; it is twenty to one they are not
conquered.

3. They are much in danger of those sins which they extenuate, and count to be
smaller than they are. For indeed their hearts are infected already, by those
false and favorable thoughts. And they are prepared to entertain a nearer
familiarity with them. Men are easily tempted upon a danger which seems small.

4. They are much in danger of those sins, which their constitutions and
temperature of body does incline them to; and therefore must here keep a double
watch. No small part of the punishment of our Original sin (both as from Adam,
and from our nearest Parents) is found in the ill complexion of our bodies: The
temperature of some inclines them vehemently to passion; and of others unto
lust; and of others to sloth and dullness: and of others to gulosity, etc. And
grace does not immediately change this distemper of the complexion; but only
watch over it, and keep it under, and abate it consequently, by contrary
actions, and mental dispositions: Therefore we shall have here uncessant work,
while we are in the body. Though yet the power of grace by long and faithful
use, will bring the very sense, and imagination, and passions into so much
calmness, as to be far less raging, and easily ruled: As a well ridden horse
will obey the Rider; and even dogs and other bruits will strive but little
against our government: And then our work will grow more easy: For as Seneca
says, Maxima pars libertatis est been moratus venture: A good conditioned belly
is a great part of a man's liberty: meaning, an ill conditioned belly is a great
part of men's slavery: And the same may be said of all the senses, fantasy and
passions in their respective places.

5. We are much in danger of the sins which our callings, trades and worldly
interest, do most and constantly tempt us to. Every man has a carnal interest,
which is his great temptation; and every wise man will know it, and there set a
double watch. The carnal interest of a Preacher, is applause or preferment: The
carnal interest of Rulers and great men, I shall pass by; but they must not
pass it by themselves. The carnal interest of Lawyers and Tradesmen, is their
gain, etc. Here we must keep a constant watch.

6. We are much in danger of those sins, the matter of which is somewhat good
or lawful, and the danger lies only in the manner, circumstances or degree.
For there the lawfulness of the matter, occasioneth men to forget the
accidental evil. The whole Kingdom feels the mischief of this, in instances
which I will now pass by. If eating such or such a meat were not lawful it
self, men would not be so easily drawn to gluttony. If drinking wine were not a
lawful thing, the passage to drunkenness were not so open: The apprehension
that a lusory lot is a lawful thing (as Cards, D^ce, etc.) does occasion the
heinous sin of time-wasting, and estate-wasting gamesters. If apparel were not
lawful, excess would not be so easily endured. Yea the goodness of Gods own
Worship, quieteth many in its great abuse.

7. We are much in danger of those sins, which are not in any great disgrace
among those persons whom we most honor and esteem. It is a great mercy to have
sin lie under a common odium and disgrace: As swearing and drunkenness, and
cursing, and fornication, and Popish errors, and superstition, is now amongst
the forwardest Professors in England: For here conscience is most awakened, and
helped by the opinion of men; or if there be some carnal respect to our
reputation in it sometimes, yet it tends to suppress the sin; And it is a
great plague to live where any great sin is in little disgrace (as the
profanation of the Lords day in most of the Reformed Churches beyond Sea; and
they say, tippling, if not drunkenness in Germany; and as backbiting and evil
speaking against those that differ from them is among the Professors in
England, for too great a part; and also many superstitions of their own; and
dividing principles and practices.)

8. But especially if the greater number of godly people live in such a sin,
then is the temptation great indeed; and it is but few of the weaker sort, that
are not carried down that stream. The Munster case, and the Rebellion in which
Munster perished in Germany, and many other; but especially abundance of
Schisms from the Apostles days till now, are too great evidences of men's
sociableness in sinning. We all like sheep have gone astray, and turned every
one to his own way, Isa. 53 6. And like sheep ^n this, that if one that is
leading, get over the hedge, all the rest will follow after; but especially if
the greater part be gone. And do not think that our Churches are infallible,
and that the greater part of the godly cannot err, or be in the wrong: For
that would be but to do as the Papists, when we have sinned by fallibility, to
keep off repentance by the conceit of infallibility.

9. We are in great danger of sinning, in cases where we are ignorant: For who
can avoid the danger which he sees not? And who can walk safely in the dark?
Therefore we see that it is the ignor anter sort of Christians, and such as
Paul calls Novices, that most err; especially when Pride accompanyeth
Ignorance, for then they fall into the special condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. Study therefore painfully and patiently till you understand the truth.

10. But above all, we are in danger of those sins which are masked with a
pretense of the greatest truths and duties, and use to be fathered on God and
Scripture; and so under the specious titles of Holiness and of Free Grace. For
here it is the understanding chiefly that resists, while the very names and
pretenses secretly steal in, and bring them into love and reverence with the
Will. And the poor honest Christian is afraid of resisting them, lest it should
prove a resisting God. What can be so false that a man will not plead for, if
he take it to be a necessary truth of God? And what can be so bad that a man
will not do, if he take it once to be of Gods commanding? The foresaid
instances of the Munster and Germane actions, with those of the followers of
David George in Holland (who took himself to be the Holy Ghost, or the
immediate Prophet of his Kingdom) and Hacket and his Grundletonians, and the
Familists, the Ranters, the Seekers, the Quakers, the Church-dividers, and the
Kingdom and State-overturners in England, have given so great a demonstration
of this, that it is not lawful to overlook it or forget it. The time comes,
that they that kill you, shall think that they do God service, Joh. 16.2. And
then who can expect that their consciences should avoid it? Why did Paul
persecute the Christians, and compel them to blaspheme? Because he verily
thought that he ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus, Acts 26.9. O
it is religious sins which we are in danger of! such as come to us as in the
Name of God, and Christ, and the Spirit: such as pretend that we cannot be
saved without them: and such as plead the holy Scriptures: such as James 3. is
written against, when a wisdom from beneath, which is earthly, sensual and
devilish, working by envy and strife, unto confusion and every evil work,
pretends to be the wisdom from above: when Zeal consumes Love and Unity,
under pretense of consuming sin: which made Paul and John require us not to
believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of God, 2 These.
2.2. and 1 These. 5.20, 21. 1 John 4.1, 2, 3. And made Paul say, If an Angel
from Heaven bring you another Gospel, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.7, 8. And
more plainly, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. Such are false Apostles; deceitful workers;
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ: and no marvel, for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light: therefore it is no great thing
if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, whose
end shall be according to their works. And Acts 20.30. Also of your own selves
shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them.
And what need any Disciple of Christ greater warning, than to remember that
their Savior himself was thus assaulted by the Devil in his temptation, with [
It is written.]

Yet let no Papist hence take occasion to vilify the Scripture, because it is
made a plea for sin: For so he might as well vilify humane Reason, which is
pleaded for all the errors in the world; and vilify the Law, because Lawyers
plead it for ill Causes; yea and vilify God himself, because the same and
other sinners plead his will and authority for their sins: when contrarily, it
is a great proof of the Scripture Authority and Honor, that Satan himself, and
his subtilest instruments, do place their greatest hope of prevailing, by
perverting and misapplying it; which could be of no use to them, if its
authority were not acknowledged.

11. We are in constant danger of those sins which we think we can conceal from
men: Therefore suppose still that all that you do will be made known; and do
all as in the open streets: It Is written (by two) in the life of holy Ephrem
Syrus, that when a Harlot tempted him to uncleanness, he desired but that he
might choose the place; which she consenting to, he chose the open marketplace,
among all the people; and when she told him, that there they should be shamed,
for all would see; he told her such a lesson of sinning in the sight of God,
who is every where, as was the means of her conversion. Conceit of secrecy
emboldeneth to sin.

12. We are in constant danger of sins of sudden passion and irruption, which
allow us not season to deliberate, and surprise us before our reason can
consider.

13. We are in danger of sins that come on by insensible degrees, and from
small beginnings creep upon us, and come not by any sudden wakening assaults:
Thus pride and covetousness, and ambition, do infect men: And thus our zeal and
deligence for God, does usually decay.

14. Lastly, We are in much danger of all sins which require a constant
vigorous diligence to resist them; and of omitting those duties, or that part
or mode of duty, which must have a constant vigorous diligence to perform it:
Because feeble souls are hardly kept (as is aforesaid) to constant vigorous
diligence.

Quest. 2. Wherein differs the sins of a sanctified person from other men's
that are unsanctified.

Answ. 1. In a sanctified man the habitual bent of his will, is ever more
against sin, than for it; however he be tempted into that particular act.

2. And as to the Act also, it is ever contrary to the scope and tenor of his
life; which is for God and sincere obedience.

3. He has no sin which is inconsistent with the true Love of God, in the
predominant habit: It never turns his heart to another End, or Happiness, or
Master.

4. Therefore it is more a sin of passion, than of settled interest and choice.
He is more liable to a hasty passion, or word, or unruly thoughts, than to any
prevalent covetousness or ambition, or any sin which is a possessing of the
heart instead of God, 1 John 2.15. James 3.2. Though some remainders of these
are in him, they prevail not so far as sudden passions.

5. There are some sins which are more easily in the power of the will, so that
a man that is but truly willing, may forbear them; as a drunkard may pass by
the Tavern or Alehouse, or forbear to touch the cup; and the fornicator to
come near, or commit the sin, if they be truly willing: But there be other sins
which a man can hardly forbear though he be willing; because they are the sins
of those faculties over which the will has not a despotical power: As a man
may be truly willing to have no sluggishness, heaviness, sleepiness at prayer,
no forgetfulness, no wandering thoughts, no inordinate appetite or lust at all
stirring in him, no sudden passions of anger, grief or fear; he may be willing
to love God perfectly; to fear him and obey him perfectly, but cannot. These
latter are the ordinary infirmities of the godly: The former sort are, if at
all, his extraordinary falls, Romans 7.14. to the end.

6. Lastly, The true Christian rises by unfeigned Repentance, when his
conscience has but leisure and helps to deliberate, and to bethink him what he
has done. And his Repentance much better resolves and strengthens him
against his sin for the time to come.

To sum up all; 1. Sin more loved than hated. 2. Sin wilfully lived in, which
might be avoided by the sincerely willing. 3. Sin made light of, and not truly
repented of when it is committed. 4. And any sin inconsistent with habitual
Love to God, in predominancy, is mortal, or a sign of spiritual death, and none
of the sins of sanctified Believers.

CHAP. XIV. How to live by Faith in Prosperity.
THE work of Faith in respect of Prosperity, is twofold: 1. To save us from the
danger of it. 2. To help us to a sanctified improvement of it.

1. And for the first, that which Faith does, is especially, 1. To see deeper
and further into the nature of all things in the world, than sense can do, 2
Cor. 4.17, 18. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. To see that they were never intended for
our Rest or portion, but to be our wilderness provision in our way. To foresee
just how the world will use us, and leave us at the last, and to have the very
same thoughts of it now, as we foresee that we shall have when the end is come,
and when we have had all that ever the world will do for us. It is the work of
Faith, to cause a man to judge of the world, and all its glory, as we shall do
when death and judgment come, and have taken off the mask of splendid names,
and shows, and flatteries: that we may use the world as if we used it not, and
possess it as if we possessed it not, because its fashion does pass away. It is
the work of Faith to crucify the world to us, and us to the world by the Cross
of Christ, Gal. 6.14. that we may look on it as disdainfully as the world
looked upon Christ, when he hanged as forsaken on the Cross. That when it is
dead, it may have no power on us, and when we are dead to it, we may have no
inordinate love, or care, or thoughts, or fears, or grief, or labor to lay out
upon it. It is the work of Faith ^o make all worldly pomp and glory, to be to
us but loss, and dross, and dung, in comparison of Christ, and the
righteousness of Faith, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. And then no man will part with Heaven
for dung, nor set his God below his dung, nor further from his heart; nor will
he feel any great power in temptations to honor, wealth or pleasure, if really
he count them all but dung; nor will he wound his conscience, or betray his
peace, or cast away his innocence for them.

2. Faith shows the soul those sure, and great, and glorious things, which
are infinitely more worthy of our love and labor. And this is its highest and
most proper work, Heb. 11. it conquereth Earth by opening Heaven; and showing
it us as sure, and clear, and near. And no man will dote on this deceitful
world, till he have turned away his eyes from God; and till Heaven be out of
his sight and heart. Faith says, I must shortly be with Christ; and what then
are these dying things to me? I have better things, which God that cannot lie
has promised me with Christ, Titus 1.2. Heb. 6.18. I look every day when I am
called in. The Judge stands before the door, James 5.9. The Lord is at hand,
Phil. 4.5. And the end of all these things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7. And shall I
set my heart on that which is not?

Therefore when the world does smile and flatter, faith sets Heaven against
all that it can say or offer. And what is the world when Heaven stands by?
Faith sees what the blessed souls above possess, at the same time while the
world is alluring us to forsake it, Luke 16. Heb. 11. and 12.1, 2. etc. Faith
sets the heart upon the things above, as our concernment, o^r only hope and
happiness: It kindles that Love of God in the soul, and that delight in higher
things, which powerfully quenches worldly love, and mortifieth all our carnal
pleasures, Matthew. 6.20.21. Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 8.5, 6, 7. Phil. 30.20, 21.

3. Faith shows the soul those wants and miseries in it self, which nothing
in the world is able to supply and cure. Nay, such as the world is apter to
increase. It is not gold that will quench his thirst, who longs for pardon,
grace and glory. A guil^y conscience, a sinful and condemned soul will never be
cured by riches, or high places, by pride, or fl^shly sports and pleasures,
James 5.1, 2, 3. This humbling work is not in vain.

4. Faith looks to Christ, who has overcome the world, and carefully
treads in his st^ps, John 16.33. Heb. 12.2, 3, 4, 5. It looks to his
person, his birth, his life, his cross, his grave, and his resurrection: to all
that strange example of contempt of worldly things which he gave us from his
manger, to his shameful kind of death. And he that studieth the Life of Christ,
will either despise the world, or him He will either vilify the world in
imitation of his Lord, or vilify Christ for the pleasures of the world. Faith
has in this warfare, the surest and most onourable guide, the ablest Captain,
and the most powerful example in all the world. And it has with Christian
unerring Rule, which furnishes him with armor for every use. Yea it has
through him a promise of Victory before it be a^tained; so that in the
beginning of the fight, it knows the end, Romans 16.20. John 16.33. It goes to
Christ for that Spirit which is our streng^h, Ephesians. 6.10. C^l. 2.7. And by
that it mortifieth the desires of the flesh: and when ^he flesh is mortified,
the world is conquered: for it is loved only as it is the provision of the
flesh.

5. Moreover, Faith does observe Gods particular Providence, who distributeth
his talents to every man as he pleases, and disposes of their estates and
comforts: so that the Race is not to the swift, nor the Victory to the strong,
nor Riches to men of understanding, Eccles. 9.11.

Therefore it convinces us, that our lives, and all being in his hand, it is
our wisdom to make it our chiefest care to use all so as is most pleasing unto
him, 2 Cor. 5.8. It foreseeth also the day of Judgment, and teaches us to use
our prosperity and wealth, as we desire to hear of it in the day of our
accounts. Faith is a provident and a vigilant grace; and uses to ask when we
have any thing in may possession, which way I make the best advantage of it for
my soul? which way will be most comfortable to me in my last review? how shall
I wish that I had used my time, my wealth, my power, when time is at an end,
and all these transitory things are vanished?

6. And Faith does so absolutely devote and subject the soul to God, that it
will suffer us to do nothing (so far as it prevails) but what is for him, and
by his consent. It tells us that we are not our own, but his; and that we
have nothing but what we have received: and that we must be just in giving God
his own: and therefore it first asks, which way may I best serve and honor
God with all that he has given me? Not only with my substance, and the first
fruits of mine increase, but with all, 1 Cor. 10.31. When Love and devotion
has delivered up our selves entirely to God, it keeps nothing back, but
delivers him all things with our selves; even as Christ with himself does
give us all things, Romans 8.32. And Faith does so much subject the soul to God,
that it makes us like servants and children, that use not their Masters or
Parents goods at their own pleasure; but ask him first, how he would have us
use them, Lord, what would thou have me to do? is one of the first words of a
converted soul, Acts 9.6. In a word, Faith writes out that charge upon the
heart, 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world
(the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life.) For if any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Ye cannot serve God
and Mammon.

But on this subject Mr. Alleine has said so much in his excellent Book of the
Victory of Faith over the world, that I shall at this time say no more.

The Directions which I would give you in general, for preservation from the
danger of prosperity by Faith, are these that follow.

Direct. 1. Remember still that the common cause of men's damnation is their
Love of this world more than God and Heaven, and that the world cannot undo you
any other way, but by tempting you to over-love it, and to undervalue higher
things: And therefore that is the most dangerous condition, which makes the
world seem most pleasing, and most lovely to us. And can you believe this, and
yet be so eager to be humoured, and to have all things fitted to your pleasure
and desires? Mark here what a task Faith has? and mark what the work of
self-denial is? The worldling must be pleased; the Believer must be saved. The
worldling must have his flesh and fancy gratified: the Believer must have
Heaven secured, and God obeyed. Men sell not their souls for sorrow, but for
mirth: They forsake not Heaven for poverty, but for riches: they turn not away
from God for the love of sufferings and dishonor, but for the love of
pleasure* preferments, dignities and estimation in the world. And is that state
better and more desirable, for which all that perish turn from God, and fell
their souls, and are befooled and undone for ever? Or that which no man ever
sinned for, nor forsook God for, or was undone for? Read over this question
once and again, and mark what answer your hearts give to it, if you would know
whether you live by sense or faith? And mark what contrary answers the flesh
and faith will give to it, when it comes to practice? I say, though many sin in
poverty, and in sufferings, and in disgrace, yea and by occasion of them, and
by their temptations, yet no man ever sinned for them: They are none of the
bait that straled away the heart from God. Set deep upon your heart, the sense
of the danger of a prosperous state, and sear and vigilance will help to save
you.

Direct. 2. Imprint upon your memory the characters of this deadly sin of
worldliness, that so you may not perish by it, whilst you dream that you are
free from it; but may alw^ies see how far it does prevail. Here therefore to
help you, I will set before you the characters of this sin; and I will but
briefly name them, lest I be tedious, because they are many.

1. The great mark of damning worldliness is, when God and Heaven are not loved
and preferred before the pleasures, and profits, and honors of the world.

2. Another is, when the world is esteemed and used more for the service and
pleasure of the flesh, than to honor God, and to do good with, and to further
our salvation: When men desire great places, and riches, more to please their
appetites and carnal minds with, than to benefit others, or to serve the Lord
with; when they are not rich to God, but to themselves, Luke 12.20, 21.

3. It is a mark of some degree of worldliness, to desire a greater measure of
riches or honor, than our spiritual work, and ends, and benefit do require:
For when we are convinced that less is as good or better to our highest ends,
and yet we would have more; it is a sign that the rest is desired for the
flesh, Romans 13.14. and 8.8, 9, 10, 13.

4. When our desires after worldly things are too eager and violent: when we
must needs have them, and cannot be without them, 1 Timothy 6.9.

5. When our contrivances for the world are too sol^icitous; and our cares for
it take up an undue proportion of our time, Mat. 6.24, 25. to the end.

6. When we are impatient under want, dishonor, or disappointments, and live
in trouble and discontent, if we want much, or have not our wills.

7. When the thoughts of the world are proportionably so many more than our
thoughts of Heaven, and our salvation, that they keep us in the neglect of the
duty of Meditation, and keep empty our minds of holy things, Mat. 6.21.

8. When it turns our talk all toward the world, or takes up our freest,
and our sweetest and most serious words, and leaves us to the use of seldom,
dull, or formal, or affected words, about the things which should profit the
soul, and glorify our great Creator.

9. When the world incroacheth upon Gods part in our families, and thrusts out
prayer, or the reading of the Scriptures, or the due instruction of children or
servants: when it comes in upon the Lords day; when it is intruding in Gods
Worship, and at Sermon or Prayer our thoughts are more pleasingly running out
after some worldly thing, than kept in attendance upon God, Ezekiel. 33*31.

10. When worldly prosperity is so sweet to you, that it can keep you quiet
under the guilt of wilful sin, and in the midst of all the dangers of your
souls. Because you have your hearts desire a while, you can forget eternity, or
bear those thoughts of it with security, which otherwise would amaze your
souls, Luke 12.19, 20.

11. When the peace and pleasure which you daily live upon, is fetched more from
the world, than from God and Heaven; so that if at any time you ask your selves
the true reason of your peace, and whence it is that you rise and lie down in
quietness of mind, your consciences must tell you, it is not so much from your
belief of the Love of God in Christ, nor from your hope to live in Heaven for
ever, as because you feel your self well in body, and live at ease and
prosperity in the world: And when any mirth or joy possesses you, you may
easily feel, that it is more from something which is grateful to your flesh,
than from the belief of everlasting glory.

12. When you think too highly and pleasingly of the condition of the rich, and
too meanly of the state of poor Believers: when you make too great a difference
between the rich and the poor, and say to the man with the gold Ring, and the
gay Apparel, Come up hither, and to the poor, Sit there at my footstool, James
4. and 5. When you had rather be made like the rich and honorable in the
world, than like the poor that are more holy; and think with more delight of
being like Lords or Great men in the world, than of being more like to humble
heavenly Believers.

13. When you are at the heart more thankful to one that gives you lands or
money, than to God for giving you Christ and the Scriptures, and the Means of
Grace: and would be better pleased if you were advanced or enriched by the
King, than to think of being sanctified by the Spirit of Christ. And when you
give God himself more hearty thanks for worldly than for spiritual things.

14. When you make too much ado for the things of the world; and labor for
them with inordinate industry; or plunge your selves into unnecessary business,
as one that can never have or do enough.

15. When you are too much in expecting liberality, kindnesses and gifts from
others; and are too much pleased in it; and grudge at all that goes beside
you; and think that it is men's duty to mind all your concernments, and further
your commodity more than other men's.

16. When you are selfish and partial about worldly interest, and have little
sense of your neighbors concernments in comparison of your own. If one give
never so liberally to many others, and give nothing to you, it does never the
more content you, nor reconcile your mind to the charity of the giver. If one
give to you, and pass by many that have more need, you love and honor the
bounty which satisfies your own desires. If you sell dear, you rejoice; and if
you buy cheap, you are glad of your good bargain, though perhaps the seller be
poorer than you. He that wrongeth you, or any way hinders your commodity, is
always a bad man in your esteem: No virtue will save him from your censures
and reproach: But he that deals as hardly by your neighbor, and well with
you, is a very honest man, and worthy of your praise.

17. When you are quarrelsome for worldly thing, and the love of them can at
any time break your charity and peace, and make an enemy of your nearest
friend; or engage you in causless Lawsuits and contentions. What abundance
does the world set together by the ears?

18. When you can see your poor brother or neighbor in want, and shut up the
bowels of your compassion from him; and do little good with what God has given
you, but the flesh and self devoureth all.

19. When you will venture upon unlawful ways of getting; or will sin for
honor or commodity; or at least will let go your innocence and conscience,
rather than lose your prosperity in the world; and will distinguish your selves
out of every danger, or costly duty, or suffering for righteousness sake; and
will prove every thing lawful, which seems necessary to the prosperity and
safety of the flesh.

20. When you are more careful to provide riches and honors for your children
after you, than to save them from worldliness, voluptuousness and pride, and to
bring them up to be the heirs of Heaven: and had rather venture their souls in
the most dangerous temptations, than abate any of their plenty or grandeur in
the world.

These be the plain marks of worldly minds, whatever a blinded heart may devise
to hide them.

Direct. 3. Take heed of those blinding pretenses which worldly minds do
commonly use, to flatter, deceive and undo themselves. For instance.

1. The most common pretense is [ That Gods creatures are good, and prosperity
is his blessing, and that our bodies must be cherished, and that synical and
eremetical extremes and austerities, are far from the genius of true
Christianity.

There is truth in all this, or else it would not be so fit to be made a cloak
for sin by misapplication. The world and all Gods works are good; and to the
pure they are pure: to the sanctified they are sanctified; that is, they are
devoted to the service of God, and used for him from whom they come: God has
given us nothing which may not be used for his service, and our salvation. No
doubt but you may make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, to further
your reception into the everlasting habitations: You may lay up a good
foundation for the time to come; and you may sow to the Spirit, and reap in the
end everlasting life, Gal. 6. You may provide you bags that wax not old: you
may please God by the sacrifices of distributing and communicating, Heb. 13.
But yet I must tell you, the world and all Gods creatures in it, are too good
to be sacrificed to the flesh, and to the Devil; and not good enough to be
loved and preferred before God, and your innocence and salvation.

The body must be cherished, but yet the flesh must be subdued; and if you live
after it, you shall die. Health and alacrity must be preserved, because they
make you fit for duty; but wanton appetites must be restrained, and no
provision must be made for the flesh, to satisfy its lusts (or wills) Romans
13.14. It must be cherished as your horse or servant for his work; but it must
not be pampered, and made unruly, or your Master. You may seek food for your
necessity and use; and ask of God your daily bread ( Matthew. 6. Psalm. 145.) but
you may not with the Israelites, ask meat for your lust, as being weary of
eating Manna so long, Psalm. 78. Hurting your health by useless austerities, is
not pleasing unto God: But sensuality and flesh-pleasing, and love of the
world, is nevertheless abominable in his sight.

Object. 2. Necessity makes me mind the world: I have children to maintain, and
am in debt, and cannot pay every one his own.

Answ. Whether you have necessity or not, you ought to labor faithfully in
your callings. But no necessity will excuse your worldly love and cares: What
will the love of the world do toward the supply of your necessities? or what
will your eager desires, and your cares do, more than the labors and quiet
forecast of one that has a contented patient mind? Surely in reason, the less
you have in the world, and the harder your condi^ion is, the less you should
love it, and the more you should abound in care and diligence, to make sure of
a better world hereafter.

Object. 3. I covet no man's but my own.

Answ. 1. Why then are you so glad of good bargains, or of gifts? 2. But what
if you do not? You covet to have more to be your own, than God allotteth you?
Perhaps you have already as much as your flesh knows what to do with; and
therefore need not covet more. But will this excuse you for loving your riches
more than God? The question is not now, what you covet, but what you love. If
the world has your hearts, the Devil has your lives; for it is by the world
that he deceives souls: And do you think then that you are fit to dwell with
God? Know ye not that the love of the world, is enmity to God? And that if ye
will be friends of the world, you are Gods enemies? James 4.4.

Object. 4. It is not by any unlawful means that I desire to gr^w rich: I wait
on God in my lawful labor, and crave his blessing.

Answ. It is not now your getting, but your loving the world that I am speaking
of: If your hearts be more set on your riches or prosperity, than on God, and
the world by loving it be made your Idol, you do but turn prayer and labor
into sin, (though they be good in themselves) while you abuse them to your
ungodly worldly ends.

What wretched muck-worm would not pray, if he believed that praying would make
him rich? I warrant you then their tune would be turned. They would not cry
out, what needs all this praying? If God would give them money for the
asking, they would quickly learn to pray without Book, and long prayers would
come into request, upon the Pharisees old account. Can any thing in the world
be more unlawful and abominable, than to love the flesh and the world, above
God and Heaven? And yet do you say that you get not your wealth by any thing
that is unlawful?

Object. 5. But I am contented with my condition, and desire no more.

Answ. So is a Swine when his b^lly is full. But the question is, Whether
Heaven and Holiness, or that worldly condition which you are in seem more
lovely to you.

O^ject. 6. I give God thanks for all I have.

Answ. So would every beggar in the Country give God thanks if he would make
them rich. Some drunkards and gluttons, and some malicious people, do give God
thanks for satisfying their sinful lusts. This is but adding hypocrisy to your
sin, and to aggravate it by profaning the Name of God, by thanking him as a
cherisher of your lusts. But the question is, whether you love God for himself,
and as your sanctifier better than you do the gratifying of your flesh?

Obj. 7. But I give something to the poor, and I mean to leave them something
at my death.

Ans. So it is like the miserable Gentleman did, in Luke 16. Or else why would
Lazarus lie at his gates, if he used not to give something to the poor? What
worldling or hypocrite is there that will not drop now and then an Alms, while
he pampereth his flesh, and satisfies its desires? Do you look to be saved for
doing as a Swine will do, in leaving that which he can neither eat, nor carry
away with him? The question is, whether God or the world have your hearts? and
what it is that you most delight in as your treasure?

Object. 8. I am fully satisfied that Heaven is better than Earth, and God than
the creature, and holiness than the prosperity or pleasure of the flesh?

Answ. Thousands of miserable worldlings, are satisfied in opinion that this is
true: They can say the same words that a true Believer does: And in dispute
they can defend them, and call the contrary opinion blasphemy. But all this is
but a dreaming speculation: Their hearts never practically preferred God, and
Holiness, and Heaven, as most suitable and best for them: Mark what you love
best, and most long after, and most delight in, and what it is that you are
lothest to leave, and what it is that you most eagerly labor for, and there
you may see what it is that has your hearts?

Object. 9. Worldliness is indeed a heinous sin, and of all people, I most hate
the covetous; and I use to preach or talk against it, more than against any sin.

Answ. So do many thousands that are slaves to it themselves, and shall be
damned for it. It is easier to talk against it, than to forsake it. And it is
easy to hate covetousness in another, because it will cost you nothing for
another to forsake his sin; and perhaps the more covetous he is, the more he
stands in your way, and hinders you from that which you would have your
selves. Of all the multitude of covetous Preachers that be in the world, is
there any one that will not preach against covetousness? Read but the Lives of
Cardinals, and Popes, and Popish Prelates, and you will see the most odious
worldliness set forth without any kind of cloak or shame: How such a one laid
his design at Court, and among the great ones for preferment? How studiously he
prosecuted it, and conformed himself to the humors and interest of those, from
whom he did seek it? How they first got this Living, and then got that
Prebendary, and then got that Denary, and then got such a Bishopric, and then
got a better (that is a richer) and then got to be Archbishops, and then to be
Cardinals, etc. O happy progress, if they might never die! They blush not
openly before Angels and men to own this worldly ambitious course, as their
design and trade of life: And the Devil is grown so impudent, as if he were now
the confessed Master of the world, as to set Divines themselves at work, to
write the history of such cursed ambitious worldly lives, with open applause,
and great commendations; yea to make Saints of them, that have a character far
worse than Christ gave of him in Luke 16. that wants a drop of water to cool
his tongue: He openly now says, All this will I give thee; and they as
impudently boast, All this I have gotten: but they forget or know not how much
they have lost. A Juda^ kiss is thought sufficient to prove him a true
Christian and Pastor of the Church, though it be but the fruit of what will you
give me? Instead of a scourge to whip out these buyers and sellers from Christ's
Temple, their merchandise is exposed without shame, and their signs set forth,
and the trade of getting preferments openly professed, and it is enough to wipe
off all the shame, to put some venerable titles upon this Den of thieves. But
the Lord whom we wait for, will once more come and cleanse his Temple: But who
may abide the day of his coming? for he is like a refiners fire, and like
fullers s^pe, and will thoroughly purge the Sons of Levi, Mal. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.

If talking against worldliness, would prove that the world is overcome, and
that God is dearest to the soul, then Preachers will be the happiest men on
earth. But it is easier to commend God, than to love him above all; and easier
to cry out against the world, than to have a heart that is truly weaned from
it, and set upon a better world.

Object. 10. But all this belongs only to them that are in prosperity; but I
am poor, and therefore it is nothing to me.

Answ. Many a one loves prosperity, that has it not: And such are doubly
sinful, that will love a world which loves not them: Even a world of poverty,
misery and distress. Something you would have done, if you had had a full
estate, and honor, and fleshly delights to love. Nay, many poor men think
better of riches and honor, than those that have them; because they never
tried how vain and vexatious they are; and if they had tried them, perhaps
would love them less. The world is but a painted Strumpet; admired afar off;
but the nearer you come to it, and the more it is known, the worse you will like
it. Is it by your own desire that you are poor? or is it against your wills?
Had you not rather be as great and rich as others? Had you not rather live at
ease and fullness? And do you think God will love you ever the better, for that
which is against your wills? Will he count that man to be no worldling, that
would fain have more of the world, and cannot? and that loves God and Heaven
no better than the rich? Nay, that will sin for a shilling, when great ones do
it for greater sums? who can be more unfit for Heaven, than he that loves a
life of labor, and want, and misery better? Alas it is but little that the
greatest worldlings have for their salvation: But poor worldlings sell it for
less than they, and therefore do despise it more.

Direct. 4. Let the true nature and aggravations of the sin of worldliness, be
still in your eye to make it odious to you. As for instance:

1. It is true and odious Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5. To have God for our
God indeed, is to love him as our God, and to delight in him, and be ruled by
him. Who then is an Idolater, if he be not one, who loves the world, and
delights in it more than in God, or esteems it fitter to be the matter of
his delight? and is ruled by it, and seeks it more? Isa. 55.1, 2, 3.

2. It is a blasphemous contempt of God and Heaven, to prefer a dung hill world
before him: To set more by the provisions and pleasures of the flesh, than by
all the blessedness of Heaven: It is called profaneness in Esau, to sell his
birthright for one morsel, Heb. 12.16. What profaneness is it then to say, as
worldlings hearts and lives do, The satisfying of my flesh and fancy for a
time, is better than God and the Joys of Heaven to all eternity.

3. It is a sin of Interest, and not only of Passion; and therefore it
possesses the very Heart and Love, which is the principal faculty of the soul,
and that which God most reserveth for himself. No actual sin, which is but
little loved, is so heinous and mor^al, as that which is most loved. Because
these do must exclude the Love of God. Some other sins may do more hurt to
others, but this is worst to the sinner himself. We justly pity poor
Heathenish Idolaters, and pray for their conversion (and I would we did it
more.) But do not you not think that our hypocrite-worldlings, do love their
riches, and their honors and pleasures, better than the poor Heathens love
their Idols? They bow the knee to a creature, and you entertain it in your
heart.

4. It is a sin of deliberation and contrivance, which is much worse than a
surprise by a sudden temptation. You plot how you may compass your voluptuous,
covetous and ambitious ends: Therefore it is a sin that stands at the
furthest distance from Repentance, and is both voluntary, and a settled habit.

5. It is a continued sin. Men be not always lying, though they be never so
great liars; nor always stealing, if they be the most notorious thieves; nor
always swearing, if they be the profanest swearers. But a worldly mind is
always worldly: He is always committing his Idolatry with the world, and
always denying his Love to God.

6. It is not only a sin about the means to a right end (as mischosen ways of
Religion may be) but it is a sin against the End it self, and a mischusing of a
false pernicious End. And so it is the perverting, not only of one particular
action, but even of the bent and course of men's lives: And consequently a
mis-spending all their time.

7. It is a perverting of Gods creatures, to a use clean contrary to that which
they are given us for; and an unthankful turning of all his gifts against
himself. He gave us his creatures to lead us to him, and by their loveliness to
show his greater loveliness, and to taste in their sweetness, the greater
sweetness of his love. And will you use them to turn your affections from him?

8. It it a great debasing of the soul it self, to fill that noble Spirit with
nothing but dirt and smoke, which was made to know and love its God.

9. It is an irrational vice, and signifies not only much unbelief of the
unseen things which should take up the soul; but also a sottish
inconsiderateness, of the vanity and brevity of the things below. It is an
unmanning our selves, and hiring out our reason to be a servant to our fleshly
lusts.

10. Lastly, It is a pregnant multiplying sin; which brings forth abundance
more: The love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Therefore

Direct. 5. Let the mischievous effects of this sin, be still before your eyes.
As for instance.

1. It keeps the heart strange to God and Heaven. The Love of God and of the
world are contrary, 1 John 2.15. and 3.17 James 4.4. So is an earthly and a
heavenly conversation, Phil. 3.18, 19, 20. And the laying up a treasure in
Heaven and upon Earth, Matthew. 6.19, 20, 21. And the living after the flesh, and
after the Spirit, Romans 8.1, 5, 6, 13. Ye cannot possibly serve God and Mammon;
nor travel two contrary ways at once; nor have two contrary felicities, till
you have two hearts.

2. It sets you at enmity with God and holiness; because God controlleth and
condemns your beloved lusts: and because it is contrary to the carnal things
which have your hearts*

2. By this means it makes men malignant enemies of the godly, and persecutors
of them; because they are of contrary minds and ways. As then, he that was
born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it
is now, Gal. 4.29. The world cannot love us, because we are not of the world,
John 15.19, 20. Pride, covetousness and sensuality, are the matter which the
burning Fever lodges in, which has consumed so much of the Church of Christ.

4. It is the sin that has corrupted the sacred Office of the Ministry
throughout most of the Christian Churches in the world: And thereby caused both
the Schisms and Cruelties, and the decay of serious godliness among them, which
is their present deplorable case. Ignorant persons are like sick men in a
Fever: They lay the blame on this and that, and commonly on that which went
next before the paroxism; and know not the true cause of the disease: We are
all troubled (or should be) to see the many minds, the many ways, the confused
state of the Christian Churches, and to hear them cry out against each other.
And one lays the blame on this party or opinion, and another on that: But
when we come to our selves, we shall find that it is, The worldly mind that
causes our calamity. Many well meaning friends of the Church do think how
dishonorable it is to the Ministry, to be poor and low, and consequently
despicable; and what an advantage is it to their work, to be able to relieve
the poor, and rather to oblige the people, than to depend upon them, and to be
above them, rather than below them. And supposing the Pastors to be mortified,
holy, heavenly men, all this is true; and the zeal of these thoughts is worthy
of commendation. But that which good men intend for good, has become the
Churches bane. So certain is the common saying, that Constantines zeal did
poison the Church, by lifting up the Pastors of it too high, and occasioning
those contentions for grandeur and precedence, which to this day separate the
East and West. When well-meaning Piety has adorned the office with wealth and
honor, it is as true as that the Sun shines, that the most proud, ambitious,
worldly men, will be the most studious seekers of that office; and will make it
their plot, and trade, and business, how by friends, and observances, and
wills, to attain their ends: And usually he that seeks shall find: when in the
mean time the godly mortified humble man, will not do so; but will serve God in
the state to which he is clearly called: And consequently, except it be under
the Government of an admirably wise and holy Ruler, a worthy Pastor in such a
wealthy station, will be a singular thing, and a rarity of the age; whilst
worldly men, whose hearts are habited with that which is utterly contrary to
holiness, and contrary to the very ends and work of their own office, will be
the men that must sit in Moses Chair; that must have the doing and ruling of
the work which their hearts are set against. And how it will go with the Church
of Christ, when the Gospel is to be preached, and Preachers chosen, and
Godliness promoted by the secret enemies of it; and when ambiti^us, fleshly,
worldly men, are they that must cure the peoples souls (under Christ) of the
love of the flesh, and the world, it were easy to prognosticate from the
causes, if the Christian world could not tell by the effects: so that, except
by the wonderful Piety of Princes -- there is no visible way in the eye of
reason, to recover the miserable Churches, but to retrive the Pastoral Office
into such a state, as that it may be no bait to a worldly mind, but may be
desired and chosen purely upon heavenly accounts: And then the richer the
Pastors are, the better; when they are the Sons of Nobles, whose Piety brings
with them their honor, and their wealth, to serve God and his Church with, and
they do not find it there to be their end or inducement to the work: But
instead of invitations or encouragements to pride and carnal minds, there may
be only so much as may not deter or drive away candidates from the sacred
Function.

5. Worldliness is a sin, which makes the Word of God unprofitable, Mat.
13.22. John 12.43. Ezekiel. 33.31. prepossessing the heart, and resisting that
Gospel which would extirpate it.

6. It hinders Prayer, by corrupting men's desires, and by intruding worldly
thoughts.

7. It hinders all holy Meditation, by turning both the heart and thoughts
another way.

8. It dries up all heavenly profitable Conference, whilst the world does fill
both mind and mouth.

9. It is a great profaner of the Lords Day, distracting men's minds, and
alienating them from God.

10. It is a murderous enemy of Love to one another: All worldly men being so
much for themselves, that they are seldom hearty friends to any other.

11. Yea it makes men false and unrighteous in their dealings: There being no
trust to be put in a worldly man any further than you are sure you suit his
interest.

12. It is the great cause of discord and divisions in the world: It sets
Families, Neighbors and Kingdoms together by the ears; and sets the Nations
of the earth in bloody wars, to the calamity and destruction of each other.

13. It causes cheating, stealing, robbing, oppressions, cruelties, lying,
false-witnessing, perjury, murders, and many such other sins.

14. It makes men unfit to suffer for Christ, because they love the world
above him: and consequently it makes them as Apostates to forsake him in a
time of trial.

15. It is a great devourer of precious time: That short life which should be
spent in preparing for eternity, is almost all spent in drudging for the world.

16. Lastly, It greatly unfitteth men to die* and makes them loath to leave the
world: And no wonder when there is no entertainment for worldlings, in any
better place hereafter.

Direct. 6. If you would be saved from the world, and the snares of prosperity,
foresee death, and judge of the world (...) it will appear and use you at the
last. Dream not of long life: He that looks to stay but a little while in the
world, will be the less careful of his provisions in it. A little will serve
for a little t^me. The grave is a sufficient disgrace to all the vanities on
earth, though there must be more to raise the heart to Heaven.

Direct. 7. M^rtifie the flesh, and you overcome the world. Cure the thirsty
disease, and you will need none of the worldlings ways to satisfy it. When
the flesh is mastered, there it no use for plenty, or pleasures, or honors, to
satisfy its lusts: Your daily bread to fit you for your work, will then
suffice.

Direct. 8. But it is the lively belief of endless Glory, and the Love of God
prevailing in the soul, that must work the cure. Nothing below a Life of Faith,
and a heavenly mind and conversation, and the Love of God, will ever well cure
a sensual life, and an earthly mind and conversation, and the love of the world.

Direct. 9. Turn away from the bait: desire not to have your estate, your
dwelling, etc. too pleasing to your flesh and fancy. Remember that it kills
by pleasing, rather than by seeming unlovely and displeasing.

Direct. 10. Turn Satan's temptations to worldliness against himself. When he
tempts you to covetousness give more to the poor than else you would have
done. When he tempts you to pride and ambition, let your conversation show
more aversation to pride than you did before. If he tempt you to waste your
time in fleshly vanities, or sports, work harder in your calling, and spend
more time in better things; and thus try to weary out the tempter.

Direct. 11. Take heed of the Hypocrites designs, which is to unite Religion
and worldliness, and to reconcile God and Mammon; and to secure the flesh and
its prosperity here, and yet to save the soul hereafter. For all such hopes are
mere deceits.

Direct. 12. Improve your prosperity to its proper ends. Devore all entirely
and absolutely to God; and so it will be saved from loss, and you from deceit
and condemnation.

CHAP. XV. How to be poor in spirit. And how to escape the pride of Prosperity.
THough no man is saved or condemned for being either rich or poor; yet it is
not for nothing that Christ has so often set before us the danger of the rich,
and the extraordinary difficulty of their salvation: And that he began his
Sermon, Mat. 5.3. with, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. The sense of which words, is not as is commonly imagined, [
Blessed are they that find their want of grace.] For 1. So may a despairing
person. 2. The text compared with Luke 16. where simply the poor and rich are
opposed, does plainly show another sense; agreeing with the usual doctrine of
Christ. And whereas Expositors doubt whether Christ spoke that Sermon to his
Disciples, or to the multitude, the text makes it plain, that he spoke it to
both, viz. that he called his Disciples to him, and as it were pointed the
finger at them, and made them his text on which he preached to the multitude;
and the sense is contained in these Propositions; as if he had said [ See you
these followers of me: You take them to be contemptible or unhappy, because
they are poor in the world; but I tell you, 1. That poverty makes not
Believers miserable: 2. Yea they are the truly belssed men, because they shall
have the heavenly riches: 3. And the evidence of their right to that, is, that
they are poor in spirit, that is, their hearts are suited to a low estate, and
are saved from the destructive vices of riches and prosperity. 1. And their
outward poverty is better suited and conducible to this deliverance, and this
poverty of spirit, than a state of wealth and prosperity is.] All these four
Propositions are the true meaning of the text.

That we may see here what is the special work of Faith, we must know which are
the special sins of prosperity, which riches and honors occasion in the world.
And though the Apostle tell us, 1 Timothy 6.10. that the love of money is the root
of all evil, I will confine my discourse to that narrower compass, in the
enumeration of the sins of Sodom, in Ez^k. 16.49. PRIDE, FVLNESS of bread,
IDLENESS: And of these but briefly, because I have spoken more largely of them
elsewhere (in my Christian Directory.)

And first of the Pride of the rich and prosperous.

PRIDE is a sin of so deep radication, and so powerful in the hearts of carnal
men, that it will take advantage of any condition, but Riches and Prosperity
are its most notable advantage. As the boat rises with the water; so do such
hearts rise with their estates. Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge the rich that they be not high minded. High-mindedness is the sin that
you are first here to avoid. In order whereunto I shall give you now but these
three general Directions.

Direct. 1. Observe the masks or covers of High-mindedness or Pride, lest it
reign in you unknown. For it has many covers, by which it is concealed from
the souls that are infected, if not undone and miserable by it.

For instance: 1. Some think that they are not Proud, because that their parts
and worth will bear out all the estimation which they have of themselves. And
he that thinks of himself but as he really is, being in the right, is not to
be accounted proud.

But remember that the first act of Pride is the overvaluing of our selves: And
he that is once guilty of this first act, will justify himself both in it, and
all that follow. So that Pride is a sin which blinds the understanding, and
defends it self by it self, and powerfully keeps off repentance. When once
a man has entertained a conceit, that he is wiser or better than indeed he is,
he then thinks that all his thoughts, and words, and actions, which are of
that signification, are just, and sober, because the thing is so indeed. And
for a man to deny Gods graces, or gifts, and make himself seem worse than he
is, is not true humility, but dissimulation or ingratitude.

But herein you have great cause to be very careful, lest you should prove
mistaken: Therefore 1. Judge not of your selves by the by as of self-love; but,
if it be possible, lay by partiality, and judge of your selves as you do by
others, upon the like evidences. 2. Hearken what other men judge of you, who
are impartial and wise, and are near you, and thoroughly acquainted with your
lives. It Is possible they may think better or worse of you than you are: but if
they judge worse of you, than you do of your selves, it should stop your
confidence, and make you the more suspicious, and careful to try left you
should be mistaken.

2. And remember also that you are obliged to a greater modesty in judging of
your own virtues, and to a greater severity in judging of your own faults, than
of other men's; though you must not wilfully err about your selves, or any
others, yet you are not bound to search out the truth about the faults of
another, as you are about your own. We are commanded to prefer one another in
honor, Romans 10.21. And verse. 3. For I say, through the grace given to me, to
every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly, than be ought
to think; but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of Faith.

2 Another cloak for Pride is, the Reputation of our Religion, Profession or
Party, which will seem to be disgraced by us, if we seem not to be some what
better than we are. If we should not hide or extenuate our faults, and set out
our graces and parts to the full, we should be a dishonor to Christ, and to
his servants, and his cause.

But remember 1. That the way by which God has appointed you to honor him,
is, by being good, and living well, and not by seeming to be good, when you are
not, or seeming better than you are: The God of Truth, who hates Hypocrisy,
has not chosen lying and hypocrisy to be the means by which we must seek his
honor It is damnable to seek to glorify him by a lie, Romans 3.7.8. We must
indeed cause our light so to shine before men that they may see our good works,
and glorify our heavenly Father, Mat. 5.16. But it is the light of Sincerity
and good Works, and not of a dissembled Profession that must so shine.

2. And the Goodness of the pretended end does greatly aggravate the crime: As
if the honor of God and our Religion must be upheld, by so devilish a means as
proud Hypocrisy.

3. And, though it be true, that a man is not imprudently without just cause,
to open his sins before the world; when it is like to tend to the injury of
Religion, and any way to do more hurt than good: yet it is as true, that when
there is no such impediment, true repentance is forward to confess, and when
the fault is discovered, defending and extenuating it, is then the greatest
dishonor to Religion. (As if you would father all on Christ, and make men
believe that he will justify or extenuate sin as you do.) And then it is a
free self-abasing confession, and taking all the shame to your selves (with
future reformation) which is the reparation which you must make of the honor
of Religion. For what greater dishonor can be cast upon Religion, than to make
it seem a friend to sin? Or what greater honor can be given it, than to
represent it as it is, as an enemy to all evil; and to take the blame, as is
due, unto your selves?

3. Another cloak for Pride, is the Reputation of our offices, dignities and
places. We must live according to our rank and quality: All men must not live
alike. The grandeur of Rulers must be maintained, or else the Magistracy will
fall into contempt. The Pastors Office must not by a mean estate, and low
deportment, be exposed to the peoples scorn. And so abundance of the most
ambitious practices, and hateful enormities of the proud, must be veiled by
these fair pretenses.

Answ. 1. We grant you that the honor of Magistrates must be kept up by a
convenient grandeur; and that a competent distance is necessary to a due
reverence: But Goodness is as necessary an ingredient in Government, as
Greatness is; and to be great in Wisdom and Goodness, is the principal
Greatness: And Goodness is Loving, and humble, and condescending, and suiteth
all deportments to the common good, which is the end of Government. See then
that you keep up no other height, but that which really tends to the success
of your endeavors, in order to the common good.

2. And look also to your hearts, lest it be your own exaltation which you
indeed intend, while you thus pretend the honor of your office: For this is an
ordinary trick of pride. To discover this, will you ask your selves these
Questions following?

Quest. 1. How you came into your offices and honors? did they seek you, or
did you seek them? did the place need you, or did you need the place? If pride
brought you in, you have cause to fear, lest it govern you when you are there?

Quest. 2. What do you in the place of honor that you are in? Do you study to
do all the good you can, and to make men happy by your Government? and is this
the labor of your lives? if it be, we may hope that the means is suited to
this end. But if you do no such thing, you have no such end: And if you have no
such end, you do but dissemble, in pretending that your grandeur is used but as
a means to that end which really you never seek. It is then your own exaltation
that you aim at, and it is your pride that plays all your game.

Quest. 3. Are you more offended and grieved when you are crossed and hindered in
doing good, or when you are crossed and hindered from your personal honor?

Quest. 4. Are you well contented that another should have your honor and
preferment, if God and the Sovereign Power so dispose of it, so be it, it be
one that is like to do more good than you?

By these Q^estions you may quickly see if you are willing, whether your
grandeur be desired by your pride for self-advancement, or by Christian
prudence to do good.

3. And I must tell you, that there is abundance of difference betwixt the case
of the Civil Magistrates, and the Pastors of the Church in this. Magistracy
must have more fear and pomp: But Pastors must govern by Light and Love: When
his Apostles strove for superiority, Christ left a decision of the controversy
for the use of all following ages. It is the contempt of the world, and the
mortifying of the flesh, and self-denial, that Pastors have to teach the
people, and withal to seek a heavenly treasure: And will not their own example
further the success of their Doctrine? The reverence that a Pastor must expect,
is not to be feared as one that can do hurt (For all coertion or corporal force
is proper to the Magistrate:) but it is to be thought one that is above all the
riches and pleasures of the world, and has set his heart on higher things:
Such a one therefore he must both be and seem. A Pastor will be but the sooner
despised, if he look after that riches and worldly pomp, which is seemly for a
Magistrate: If he have a sword in his hand, it is the way to be hated: If he
have teeth that are bloody, or claws that can tear, he will be accounted a
wolf, though he have the clothing of a sheep. See Dr. ^ Stillingfleet of
Satisfaction on this point.
When our Divines give the reason of Christ's humiliation, they say, that if he
had preached up heavenly-mindedness, self-denial, and mortification, and had
himself lived in pomp and fullness, the people would not have regarded his
words: And surely the same reason holds in some measure as to all his
Ministers. Again, I say, that if ever the Church be universally reformed, the
Pastoral office must be only encouraged with necessary support, to keep the
Pastors from despondency, and distracting cares; but it must not be made a bait
of ambition, covetousness or sloth; but must be stripped of that which makes it
thus desirable to a carnal mind. Otherwise we must expect, that except when
Princes are very holy, the Churches be ordinarily guided by carnal and ungodly
men; who will do it according to their minds and interest. All the world cannot
answer the reason of this: which is, Honors and wealth will be certainly
sought with greatest industry by the worldly, that is, the worst of men: and
not by the heavenly mortified persons: And they that seek shall usually find:
And so while the humble, holy person stays till he is called, and the proud
and worldly, who have the keenest appetite, use all their art and friends to
rise, the conclusion is as sure as sad, and has been so proved by woeful
experience almost 1300 years.

4. Another of Prides pretenses is Decency, and the avoiding of reproach and
scorn: If we live not as high as others, we shall be derided or contemned; or
thought to be sordid, beggarly or base.

Answ. 1. This is one of the signs and effects of Pride, that it makes a
greater matter of other men's thoughts of you, than you ought to make: It cannot
bear contempt and scorn so easily as Humility can do: Too careful avoiding of
contempt, is the proper work of Pride. 2. It is granted that you should not be
contemptuous of your just reputation; and also that you must not by any
causless affected singularity, or by any practice which is indeed uncomely,
make your selves the scorn of others. But it is as true that you must not
desire a higher estimation than is really your due; nor yet be over solicitous
for that which is your due indeed; nor must you follow the proud in any thing
which is contrary to true humility, for the keeping of their good report, nor
go above your rank to avoid contempt. 3. And forget not whose good word it is
that you should especially regard: Your truest honor is in the esteem of God,
and all good men, and not in the opinion or praises of the proud. They that are
addicted to this vice themselves, perhaps may deride those that go below them
(and yet they will more envy those that go above them:) But the humble will
think much better of you for being humble, and nothing can make you viler in
their eyes than Pride. If you were humble your selves, you would prefer your
honor with humble, wise and sober persons, above the opinions of the proud,
who know not good from evil.

5. Another cloak of Pride is opinionative and doctrinal Humility: When we have
heard and read much against Pride, and can speak (or preach) against it, as
freely, and fluently, and vehemently, and movingly, as any others; and in all
company and conference signify our dislike of it; when we are much in
dissuading others from it, and in extolling humility, and lowliness of mind;
this does not only deceive others, but very often the speaker himself; and
makes him think that he has no great degree of Pride.

But speculation, and opinion, and talk, are one thing, and a renewed truly
humble soul is another thing. If all this while you are as great, and wise, and
good in your own esteem, and make as great a matter of men's opinion of you, as
others do that speak less against Pride, your speeches and preachings serve but
to condemn your selves. It is as easy to talk against covetousness, gluttony,
and other sins, whilst he that condemns them, continues in them, and
condemns himself. Talking against an enemy, obtains no victory; and talking
against sin, may signify what you have learned to say, or perhaps what dislike
you have to that sin at a distance, or in specie, or in another, when yet you
may damnably love it in your selves. It were well for Preachers, if it were as
easy or common to conquer sin, as to preach against it: But alas it is not so.

6. Another cloak of Pride is, The presence of a real partial humility,
together with an outward humble garb. A man may be really humble in some, yea
in many respects, and yet be exceeding proud in others: He may be vile in his
own eyes, because he is conscious of many great and odious sins, and because he
knows that sin is a thing odious to God, and all that will be saved, must be
humbled for it; and because he knows that his body is earth, and must return
by death to filth and dust: And he may go in sordid poor apparel; and such may
have a humble tone and manner of speech; and perhaps speak so self-abasingly,
as if there were none so lowly as they: And yet they may be exceeding proud of
their supposed wisdom, or spiritual understanding, and of a supposed
extraordinary measure of holiness, or revelations, or interest in God, or of
this humility it self: Yea their common natural pride may not be taken down,
though there be frequent expressions of great humiliation.

And if the proudest Gallants can, with their hat at your foot, profess
themselves your humble servants, why may not Religious Bride go as far?

And note here, that this Religious Pride, is of a higher and more aggravated
strein than the other: 1. Because it is committed against more humbling means.
2. Because it is a sin against more knowledge. 3. Because it is accompanied
with the profession of Humility, and so is aggravated by more hypocrisy. 4.
Because it is an abuse of more excellent things: It is more odious to turn the
pretense of wisdom, revelations, humility, godliness, good works, etc. into
pride, than to be proud as children are of their fine clothes; or as
addle-brained women are of their precedencies. 5. Because it most odiously
fathereth it self on God, as if it were but the grateful magnifying of his
graces: To put Gods Name into the boasts of Pride, and say, I thank thee, Lord,
that I am not as other men, nor as this Publican (Luke 18.11.) To say, God has
revealed more to me than to you; or has made me more holy and spiritual than
you, Isa. 65.5. Stand by thy self; come not near me; for I am holier than thou:
This is, when Pride speaks it, most odious blasphemy; to father the
firstborn of the Devil upon God.

There are two sad instances of this kind of Pride, which are now too
familiarly seen among us.

The one is in the case of many convinced Hypocrites, yea and many passionate
feeble Christians, who are afrighted with the terrors of the Lord, and partly
disturbed by their guilt, or passions, and partly take it to be an honorable
sign of humility to condemn themselves; and therefore will fill the ears of
Ministers with sad complaints of their fears and doubts, and sins and wants, as
if they would hardly be kept from desperation. And yet if they know that
another does believe them, and think and speak as bad of them as they speak of
themselves; yea if he do but sl^ght them, and prefer others before them, or
plainly reprove them for any disgraceful sin, they swell with the wrath of
Pride against him, and will not easily think or speak well of such a one: And
they love him best that thinks best of them, and praises them most, even
when they most dispraise themselves; which shows that a man may be really
humbled in some respects, and seem to be humbled in more, and yet at the heart
be dangerously proud.

The other instance is, in the common separating Spirit of Sectarians; and in
particular, in those called Quakers in these times (For against commanded
separation from sin, by self-preservation or discipline, I am far from
speaking.) Their great pretense of singularity is, to avoid and detest the
Pride of others; they cry out against Pride as much as any. Their garb is
plain; humility, and self-emptiness, and poverty of spirit, is their
profession. And yet when they are so ignorant, that they can scarce speak
sense; and when they understand not the Catechism or Creed, but have need to be
taught which are the principles of the Oracles of God; they think they are
taken into the counsels of the Almighty; they think they abound in the Spirit,
and in wisdom, in revelations, and in holiness; and the wisest and holiest of
Christ's Ministers and People, who are as far above them in knowledge and
godliness, as the aged are above a stammering Infant, are proudly despised by
them, and openly and impenitently reviled and railed at, as ignorant fools, and
ungodly, worldly, self-seeking men, and as the deceivers of the people, and as
void of the Spirit; which could never proceed to the height that we have seen
it, and which their words and writings utter at this day, without a very
strange degree of Pride, and such as either makes men mad, or is made by
madness, or little less.

And here note also, that it is no wonder if Religious Pride can despise the
common applause of the world, and bear a great deal of ignominy from the
vulgar; because they have learnt so much as to know that wicked men are fools,
and base, and their judgment is no great honor or dishonor to any man; and
that godly men only are truly wise, and their judgment most to be regarded. And
therefore it is with them whom they think highliest of themselves, that they
desire to be thought highliest of; and it is among the Religious sort, that
Religious Pride does fish for honor: even as men that are proud of their
Learning, do hunt after the applause of learned men, and can despise the
judgment of the unlearned vulgar, as quite below them.

I know that this last instance of Pride, is not always an attendant of
Prosperity: But often it is, a kind of wantonness thence arising, which is much
restrained in suffering times: And being speaking of the rest, I thought not
meet to pass it by.

Direct. II. Understand which are the ordinary effects and characters of Pride,
that you may not live in it, and perish by it, whilst you thought you had
overcome it. At this time (having said more of it elsewhere) I shall recite but
these marks of prosperous Pride, and show the contrary signs of lowliness.

1. The high-minded are self-willed, and much addicted to rule and domineer.
They would have their own wills, in all their own matters, and are hardly
brought to submit to the judgment and will of others. Obeying goes quite
against their grain, any further than they like the commands of their
superiors: And if they are in any hope of reaching it, they aspire to be the
Governors of others, that they may still stand uppermost, and have their will
in all the matters about them, as well as in their own. If there be a place of
Power and Preferment void, the proud man is the forwardest expectant; and
makes no great question of his fitness; but thinks that he is injured if he
be put by, how worthy a man soever be preferred before him: He snuffs and
scorns at inferiors that stick at his most sinful and unreasonable commands;
and thunders out the charge of Rebellion or Schism against those that question
his infallibility, or that will stick at obeying him before God, and against
him; as if he had been born to rule, and other men to obey him; and all do him
wrong, who fall not down and worship not his will, at the first intimation:
Though perhaps he be but a Minister of Christ, who should be as a little child,
and the servant of all, and should stoop to the feet of the poorest of the
flock, and should receive the weak, and bear with their infirmities; yet Pride
will there lift up the head, and forget all the humbling examples and
admonitions of Christ, and will either seek to draw Disciples after it, by
speaking perverse things, Acts 20.30. or forget 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither us being
Lords over Gods heritage, but examples to the flock.

But on the contrary, the poor in spirit are readier to obey than rule, as
knowing that ruling requires the greater parts and graces; and are inclined to
think others to be fitter for places of Teaching or Authority than themselves
(further than clear experience constrains them to know the contrary:) For in
honor they prefer others, instead of striving to be preferred before others:
They have a tractable, humble, yielding disposition, except when they are
tempted to sin. They are gentle, and easy to be entreated, James 3.17. and can
submit themselves to one another; yea and be their voluntary subjects, 1 Pet.
5.5. Ephesians. 5.21. (Yet not becoming unnecessarily the servants of men; but
choosing it rather when they may be free.) They are as little children, in that
they expect not rule, but to be ruled, Matthew. 18.3. They have learned to serve
one another in love, Gal. 5.13. and take it not for Christian love, that can do
good only upon terms of equality, and cannot stoop to voluntary service. They
can go two mile with him that compels them to go one: No man more obedient
when you command not sin. For as he affects not to be called Master, or
Rabbi, or to have the highest seat or name ( Mat. 23.11, etc.) So he has
learnt not to please himself, but to please others for their good to
edification, Romans 15.2. Especially if he be a Pastor of the Church, though he
do by an excelling light, and love, and good life, keep up the true honor of
his calling; yet is he the more averse to Lord it over the flock, because he
knows that he must be an example to them: And it is not an example of pride,
but of lowliness, which Christ did give, and he must give; and therefore both
are joined together, 1 Pet. 5.3, 5.

2. The Proud do make too great a matter of that honor which perhaps may be
their due: They plot for it: they set their hearts upon it. If they are
slighted, or others preferred before them, their countenances are cast down, as
Cains; or they are troubled, as Haman; or they will revenge it, as Cain, and as
Joab upon Abner: Touch their honor, and you touch their hearts: Despise them,
and you torment them, or make them your enemies.

But the Poor in spirit regard their honor, as they do other matters of this
world; that is, with moderation, and so far as it is conducible to the honor
of Religion, or their Country, or to the service and business of their lives.
They will not be Prodigals of that which they may serve God by: and they will
not be over desirous of that which may be a bait to Pride, and a snare to their
souls, though it gratify the fleshly fancy. They will seek it, as if they
sought it not; and possess it, as if they possessed it not, remembering how vain a
thing man is, and how little his thoughts or breath can do, to make us happy:
God is so great in a Believers eye, and man and worldly vanity is so small,
that a lowly mind can scarce have room and time to regard the honor which is
the proud man's portion; because he is taken up with honoring his God, and
esteeming the honor which consists in his approbation.

Therefore it is tolerable to him, to be made of no reputation* to be laden
with reproaches, to be spit upon and buffeted; to be made as the scorn and
off^scouring of the world, and to have his name cast out as an evil doer, so he
be not an evil doer indeed, 1 Cor. 4.13. Luke 6.22. Whatever you think of him,
or whatever you say of him, he knows that it is little of his concernment:
your favor is not his felicity; nor are you the Judge, whose sentence must
finally decide his cause. He humbles himself, and therefore can endure to be
humbled by others. He chooses the lowest place himself, and therefore can
endure to be low, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5. Luke 14.11. and 18.14. and 14.10.

3. The high-minded are ashamed to be thought to come of a low descent; or that
their Parents or Ancestors were poor: And if their Ancestors were rich and
great, that little honor does help to elevate their minds; because they want
that personal worth which is honorable indeed, they are fain to adorn
themselves with these borrowed feathers.

But the lowly know that if Riches prove such a hinderance of salvation, and so
few of the rich proportionably are saved, as Christ has told us, it can be no
great honor to be the offspring of the rich: It is a sad kind of boast, to say
[my Ancestors are liker to be in Hell than yours; or if any of them be in
Heaven, they came thither as a Camel through a needles eye.] We know we are all
of the common earth, and there our flesh will all be levelled, and our noblest
blood will turn to the common putrefaction: We are all the seed of sinful Adam;
our Father was an Amorite, and our Mother an Hittite, Ezekiel. 16.3. And good men
have used humbly to lament their forefathers pride and wickedness, instead of
boasting of their worldly wealth; as you may read, Neh. 9.16, 39. Dan. 9.

4. The high-minded are ashamed to be thought poor themselves: Because wealth
is the Idol which they most honor; they think that it will most honor them.
Because they see that most men admire and honor it in the world; therefore
they being of the world, do judge as the world, and confirm themselves to its
opinion. Even the poor that is proud, is ashamed of his poverty, and would be
fain accounted rich.

But the lowly are not ashamed to say with Peter, Acts 3.6. Silver and gold
have I none; while they have better riches to rejoice in: They are glad, when
with Paul they can say, We are poor, but making many rich, 2 Cor. 6.10. They
will not deny, or cast away any riches (which God does lend them) because as
his Stewards, they must be accountable for them to their Lord. But they take it
to be no shame to be liker Christ than Croesus; or liker his Apostles than the
Prelates and Cardinals of Rome; or to be of those poor that are poor in spirit,
who are rich in faith, and heirs of Heaven, James 2.5. Matthew. 5.3. Nor is it
any desirable honor to have our salvation so much hindered and hazarded, as
the rich have. God, and Angels, and wise men, do think never the worse of a
good man for being poor.

5. The high-minded are therefore usually addicted to some excess in ornaments
and apparel, because they would be taken to be rich and comely (unless when
their Pride works some other way.) Yea, if they be never so mean and poor,
they would seem by their clothing to be somewhat richer than they are; or would
be rich in hypocrisy, or outward appearance, except it hinder their relief.
They that wear soft clothing were wont to dwell in the houses of Kings, Matthew.
11.8. but now they dwell in the houses of most Citizens, Tradesmen, Husbandmen;
yea of Ministers themselves; wives, children and servants are commonly sick at
once of this disease: And though it be one of the lowest and foolishest games,
which Pride has to play; yet women, and children, and lightheaded youths, do
make up the greater number for this vanity; while the pride of the graver wiser
sort, does turn it self to greater things.

But the lowly who are not ashamed to be poor, are not ashamed of poor apparel:
Though they are not for uncleanliness, nor for an affected singularity, for
ostentation of humility; yet they had rather go below their rank, than above
it, as taking Pride to be a greater shame and hurt than poverty: If their
clothing be convenient to their health and use, and not offensive to others, it
suffices them: and a patch, or a rent, or a garment that is old, will not make
them blush: they have learnt, 1 Pet. 3.3. [ Whose adorning, let it not be that
outward, of plating the hair, or of wearing of gold, or of putting on of
apparel; but the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.

6. The high-minded have high thoughts of worldly pomp, and wealth, and
greatness; and think of such as excel in these, with great esteem and
reverence: They bow to the man that has the gold Ring, and the gay apparel,
while they slight the b^st and wisest that are poor: They bless the Covetous
whom the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10.3. And they think if they be poor and low
themselves, how brave a thing is it to be high and rich: And had far rather be
rich than gracious, and be higher in the world, than to have a lowly mind.

But the humble have learnt of Christ to be meek and lowly, Matthew. 11.29. and
are still learning it of him more and more: They had rather have Paul's heart,
that counted all things as loss and dung for Christ, and learned to abound and
to suffer want, and in every state to be content, than to be lifted up with
worldly vanity. They know that it is better to be of a humble spirit with the
lowly, than to divide the spoils with the proud, Prove. 16.19. And as the
brother of low degree (being sanctified Believer that can use all for God) must
rejoice when he is exalted; so must the brother of high degree, when he is made
low, Jam. 1.9, 10. They pity a Dives in his purple and silk, more than a
Lazarus at his gates in rags. They wish not too eagerly for so dangerous an
exaltation, from which they see so many terribly cast down. They much more
honor a poor Believer, than a pompous sinner. For in their eyes a vile person
is contemned; but they honor them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4.

7. The high-minded are ashamed of low employments: If they be seen doing such
work as is accounted base, or proper to poor inferior persons, they think they
are dishonored: If the proud sort of the Pastors of the Church, had been sent
as Paul and the Apostles, to travel about the world on foot, and to preach the
Gospel in their humble self-denying terms, they would have said that this was
an unsufferable drudgery; and Christ must have provided more encouraging
rewards of learning, or else he should have been no Master of theirs. Yea a
servant that is proud, will disdain the lowest works of your service, as if it
were a disgrace to stoop so low.

But the lowly do learn of Christ another lesson. He stoopt to wash and wipe
the feet of his Disciples, to teach them what to do toward one another. Not as
the Pope does once a year wash some poor men's feet, by a Scenical ceremony (For
Piety and Charity are both turn^d into imagery and ceremony by Satan, when he
would destroy them) but seriously to instruct his Ministers themselves, what
lowliness they must use toward one another, and to all the flock. Christ went
on foot to preach the Gospel, and so did his Apostles; not to oblige us to do
so when weakness does forbid us; nor to deny the benefit of a horse, when we
may have it; but to teach us that neither Pride should make us ashamed to go on
foot, nor lazyness make it seem intolerable, when we are called to it. When
Christ would appear in state at Jerusalem, he rode upon a borrowed Ass, to
fulfill the Prophecy, Zech. 9.9. Behold thy King comes unto thee, meek and
sitting upon an Ass, Matthew. 21.5. Paul refused not (with other Preachers) to
labor at the trade of a Tent-maker, Acts 18.3. And Timothy was not ashamed to
bring him his cloak and parchments, so great a Journey, 2 Timothy 4.13. Nothing is
avoided by the lowly at a shame, but that which is displeasing to God, and
disagreeeble to his Christian duty: But not that which he can call the service
of God, and which God accepts and will reward.

8. The high-minded are ashamed of the company and familiarity of the poor
(unless when they seek for applause by populari^y:) And they greatly affect the
savor and company of the rich, James 5.4, 6. Therefore Solomon says, that the
rich has many friends, Prove. 14.20. When the poor is hated of his neighbor.

But the lowly choose to converse with the low. For so did Christ who was our
pattern: and it is his Law [ Romans 12.16. Mind not high things, but condescend
to men of low estate. Christ was not ashamed to call us brethren, Heb 3.11. nor
will he be ashamed so to call the least of his true Disciples before God and
Angels at the dreadful day, Matthew. 25.40. and 28.10. Joh. 20.17. They are the
most honorable company, who are likest to Christ, and are the wisest, and the
holiest; and not those who are likest to his crucifiers and enemies, and have
their portion in this world.

9. Pride is usually attended with vain curiosity: curiosity in ornaments, in
fashions, in distressings, in attendance, in furniture, in rooms, and in
abundance of small inconsiderable circumstances. The proud (who go this lower
way) do make a great matter of so many such trifles, that their minds have no
room for the greatest things. They do not only trouble themselves with many
things, while the one thing needful is the more neglected ( Luke 10.42.) but
all about them must be partakers of the trouble. What abundance of trades does
Pride maintain? and how many are continually at work to serve it?

But the lowly who mind not vain ostentation, do save themselves all this
unprofitable pains: They can avoid undecent sordidness, at a cheaper rate than
by proud curiosity. They are accurate and curious in greater matters, in doing
good, in securing their salvation, in escaping sin, and in pleasing God; which
will one day prove a wiser curiosity, than to be curious in courtship, and
complements, and dressings, and other impertinent childish things: Though the
least just decency is not to be neglected in its place, it is foolish pride to
prefer it before things of importance and necessity. Man's mind and time are not
sufficient for all things: Somewhat must be omitted; and its wisdom which
chooses to omit the least, and folly which chooses to omit the greatest. As in
Learning, they prove the soundest Scholars who spend their studies on the most
excellent and useful parts of learning; whilst those that too much study things
superfluous, are ever empty of necessary knowledge: It is so also in the
actions of our lives: As Paul so vehemently condemns vain jangling about
unnecessary and unedifying questions, though yet truth was not contemptible in
those matters: so also vain curiosity, and unedifying diligence (though about
things not altogether contemptible) is but the perilous diversion of the mind,
from greater things, 1 Timothy 1.6, 7, etc.

10. The high-minded cannot endure to be beholden (unless necessity or
covetousness prevail against their Pride.) But they would have all others
beholden to them, that they may seem as petty Deities in the world. O how it
puffs them up to have the people depend upon them, and acknowledge them for
their benefactors, and to have crowded sacrifices of thanks and praise to be
offered them as they go about the streets: If they were accounted such as the
world could not live, nor be happy without them, as being the most necessary
parts or pillars thereof, nothing could more content their humor.

But the lowly mind desires rather to do good, than to be known to do it: And
it is not men's unthankfulness that will take him off, because it is not their
thanks which is his reward. He would be as like God as he can in doing good,
but not for his own glory, but for Gods. As he is Gods Steward, it is with God
that he keeps reckoning; and if his accounts will pass with him, he has
enough. And if God will have him to need the help of others, he is not too
stout to seek and be beholden. Though every ingenious man should value his
freedom from the servitude of man, 1 Cor. 7.23. and if he can be free, should
choose it rather, verse. 21. (And the borrower is a servant to the lender, Prove.
22.7.) And we may say with him in Luke 16.3. To beg I am ashamed: Yet here
humility will make us stoop, when God requires it. Christ himself refused not
to be a Receiver, Luke 8.3. No nor to ask a draught of water, John 4. And
poverty is often a great mercy to the proud, to take them down, and make them
stoop. The rich answers roughly; but the poor uses entreaties, Prove. 18.23.
So much of the Marks of Pride.

Direct. III. Overlook not the odiousness and peril of Pride. I will name you
now but a few of its aggravations, because I have more largely mentioned them
elsewhere.

1. It is the most direct opposition to God, to set up our selves as Idols in
his place, and seek for some of his honor to our selves.

2. It is the first born of the Devil, and an imitation of him whom God in
nature has taught us to take for the greatest enemy of him and us; and the
most odious of all the creatures of God.

3. It is madness to fall by that same sin, which we know was the overthrow of
our first Parents, and of the world.

4. And it is sottish impudency in such as we, who know that our bodies are
going into rottenness and dust, and think in what a place and plight we must
there lie, and that those days of darkness will be many: And who know that our
souls are defiled with sin, and if we have any saving knowledge and grace, it
is small, and mixed with abundance of ignorance and corruption; and the nature
of it is contrary to Pride.

5. It is contrary to the design of redeeming grace, which is to save the
humble contrite soul.

6. It betrayeth men to a multitude of other sins (as vanity of mind, loss of
time, neglect of duty, striving for preferment, quarrelling with others, upon
matters of reputation or precedence, etc)

7. And it is a sin that God is specially engaged against, and the surest way
to dejection and self frustration, 1 Pet. 5.5. James 4 6. Isa. 2.12. Prove.
15.22. and 16.5. and 21.4. Psalm. 138 6. and 31.23. Job 40.11, 12. Luke 14.11.
and 18.14.

II. After these three general Directions, I shall briefly name a few
particular ones.

Direct, 1. Remember continually what you are, and what you were, what your
bodies are, and will be; and what your souls are by the pollution of sin; and
how close it still adhereth to you; and from how great a misery Christ redeemed
you: He neither knows his body, nor his soul, his sin, or misery, nor Christ,
nor grace, who is a servant unto Pride.

Direct. 2 Remember the continual presence of the most holy dreadful God: And
can Pride lift up the head before him?

Direct. 3 Look to the example of a humbled Savior, and learn of God incarnate
to be lowly, Matthew. 11.29. From his birth to his ascension, you may read the
strangest Lecture of Lowliness, that ever was delivered to the haughty world.

Direct. 4. Turn all your desires to the glorifying of God; remembering that you
were not made for your own glory, but for his.

Direct. 5. Think much of the heavenly Glory, and it will cloud all the
vainglory of the world.

Direct. 6. Think what it is that is your honor among the Angels in Heaven,
and what is most approved and honored by God himself; and therein place your
honor; and not in the conceits of foolish men.

Direct. 7. Lastly, Make use of humbling occasions to exercise your self-denial
and lowliness of mind. I commend not to you the pious folly of those Popish
Saints, who are magnified by them for making themselves purposely ridiculous to
exercise their humility (as by going through the streets with their breeches on
their heads, and other such fooleries:) For God will give you humbling
occasions enough, when he sees good: But when he does it, be sure that you
improve them to the abasing of your selves: and use your selves to be above the
esteem of man, and to bear contempt when it is cast upon you (as Christ did for
your sakes) though not to draw it foolishly or wilfully upon your selves. He
that has but once born the contempt of men, is much better able to b^ar it
afterward, than he that never underwent it, but thinks that he has an
entire reputation to preserve: And he that is more sollicitous of his duty, and
most indifferent in point of honor, does usually best secure his honor by
such neglect, and always best undergo dishonor.

CHAP. XVI. How to escape the sin of Fullness or Luxury by Faith.
THE second sin of Sodom, and fruit of abusrd Prosperity, is Fullness of Bread,
Ezekiel. 16 49 Concerning which (having also handled it elsewhere more at large) I
shall now briefly give you these general Directions first, and then a few that
are more particular.

Direct. I. Understand well what sinful Fullness: It is sinful, when it has any
one of these ill conditions.

1. When you eat or drink more in quantity, than is consistent with the due
preservation of your health: or so much as hurts your health or reason. For
the use of food is to fit us for our duty; and therefore that which disableth
and unfiteth us, is too much. But here both the present and future must be
considered.

2. When you have no higher end in eating and drinking, than the pleasing of
your appetite. Be it little or much, it is to be judged of according to its
end. A beast has no other end, because he has no reason, and so properly has
no end at all* But we are bound to eat and drink to the glory of God, and to do
all to further us in his service, 1 Cor. 10.31. The appetite may be pleased in
order to a higher end; that is, 1. So far as it is a true directer what is for
our health, and will be best digested: 2. So far as by moderate and seasonable
exhilaration, it fitteth us by cheerful alacrity for our duty: and therefore it
has been good men's use to have holy feasts, as well as holy fasts. But the
appetite must be restrained and denied, 1. When it is against health: And 2.
When it hinders from duty: Or 3. When it would be the ultimate end of our
repast, and there is no higher reason for it, than the appetites delight.

It is not said that the Sensualist in Luke 16. did eat too much: but that he
fared sumptuously every day, and that he had his good things here: that is,
that he lived to the pleasing of his flesh. It is not said of him in Luke
12.19, 20. that he ate or drank too much; but that he said, Soul, take thy
ease, eat, drink, and be merry; that is, that he preferred the pleasing of his
appetite or flesh, before the everlasting pleasures. The sin of the Israelites
was, that they were weary of eating Manna only, so many years, and desired
flesh only to please their appetite: and therefore is is said, that they asked
meat for their lust, Psalm. 78.18. that is, to gratify their flesh or sense.
And the terrible threatenings thundered out by James against the rich, are on
such accounts, James 5.4, 5. Ye have lived in pleasure on earth, and been
wanton; ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter. And we are
commanded to make no provision for the flesh, to satisfy the wills or lusts
thereof; that is, merely or chiefly to please our senses.

3. It is sinful Fullness, when you needlessly strengthen either lustful or
sluggish inclinations by the quantity or the quality of your food. I know
nature must not be famished, nor our health and life destroyed, under pretense
of conquering sin: But when necessity of life and health does not require it,
all that must be avoided, which cherishes any vicious disposition. And these
two are the usual effects of fullness. 1. Some, especially idle youths, abound
with lustful thoughts and inclinations, which fullness greatly cherishes; and
pleasing their appetite, is the fuel of their lust: when as if they would drink
water, and eat courser food, and little of it (and withal be laborious in some
serious work) their lusts would be more extinguished: These persons are guilty
of sinful Fullness, if they take but near as ^uch as other men may do; because
for the pleasing of one lust, they seed another.

2. Others that are flagmatick and dull, can never feed fully, but they are
heavy and drowsy, unfit for prayer, and unfit for work: usually the health, as
well as the consciences of these persons, does require a spare kind of diet;
and that which is but enough for others, is too much for them. Because the
avoiding of sin, and the performance of our duties, is the measure of our food.

4. It is sinful Fullness, when any of Gods creatures are taken without any
benefit, and in vain. It is a sin to take any more than we have cause to think
is like to do us good; though we thought it were like to do no harm. That which
is used only to gratify the appetite, or for any other unprofitable cause, and
neither furthereth health nor duty, is sinfully cast away. And if vain words be
forbidden, vain eating and drinking can be no better.

The evil of the sin is, 1. Because man being a rational creature, should do
nothing in vain: 2. Because we are Gods Stewards, and must give an account of
all our talents: 3. Because Gods mercies are not to be contemned, nor cast away
as nothing worth. 4. But especially because there are thousands in want, while
you abound; and if you spend that in vain, which others need, you wrong God,
and rob them, and show that you want love to your brethren, and prefer your
appetites before their necessities. If you think any thing that you have is
absolutely your own, you are but foolish pretenders against God: But if you
know that God has lent it you for his service, how dare you cast it away in
vain? Joh. 6.12. When Christ had multiplied food (or satisfied men's appetite)
by miracle, he says, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be
lost: Nothing then must be lost, on your selves or others.

5. To bestow too much cost upon the belly, is a sinful Fullness too; though the
quantity of food be never so small. Cost is too much when it is more than is
profitable; or when the cost exceeds the profit. The reasons of this are the
same as of the former; because we are Gods Stewards, and must give account of
all that we have, and must improve it all to our Masters use; and because
thousands want what we might spare, and superfluously expend. What are the
occasions which will justify some extraordinary costliness, is too long now to
explicate. In general, it must be for some end and benefit, which is better
than any which might be procured otherwise by that expense: But pride or
appetite are no justifying causes of it. It was faring sumptuously which was
that carnal Gentlemen's sin, in Luke 16. It is sa^d of such, Phil. 3.18. that
their belly is their God; for they daily sacrifice much more to it, than they
do to God: Many hundred pounds a year, is little enough for many men to
sacrifice to their throats. It is such a sacrifice which James calls, the
cherishing of their hearts as in a day of slaughter, James 5.5. This is the hid
treasure which their bellies are filled with, Psalm. 17.14. The rich man's full
barns, Luke 12 20. were but to fill his belly, and please his flesh [Thou have
enough laid up for many years.] For what? why for ease, and eating, and
drinking, and mirth; They think it is their own, and that they may spend it on
themselves; but O the terrible account! As David would not offer that to God
which cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24. so neither will they offer too cheap a
sacrifice to their bellies. But lust deserves not much cost: He that is your
God, is the God of others as well as of you; and cares for them as well as for
you; even when he gives them less than you: And he gives it you, that you may
have the trial, and the honor of giving it according to his will to them.

It is every man's duty to choose the cheapest diet (and other accommodations)
which will but answer his lawful ends; that is, 1. His health and welfare: 2.
And the meet entertainment of others, and the avoiding of those evils which are
greater than the charge.

He that loves his neighbor as himself, will not see multitudes cold and
hungry, while he gratifieth his own sensuality with superfluities. Though all
men are not to live at the same rates, yet all are to observe this common rule
of charity and frugality. The Rule given by Paul for apparel, must be used also
for our food; that women adorn themselves with modest apparel, with
shamefastness and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array, 1 Timothy 2.9. So must we feed with moderation and sobriety, and not
with too rich and costly food.

6. And it is a great aggravation of this sin, to bestow too much of our time
upon it: When those precious hours are spent in needless eating and drinking,
or sitting at it, which are given us for far greater work. Though no set time
can be determined for all men, yet all must feed as those that have still
necessary business upon their hand, which stays for them, and for which it is
that they cherish themselves: And therefore let not time pass away in vain, but
make haste to your work, and feed not idleness instead of diligence.

7. And the root of all this mischief, is, when the hearts of men are set upon
their bellies; and their fancies and wits are slaves unto their appetites: when
they are not indifferent about things indifferent, but make a great matter of
it, what they shall eat, and what they shall drink, beyond the necessity or
real benefit of it. When they are troubled if their appetite be but crossed, and
they are like crying children or swine, that are discontented and complaining
if they have not what they would have, and if their bellies are not full. When
they are like the Israelites, that wept for flesh, Numb. 11.4. Because they
serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, Romans 16.17, 18. But the poor
in spirit, can live upon a little, and mind the things of the Spirit so much,
that they are more indifferent to their appetite. And custom makes abstinence
and temperance sweet and easy to them. For a well-used appetite is like
well-taught children; not so unmannerly, nor craving, nor bawling, nor
troublesome, as the gluttons ill-used appetite is. It troubles men's minds, and
takes up their thoughts, and commands their estates, and devoureth their
time, and turns out God, and all that is holy; and like a thirst in a
dropsy, it de^oureth all, and is satisfied with nothing, but increases its
self, and the disease: As if such men did live to eat, when the temperate do
eat to live.

8 Lastly, It is the height of this sin, when you also cherish the gulosity and
excess of others. When for the Pride of great housekeeping, you cause others
to waste Gods creatures and their time; and waste your estates to satisfy
their luxury, and to procure their vain applause, Hab. 2.15. Woe to him that
gives his neighbor drink; that put thy bottle to him, and makeest him
drunken also. This is the Fullness which is forbidden of God.

Object. But is it not said that Christ came eating and drinking, and the
Pharisees quarrelled with him and his Disciples, because they did not fast as
John and his Disciples did; and they called him a gluttonous person, and a
wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners.

Answ. 1. John lived in a wilderness, upon locusts and wild honey: and because
Christ lived not such an austere eremetical life, the quarrelsome Pharisees did
thus calumniate him. But Christ never lived in the least excess. Mark that part
of his life which they thus accused, and you will find it such as the sensual
will be loath to imitate. 2. Christ was by office to converse with Publicans and
sinners for their cure: And this gave occasion to the calumnies of malice. 3.
There was a difference of Reasons for John's austerity, and Christ's. But when
he, the Bridegroom was taken away, he foretells that his followers should
fast. 4. Christ fasted forty days at once, and drank water, and lived in
perfect temperance: Imitate him, and we will not blame you for excess: His
example preached poverty in spirit.

Direct. II. Remember the Reasons why fullness and gulosity are so much
condemned by God, viz.

1. A pampered appetite is unruly; and feeds your concupiscence. The flesh is
now become our most dangerous enemy; and therefore it must be dangerous to
pamper it, to the strengthening of its lusts: When even Paul was put to buffet
and tame it, and bring it into subjection, for fear of proving a castaway
after all his wondrous labors.

2. The pleasing of the appetite too much, corrupts the delight and relish
of the soul. Delight in God, and Heaven, and Holiness, is the sum and life of
true Religion; and the delights of sense and fleshly appetite, turn away the
soul from this, and are most mortal enemies to these true delights. For they
that are after the flesh, do mind or savor the things of the flesh; and they
that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit, Romans 8.6, 7. And the
carnal mind is enmity to God: if it cannot be subject to his Law, certainly it
is unfit to relish the sweetness of his Love, and spiritual mercies.

3. And the Thoughts themselves are corrupted and perverted by it: They that
should be thinking and caring how to please God, are thinking and caring for
their bellies. Even when all their powers should be employed on God, in
meditation, or in prayer, their thoughts will be going after their fleshly
appetite, as Ezekiels hearers were after their covetousness, 33.31. And as some
of Christ's hearers were after the loaves.

4. The use of pleasing the fleshly appetite does make men need riches; which
is a misery, and a snare. Such must needs have their desires satisfied, and
therefore cannot live on a little: And therefore if they have riches, their
flesh devoureth almost all, and they have little to spare for any charitable
uses. And if they have none, they are tempted to steal, or get it by some
unlawful means. And so it tempts them to the love of money (which is the root
of all evil) because they love the lust which needs it.

5. And it makes them utterly unfit for suffering (which Christ will have all
his followers to expect.) He that is used to please his appetite, will take
that for a grievous life, which another man will feel no trouble in: If a full
fed Gentleman or Dives were tied to fare as the poor labourer does at the best,
he would lament his case as if he were undone, and would take that for half a
martyrdom (if it were on a pious pretense) which his neighbor would account no
suffering, but a feast. And will God reward men for such self-made sufferings?
How unfit is he to endure imprisonment, banishment and want, who has always
used to please his flesh? If God cast him into poverty, how impatient would he
be? How plentifully and pleasantly would most poor Countrymen think to live,
if they had but a hundred pounds a year of their own? But if he that has
thousands, and is used to fullness, should be reduced to an hundred, how
querulous or impatient would he be?

6. It makes the body heavy and unfit for duty: both duties of piety, and the
honest labors of your calling.

7. It makes the body diseased; and so more unfit to serve the soul. It is to
be noted, that the excess reproved by Paul at their Love Feasts, was punished
with sickness, and with death: And as that punishment had a moral suitableness
to their sin; so it is not unlike that (according to Gods ordinary way of
punishing) it was also a natural effect of their excess.

8. It is a most unsuitable thing to such great sinners as we are, who have
forfeited all our mercies, and are called so loud to penitent humiliation; when
we should turn to the Lord with all our hearts, with fasting, weeping and
mourning, to be then pleasing our fleshly appetites with curiosities and
excess, is a sin that God once threatened in a terrible sort, Isa. 22.12, 13.
Fasting is in such cases a duty of Gods appointment, Joel 2.12. Luke 2.37. 1
Cor. 7.5. Cornelius his fasting and alms-deeds came up before God, Acts 10.30.
Daniel was heard upon his fast, Dan. 9.3. Christ fasted when he entered
solemnly on his work, Matthew. 4. And some Devils would not be cast out without
fasting and prayer: And is luxury fit in such a case?

9. Lastly, Remember what was said before, that others are empty, while we are
full: Thousands need all that we can spare: And they are members of Christ, and
of the same body with us: And so much as we waste on our appetite, or pride, so
much the less we have to give. And he that sees his Brother in need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him (when he cannot deny
superfluities to himself) how dwells the Love of God in him! When the poor we
shall have always with us, that we may always have exercise for our love: And
he that glutteth his own flesh to the full, and gives the poor but the
leavings of his lust, if it were a thousand pound a year that he gives, must
look for small reward from God, however he may do good to others.

More particular Directions may be as follows.

Direct. 1. Understand well how much the flesh in this laps^d state is our
enemy; and how much gulosity does strengthen it against us; and how much of the
work of grace lies in resisting and overcoming it; and what need we have to
serve the Spirit, and not to be helpers of the flesh: And the true
consideration of these things may do much, Gal. 5.17, 18, 19, 22, 23. Romans 8.6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 13.

Direct. 2. Set your selves to the work of God according to your several
places; and live not idly: And then mark what helps or hinders you in your
work. If you play not the loitering hypocrites, but make your duties the
serious business of all your lives, you will quickly find how inconsistent a
brutish appetite, and a full belly, and a curious, costly, and time-wasting
pampering of the flesh, is with such a Christian life.

Direct. 3. Study well the life of Christ, and the example of the ancient
Saints. Remember what diet was in use with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; with the
Apostles, and holiest servants of Christ. And that it was Solomon the most
voluptuous King of Israel, that was told by his Mother, that it is not for
Kings to drink wine, but for them that are of a sorrowful heart: And that the
description of the luxurious then was [ riotous eaters of flesh, Prove. 31.5.
and 23.20. And that it was the mark of fleshly Heretics, to feast themselves
without fear, Jude 12. And that they were destroyed by Gods wrath, though they
had their desire who murmured for want of flesh, after many years abstinence in
a wilderness; and it is called, Asking meat for their lust, Psalm. 78.18. I doubt
many of our servants now, would be discontented, and think their bellies too
hardly used, if they had no better than the milk and honey of the Land of
Promise; yea or the Onions and fleshpots of Egypt.

Direct. 4. Think what a base and swinish kind of sin it is, to be a slave to
ones guts or appetite: And how far it is below, not only a Christian, but a
man, and what a shame to humane nature.

Direct. 5. Look often to the grave, and observe those skulls into which once
the pleasant meats and drinks were put; and those jaws that were so often
employed, in grinding for the belly: And remember how quickly this will be your
case, and think then whether such a carcass deserve so much care, and cost, and
curiosity, to the neglect and danger of an immortal soul.

Direct. 6. Lay a constant Law upon your appetite, and use it not to be pleased
without cause and benefit; but use it to a wholesome, but not a full, a costly,
a curious, or a delicious food: And use will make intemperance to be loathsome
to you, and temperance to be sweet.

Direct. 7. Learn so much reason as to know truly what is most conducible to
your health, both for quantity and quality; and mark what diseases and deaths
are usually caused by excess: It is more reasonable to be temperate for
prevention of diseases, than under the power and feeling of them; when pain and
sickness force you to it, whether you will or not. If you will not obey God so
carefully as your Physician; yet obey the preventing counsels of your
Physician, before you need his curing counsel.

Direct. 8. Neglect not the manly and the sacred delights which God allows: I
mean, the pleasures of honest labors, and of your calling, and of reading and
knowledge, of meditation and prayer, and of a well ordered soul and life, and
of the certain hopes of endless glory. Live upon these, and you will easily
spare the fleshly pleasures of a Swine.

CHAP. XVII. How to conquer sloth and idleness by the Life of Faith.
THE third sin of Sodom, and of abused Prosperity, is Idleness, Ezekiel. 16.49.
Concerning which I shall first tell you the nature and signs of it, and then
the evil of it; and then give you more particular Directions against it: But
this also but briefly, because I have done it more largely in my Christian
Directory.

I. That you may know who are guilty of this sin, and who not, I shall first
premise these Propositions.

1. Nothing but disability will excuse any one from the ordinary labors of a
lawful calling. Riches or honors will excuse none. They are the subjects of
God, as well as others that have less: And he that has most, has most to use,
and most to answer for: To whom men commit much, of them they require the more,
Luke 12.48. and 19.23. Greatness and wealth is so far from excusing the
forbearance of a calling, that it will not allow any one the omission of one
hours labor and diligence in his calling. If God give the Rich more wages than
others, it is unreasonable to think that therefore they may do less work.

2. Yet when mere necessity compels the poor to labor more than else they
were obliged to do, even to the detriment of their health, or shortening of
Gods Worship, the rich are not bound therefore to imitate them, and to incurr
the same inconveniences; because they have not the same necessities. As in
their diet, the rich is not allowed to take any more for quantity or quality,
than is truly for their good, any more than the poor: but they are not bound to
live as those poor do, who want that either for quantity or quality, which is
truly for their good; so is it also in this case of laboring.

3. The labors of every ones calling must be the ordinary business of his
life; and not a little now and then instead of a recreation. If it be a man's
calling, he must be constant and laborious in it.

4. Yea no interposed recreation or idleness is lawful, but that which either
is necessitated by disability, or that which is needful to fit the mind or
body for its work: As whetting to the mower.

5. All men's callings tie them not constantly to one kind of labor; but some
may be put to vary their employments every day: as poor men that live by going
on errands, and doing other men's business, under several Masters, several
ways: And as many rich people whose occasions of doing good may often vary.

6. The rich and honorable are not bound to the same kind of labor as the
poor. A Magistrate or Pastor is not bound to follow the Plow; nay, he is bound
not to do it ordinarily, lest he neglect his proper and greater work. Some men's
labors are with the hand, and some men's with the head.

7. Every man should choose that calling which is most agreeable to his mind and
body: Some are strong, and some are weak: some are of quick wits, and some are
dull: All should be designed to that which they are fittest for.

8. Every one should choose that calling (if he be fit for it) in which he may
be most serviceable to God, for the doing of the greatest good in the world:
and not that in which he may have most ease, or wealth, or honor: God and the
public good must be our chiefest ends in the choice.

9. And in the labors of our calling, the getting of riches must never be our
principal end: But we must labor to do the most public good, and to please
God by living in obedience to his commands.

10. Yet every man must desire the success of his labor, and the blessing of
God on it, and may continue his work as best tends to success. And though we
may not labor to be rich, Prove. 23.4. as our principal end; yet we must not be
formal in our callings; nor think that God is delighted in our mere toil, to
see men fill a bottomless vessel; but we must endeavor after the most
successful way, and pray for a just prosperity of our labors: and when God
does prosper us with wealth, we must take it thankfully (though with fear) and
use it to his service, and do all the good with it that we can, 1 Cor. 16.2.
Lay by as God has prospered every man, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him work with his
hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that needs,
James 1.9. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted.

11. The lowness of a man's calling, or baseness of his employment, will not
allow him to be negligent or weary of it, or uncomfortable in it: Seeing God
must be obeyed in the lowest services, as well as in the highest; and will
reward men according to their faithful labor, and not according to the dignity
of their place: And indeed no service should be accounted low and base, which
is sincerely done for so great and high a Master, and has the promise of so
glorious a reward, Col. 3.23, 24.

12. The greater and more excellent any man's work and calling is, his idleness
and neligence is the greater sin. It is bad in a Plowman, or any day-labourer;
but it is far worse in a Minister of the Gospel, or a Magistrate: Because they
wrong many and that in the greatest things, and violate the greatest trust from
God: Christ bids us pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth Laborers
into his harvest, Luke 10.27. and not proud, covetous, idle drones, that would
have honor only for their wealth and titles: And he says, that the Labourer
is worthy of his hire, but not the loiterer. Among the Elders that rule the
Church, it is especially the laborers in the word and doctrine that are worthy
of double honor. Dr. Hammond notes on 1 These. 5.12. that the Bishops whom
they are required to know and honor, were those that labored among them, and
were over them in the Lord, and admonished them; and that it was [ for their
works sake] that they were to esteem them very highly in love.] The highest
title that ever was put on Pastors, was to be [ Laborers together with God, 1
Cor. 3.9.]

And the calling of Magistrates also requires no small diligence. Jethro
persuades Moses to take helpers, not that he might himself be idle, but lest
he should wear away himself with doing more than he could undergo, Exodus 18.18.

So the calling of a Schoolmaster, and of Parents and Masters of families, who
have rational souls to instruct and govern, requires a special diligence: And
negligence in such is a greater sin, than in him that neglects sheep or
horses.

So also it is a great sin in a Physician, because he does neglect men's lives;
and in a Lawyer, when by sloth he destroys men's estates: The greatness of the
trust, must greaten men's care.

13. He that has hired his labor to another (as a Servant, a Lawyer, a
Physician) is guilty of a thievish fraud, if he give him not that which he has
paid for: Owe nothing to any man, but love, Romans 13. Hired labor is a debt
that must be paid.

14. Religious duties will not excuse idleness, nor negligence in our callings:
(but oblige us to it the more:) nor will any bodily calling excuse us from
Religious duties; but both must take their place in their seasons and due
proportions.

Q^est. 1. But what if a man can live without labor; may not be forbear who
needs it not? Answ. No, because he is nevertheless a subject of God, who does
command it: and a member of the Commonwealth which needs it.

Quest. 2. What if I were not brought up to labor; am I bound to use it? Answ.
Yes, you must yet learn to do your duty, and repent, and ask pardon for living
so long in sinful idleness. What if you had not been brought up to pray, or to
read, or to any needful trade, or ornament of life? What if your Parents had
never taught you to speak? Is it not your duty therefore to learn it when you
are at age, rather than not at all?

Qu. 3. But what if I find that it hurts my body to labor; may I not
forbear? Answ. If it so hurt you, that you are unable to do it, there is no
remedy: Necessity has no Law: Or if one sort of labor hurt you, when you can
take up another, in which you may be as serviceable to the Commonwealth, you
may choose that to which your strength is suitable: But if you think that every
sudden pain or weariness is a sufficient excuse; or that some real hurt will
warrant you in an idle life, you may as well think that your servant, and your
Horse or Ox may cease all their labor for you, when they are weary: or that
your candle should not burn, nor your knife be used in cutting, because that
use consumes them.

Quest. 4. What if I find that worldly business does hinder me in the service
of God; I cannot pray, or read, or meditate so much? Answ. The labors of your
callings are part of the service of God: He has set you both to do, and you
must do both; that is, both spiritual and corporal work: And to quarrel with
either, is to quarrel against God who has appointed them.

Quest. 5. But is it not worldliness when we follow worldly business, without
any need? Answ. 1. Yes, if you do it only from the love of the world, and with
a worldly mind: But not when you do it in obedience to God, and with a heavenly
mind. 2. He cannot be said to have no need, who has a body that needs it, or
lives in Commonwealth that needs it, and is a subject to God who commands
it.

Quest. 6. But what if I find by constant experince, that my soul is more
worldly after worldly business, and more cold and alienated from God? Answ.
What if you should find it so after giving to the poor, or visiting the sick,
or providing for your family? What then must you do? You must lament the
carnality of your minds, and beg of God for such grace as may fit you for your
duties: And not cast off your duty, because you are so bad; but labor to be
better, and to do it better. And 2. You must not judge of the benefit only by
present feeling: But if God has promised a blessing to you, believe it; and
you shall certainly meet with it at the last. Many a one thinks that to forsake
all bodily labor, and to do nothing but the duties of Religion, does benefit
them more at the present; when perhaps in a little time, the sickness of their
bodies, or the melancholy destraction of their minds, does lose them more than
they had gotten, and make them unfit for almost any duty at all. And many a one
that think their spiritual benefit is interrupted by their callings, do find
all Gods Promises fulfilled at last, to their satisfaction.

Quest. 7. But is it not lawful to set ones self only to Religion, as John
Baptist, Anna, etc. did?

Answ. It is a duty to be as religious as you can: But it is also a duty to
labor in your calling, and do all the good you can to others. The aged and
impotent that cannot labor in a calling, are excused from it: And they that
give up themselves to the Magistracy, Ministry, Physic, etc. must meddle with
no lower things, which would hinder them in the higher. But no man can be
excused from doing all the good he can to others, by any pretenses of looking
to his soul; For he can no way more surely further his salvation; nor cahe
hinder it more, than by sinful negligence and sloth.

Quest. 8. But was not labor and toil a curse upon Adam after his sin? and any
man that can may labor to escape a curse.

Answ. 1. Adam in innocence was set to dress and keep the Garden. 2. The curse
was in the toil and the frustration of his labor. 3. And even that is such a
curse, as God will not take off, or remit.

Quest. 9. Does not Paul say to servants, If ye can be free, use it rather?
Answ. True: But he says not, If you can be idle, use it rather. A free man may
work as hard as a bondsman.

Quest. 10. May not a man that has several callings before him, choose the
easiest? Answ. Not merely or chiefly because it is easy: but he must choose the
most profitable to the common good, be it easy or hard, if it be such as he
can undergo. Yet he may avoid such a calling, as by trying his body,
indisposeth him to spiritual things; or by taking up all his time, will deprive
him of convenient leisure for things spiritual. But he that only to ease his
flesh, does put by more profitable employments, because they will cost him
labor, does serve his flesh, and cast off his duty to his God.

II. The signs of wealthy-idleness are these:

1. When men think it unnecessary for them to labor constantly and diligently,
because they are rich, and can live without it; or because they are great, and
it is below them. The confutation of which error, I gave you before, and shall
give you more of it anon. The poor in spirit, think not a laborious life below
them.

2. When men have time to spare: This is a most evident mark of Idleness: For
God has given us no time in vain; but has given us full work, for all our
time. They that have time to play away needlessly, to sleep away needlessly, to
prate away needlessly, do tell the world that Sodom's Idleness is their sin.
Especially poor souls, who are yet unsanctified, and are strangers to a renewed
heart and life, and are utterly unfit to die, O what abundance of important
work have these to do? And can they be idle, while all this lies undone?
Indeed if they are in despair of being saved, it is no wonder: And one would
think by their lives that they did despair: For surely a man so near another
world, that must be in Heaven or Hell for ever, would never live idly, if he
had any good hope that his endeavors should not be all in vain. The poor in
spirit have no time to spare: Labor is their life: Eternity is still before
their eyes. Necessity is upon them; and they know the woe that follows
Idleness: Repentance for sin, and negligence past, is a constant spur to future
diligence. And their work is sweet, and incomparably more pleasant to them than
Idleness. If the Devil be so diligent, because he knows that his time is
short, Rev. 12.12. it is a shame to them that are not so, who call themselves
the servants of the Lord.

3. When men's labor has but the time that is due to Recreation; and Recreation
and Idleness has the great part of time that is due to labor. The labor of
the idle Sodomite, is like the Religion of the reserved Hypocrite: It is but
the leavings of the flesh, or somewhat that comes in upon the by. But God is
not unconstant in his mercies unto us: He is still preserving us, and
maintaining us: The Angels are still guarding us: The faithful Ministers of
Christ are constant in teaching us (and loath that Satan should hinder them, and
save their labor:) Faithful Magistrates also watch continually, to be a
terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well, as the Ministers of
God for our good: And can a short and idle kind of laboring then excuse us?
Christ said, It was his meat to do his Fathers will, when he was endeavoring
man's salvation, John 4 34. And that he must do the work of him that sent him
while it was day, John 9.4. And shall Idleness be excused in us? even in us who
must be judged according to our works, Rev. 22.12. Mark 13.34. by him that has
commanded every man his work? Yea when we are redeemed and purified to be
zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. and are his workmanship created to good
works in Christ, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them, Ephesians.
2.10.

4. When men make a great matter of all their labor; and of that which to a
diligent man is small. The sluggard has his thorn hedge, and a Lion in the
way, Prove. 22.13. and 26.13, 15, 16. But the diligent say, when they have done
their best, We are unprofitable servants: Nothing is so weary to them as
unprofitable idleness (except hurtful wickedness.) They think still, O how
short is time! and how much work is yet undone! And as every faithful Minister
in his calling, is never so well pleased, as when he does most for the good of
souls; so is it with every faithful Christian in his place. A Candle if it be
not burnt, is lost, and good for nothing.

5. The idle Sodomite has a mind which follows the affections of his body:
And as soon as his body is a little weary, his mind is so too, and suffers
the weariness of the body to prevail: Because the flesh is King within them.
Nay a slothful mind does often begin, and they are weary to look upon their work,
or to think of it, before it has wearyed the body at all: And what they do,
they do unwillingly; because they are in love with idleness, Mal. 1.13. But the
lowly and laborious are in love with diligence and work: and therefore though
they cannot avoid the wearyness of the body, their willing minds will carry on
the body as far as it can well go. The diligent woman works willingly with
her hands; her candle goes not out by night, etc. Prove. 31.13, etc. Servants
must do service with good will, as to the Lord, Ephesians. 6.7. If Ministers preach
and labor willingly, they have a reward, 1 Cor. 9.17. But not if they are only
driven on by necessity, and the fear of woe, 1 Pet. 5.2. What shall we do
willingly, if not our duties? He that sineth willingly, and serves God, and
follows his labor unwilingly, shall be rewarded according to his will.

6. The idle Sodomite does love and choose that kind of life which is easiest,
and has least work to be done. This is the chief provision by which he
fulfilleth his fleshly lust. An idle servant thinks that the best place, in
which he shall have most ease and fullness. An idle Parent will cast all the
burden of his childrens teaching, upon the Schoolmaster and the Pastor. An idle
Minister thinks himself best, where he may have no more labor, than what
tends to his public applause; and when he has the most wealth and honor,
and least to do, he takes that to be the flourishing prosperity of the Church.
And indeed if our calling were like the soldiers to kill men, and not liker
the Surgeons to cure them, we might think it is the best time, when we have
least employment.

But the faithful servant will be most thankful for that state of life, in
which he does most good: And as he takes doing good, to be the surest way of
getting and receiving; so he takes the good of another as his own; and
another necessity is his necessity: He knows that he is best, who is likest
unto God; and that is he that is the most abundant in love, and doing good:
Like the Sun that never rests from moving or giving light and heat. The
running spring is pure, when the standing water is muddy and corrupt: The
cessation of motion quickly mortifieth the blood: He that said as to works of
charity, Be not weary of well doing; for in due time, you shall reap, if you
faint not, Gal. 6.9. has said so too, as to our bodily labor in our common
callings in the world, 2 These. 3.13.

I know that a servant may be glad of a place where he is not oppressed with
unreasonable labor, and where he has competent time for the learning of Gods
Word: And a poor man may be glad when he is freed from necessity of doing that
which is to his hurt: But otherwise no man but a fleshly bruit will wish or
contrive for a life of idleness.

Object. Is it not said, Blessed are the dead, for they rest from their
labors? Rev. 14.13. Ans. True: but mark that their works follow them: And what
are the works which follow you? And note, that it is not work or duty that they
shall rest from: (For they rest not crying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty,
etc.) But it is only their labors; that is, the painful sort of work and
suffering, proper to this sinful life. The blessed indeed are freed in Heaven
from this; because they were not freed (...) it on earth, as the ungodly and
slothful servant are.

7. Lastly, Idleness is seen by the work that is undone, Pro. 24.30. The
sluggards Vineyard is overgrown with weeds. If your souls be unrenewed, and
your assurance of salvation, and evidences yet to get, and few the better for
you in the world, and you are yet unready for death and judgment, you give too
full a proof of idleness. The diligent woman, Prove. 31.16, etc. could show her
labors in her treasures, her Vineyard, the clothing and provisions of her
family, etc. show yours by the good which you have done in the world, and by
the preparation of your souls for a better world. Let every man prove his own
work, that he may have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, Gal.
6.3, 4. What case are your children in? Are they taught, or untaught? What case
is your soul in? your fruit must judge you.

III. The mischiefs of this Sodomitical Idleness, and the reasons against it,
are (briefly) these.

1. It is contrary to the active nature of man's soul; which in activity
exceeds the fire it self. It is as natural for a soul to be active, as for a
stone or clod of earth to lie still. And this active nature animateth the
passive body, to move it, and use it in it is proper work. And should this
heavenly fire be imprisoned in the body, which it should command and move?
Psalm. 104.23. Man goes forth to his work and to his labor till the evening.

2. It is contrary to the common course of nature. Does the Sun shine for you
as well as for others? or does it not? Does all the frame of nature continue in
its course (the air, the waters, the summer and winter) for you as well as for
others, or not? If not, then you take not your selves beholden to God for them:
And if you have no use for the Sun and other creatures, you have no use for
life: for by them you live. But if yea, then what is it that they serve you
for? Did God ever frame you so glorious a retinuue, to attend you only to
sleep, and laugh, and play, and to be idle? what, is all this for no higher an
end? or rather do you not by your idleness forfeit life, and all these helps
and maintainers of your lives?

3. It is an unthankful reproach and blasphemy against the God of Nature; yea
and against the Lord your Redeemer; to think that the wise Almighty God, did
make so noble a thing as a soul, and place it in so curious an engine as the
body, where spirits, and blood, and heart, and lungs, are never idle, but in
constant motion; and that he has appointed us so glorious a retinue as
aforesaid, and all this to do nothing with, or worse than nothing? To sleep,
and rise, and dress your selves, and talk, and eat, and drink; to tell men only
that you are not dead, lest they should mistake, and bury you alive? what is it
but to put a scorn on your Creator and Redeemer, to live as if he had created
and redeemed you for no better and nobler ends than these?

4. You do as it were pray for death, or provoke God to take away your lives.
For if they be good for nothing else but idleness, and beastly pleasures, why
should you expect to have them continued? or at least, why should he not use
you as Nebuchadnezzar, and take away your reason, and turn you into beasts, if
the life and pleasure of a beast be all that you desire? Could not you eat, and
drink, and sleep, and play, without an intellectual soul? Cannot the birds make
their nests, and breed, and feed their young, and sit and sing, without an
intellectual nature? Cannot a swine have his ease, and meat, and lust, without
reason? what should you do with reason for such uses?

5. You show a stupid senseless heart, that can live idly, and have so much to
do; and have so many spurrs to rouse you up: To live continually in the sight
of God, to have a soul so ignorant, so unbelieving, so unholy, so unfurnished
of faith and love, so unready for death, so uncertain of salvation; nay in such
apparent danger of damnation, and to be still uncertain of living one day or
hour longer; and yet to live idly in such a case, as if all were well, and your
work were done, and you had no more to fear or care for: O what a mad, what a
dead, what a sottish kind of soul is this! to see the graves before your eyes;
to see your neighbors carried thither; to feel the tokens of mortality daily
in your selves; to be called on and warned to prepare, and yet under this to
live as if you had nothing to do, but to show your selves in the neatest dress,
and as a Peacock, to spread your plumes for your selves and others to look
upon, or to pamper a carcass for worms and rottenness! O what a deplorable case
is this! The Lord pity you, and awaken your understandings, and bring you to
your wits, and you will then wonder at your own stupidity.

6. Idleness is a sin which is contrary to Gods universal Law: The Law which
extended to all times and places. Adam in innocence was to labor: He that had
all things prepared for his sustenance by God, was yet himself to labor: He
that was Lord of all the world, and was richer than any of our proud ones
whosoever, was yet to dress and keep the garden. Cain was a tiller of land, and
Abel was a keeper of cattle, when they were heirs of all the earth. Noah also
was Lord of all the world, and richer than you, and yet he was an Husbandman.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were Princes, and yet keepers of sheep and cattle: It
is not a bare permission, but a precept of diligence in the fourth Commandment
[ Six days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to do.] Christ himself
did not live idly, but before his Ministry they said, Mark 6.3. Is not this the
Carpenter? And afterward how incessantly was he doing good to men's bodies and
souls? And what laborious lives did his Apostles live? See 2 Cor. 6.5. and
11.23. Acts 18.3. And are you exempt from the universal Law?

7. You show a base and fleshly mind. The noblest natures are the most active,
and the basest the most dead and dull. The earth it not baser than the fire, in
a greater degree than an idle soul is baser than one that is active, and
spends themselves in doing good. Methinks your Pride it self should keep you
from proclaiming such a dead and earthen disposition.

8. Idleness is of the same kind with fornication, gluttony, drunkenness, and
other such beastly sins: For all is but sinful flesh-pleasing, or sensuality:
The same fleshly nature which draws them to the one, does draw you to the
other; and they do but gratify their flesh in one kind of vice, as you do in
another. And it is pity that Idleness should be in so much less disgrace than
they. And truly if you cannot deny your flesh it is ease, I cannot see if the
temptation lay as strong that way, how you should deny it in any of those
lusts; so that you s^em to be vertually fornicators, gluttons, drunkards, etc.
and ready to commit the acts.

9. And hereby you strengthen the flesh as it is your enemy for the time to
come. When you have long used to please it by idleness, it will get the
victory, and must be pleased still: And then you are undone for ever, if grace
do not yet cause you to overcome it. For if you live after the flesh you shall
die: but if by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live,
Romans 8.13. None are freed from condemnation, nor are members of Christ, but
they that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. For the
carnal mind is enmity against God, v. 7.

10. Idleness is a sin much aggravated by its continuance. A drunkard is not
always drunken, nor a swearer is not always swearing, nor a thief is not
always stealing; but an idle person is almost always idle: whole hours and
days, if not weeks and years together. O what a continual course of sin do our
rich and gentile drones still live in! As if they were afraid to do any thing,
which when death comes, they could comfortably be found doing!

11. And O what a time-wasting sin is Idleness! O precious time, how art thou
despised by these drowsy despisers of God and of their souls! O what would the
despairing souls in Hell give for some of that time which these Bedlams prate
away, and game and play away, and trifle and fool away, and sleep and loiter
away! And what would they give for a little of it themselves, upon the same
terms, when it is gone, and when wishing is too late!

12. Idleness is a self-contradicting sin: None are so much afraid of dying as
the idle (and I do not blame them if they knew all) and yet none more cast away
their lives: They die voluntarily continually: He that loses the use and
benefit of life, does lose his life it self: For what is it good for, but as a
means to its ends? What difference between a man asleep and dead, but only that
one is more in expectation of usefulness when he awaketh? It is a pitiful
sight to a man in his wits, to see the Bedlam world afraid of dying, and
trembling at every sign of death; and in the mean time setting as little by
their lives, as if they were worth no more, than to spend at cards, or dice, or
stage plays, or dressings, or feastings, or ludicrous complements.

13. You teach your servants that life which yet you will not endure in them:
For why should they be more careful and diligent in the work which you command
them, than you in the work which God commands you? Are you the better
Masters? or, will you find them better work? or, will you pay them better
wages? I know God needs not your service, as you do theirs: But he commands
it, for other ends, though he need it not. And should any be more careful^ to
please you, that are but worms and dust, than you should be to please your
Maker? If an idle life be best, why do you blame it in your servants? If it be
not, why do you live such lives your selves?

14. By Idleness you show that when you do labor, it is but for your carnal
selves, and that it is not God whom you serve in your daily callings. He that
will labor when he is poor, and feels the necessity of it, and will give
over all, and live idly, and playfully when he is rich, does show that he
labors not in obedience to God (or else he would continue it) but merely to
supply his bodily wants. You have your reward then from your selves, and you
cannot in reason expect any from God. But true Believers have another rule, by
which they live, Col. 3.23, 24. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the
Lord, and not to men; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of
the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ.

15. Idleness is a forfeiture of your protection, and of your daily bread. God
is not bound to keep you to play, and loiter, and do nothing. You have not a
plenary right to your meat, if you live in wilful idleness. I showed you Gods
Commands before. Gods Promise of prosperity, is, Thou shall eat the labor of
thy hands, Psalm. 128.2. (And if many in England that have most, should eat no
other than the labor of their hands, it would cure their fullness.) The
diligent woman, Prove. 31.27. does not eat the bread of idleness. And Paul
makes it a Church-Canon, 2 These. 3.6.10, 12 and commands and exhorts us,
in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that all work with quietness, and eat
their own bread; and that the Church withdraw themselves from every Brother
that walks disorderly; and that if any would not work, neither should be eat.

16. The idle rob themselves and others: You rob your selves of the fruit of
your own labors; and you rob your Masters, or your Families, or whomsoever you
should labor for, Prove. 18.9. He that is slothful in his work, is Brother to
him that is a great waster, Prove. 21.25. The desire of the slothful kills
him, because his hands refuse to labor; that is, 1. The sluggishness of the
wisher famisheth him: And 2. The hunger or desire tormenteth him when he has
not the thing desired, Eccles. 10.18. By much sloth the building decays; and
by idleness of the bands, the house droppeth through, Prove. 19.15. Slothfulness
casts into a deep sleep; and an idle soul shall suffer hunger. And he that
provideth not for his own (kindred and relations) but especially for those of
his family, has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
Has no one need of you? has no one hired you? has no one any right to your
labors, that you are so long idle? If none have need of you, what do you in
the world?

17. The idle are drones and burdens of the Commonwealth: And the best ordered
Governments have made Laws against them, as they did against other pernicious
crimes, 2 These. 3.8. Paul labored day and night, that he might not be
chargeable to any. And you think because you have enough, that other men must
labor for you, but you may live idly without any blame. You live then upon the
labors of others, but who lives upon yours? Yea I have known some lazy
persons, that because they are professors of zeal in Religion; or because they
are Ministers or Scholars, live idly in their callings, and take their ease,
and think that all others that have riches are bound to maintain them (like the
Popish begging Friars) and they say, He is covetous that cher^sheth not them in
idleness; and he that gives not to them, does them wrong; when Paul commands
that they should not eat: And when we ask them how they live, they say, Upon
the providence of God: And when the tenderness of people causes them to
contribute to relieve these drones, they hypocritically admire the providence
of God, who provideth for them, and live in idleness, and call it living upon
providence.

18. Idleness depriveth you of the great delight of doing good. There is no
such pleasure in this world, as is found in succesful doing good: No man
knows it but he that tries it, (and that without any conceits of merit, in
commutative Justice.) To do good in Magistracy for the piety, peace and safety
of the people; to do good as Ministers, for the saving of souls; to do good as
Parents, to educate a holy seed; to do good as Physicians, to save men's lives,
etc. It is a pleasure exceeding all voluptuousness. And this the idle wilfully
reject.

19. You lose all the reward of well doing at the last, and fall under the doom
of the unprofitable servant, Mat. 25. who must be cast into outer darkness. You
must answer for all the talents of time, and health, and strength, and parts,
to him who will judge all according to what they have done in the body: And
where shall the idle then appear?

20. Idleness will destroy your health and lives: Nothing but fullness (which is
its companion) does bring so many thousands unseasonably to the grave. And do
you neither love your souls, nor your lives? Are you only for your present ease?

21. Idleness breeds melancholy, and corrupts the fantasy and mind, and so
unfitteth you for all that is good. Therefore the Idle that will do no good,
are fain to devise some vanity to do; some game, or play, or dress, or
complement, etc. or else they would grow addle-brained, and a shame and burden
to themselves. The constant labors of a lawful calling is one of the best
cures of melancholy in the world, if it be done with willingness, success and
pleasure.

22. Lastly, Idleness is the Nursery of a world of vices. It is the field of
temptation, where Satan sows his tares while men are sleeping. When they are
idle, they are at leisure for lustful thoughts; for wanton dalliance; for idle
talk; for needless sports, and plays, and visits; for gaming, and riotous
feasting, drinking and excess; for pride, and an hundred vain curiosities: Yea
for contentions and mischievous designs: Needless and sinful things must be
done, when necessary duties are laid by.

And if they are poor, idleness prepares them to murmr and be discontent,
and fallout, and contend with one another; to defraud others, and to steal.
These and more are the natural fruits of Idleness.

But here I must annex two Cautions.

1. That none make this a pretense for a worldly mind and life; nor think that
Religion is a fruit of Idleness; nor say as Pharaoh did of the Israelites, when
they would go sacrifice to God, Ye are idle, Exodus 5.17. It is Idleness that
makes most men ungodly: They are convinced that it is better to meditate on
Gods Word, and call upon his Name, and give all diligence to make our calling
and election sure; But they are idle, and say, There is a Lion in the way; what
a weariness is it? we shall never endure it: As if their souls and Heaven were
not worth their labor, and as if they would go to Hell for ease; and as if the
feast of joy and glory were not worth the labor of eating or receiving it.

2. Make not this a pretense to oppress your servants with unmerciful labors,
beyond their strength; or such as so weary them, and take up all their time,
that they have not leisure so much as to pray. It is Gods great mercy to
servants, that he has separated the Lords day for a holy rest; or else many
would have little rest, or means of holiness. Some think that others can never
labor enough for them, because they pay them wages; and yet that they are
bound to do nothing themselves, even because God has given them more wages and
wealth than he has given to others.

More particular Directions are as follows.

1. Give up your selves by absolute subjection to God as his servants; and then
you can never rest in an idle unserviceable life.

2. Take all that you have, as Gods talents, and from his trust; and then you
dare not but prepare in the use of them, for your account.

3. Live as those that are certain to die, and still uncertain of the time, and
that know what an eternal weight of joy or misery depends upon the spending
of your present time: And then you dare not live in Idleness. Live but as men
whose souls are awake, to look before them into another world, and you will say
(as I have long been forced to do) O how short are the days! how long are the
nights! how swift is time! how slow is work! how far am I behind-hand! I am
afraid lest my life will be finished before the work of life; and lest my time
will be done, while much of my work remains undone.

4. Ask your selves what you would be found doing if death now surprise you?
and whether work or idleness will be best in the review?

5. Try a laborious life of well-doing a while, and the experience will draw
you on.

6. Try your selves by a standing resolution, and engage your selves in
necessary business, and that in a set and stated course; that necessity and
resolution may keep you from an idle life.

7. Forsake the company of the idle and voluptuous, and accompany the laborious
and diligent.

8. Study well how to do the greatest good you can, that the worth of the work
may draw you on. For they that are of little use, for want of parts, or skill,
or opportunity, are more liable to be tempted into idleness, as thinking their
work is to no purpose: when the well-furnished person does long to be
exercising his wisdom and virtue in profitable well-doing.

CHAP. XVIII. How by Faith to overcome unmercifulness to the needy.
IV. THE fourth sin of Sodom, and of Prosperity, mentioned, Ezekiel. 16.49. is,
They did not strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. Against which at the
present I shall give you but these brief Directions.

Direct. 1. Love God your Creator and Redeemer, and then you will love the
poorest of your Brethren for his sake. And love will easily persuade you to do
them good.

Direct. 2. Labor most diligently to cure your inordinate self-love, which
makes men care little for any but themselves, and such as are useful to
themselves: And when once you love your neighbors as your selves, it will be
as easy to persuade you to do good to them as to your selves; and more easy
to dissuade you from hurting them than your selves: (because sensuality
tempts you stronglier to hurt your selves, than any thing does to hurt them.)

Direct. 3. Overvalue not the things of the world; and then you will not make a
great matter of parting with them, for another good.

Direct. 4. Do as you would be done by: And ask your selves how you would be
judged of and used, if you were in their condition your selves.

Direct. 5. Set the life of Christ and his Apostles before you; and remember
what a delight it was to them to do good: And at how much dearer rate Christ
showed mercy to you and others, than he requires you to show mercy at to any.

Direct. 6. Read over Christ's precepts of Charity and Mercy, that a thing so
frequently urged on you, may not be senslesly despised by you.

Direct. 7. Remember that Mercy is a duty applauded by all the world: As humane
interest requires it; so humane nature approves it in all. Good and bad, even
all the world do love the merciful: Or if the partial interest of some proud
and covetous persons (as the Popish Clergy for instance) do call for cruelty
against those that are not of their mind, and for their profit; yet this goes
so much against the stream of the common interest, and the light of humane
nature, that mankind will still abhor their cruelty, though they may afright a
few that are near them from uttering their detestation. All men speak well of a
merciful man, and ill of the unmerciful.

Direct. 8. Believe Christ's promises which he has made to the merciful, so
fully and frequently in Scripture: As in Mat. 5.7. Luke 6.36. Prove. 11.17.
Psalm. 37.26, etc. And believe his threatenings against the unmerciful, that they
shall find no mercy, Prove. 12.10. James 2.13. And remember how Christ has
described the last Judgment, as passing upon this reckoning, Matthew. 25.

Direct. 9. Live not in fleshly sensuality your selves: For else your flesh
will devour all; and if you have hundreds and thousands a year, will leave you
but little or nothing to do good with.

Direct. 10. Engage your selves (not by rash vows, but by resolution and
practice) in a stated way of doing good, and take not only such occasions as
fall out unexpectedly. Set a part a convenient proportion of your estates, as
God does bless you; and let not needless occasions divert it, and defraud the
poor, and you of the benefit.

Direct. 11. Remember still that nothing is absolutely your own, but God who
lends it you has the true propriety, and will certainly call you to an
account. And ask your selves daily, How shall I wish at the day of reckoning,
that I had expended and used all my estate? and do accordingly.

Direct. 12. Forget not what need you stand in daily of the mercy of God; and
what need you will shortly be in, when your health and wealth will fail you.
And how earnestly then you will cry to God for mercy, mercy, Prove. 21.13. Whosoever
stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall
not be heard.

Direct. 13. Hearken not to an unbelieving heart, which will tell you that you
may want your selves, and therefore would restrain you from well doing. If God
be to be trusted with your souls, he is to be trusted with your bodies. God
tries whether indeed you take him for your God, by trying whether you can
trust him. If you deal with him as with a bankerupt, or a deceitful man, whom
you will trust no further than you have a present pawn or security, in case he
should deceive you; you blaspheme him, instead of taking him for your God.

Direct. 14. Let your greatest mercy be showed in the greatest things; and let
the good of men's souls be your end even in your mercy to their bodies. And
therefore do all in such a manner as tends most to promote the highest end.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

CHAP. XIX. How to live by Faith in Adversity.
IF I should give you distinct Directions, for the several cases of poverty,
wrongs, persecutions, unkindnesses, contempt, sickness, etc. it would swell
this Treatise yet bigger than I intended. I shall therefore take up with this
general Advice.

Direct. 1. In all Adversity remember the evil of sin, which is the cause, and
the Holiness and Justice of God which is exercised; and then the hatred of sin,
and the love of Gods Holiness and Justice will make you quietly submit. You
will then say, when Repentance is serious, I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, Micah 7.9. And, why does living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Lam. 3.39. Let us search and
try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord; for he has smitten, and he will
heal, etc. v. 40, 41.

Object. But does not Job 's case tell us, that some afflictions are only for
trial, and not for sin?

Answ. No; it only tells us that the reason why Job is chosen out at that
time, to suffer more than other men, is not because he was worse than others,
or us bad; but for his trial and good. But 1. Affliction as it is now existent
in the world upon mankind, is the fruit of Adams sin at first, and contained in
the peremptory unremitted sentence. 2. And this general state of suffering
mankind, is now in the hand and power of Christ, who sometimes indeed does let
out more on the best than upon others, and that especially for their trial and
good; but usually some sins of their own also have a hand in them, and procure
the evil, though his mercy turn it to their benefit.

Direct. 2. Deal closely and faithfully with your hearts and lives in a
suffering time, and rest not till your consciences are well assured that no
special provocation is the cause, or else do testify that you have truly
repented, and resolved against it.

Otherwise you may lengthen your distress, if you leave that thorn in your sore
which causes it: Or else God may change it into a worse; or may give you over
to impenitency, which is worst of all: Or at least, you will want that assured
peace with God, and solid peace of conscience, which must be your support and
comfort in affliction; and so will sink under it, as unable to bear it.

Direct. 3. Remember that the sanctifying fruit of Adversity is first and more
to be looked after, than either the comfort, or the deliverance. And therefore
that all men, no nor all Christians, must not use the same method, in the same
affliction, when as their spiritual cases differ.

A cleared conscience, and one that has walked faithfully with God, and
fruitfully in the world, and kept himself from his iniquity, may bend most of
his thoughts to the comforting promises, and happy end. But one man has been
bold with wilful sin, and his work must be first, to renew repentance, and see
that there be no root of bitterness left behind, and to set upon true
reformation of life, and reparation of the hurt which he has done.

Another is grown into love with the world, and has let out his heart to
pleasant thoughts and hopes of prosperity, and alienated his thoughts more than
before from God. This man must first perceive his error, and hear Gods voice
which calls him home, and see the characters of vanity and vexation, written
on the face of that which he over-loved; and then think of comfort when he has
got a cure.

Another is grown dull and careless of his soul, and has lost much of his
sense of things eternal, and is cold in love, and cold in prayer, and lives as
if he were grown weary of God, and weary of well doing. His work must be to
feel the smart of Gods displeasure, so far as to awaken him to repentance, and
set him again with former seriousness, upon his duty: And when he mendeth his
pace, he may desire to be eased of the rod and spur. But to give unseasonable
cordials to any of these, is but to frustrate the affliction, and to hurt them,
and prepare for worse. Nay, and when they are comforted in season, it must be
with due caution: Go thy way, and sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee. It is p^rnicious unskilfulness in those comforters of the afflicted, who
have the same customary words of comfort for all; and by their improper
cordials unseasonably applied, delude poor souls, and hinder that necessary
repentance which God by so sh^rp a means does call them to.

Direct. 4. Remember that your part in affliction is to do your duty, and to
get the benefit of it: but to remove it is Gods part: Therefore be you careful
about that part which is your own, and then make no question but God will do
his part. Let it be your first question therefore [ What is it that I am
obliged to in this condition?] What is the special duty of one in this
sickness, this poverty, imprisonment, restraint, contempt, or slander, which I
undergo?] Be careful daily to do that duty, and then never fear the issue of
your suffering: Nothing can go amiss to him that is found in the way of his
duty.

And let it be your next question, What spiritual good may be got by this
affliction? May not my repentance be renewed? my self-denial, humility,
contempt of the world, patience, and confidence on God, be exercised and
increased by it? and is not this the end of my heavenly Father? Is not his rod
an act of love and kindness to me? Does he not offer me by it all this good?

And let your next question be [ Have I yet got that good which God does offer
me? Have I any considerable benefit to show, which I have received by this
affliction since it came?] If not, why should you desire it to be taken away?
Play not the Hypocrite in speaking that good of an afflicting God, which you do
not seriously believe: If you believe that God is wiser than you, to know what
is fittest for you, and that he is better than you, and therefore has better
ends than you can have; and that really he offers you far greater good by
your sufferings, than he takes from you: Let your affections then be agreeable
to this belief: Are you afraid of your own commodity? Do you impatiently long
to be delivered from your gain? are you so childish as to pull off the
plaster, if you believe that it is curing the sore? and that it cannot be well
and safely done without it? Do you call it the fruit of Gods Wisdom and Love,
and yet be as weary of it, as if there were nothing in it but his wrath? Trust
God with his work who never fails; and be careful of your own, who are
conscious of untrustiness.

Direct. 5. Look principally to your hearts, that they grow not to an
over-valuing of the prosperity of the flesh; nor to an under-valuing of
holiness and the prosperity of the soul. For this unhappy carnality does both
cause affliction, and make us unprofitable and impatient under it.

1. He that is a worldling, or a voluptuous flesh pleaser, and savoureth
nothing but the things of the flesh, will think himself undone, when his
pleasure, and plenty, and honor with men, is taken away. Nothing makes men
grieve for the loss of any worldly commodity, so much as the over-loving of it.
It is Love that seeks it when you are in hope, and Love that mourns when
you are in want, as well as Love which delights in it when you possess it: As
sick men use to love health better than those that never felt the want of it;
so it is too common with poor men to love riches better than the rich that
never needed: (And yet, poor souls, they deceive themselves, and cry out
against the rich, as if they were the only lovers of the world, when they love
it more themselves, though they cannot get it.) Never think of bearing
affliction with a patient and submissive mind, as long as you over-love the
things which affliction takes from you: For the loss of them will tear those
hearts which did stick so inordinately to them.

2. And if you grow to an undervaluing of Holiness, you can never be reconciled
to afflicting providence. For it is for our profit that God corrects us; but
for what profit? that we may be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10, 14. If
therefore you undervalue that which is Gods end, and goes for your gain, you
will never think that you are gainers or savers by his rod. In correction God
does as it were make a bargain with you; he will take away your riches, or your
friends, or your health, and he will give you (if you refuse it not) increase
of patience, and mortification in the stead of them: he will exchange so much
heavenly-mindedness, for so much of the treasures or pleasures of the world.
And now, if you do not like the bargain, if really you had rather have more
health, than more holiness; more of the world, than more heavenly-mindedness;
more fleshly pleasure, than more mortification of fleshly desires, you will
never then like the correcting hand of God, nor rightly profit by it: You will
grudge at his dealing, and wish that you were out of his hand, and in your own;
and that your estates, and health, and friends, were not at his disposal, but
at yours; and you will lose the offered benefit, because you value it not, and
accept it not as it is offered you.

3. And those that have some esteem of Holiness, and yet neglect the duty which
should procure the exercise and increase of grace, do make correction
burdensome by making it unprofitable to them. For to hear that they may be
gainers by affliction, and to find that they are not, will not reconcile them
to it. Whereas if they had really got the benefit, it would quiet them, and
comfort them, and make them patient, and thankful to their Father. What have
you to show that you gained by your sufferings? Are you really more mortified,
more penitent, more humble, more heavenly, more obedient, more patient than you
were before? If you are so, you cannot possibly think that it has been to your
loss to be afflicted: For no one that has these graces can so undervalue them,
as to think that worldly prosperity or ease is better. But if you have not such
gain to show, what wonder if you are weary of the medicine which heals not?
and if, when you have made it do you no good, you complain of it, when it is
your selves, that you should complain of. If you could say, that before you
were afflicted, you went astray, but now you have learnt and kept Gods
precepts, you might then say by experience, It is good for me that I was
afflicted, Psalm. 119.67, 71. And men are taught by natural self-love, not to
think ill of that which does that which does them good, if by experience they
know it. You will then confess that God in very faithfulness afflicts you,
Psalm. 119.75.

Direct. 6. Remember that nothing can be amiss which is done by God: For where
there is perfection of Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, no actions can be bad.
And there is nothing done by any of your afflicters, which is not governed by
the will of God, Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not
done it? 2 Chronicles. 10.15. So the King hearkened not to the people; for the cause
was of God, that the Lord might perform his Word -- God who would not cause the
sin, is said to be the cause of the event as a punishment, because he wisely
permitted it for that end, Acts 2.23. Him being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain -- Acts 4.28. The people of Israel were gathered to do,
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done: That is, he
willed by his antecedent will, that Christ should be a sacrifice for sin; and
he willed by his consequent will, (as a Judge and punisher of man's sin) that
the rebellious Jews should be left to their malicious wills, to execute it. And
that God which moderateth the wills and actions of the most malicious men and
Devils, will restrain them from violating any of his promises for his servants
good.

Direct. 7. Always keep before your eyes the example of a crucified Christ,
and of all his holy Apostles and Martyrs which have followed him. Look still to
Jesus the author and finisher of your Faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the Throne of God. Consider him that endured such contradiction
of sinners against himself, lest you be wearied and faint in your mind, Heb.
12.2, 3. If you did determine to know nothing but Christ crucified, and by his
cross had crucified the the world, (1 Cor. 2.2. Gal. 6.14.) you would be able
to say, I am crucified with Christ, yet I live, that is, not I, but Christ
lives in me, Gal. 2.20. And to look on the pleasure and glory of the world, as
the world did look on a crucified Christ, when they shook the head at him as he
hanged on the cross. You would love the narrow suffering way, where you see
before you the footsteps of your Lord, and of so many holy Martyrs and
Believers: You would say, sure this is the safe and blessed way, in which
Christ, and all the heavenly Army have passed hence unto their Crown: You would
say, Is the servant greater than his Lord? If thus the innocent Lord of life,
and Master of the house was injured and afflicted, am I better than he? Though
he suffered to save me from Hell, yet not to save me from the purifying trials
here on earth. Doubtless you would count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and count them but dung that you
might win him -- and that you might know him, and the power of his
resurrection* and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to
his death, Phil. 3.8, 10.

Direct. 8. Keep the eye of Faith still fixed on the eternal glory; that you
may understand what affliction is, when you take it with its end. Remember what
eternal Joys it leads to; and what thoughts you will have of all your pain,
when you find your selves in the everlasting rest. Remember where all tear^
shall be wiped from your eyes; and who dare blame that way as narrow or soul,
which brings us to such an end, Psalm. 126.5, 6. They that s^w in tears, shall
reap in joy: He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Is not eternal joy
sufficient for you? When you are suffering with the Church militant, look up to
the Church triumphant; and remember that they were lately as low, as sad, as
sorrowful as you, and you shall shortly be as high, as glad, as joyful as they.
Look into Heaven, and see what you suffer for, and think whether that be not
worthy of harder terms than any you can undergo. Romans 8.17, 18. If we suffer
with him, that we may be also glorified together: For I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us, 2 Cor. 4 16, 17, 18. For which cause we faint
not: but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by
day: For our light affl^ction which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: While we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: For the things which are
seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal. For we know
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building
of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Heaven well
believed, will enable us patiently and cheerfully to bear all things. He will
account the very reproach of Christ, to be greater riches than the treasures of
the world, who looks believingly to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26.

Direct. 9. Learn to die, and then you have learned to suffer. He that can bear
death, by the power of faith, can bear almost any thing. And he that is well
prepared to die, is prepared for any affliction; and he that is not, is
unprepared for prosperity.

Direct. 10. Remember still that life being so very short, the afflictions of
Believers are as short. We have so little a time to live, that we have but a
little while to suffer. And if thou faint in the day of adversity, when it is
so little a while to night, thy strength is small, Prove. 24.10.

Direct. 11. Remember that thou bear but the common burden of the Sons of
Adam, who are born to sorrow as the sparks fly upward: And that thou in like to
all the members of Christ, who must take up their cross, and suffer with him,
if they will reign with him: And that thou art but going the common way to
Heaven, which that heavenly society has trod before thee: And can thou
expect to be exempted both from the lot of humane lapsed nature, and from the
lot of all the Saints? If thou would be carried to Heaven in the Chariot of
Elias, and could expect to escape the jaws of death, yet must thou endure
the persecution, weariness and hunger of Elias before such a change.

Direct. 12. Think also how unreasonable it is, for one that must have eternal
glory, to grudge at a little suffering in the way, and for one that is saved
from the torments of Hell, to think it much to be duly chastened on earth. For
a Lazarus that must be comforted in Abraham's bosom, to murmr that he waits
a while in poverty at the rich man's doors? Shall a wicked worldling venture
into endless pains, and put himself out of the hopes of Heaven, and all this
for a short and foolish pleasure? And will you grudge to suffer so small and
short a chastisement in the way to an endless rest and joy?

Direct. 13. Think why it is that Christ has so largely commended, and blessed a
suffering state, and chosen such a life for those that he will save: And why he
so often pronounces a woe to the prosperous world: It is not for want of love
to his Disciples; nor for want of power to secure their peace, Matthew. 5.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Blessed are they that are
persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Luke
6.24, 25, 26. Woe to you that are rich, for you have received your consolation:
Woe to you that are full, for ye shall hunger: Woe unto you that laugh now, for
ye shall mourn and weep: Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you, for
so did their Fathers to the false Prophets, James 1.2, 3. My Brethren, count it
all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations (that is, trying afflictions)
knowing that the trying of your faith works patience -- James 5.1, 2. Go too
now ye (...) men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon you --
All these words are not for nothing: And judge how he should think of adversity
who believes them.

Direct. 14. Mark well whether you find not that your selves and others are
usually much better in affliction, than in prosperity: And whether there be not
something in the one to make you better, and in the other to delude men, and
make them worse. O look and tremble at the dangers and dol^ful miseries of most
that are lifted high! how they are blinded, flattered, captivated in sin, and
are the shame of nature, and the calamity of the world! And mark when they come
to die, or lie in sickness, how enlightened, how penitent, how humble, how
mortified and reformed they then seem to be, and how much they condemn all sin,
and justify a holy life: And observe your selves whether you be not wiser and
better, more penitent, and less worldly in an afflicted state: And will you
think that intolerable, which so much bettereth almost all the world? Alas,
were it not for affliction, there are some Nebuchadnezzars that would never be
humbled, and some Pharaohs that would never confess their sins, and some
Manassehs that would never be converted. Many in Heaven are thankful for
affliction, and so should we, Eccles. 7.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It is better to go to
the house of mourning, than to the house of feasting: For that is the end of
all men, and the living will lay it to heart. Sorrow is better than laughter;
for ^y the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better. The heart of
the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house of
mirth. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the
song of fools: For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter
of a fool.

Do you not perceive that a merry prosperous state inclines to folly, levity,
rashness, inconsiderateness, stupidity, forgetting the latter end, etc? And
that a sadder frame is more awakened, illuminated, fixed, sensible, considerate
and fit for great employments? Quarrel not then with your Physician, because he
dyeteth you as tends to your cure, and turns you not over to the diet of
desperate patients, or of fools.

Direct. 15. If God afflict you, add not causless affliction to your selves. If
he touch your friends, or body, or estate, do not you therefore touch and tear
your hearts. If you have not enough, why do you complain of it? If you have
enough, why do you make your selves more? He that has said, Blessed are they
that mourn, did never mean that those are blessed that mourn erroneously, for
nothing, or for that which is their benefit, or that plevishly quarrel with God
and man, or that wilfully by pride or impatiency torment themselves. He meant
not to bless the sorrow of the covetous that grieveth because he is not rich,
or because he is wronged, or is a loser in some commodity; nor to bless the
sorrow of the proud, who is troubled because he is not observed, honored or
preferred: Nor the sorrow of the sensual, who grieve when their lusts and
pleasures are restrained: Nor the sorrows of the idle, who grieve if they are
called to diligent labor; nor the sorrow of the envious, who grieveth to see
another prosper; nor the sorrows of the cruel, who grieve when they cannot be
as hurtful to Gods servants, and their neighbors or enemies, as they desire.
It is neither wicked sorrows, nor wilful self-vexation, which Christ does
bless: But it is the holy improving, and patient enduring the sufferings laid
upon us by God or man.

Direct. 16. Let Patience have its perfect work. He that believes, will not
make haste, James 1.3. Isa. 28.16. God's time is best; and eternity is long
enough for our ease and comfort. It is by patient continuance in well doing,
that glory, honor and immortality must be sought, Romans 2. We shall reap in due
season, if we faint not, Galat. 6.9. James 5.7, 8, 9. Be patient therefore
Brethren unto the coming of the Lord. Behold the husbandman waits for the
precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until he receive
the early and latter rain. Be ye also patient: stablish your hearts; for the
coming of the Lord draws nigh. When others by impatience lose themselves, do
you in your patience possess your souls, Luke 21.19. Romans 5.4. Patience works
experience, and experience hope, which makes not ashamed. If we hope for that
we see not, thee do we with patience wait for it, Romans 8.25. Through patience
and comfort of the Scriptures it is that we have hope, Romans 15.4. Therefore we
have need of patience, that when we have done the will of God, we may inherit
the promise, Heb. 10.36.11.

CHAP. XX. How to live by Faith, in troubles of Conscience, and doubts or
terrors about our spiritual and everlasting state.
HAving written a Treatise called, The Right Method for Spiritual Peace and
Comfort, etc. upon this subject already, I must refer the Reader thither, and
here only add these few Directions.

Direct. 1. Distinguish of the several Causes of these troubles; and take heed
of those unskilful Mountebanks, who have the same cure for every such disease,
and speak present comfort to all that they hear complain; and that think every
trouble of mind is some notable work of the Spirit of God; when it is often the
fruit of the manifold weakness or wilfulness of the troubled complainers.

Direct. 2. When it is some heinous sin committed, or great corruption
indulged, which does cause the trouble, be sure that sound Repentance be never
omitted in the cure; and that a real reformation prove the truth of that
Repentance. For Christ never died to justify and save the impenitent sinner:
And a deceitful Repentance is the common self-deceit and undoing of the world.
And how can that be true Repentance, which changes not the will and life? God
will not give you peace and comfort, as long as you indulge your wilful sin.

Note here the difference between 1. The grossly impenitent: 2. And the
mock-repentance of the Hypocrite: 3. And the true Repentance of sound Believers.

1. The grossly impenitent cannot bring his heart to a serious purpose to let go
his sin, nor to a consent or willingness, that God should cure him, and change
his mind: but he had rather have his pride, and covetousness, and sensuality,
to be fully pleased, than to be mortified. Like a fool in a Fever or a
Dropsy, that had rather have drink, than have the cure of his thirst.

2. The mock repentance of the Hypocrite has some purposes under an
extraordinary conviction, to leave his sin; and for a time may seem to do it.
But when the temptation is as strong again, he is the same, and returns to
his vomit; or else exchangeth his sin for a worse. And if you ask him whether
he had rather have the mortifying of all his lusts, or the pleasing of them,
his understanding and conviction may cause him truly to say at the present,
that if God would presently mortify his sin, or offer him this in choice, he
would rather consent to it, than take the pleasing of them. But mark it, 1.
That though he consent that God should do this himself; yet he will not consent
to use the means, and do his duty to attain it. If a cold wish, or bare consent
would change his soul, and take away all sinful inclinations at once, that he
might never more desire the pleasure of sin, nor be put to any conflict to
overcome it, nor any great difficulty to deny it, and all this might be done
without any labor of his own, I doubt not but the Hypocrite would consent to
be so mortified. But to watch, and pray, and read, and meditate, and use the
means which God appoints him, both to get mortification, and to use it for
the conquering of every temptation; this the Hypocrite will not consent to.

2. And what he does consent to at the present, he consents not to when his
sinful pleasure is revived by the next temptation.

3. But the true penitent Christian is both willing to be changed and had
rather have his lusts to be killed, than pleased; and also willing to use Gods
means both to mortify the inward lust, and to overcome the outward sin: And
this in sincerity is his habitual state.

Direct. 3. Never forget that 1. The gracious nature of God: 2. The sufficiency
of Christ's Sacrifice and Merit: And 3. The truth of the universal ^ffer or
promise of pardon to all (if they will accept the offer) are the foundation of
all our faith and comforts; and are that universal grace which is before our
special grace or faith, and is presupposed to it: On this foundation all our
faith and peace is to be built.

Direct. 4. The particular application of this to our selves, is, 1. By
Believing, and then by knowing that we do believe; and then by discerning our
privileges upon believing.

1. Our believing it self is, 1. Our Ascent to the truth of the Gospel: 2. Our
Acceptance of the good (even Christ and life) which is offered in it, and
consent to the Baptismal Covenant with God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit:
And 3. Our Affiance in Christ and his Covenant.

2. To know that we do believe (somehow) is easy, when we do it: But to be
sure that this belief is sincere and saving, is more difficult, because of the
deceitfulness of the heart of man, and the mixtures of unbelief, and other
sins, and the weakness of grace where it is true, and the counterfeits of it,
and the insufficient degrees which are in Hypocrites; so that it is not easy
to discern whether the faith which we have be sincere, and predominant above
our sense and our unbelief (as it must be.) But yet it may be known by such
means as these.

1. By laboring to strengthen and increase our faith and grace, that it may
not by the smalness be next to undiscernable. 2. By subduing all contrary
inward corruptions, which obscure it. 3. By frequent exercising it; seeing
habits are discerned only in their acts. 4. By resisting and conquering
temptations, and doing all the good we can in the world, and living as wholly
devoted to God, above all worldly fleshly interest; that so 1 Faith may be
evidenced by its fruits: 2. And God may reward the faithful soul with his
assuring seal, and light and comfort. 5. By escaping all those lapses into
heinous and wilful sin, which cause wounds, and sears, and hinder assurance,
peace and joy. 6. By a wise and constant examination of the heart, and
observation of it, in the time of trial, and finding the habits and strength of
faith, and of unbelief, in their several actings, and prevalencies in their
conflicts. 7. And withal, escaping those ignorances and errors, about the
nature, means, causes and signs of grace and assurance, which keep many from
it, who have justifying faith. These seven are the true and necessary means to
get assurance of your own sincerity, and that indeed you have the true seal,
and earnest, and witness of the Spirit of Christ.

3. When you have first truly believed (or consented to the Baptismal Covenant
of Grace) and next got assurance that you do this in sincerity, the last part
is the easiest, which is to gather up the privileges, or comfortable
conclusions which follow hereupon: Which are your pardon and justification,
your adoption and right to life eternal, and to all the benefits promised by
God, in that Covenant to which you do consent; which are all comprehended in
the three great Relations established by, the Covenant, viz. that God is your
Reconciled God and Father Christ in your Head and Savior, and the Holy Spirit
is your Life and Sanctifier.

These three works which make up assurance, are contained in the three parts of
this syllogism. 1. He that truly believes, is justified, and adopted, and an
heir of life. But I do truly believe: Therefore I am justified, adopted, and am
an heir of life.

Or thus to the same sense.

Every one who truly consents to the Baptismal Covenant, has right to the
blessings of the Covenant; God is his Father, Christ is his Savior, and the
holy Spirit is his Sanctifier. But I do truly consent to the Baptismal
Covenant: Therefore I have right to all the benefits of it: God is my Father,
etc.

Direct. 5. Remember that when you have got assurance, and have truly gathered
this conclusion, the continual and lively exercise of faith, is still necessary
to your actual joy.

For it is possible for a man to have no notable doubtings of his own sincerity
or salvation, and yet to have such dullness of soul, and such diversions of his
thoughts, as that he shall enjoy but little of the comforts of his own
assurance. Therefore true joy requires much more, than bare self examination,
and discerning of our evidences, and right to life.

Direct. 6. When doubts and troubles are caused by ignorance or error, about
the true nature and signs of grace, and the way of assurance (which is very
common) nothing then is more necessary than a sound and skilful Teacher; to
work out those mistakes, and to help the ignorant Christian to a clearer
understanding of the terms of the Covenant, and the sense of the Promise, and
the true methods of Christ in his gifts and operations. Otherwise the erring
soul will be distracted and lost in a wilderness of doubts, and either sit down
at last presumptuously on false grounds, or turn to one error to cure the
troubles of another; or languish in despair; so lamentable a thing is it to be
possessed with false principles, and to attempt so great a work in the dark.

Direct. 7. And here there are these two extremes to be carefully avoided: 1.
That of the Infidel and Justiciary, who trusts and teaches others to trust
to his own virtues and works without a Savior, or ascribes the part of a
Savior to them. 2. The Antinomian and Libertine, who teach men not to look at
any thing in themselves at all, no not as an evidence, or condition, or means,
much less as any cause of life; but to trust to Christ's blood, to be to you
instead of Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience, and all your use of means; and
do ascribe the part of these duties of man, to the blood of Christ; as if it
did belong only to Christ to do that same thing which belongs unto them.

Therefore here you must be sure to be well acquainted what is truly the office
and part of Christ; and what is truly the office and part of Faith, of
Repentance, of Confession, of Prayer, etc. And to be sure that you wholly trust
Christ for his part, and join not Faith, nor any of your own works or duties in
the least degree of that trust or honor which belongs to Christ, and his
office and work: And that you faithfully use (yea I will say, Trust too, though
ignorance snarl at it) your Faith, Repentance, Prayer, etc. in and for its own
office and part; and do not foolishly blaspheme Christ, by ascribing the part
and office of your duty unto him and his office, under pretense of giving him
the honor of them. It is Christ's office and honor to be a sacrifice for sin,
and a propitiation for us, and a perfect Savior and Intercessor, and to give
us the Spirit, by which we believe, repent, pray, obey, hope, love, etc. But
not to be a penitent believing sinner, nor to accept of an offered Savior, nor
to be a consenting Covenanter with God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, nor to
be washed from sin in his blood, reconciled, adopted, nor to pray for pardon in
the name of another, nor to trust upon a Savior, nor to be a Disciple, a
Subject, a Member of a Savior, etc. Nor yet that his blood, or merits, or
righteousness, should be to you instead of these. No, these are to be done by
you.

Direct. 8. In this case also take heed of those ignorant guides, who know not
the errors of fancy, melancholy, or disturbed passions, from the proper works
of the Spirit of God: For they wrong the Spirit, when they ascribe men's sinful
weaknesses to him: And they greatly wrong the troubled sinner many ways: 1.
They puff up men with conceits that they are under some great and excellent
workings of the Spirit, when they are the works of Satan, and their own
infirmity or sin. 2. They teach them hereby to magnify and cherish those
distempers, and passions, and thoughts, which they should resist, and lament,
and cast away. 3. And they set them in an Enthusiastic, or truly Fanatical way
of Religion, to look for Revelations, or live still upon their own fancies, and
passions, and distempers, and Satan's temptations, conceiting that they live
upon the incomes of God, and are actuated in all this by the Holy Ghost. And of
what mischievous importance and consequence all this is, and how much hurt such
zealous ignorance does, both in the Teachers and the people, the thing it self
does plainly show; and the sad experience of this age does show it more
plainly, in Ranters, Quakers, and other true Fanatics, and in many women, and
other weak persons, of better principles than theirs.

And it is an unsafe course which many such weak persons use, to think in their
troubles that every text of Scripture which comes into their mind, or every
conceit of their own is a special suggestion of the Spirit of God: You shall
ordinarily hear them say, [ Such a text was brought to me, or was set upon my
heart, and such a thing was set upon my mind] when two to one, it was no
otherwise brought unto them, nor set upon them, than any other ordinary
thoughts are; and had no special or extraordinary operation of God in it at
all. Though it is certain that every good thought which comes into our minds,
is some effect of the working of Gods Spirit, as every good word, and every
good work is; and it is certain that sometimes Gods Spirit does guide and
comfort Christians as a remembrancer, by bringing informing and comforting
texts and doctrines to their remembrance; yet it is a dangerous thing to think
that all such suggestions or thoughts are from some special or extraordinary
work of the Spirit, or that every text that comes into our minds, is brought
thither by the Spirit of God at all.

The reasons are these,

1. Satan can bring a text or truth to our remembrance for his own ends, as he
did to Christ, Matthew. 4. in his temptations.

2. Our own passions or running thoughts, may light upon some text or truth
accidentally, as they do on other things which so come in.

3. When the Spirit does in an ordinary way help us in remembering or meditating
on any text or holy doctrine, he does it according to our capacity and
disposition, and not in the way of infallible inspiration, and therefore there
is much of our weakness and error usually mixed with the Spirits help, in the
product: As when you hold the hand of a child in writing, you write not so well
by his hand, as by your own alone, but your skill, and his weakness and
unskilfulness do both appear in the letters which are made; so is it in the
ordinary assistance of the Spirit in our studies, meditations, prayers, etc.
otherwise all that we do would be perfect, in which we have the Spirits help;
which Scripture, and all Christians experience do contradict.

4. And to ascribe that to the Spirit which is not at all his work, or that
which is partly our own work, so far as it is our own, and savoureth of our
weaknesses and error, is a heinous injury to the Spirit.

5. And it tosseth such mistaken Christians up and down in uncertainties; while
they think all such thoughts are the suggestions of the Spirit, they meet with
many contrary thoughts, and so are carried like the waves of the Sea, sometimes
up, and sometimes down; and they have sometimes a humbling terrible text, and
the next day perhaps a comforting text comes into their minds, and so are
between terrors and comforts, distracted by their own fantasies, and think it
is all done by the Spirit of God.

6. And it is a perverse abusing of the holy Scripture, to make such
remembrances the Rule of your application of it to your selves: that text which
you remember had the same sense before you remembered it; and your spiritual
state was the same before: If that text agree with your state, and either, the
terror or the comfort of it belong to you, this must be proved by solid
reason, drawn from the true meaning of the text, and the true state of your
souls; and not supposed merely because it comes into your thoughts, or because
it is set upon your hearts: Do you think that your remembering it will prove
that it specially belongs to you? Do not many comfortable texts come into the
minds of Hypocrites, who are unfit for comfort? And many terrible texts come
into the minds of humble souls, that have right to comfort, and should not be
more terrified? You may as well think that your money or estate is another
man's, because he thinks on it: Or that another man's dangers and miseries are
yours, because you think of them: Or that you are either Kings, or Lords, or
beggars, or thieves, or whatever comes into your minds: Or that another man's
Leases or Deeds by which he holds his Lands, are all yours, because they are
put into your hands to read.

7. And if you go this way to work, you are in danger to be carried into many
other errors and sins, and think that all is of the Spirit of God, because you
feel it set upon your hearts. And so you will feign the sanctifying Spirit to
be the author of sin, and the lying Spirit shall be honored and called by his
name.

Mark well these following texts of Scripture, 2 These. 2.1, 2, 3. We beseech
you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ -- that ye be not soon
shaken in mind, or troubled, neither by Spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as
from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand: Let no man deceive you -- You
see here that Spirit, Word and Scripture may be pretended for an untruth.

Matthew. 4. Satan often says, It is written,

2 Cor. 11.12, 13, 14, 15. False Apostles, and deceitful workers may transform
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and Ministers of Righteousness; and no
marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light.

1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they be of God.

Gal. 1.7, 8. If we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel to you, let
him be accursed.

Quest. But how then shall I know when it is the Spirit which puts any thing
into my mind?

Answ. 1. The matter it self must be tried, whether it agree with the sacred
Scripture, and must be proved true by the Word of God. 2. The end to which that
truth is brought, must be proved to be just and good: For Satan pleads truth^
to sinful ends. 3. The application of them to your own case must be such as
will hold trial, and it must be proved by sound argument, that indeed they do
thus and thus belong to you: For Gods Spirit will not belie you, nor make you
better or worse than you are; no more than he will belie the Scriptures.

Object. But is it not the same Spirit which spoke to the Apostles, which
speaks to us? If they were to believe him immediately, so must we; and seeing
the Spirit is above the Scripture, we must try the Scriptures by the Spirit,
and not the Spirit by the Scriptures.

Answ. Alas, how pitifully ignorance beweildreth men! 1. It is the same Spirit
which was in the Apostles, and is in the weakest Christian: But he works not
in the same degree: He inspired them to infallibility; being promised to lead
them into all truth, and to bring all things which Christ had spoken to their
remembrance; and he enabled them to prove this by manifold miracles: Does he do
all this by you? or had you the same promises? 2. The same Spirit in them was
given to one end, and to you for another. To them it was given to cause them by
his inspiration to deliver all that Christ had taught them, and to leave it on
record to all generations, as his infallible Word and Law, to be the Rule of
doctrine and practice to the end of the world. But to you the same Spirit is
given, to cause you to understand, and love, and obey this Law which is already
written, and not to write or know another.

3. The Spirit indicted the Scriptures before you were born: and we are sure
that that is the Word of God; and we are sure that Gods Spirit contradicts
not it self: Therefore your after-pretended revelations, must be tried by the
certain ancient Rule, which had the seal of miracles which yours has not.

Obj. But how shall I know what application to make of Scripture to my self,
but by the teaching of the Spirit of God?

Answ. But you must not take every thought and suggestion or remembrance, to be
the Spirits application. Gods Spirit teaches men by the light of sound
evidence, which may be proved, and will hold good in trial: He teaches you by
exciteing you to rational studies and argumentation, and by blessing you in
such sober use of Gods means: But he does not teach you to know your state, by
the bare remembering of a text.

Direct. 9. Take heed also of misunderstanding what is the witness of the
Spirit, that we are Gods children.

Many think it is like some voice, or suggestion, or inspiration within them,
saying, Thou art the Child of God. And so many Christians languish in terrors,
that feel no such persuading Spirit in them. And many Hypocrites are deluded by
the persuasions of their own imaginations. But in Scripture, the word witness
is often taken for [ evidence] or an objective testimony: And the Spirits being a
witness, and being a seal, an earnest, a pledge, a white stone, a new name,
etc. are all of the like signification: And the meaning is, By this we know
that we are the children of God, or that he abides in us, by the Spirit which
he has given us, 1 John 3.10.24. and 4.13. And if any one have not the Spirit
of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8.9. As if he should say, have you the
Spirit of Christ, or have you not? if you have, that is a seal, an earnest, a
pledge of Gods Love, and of your heavenly inheritance, and a certain evidence
or witness that you are his children, Gal. 4.6. He that loves God as his
Father in Christ, and is sanctified to God, has the Spirit. Show this Love,
and this Sanctification, and you produce the true witness that you are the
heirs of life. Holiness, and Heavenliness, and Love, is the witness, seal and
earnest; and not chiefly an inward persuasion that we are Gods children.

2. Yet this much more the Spirit does; when it has sanctified us, and given
us the witness or evidence in our selves, (1 John 5.10, 11.) He also helps us
to see and know that grace which he gives and actuateth in us.

3. And also to conclude from that evidence, that we are Gods children: And
also to feel the inward comfort of that conclusion. But all this he does by
these means in a discursive or rational way, and by blessing such reasoning to
our comfort.

4. Also he comfort the soul in another way, distinct from the way of
concluding from evidence; and that is by exciting the Love of God and his
praises in us, which are of themselves delighting acts: But of this anon.

Direct. 10. Take heed of Heretical Seducers, who use to fish in troubled
waters, and to fall in with such perplexed consciences, to persuade them that
all the cause of their trouble is their opinions, and unsound Religion, and not
in them; and that the only way to comfort, is to change their Religion, and to
come over unto them.

No person fitter for a Quaker, a Papist, or any Sectary, to work upon, than a
troubled mind. For such are like the ignorant Country people in their sickness,
who will hearken to any one who puts them in hope, and promises them ease,
and most confidently tells them, that he can cure them, and says, I was just
in your case, and such or such a thing cured me: so will the Formalist, and the
Fanatic, the Papist, and the Quaker say, I was just in your condition, [I was
troubled, and could get no peace of conscience, no joy in the Holy Ghost, but
was always held in fears and doubting, till I changed my Religion; and ever
since that I have been well, and O what joys I have to boast of!] And if it be
an unsound Hypocrite that is thus tempted, perhaps God may give them over to
find abundance of Bedlam joy, in the sudden change of their opinion: And
falsehood may comfort that man, whom the truth which he was false to, would not
comfort. But if it be a weak sincere Believer; if God show him not so much
mercy as to rescue him from the temptation, he will do as the foresaid Country
patient; he will try one man's medicine, and another woman's medicines, and
hearken to every one that can speak confidently, and promise him a cure, till
he has tried, that their case and his were not the same, and that they were
all but ignorant deceived deceivers; and when all fail him, he will come back
again, to the faithful experienced directors of his soul.

Direct. 11. If weakness of grace be the cause of doubting (which is of all
other, the commonest cause in the world) the way to comfort is that same which
is the way to strengthen grace.

Such a one, if ever he will have joy, must be taught how to live the Life of
Faith, and to walk with God, and to mortify the flesh, and get loose from the
world, and to live as entirely devoted to God; and especially how to keep every
grace in exercise; and then grace will show it self, as the air does in a windy
season, or as the fire when it is blown up and flameth. There is no surer or
readier way to comfort, than to get Faith, Repentance, Love, Hope and
Obedience, in a vigorous activity, and great degree, and then to keep them much
in action. Mountebanks and Sectaries have other ways; but this is the constant
certain way.

Direct. 12. If you perceive that trouble is caused by misunderstanding the
Covenant of Grace, and looking at Legal Works of merit, as the ground of peace,
and over-looking the sufficiency of the Sacrifice, Merits, or Interc^ssion of
Christ, the principal thing to be done with such a soul, is, to convince them
of the impossibility of being justified by works, on legal terms; and to show
them the necessity of a Savior, and the design of God in man's redemption, and
that there is but one Mediator between God and man, and one Name by which we
can be saved; and that Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man
comes to the Father, but by the Son; and that he was made sin for us who knew
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; and that of God
he is made unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption; and that God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son; and that he that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life; and that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; but he that
believes not is condemned already. Thus must Christ crucified, the
propitiation for the sins of all the world, be preached to them, who are
troubled as for want of a Savior, or an atonement, a sacrifice, or ransom,
or propitiation for sin; or because they are not instead of a Savior to
themselves.

But to tell a man only of the sacrifice and merits of Christ, who doubts
only of his interest in him, and of the truth of his own Faith, Repentance and
Sanctification, is to prate impertinently, and to delude the sinner, and to
deal injuriously with Christ.

Direct. 12. If Melancholy be the cause of the trouble (which is very ordinary)
it will be necessary, 1. Well to understand it: And 2. To know the cure: Of
which, having spoken more largely elsewhere, I shall now give you only this
brief information.

1. The signs of this Melancholy are, overstretched, confused, ungovernable
thoughts; continual fear, and inclination to despair, and to cry out, undone,
undone; I am forsaken of God; the day of grace is past; I have sinned against
the Holy Ghost; never man's case was like mine! And usually their sleep is gone
or broken, and they are inclined to be alone, and to be always musing, with
their confounded thoughts; and at last are tempted to blasphemous thoughts,
against the Scriptures, and the life to come, and perhaps urged to utter some
blasphemous words against God; and if it go to the highest, they are tempted to
famish or make away themselves.

2. The cure of it lies 1. In setting those truths before them, which tend
most to quiet and satisfy their minds. 2. In engaging them in the constant
labors of a calling, in which both mind and body may be employed. 3. In
keeping them in fit and cheerful company which they love, and suffering them to
be very little alone. 4. In keeping them from musing, and that meditation or
thoughtfulness which to others is most profitable, and a duty. 5. Keeping them
from overlong secret prayer (because they are unable for it, and it does but
confound them, and disable them for other duties;) and let them be the more in
other duties which they can bear. 6. And if the state of their bodies require
it, Physic is necessary, and has done good to many (if rightly chosen.)

Direct. 13. Take heed of foolish, carnal, hasty expectations of comfort from
the bare words of any man; but use men's advice only to direct you in that way,
where, by patience and faithfulness, you may meet with it in due season.

Nothing is more usual with silly souls, than to go to this or that excellent
Minister, whom they deservedly admire, and to look that with an hour or twos
discourse, he should comfort them, and set all their bones in joint* And when
they find that it is not done, they either despair, or turn to the next
deceivers, and say, [ I tried the best of them: And if such a man cannot do it,
none of them can do it.] But, silly soul, do Physicians use to charm men into
health? Will thou go and talk an hour with the ablest Physician, and say, that
because his talk does not cure thee, thou will never go to a Physician more,
but go to ignorant people that will kill thee? Thou have then thy own
deserving; even take the death which thou have chosen, and drink as thou have
brewed. The work of a Minister is not to cure thee always immediately, by
comfortable words. (What words can cure an ignorant, melancholy, or incapable
soul!) But to direct thee in thy duty, and in the use of those means, which if
thou will faithfully and patiently practice, thou shall certainly be cured in
due time: If thou will use the Physic, diet and exercise, which thy Physician
does prescribe thee, it is that which must restore thy health and comfort, and
not the saying over a few words to thee. If thou lazily look that other men's
words or prayers should cure and comfort thee without thy own endeavors, thou
may thank thy self when thou art deceived.

Direct. 14. The principal means of comfort is to live in the exercise of
comfortable duties.

Faith, Hope, and especially the Love of God, are duties which are also man's
felicity: And the exercise of these in Praises and Thanksgiving, are the proper
pleasure of the soul. Give up thy self wholly to study the Goodness and Love of
God in Jesus Christ, till thou feel thy heart enflamed with his Love, and spend
half thy godly conference in Gods praises, and half thy daily prayers in that,
and in thanksgiving; and this will comfort thee not only by the reasoning way
of evidence; but as a feast pleases thy taste, and as the fire warmeth thee,
or as the loving of thy friend delights thee, or as health it self is the
pleasure of thy flesh.

As the sins themselves of not knowing God, not loving him, nor delighting in
him, are the greatest part of the penalty, or rather misery of the sinner
(which has its peculiar way of remission) so the knowledge, and love, and
praise of God, and delighting in him, is instead of a reward unto it self, and
a beginning of Heaven to the heavenly Believer.

Direct. 15. Dwell much in Heaven, if you would dwell in comfort. Comfort your
selves and one another with these words, that we shall for ever be with the
Lord. Heaven is the place or state of our everlasting comfort; and all that we
have here must come from thence: And Faith, and Hope, and Love must fetch it:
He that will have carn^l joy, must go for it to pastime, or lusts and pleasure,
to an Alehouse, or a Whore, or to a Gameing-house, or a Playhouse, or to his
weal^h and worldly honors: But he that will have heavenly joy, must go for it
by Faith to Heaven; and dwell there every day by Faith, where he hopes to dwell
for ever. Heaven will nor comfort either them that believe it not, or them that
remember it not; but them whose conversation and hearts are there, Phil. 3.20,
21.

Direct. 16. Set your selves wholly to do good. Resolve that you will be
faithful to Christ, and do all the good that you can in the world, and let him
do with you what he will: And in this way you shall quickly find, that the
soundest consolation will come in to your souls, before you could expect it.
Though no works of our own can add any thing to God, nor must be trusted to at
all, in a legal sense; and though blind Libertines tell you, that all comfort
is legal and unsound, which came by the thoughts of any thing in your selves,
or any of your own doings; yet God is no such enemy to godliness, but he that
will hereafter judge you to Heaven or Hell according to your works, will now
judge you to joy or sorrow of heart, usually according to your works: Well
doing shall afford you peace, and ill doing shall disquiet you, when all ^s
said.

Direct. 17. Lastly, Be sure, while you want the comforts of assurance, to hold
fast those comforts which rationally belong to common grace, and to them that
have the Gospel offers of salvation. When the Gospel came to Samaria, Acts 8.
there was great joy in that City. It is glad tidings in it self, for guilty
souls to have Christ and pardon freely offered to them. Can you not say, I am
sure that I am regenerate, justified and adopted? For all that, if you be not
Infidels, you can say, I am sure that Christ, and Pardon, and Heaven, are
freely offered me, and Ministers are commissioned to entreat me to accept it;
and nothing but my wilful and final refusal can deprive me of it, and shut me
out. This is certain; take but so much comfort as this much should rationally
infer.

To which I might add, the comforts of your probability, when you are in some
degree of hope, that your faith and repentance are sincere, though you are not
certain: But this I have more largely spoken of (and the rest which is needful
to be spoken on this subject) in the forenamed Treatise long ago.

The ordinary and long troubles and unsettledness of honest Christians, are
caused most 1. By unskilful Guides, who are most confident, where they are most
ignorant, and revile those Truths and Methods which God has appointed for the
settling of men's peace: 2. And by their own lazy and unskilful course; who take
up most with examining and complaining, instead of learning more understanding
in Gods Methods, and diligent ^^^nding what is amiss, that the cause of their
trouble might be taken away.

CHAP. XXI. How to live by Faith in the Public Worshipping of God.
I May not be so tedious (nor do that which is done elsewhere) as to direct you
in the several parts of Worship distinctly; but shall only give you some brief
Directions about Public Worship in the general.

Direct. 1. Come not before God with Pharisaical conceits of the worthiness of
your selves, or Worship, as if you offered him something which did oblige him:
But come as humble receivers, that need him and his grace, who needs not you;
and as learners that hope to be wiser and better by drawing near to God.

You know Christ's instance of the prayers of the Pharisee and the Publican: And
remember that many a ones heart says, I thank thee Lord that I am not as other
men, or as this Publican, whose tongue can spend an hour or more in sad
confessions; yea and that it is those very copious confessions of their
badness, that puff them up as if they were so good.

Yea many a one that in opinion is most vehement against all our works in our
Justification, or looking at any thing in our selves at all, to make us
acceptable with God, as being against free grace in Christ, do yet look so much
at that which is (or is conceited to be) in themselves, that fe^ Churches on
earth are thought worthy of t^^^r communion.

Note also that it is sacrificing which is commonly the Hypocrites Worship in
the Old Testament, and hearing and obeying which he neglects, and God calls
him to: As you may see at large in Isa. 1. throughout; and many other places,
Psalm. 40.6. Sacrifice and offering thou did no^ require: Mine ears have thou
opened, etc. So Psalm. 50.8, 9, etc. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices
and burnt offerings, to have been continually before me; I will take no bullock
out of thy house -- For every beast of the Forest is mine, etc. If I were
hungry, I would not tell thee, for ^he world is mine, and the fullness thereof
-- Offer to God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows to the most High. And call upon
me in the day of trouble -- But to the wicked, says God, What have thou to do
to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee --

1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Has the Lord delight in burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, as
in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and
to hearken, than the fat of Rams.

Psalm. 4.3, 4, 5. Know, that the Lord has chosen the man that is godly for
himself -- Stand in awe and sin not -- Offer the sacrifices of righteousness --

Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.

Matthew. 9.13. and 12.7. Learn what this means, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice --

Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more
ready to hear, than to offer the sacrifice of fools, for they know not that
they do evil.

All this tells us, that fools and hypocrites, while they disobey Gods Law,
do think to make up all with sacrifice, or to appease God with offering him
something that is excellent: But the acceptable Worshipper comes to God as a
penitent, a learner, resolving to obey; as a Receiver of mercy, and not a
meriter.

Direct. 2. Overvalue not therefore the manner of your own Worship, and
over-vilifie not other men's, of a different mode: And make not men believe that
God is of your childish humor, and valueth or vilifieth words, and orders, and
forms, and ceremonies, as much as self-conceited people do.

If one man hear another pray only from the habits of his mind, and present
desires, he reproacheth him as a rash presumptuous speaker, that talks that
to God which he never fore-considered. As if a beggar did rashly ask an alms,
or a corrected child, or a malefactor did inconsiderately beg for pardon,
unless they learn first the words by rote: or as if all men's converse, and the
words of Judges on the Bench were all rash; or the counsel of a Physician to
his Patient, because they use not books and forms, or set not down their words
long before.

And if another man hear a form of prayer, especially if it be read out of a
Book; and especially if it have any disorder or defect, he sticks not to
revise it, and call it false Worship, and man's Inventions, and perhaps
Idolatry, and to fly from it, and make the world believe, that it is an odious
thing which God abhors. And why so? Are your words so much more excellent
than the words of others? Or does the Book, or Press, or Pen, make them odious
to God? Or are all words ba^ which are resolved on beforehand? Is the Lords
Prayer and the Psalms all odious, because they are book-forms? Or does the
command of other men make God hate them? Let Parents take heed then of
commanding their children prescribed words. (Nay rather let them take heed lest
they omit such prescripts:) Or, is it the disorder or defects that makes them
odious? Such are not to be justified indeed wherever we find them: But woe to
us all, if God will not pardon disorders and defects, and accept the prayers
that are guilty of them.

Many a time I have heard such forms of prayers, whose disorders and defects I
have much lamented (and done my part to have cured) and yet I durst not so
reproach them as to say, God will not accept and hear them: Or that it is
unlawful to join in communion with them. And many a time I have heard as sad
disorder in extemporate prayers sometimes by wrong methods, or no method at
all; sometimes by vain repetitions; sometimes by omitting the chiefest parts of
prayer, and sometimes in the whole strein, by turning a prayer into a Sermon to
the hearers, or a mere talk or narrative to God, that had little of a prayer in
it, save very good matter, and honest zeal. And though this prayer was more
disorderly than the forms which ( perhaps in that prayer) were accused of
disorder; yet durst I not run away from this neither, nor say, it is so bad,
that God will not hear it, nor good men should have no comunion in it.

It is easy (but abominable) to fall in love with our own, and to vilify that
which is against our opinion, and to think that God is of our mind, and is as
fond of our mode and way as we are, and as exceptious against the way or words
of other men, as childish, pievish Christians are. Look on your Book, and read,
or learn your prayer in words, says one, or else God will not hear you: Look
off your Book, and read not or learn not the words, says another, or God will
not hear you. But oh lamentable, that both of them tremble, not thus to abuse
God, and add unto his Word, and to prophecy or speak falsely against their
brethren in his Name; nor to reproach the prayers which Christ presents from
his servants to the Father, and which (notwithstanding their defects) are his
delight!

Direct. 3. Offer God nothing as worship, which is contrary to the perfection
of his Nature, as far as you can avoid it: And yet feign not that to be
contrary to his nature which he commands. For then it is certain that you
misunderstand either his nature or command.

Direct. 4. Never come to the Father but by the Son; and dream not of any
immediate access of a sinner unto God, but wholly trust in Christ's mediation.
Receive the Fathers will from Christ your Teacher, and his commands from Christ
your King, and all his mercies from Christ your Head, and the Treasury of the
Church, and your continual Intercessor with God in Heaven. And put all your
prayers, praises, duties, alms, into his hand; that through him alone they may
be accepted of God.

Direct. 5. Understand well how far the Scripture is a particular Rule (as to
the substance of Gods Worship) and how far it is only a general Rule (as to the
circumstances) that so you may neither offer God a Worship which he will not
accept; nor yet reject or oppose all those circumstances as unlawful, which are
warranted by his general commands: (Of which I have said enough elsewhere.)

Direct. 6. Look first and most to the exercise of inward grace, and to the
spiritual part of Worship (for God will be worshipped in spirit, and in truth,
and hates the Hypocrite, who offers him a carcass, or empty shell, and
ceremony, and pomp, or length of words, instead of substance; and draws near
him with the lips, without the heart:) And yet in the second place, look
carefully also to your words, and order, and outward behavior of the body: For
God must be honored with soul and body. And order and reverend solemnity is
both a help to the affections of the soul, and a fit expression of them.

Never forget that hypocritical dead formality, and ignorant, self-conceited,
fanatical extravagancies, are the two extremes by which the Devil has labored
in all ages, to turn Christ's Worship against him, and to destroy the Church and
Religion by such false Religiousness.

The poor Popish Formalists on one side, mortify Religion, and turn it into a
carcass, and a comely Image that has any thing save life. And the Fanatics on
the other side, do call all the enormities of their proud and blustering
fancies by the name of spiritual devotion; and do their worst to make
Christianity to seem a ridiculous fancy to the world: Escape both these
extremes, as ever you will escape the dishonouring of God, the dividing, and
disturbing, and corrupting of the Church, the deluding of others, and the
disappointing and deceiving of your selves.

Direct. 7. Neglect not any helps which you can have, by the excellent gifts of
any of Christ's Ministers or flocks; and yet take heed that through prejudice,
or for the faults of either, you vilify or reject nothing which is of God. But
carefully distinguish between Christ's and theirs.

Communion with the holiest and purest Assemblies, is more desirable than with
the less pure. But yet all that is less desirable comparatively, is not simply
unlawful, nor to be rejected: The labors of an abler and more faithful
Minister, are much to be preferred before theirs that are less able and
faithful: For God works usually according to the aptitude of the means, and
of the receiver. To the recovery and salvation of a soul it is necessary, 1.
That the Understanding be made wise: 2. That the Heart or Will be sanctified by
Love. 3. That the Life be holy and obedient.

To the first of these there are three things needful; 1. That the
Understanding be awakened: 2. That it be illuminated: 3. That it be preserved
from the seduction of temptations to deceit.

Now an able and faithful Pastor is suited to all these effects: 1. He is a
lively Preacher to awaken the understanding: He is a clear, intelligent,
methodical and convincing Teacher, to illuminate it: 3. He can confute
gainsayers, and refute objections, and shame the cavils of tempters and
deceivers to preserve it.

And 2 He speaks all from the unfeigned Love of God and men; and as all his
words do breathe forth Love; so they art apt to kindle such love in the
hearers: For every active nature tends to propagation.

3. And the holiness of his life, as well as doctrine, tends to win the
people to a holy life: So that he that loves his own soul, must not be
indifferent what Pastor he chooses for the help and conduct of his soul; but
should most carefully seek to get the best or fittest for such necessary ends.

But yet it follows not that a weaker or worse may not be heard, or may not
be accepted or submitted to, in a case of necessity; when a better cannot be
had, without more disturbance and hurt than the benefits are like to
recompense. And when we live under such a weak, or cold, or faulty Pastor, our
care must be so much the greater, that we may make up that in the diligence of
our attention, which is wanting in his manner of expression; and that we make
up that in a care of our own souls, which is wanting in his care: And that our
knowledge of his failings tempt us not to slight the truth which he delivers;
and that we reject not the matter for the manner: The Sheep of Christ do know
his voice, and they know his words, and reverence and love them, from what
mou^h soever they proceed. A Religious z^alous man that preaches false
doctrine, is more to be avoided, than a cold or scandalous man who preaches
the truth. If you doubt of this, observe these texts.

Matthew. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat; All therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but do not ye after their
works, for they say and do not.

Acts 1.17. For he (Judas) was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this
Ministry. Judas the thief and traitor was an Apostle, called and sent out by
Jesus Christ.

Phil. 1.15, etc. Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some
also of good will. The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely,
supposing to add affl^ction to my bonds -- what then? Notwithstanding every
way, whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached, and I do therein
rejoice, yea and will rejoice --

Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you brethren, Mark them which cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them --

Acts 20.30. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away Disciples after them.

Gal. 1.7, 8. If we or an Angel from Heaven bring another Gospel, let him be
accursed --

Is not all this a plain decision of the case?

Direct. 8. While you prefer local communion with the purest Churches, and ^est
taught and ordered, for your own edification, take heed that you disown not a
distant and mental communion with any part of the Church of Christ on earth,
which Christ himself disowneth not. But first remember that you are members of
the Universal Church, and as such in mental communion with the whole, present
your selves and services to Christ; and next as members of your Particular
Church.

It is true, that you must not own the corruptions of any Church, or of any of
their Worship; but you must own the Church it self, and own all the substance
of the Worship which is good, and which God owneth. God does not reject the
matter for the manner, nor the whole, for a faulty part, where the heart is
sincere that offers it: nor no more must you. And if they force you not to
any actual sin (as by false speaking, subscribing, or the like) you must
sometimes also locally join with such Churches, when occasion requires it: (As
when you have no better to go to, or when it is necessary to show your mental
communion, or to avoid schism, scandal or offense) As you must not approve of
your own failings in Gods Worship (as in the manner of praying, preaching,
etc.) and yet must not give over worshipping God, though you are always sure
to fail; even so must you do by your communion with others.

And here I would earnestly entreat all those that are inclinable to sinful
separation, to think but of these few things.

1. What is more contrary to Christianity than Pride? and what is a plainer
sign of Pride, than to separate from whole Churches (and perhaps from most part
of the Christian world, for such faults as are no greater than others of our
own? and to say, They are too bad for such as you to communicate with?

2. Whether it be not much contrary to that clemency of Jesus Christ, by which
he pardons the failings of Believers? and which we have need of our selves as
well as others? And whether it be not an horrid injury to our Lord, to ascribe
his inheritance to the Devil, and to cast those out of his Church whom he
himself receives, and to deny so many of his servants to be his?

3. How great a loss is it, to lose your part in all those prayers of the
Churches (how weak soever) which you disown? And how can you justly expect the
benefit of such prayers?

I would not take all their riches for my part of the benefit of those prayers
of the Churches of Church, which some reject because they are extemporate, and
others because they are forms, or book-prayers, or imposed; nor would I take
all their wealth and honor, for my part in all the prayers of the Universal
Church, which are guilty of more disorders, tautologies, unmeet expressions,
and manifold defects, than any that I ever yet heard from those Ministers that
pray either by habit or book.

Direct. 9. Take heed both of carelessness and curiosity in the worshipping of
God. Avoid carelessness, because it is profaneness and contempt: Therefore
watch against idleness of mind, and wandering thoughts, and remember how great
a work it is, to speak to God, or to hear from him about your everlasting state.

And yet curiosity is a heinous sin: When men are so nice, that unless there be
quaint phrases, and fine cadencies and jingles, or at least a very laudable
style, they nauseate all, and are weary of hearing a homely style, or common
things: when every unmeet expression, or tautology of the speaker, does turn
their stomachs against the wholesomest food. This curiosity comes from a weak
and an unhealthful state of soul.

Direct. 10. Lastly, Let your eye of Faith be all the while upon the heavenly
Host, or Church triumphant: I remember how they worship God: with what wisdom,
and purity, and fervor of Love, and sacred pleasure, and with what unity, and
peace, and concord? And let your Worship be as much composed to the imitation
of them, as is agreeable to the likeness of our condition unto theirs.

There is no hypocrisy, dullness, darkness, errors, self-conceitedness, pride,
division, section, or uncharitable contention: Oh how they burn in Love to God?
and how sweet that Love is to themselves? and how those souls work up in
heavenly Joys to the face of God, in all his praises. Labor as it were to
join your selves by faith with them, and as far as stands with your different
case, to imitate them. They are more imitable and amiable, than the purest
Churches upon earth. Their love and blessed concord is more lovely, than our
uncharitable animosities, and odious factions and divisions are.

And remember also the time when you must meet all those upright souls in
Heaven, whose manner of Worship you vilified, and spoke reproachfully of on
earth, and from whose communion you turned away: And only consider how far they
should be disowned, who must be dear to Christ and you for ever.

The open disowning and avoiding the ungodly and scandalous, is a great duty in
due season, when it is regularly done, and is necessary to cast shame on sin
and sinners, and to vindicate the honor of Christianity before the world. But
otherwise it is but made an instrument of pernicious pride, and of divisions in
the Church, and of hindering the successes of the Gospel of Christ.

CHAP. XXII. How to pray in Faith.
PAssing by all the other particular parts of Worship as handled elsewhere (in
my Christian Directory) I shall only briefly touch the duty of prayer;
especially as in private.

Direct. 1. Let your heart lead your tongue, and be the fountain of your words*
and suffer not your tongues in a customary volubility to overrun your hearts.
Desire first, and pray next; and remember that desire is the soul of prayer;
and that the heart-searching God does hate hypocrisy, and will not be mocked,
Matthew. 6.1, 3, 4.

Direct. 2. Yet do not forbear prayer, because your desires are not so earnest
as you would have them. For 1. Even good desires are to be begged of God: 2.
And such desires as you have toward God, must be exercised and expressed. 3.
And this is the way of their usual increase. 4. And a profane turning away
from God, will kill those weak desires which you have, when drawing near him in
prayer, may revive and cherish them.

Direct. 3. Remember still that you pray to a heavenly Father, who is readier
to give, than you are to receive or ask. If you knew his Fullness and Goodness,
how joyfully would you run to him, and cry Abba, Father? John 20.17. Luke
12.30, 32. Mark 11.25. Matthew. 6.8, 32.

Direct. 4. Go boldly to him in the Name of Christ alone. Remember that he is
the only Way and Mediator. When guilt and conscience would drive you back,
believe the sufficiency of his sacrifice and atonement. When your weakness and
unworthiness would discourage you, remember that no one is so worthy, as to be
accepted by God on any other terms, than Christ's Mediation. Come boldly then to
the Throne of Grace, by the new and living way, and put your prayers into his
hand, and remember that he still lives to make intercession for you, and that
he appears before God in the highest, in your cause, Heb. 10.19. Ephesians. 3.12.
Romans 5.2. Heb. 9.24* and 7.25, 26.

Direct. 5. Desire nothing in your hearts which you dare not pray for, or which
is unmeet for prayer: Let the Rule of Prayer, be the Rule of your Desires. And
undertake no business in the world, which you may not lawfully pray for a
blessing on.

Direct. 6. Desire and pray to God, first, for God himself, and nothing lower;
and next for all those spiritual blessings in Christ, which may fit you for
communion with him. And lastly, for corporal mercies, as the means to these,
Matthew. 6.33. Psalm. 42.1, 2, 3, etc. Psalm. 73.25, 26.

Direct. 7. Pray only for what is promised you, or you are commanded to pray
for: And make not promises to your selves, and then look that God should fulfill
them, because you confidently believe that he will do it; and do not so
reproach God, as to call such self-conceits and expectations, by the name of a
particular Faith: For where there is no word, there is no faith.

Direct. 8. What God has promised, confidently expect; though you feel no
answer at the present. For most of our prayers are to be granted (or the things
desired to be given) at the harvest time, when we shall have all at once.
Whether you find your selves the better at present for prayer, or not; believe
that a word is not in vain, but you shall reap the fruit of all in season, Luke
18.1, 7, 8. James 5.7, 8.

Direct. 9. Let the Lords Prayer be the Rule, for the matter and method of your
desires and prayers. But with this difference: It must always be the Rule
which your desires must be formed to, both in matter and method. You must
always first, and most desire the hallowing of Gods Name, the coming of his
Kingdom, and the doing of his will on Earth as it is in Heaven, before your own
being, or well-being: But this is only a Rule for your General Prayers (which
take in all the parts:) For when you either intend to pray only, or chiefly for
some one particular thing, you may begin with that, or be most upon it.

Therefore all Christians should specially labor to understand the true sense
and method of the Lords Prayer (which God willing, I hope elsewhere to open.)

Direct. 10. Be more careful in secret of your affections, than of the order of
your words (yet choosing such as are aptest to the matter, and fittest to excite
your hearts) But in your families or with others, be very careful to speak to
God, in words which are apt, and orderly, and moving; and to do all with such
skill, and reverence, and seriousness, as tends (not to increase, but) to
cure the dullness, hypocrisy and unreverence of others, Eccles. 5.1, 2. Matthew.
6.7, 8, 9, 10, etc.

Direct. 11. Pray as earnestly as if God himself were to be moved with your
prayers: Yet so as to remember, that the change is not to be made upon him, but
upon you. As when the Boat-man lays hold upon the bank, he draws the Boat
to it, and not the bank unto the Boat. Prayer fitteth you to receive the mercy;
both naturally as it exciteth your desires after it, and morally as it is a
condition on which God has promised to give it: when you pray you tell God
nothing which before he knew not better than you: But you tell him that in
confession and petition, which he will hear from your own mouths, before he
will judge you meet for the mercies which you are to pray for.

In sum, pray, because you believe that praying Believers shall have the
promised blessing: And believe particularly and absolutely, that you shall have
that promised blessing through Christ, because you are praying Believers, and
therefore the persons to whom it is promised.

CHAP. XXIII. How to live by Faith toward Children, and other Relations.
Direct. 1. BElieve Gods Promises made to Believers and their seed: (of which I
have written at large in my treatise of Infant Baptism.) And labor to
understand how far those promises extend, both as to the persons and the
blessings. There was never an age of the world, in which God did not
distinguish the holy seed, even Believers and their Children, from the rest of
the world, and take them as those that were specially in his Covenant.

Direct. 2. Let not your conceits of the bare birth-priviledge, make you omit
your serious, solemn and believing Dedication of them unto God, and entering
them into his Covenant.

For the reason why your seed is called Holy, and in a better case than the
seed of Infidels, is not merely because they are the offspring of your bodies,
and have their natures from you; much less as deriving any grace or virtue from
you by generation: But because you are persons your selves who have dedicated
your selves with all that you have, absolutely to God by Christ: And they being
your own, and therefore at your disposal, your wills are taken for their wills,
so far as you act in their names, and on their behalf: And therefore when you
dedicate them to God, you do but that which you have both power and command to
do: And therefore God accepts what you so dedicate to him. And Baptism is the
regular way in which this dedication should be solemnly made: But if through
the want of a Minister, or water, or time, this be not done, your believing
dedication of your child to God, without Baptism shall be accepted. For it is
the substance, and not the sign, the will, and not the water, which God
requires in this case.

Quest. But what then shall we think of the children of godly Anabaptists,
whose Judgment is against such dedication?

Answ. Many whose Judgment is against baptizing them, is not against an
offering or dedicating them to God. And those who think that they are not
allowed solemnly to enter them into Covenant with God, yet really do that which
is the same thing: For they cannot be imagined, to be unwilling, to dedicate
them to God, to the utmost of that interest and power, which they understand
that God has given them: and doubtless they most earnestly desire that
according to their capacity, they may be the children of God, and God will be
their God in Christ. And this vertual dedication seems to be the principal
requisite condition.

But yet as the unbaptized are (ordinarily) without the visible Church and its
privileges; so if any be so blind, as neither explicitly nor vertually to
dedicate their seed to God; I know no promise of their childrens salvation, any
more than of the seed of Infidels.

Direct. 3. If the children of true Christians dedicated by the Parents will to
God, through Christ, shall die before they come to the use of reason, the
Parents have no cause to doubt of their salvation.

It is the conclusion of the Synod of Dort in Artic. 1. And the reason is this.

If the Parent and child be in the same Covenant, then if that Covenant pardon
and adopt the Parent, it does pardon and adopt the child: But the Parent and
child are in the same Covenant: Therefore, etc.

God has but one Covenant on his part, which is sealed by baptism (as I have
proved at large to Mr. Blake.) Indeed some are only externally in Covenant with
him on their part, that is, they did covenant only with the tongue, and not the
heart: And consequently God is no further in covenant with them, than to allow
and command his Ministers to receive them into the Visible Church, and give
them its privileges; and is not as a Promiser in Covenant with them at all
himself, either for inward, or for outward blessings. He has not one Covenant
which gives outward, and another which gives inward blessings.

And it is here supposed, that the only condition prerequisite on the Infants
part, that he may have right to this Covenant, and its blessings, is that he be
the seed of a true Believer, and dedicated in Covenant to God by the Parents
will or act. Actual Faith is not prerequired: Seminal grace may be inherent,
but 1. Not known to the Baptizer: 2. Nor prerequired as a condition; but liker
to be given by virtue of the Covenant. Nothing else therefore being
prerequisite as a condition, it follows, that as the Parents dedicating
themselves to God, if baptized at age, is the condition of their certain title
to the present blessings of the Covenant ( viz. that God be their Father,
Christ their Savior, and the Spirit in Covenant to operate in them to
sanctification, and their sins are all pardoned, and they are heirs of Heaven)
even so upon the Parents dedication of their children to God, they have right
to the same blessings; else why do we baptize them, seeing Baptism in the true
nature and use of it, is a solemn dedicating them to God, in that same
Covenant, and a solemn investing them in the relations and rights of that same
pardoning Covenant, and not in any other.

I do not say that all baptized Infants, so dying, are saved, be they the
children of Infidels, or Heathens, and remaining their true propriety; nor
those that are offered and baptized never so wrongfully, or hypocritically; nor
will I stay to dispute for what I have asserted. But 1. I exhort Christians
believingly to dedicate their children in Covenant with God in Christ: And 2.
To believe that if they so dye, that Covenant of Christ forbids them to
doubt of their salvation.

Direct. 4. Let your Duty be answerable to your hope: And do not only pray for
your childrens sanctification, but if they live, endeavor it by all possible
care, in a wise and godly education:

Remember that nature, and your dedicating them to God, do both oblige you to
this care for their salvation. And that the education of children, is one of
the greatest duties in the world, for the service of Christ, and the prosperity
of Church and State: And the neglect of it, not the smallest cause of the ruin
of both, and of the worlds calamity.

Many a poor, sottish, lazy Professor have I known, who cry out against
ignorant, dumb and unfaithful Ministers, as guilty of the blood of souls, and
are so religious, as to separate from the Assemblies that have Ministers that
are but partly such; when as their own children are almost as ignorant as
Heathens, and they only use them to a few customary formal duties (while they
think they are enough against forms) and turn over the chief care of their
instruction to the Schoolmaster. And are themselves so ignorant, dumb and idle;
unfaithful and unnatural to their poor childrens souls, as that it is a doubt
whether in a well-ordered Church they ought not to be denied communion
themselves. They so little practice, Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19. and 6.7. Ephesians. 6.4, etc.

Direct. 5. If your children live to the flesh in an ungodly course of life,
contrary to the Covenant which by you they made, they forfeit all the benefits
of the Covenant: And you can have no assurance by any thing that you can do for
them, that ever they shall be converted (though it is not past hope.) And if
they be converted at age, their pardon and adoption will be the effect of Gods
Covenant, as then it was newly entered with themselves, and not as it was made
before for them in infancy.

Direct 6. Yet because that still while there is life, there is hope, you ought
not by despair or negligence to omit prayer, exhortation, or any other duty
which you can perform in order to their recovery: And though now they have
wills of their own, their salvation is not laid so much upon you, as it was in
Infancy, at their first covenanting with God; yet still God will show his love
to his servants in their seed; and faithful endeavors are not vain nor
hopeless; and therefore it is still one of your greatest duties in the world,
to seek their true recovery to Christ.

Direct. 7. If God make your children a scourge, or a heartbreaking to you,
bear and improve it as becomes Believers: That is;

1. Repent of your own former sin, your own youthful lusts; your disobedience
to your Parents; your carnal fondness on your children; your loving them too
much, and God too little; the evil examples you have given them; and your
manifold neglect of a prudent, seasonable, earnest, unwearied instructing them
in godliness; your bearing with their sin, and giving them their own wills,
till they were masterless, etc, Renew your Repentance, and you have got some
benefit.

2. Think how unkindly and unthankfully you have dealt with a gracious Savior,
and a heavenly Father.

3. Let it take off your affections from all things under the Sun, and call
them up the more to God: For who would love a world, where none are to be
trusted, and where all things are vexatious, even the children of your love and
bowels.

Direct. 8. If they die impenitently, and perish, mourn for them, but with the
moderation of Believers: That is, 1. Consider that God is more the owner of
your children, than you are; and may do with his own as he list. 2. And he is
more wise and merciful than you; and therefore not to be murmured at as wanting
either. 3. And it is an unvaluable mercy that your own soul is sanctified, and
shall be saved. 4. And the most godly have had ungodly children before you.
Adam had a Cain, Noah had a Cham, Isaac had an Esau, David had an Absalom, etc.
5. And if all the godly that pray for their childrens salvation must be therein
gratified, all the world would then have been saved. For Noah would have prayed
for all his children, and they for theirs, and so to the worlds end.

Object. Oh but my conscience tells me, that it is my own sin which has had
a hand in their undoing.

Answ. Suppose it be so; it is certainly a pardonable sin. Do you then repent
of it, or not? If you repent; as you mourn for your relations; so you should
rejoice that God has forgiven you. For repented sin is certainly pardoned to
you, and pardoned sin to you, is as great cause of joy, as unpardoned sin in
your relations is cause of sorrow. Therefore mourn with such moderation, and
mixed comfort and thanksgiving, as becomes one that lives by faith. The
affliction indeed is near and great; and heavier than any calamity that could
have befallen their bodies, and is not to be slighted by an unnatural
insensibility: But yet you have a God who is better to you than a thousand
children; and your cross is but as a feather, if you set it in the balance
against your blessings, even the Love of God, and your part in Christ, and life
eternal.

CHAP. XXIV. How by Faith to order our Affections to public Societies, and the
unconverted world.
Direct. 1. TAke heed that you lose not that common Love which you owe to
mankind, nor that desire of the increase of the Kingdom of Christ, which must
keep up in you a constant compassion to the unconverted world, viz. Idolaters,
Infidels, and ungodly Hypocrites.

It is pitiful to observe the unchristian senslesness of most zealous
Professors of Religion in this point: Though God has purposely put the three
public Petitions first in the Lords Prayer, to tell them what they must first
and most desire, that is, the hallowing of his Name, and the coming of his
Kingdom, and the doing of his Will on Earth as it is in Heaven; yet they seem
not to understand it, or to regard it: But their thoughts and desires are as
selfish, and private, and narrow, as if they knew nothing what the World or the
Church is, or cared for neither. Their mind and talk is all of their own
matters, for body or soul, or of their several Parties, and particular
Churches; or if any extend his care as far as this spot of Land in Britain and
Ireland, or some of the Reformed Churches, they go further than their
companions; their selves, and their side or party is almost all that most
regard: Perhaps the poor scattered Jews have a few words in the prayers of
some; but the miserable case of the vast Nations of the Earth, who seem to be
forsaken of God is neglected by them. Five parts in six of the earth are
Heathens and Mahometanes: and of the sixth part, the Protestants are but about
a sixth, compared with the poor ignorant Abbassines, Armenians, Syrians, the
Greek Churches, and the Papists; (to say nothing what the most of the
Protestants themselves are.) Yet are almost all these put by, with a word or
two, or none at all, in the daily prayers of most Professors: And it is rare to
hear any to pray with any importunity for their conversion. Is this men's love
to mankind? Is this their love to the Kingdom of Christ? or to God and
Godliness? Is God of as narrow a mind as you? Are you and your party all the
world, or all the Church? or all that is to be regarded and prayed for?

Direct. 2. Do not only pray for them, but study what is within the reach of
your power to do for their conversion. For though private men can do little in
comparison of what Christian Princes might do who must not be told their duty
by such as I.) Yet somewhat might be done by Merchants and their Chaplains, if
skill and zeal were well united; and somewhat might be done by writing and
translating such books as are fittest for this use: And greater matters might
be done, by training up some Scholars in the Persian, Indostan, Tartarian, and
such other languages, who are for mind and body fitted for that work, and
willing with due encouragement to give up themselves thereto. Were such a
College erected, natives might be got to teach the languages: and no doubt but
God would put into the hearts of many young men, to devote themselves to so
excellent a service; and of many rich men, to settle Lands sufficient to
maintain them; and many Merchants would help them in their expedition. But
whether those that God will so much honor, be yet born, I know not.

Direct. 3. Pray and labor for the Reformation and Concord of all the
Christian Churches; as the most probable means to win to Christ the world of
Heathens and Unbelievers.

If the Protestant Churches were more pure and peaceable, more holy, and more
unanimous and charitable to each other, it would do much to win the Papists
that are near them: And if the Papists, and Greeks, and Armenians, and
Abassines were more reformed, wise and holy, it would do much to win the
Heathens and Mahometanes round about them. They would be the salt of the earth,
and the lights of the world, and the leaven which must leaven the whole lump:
The neighboring Mahometanes, and Heathens, would see their good works, and
glorify God, Matthew. 5.16. A holy, harmless, loving conversation, is a Sermon
which men of all languages can understand: Thus as Apostles we might preach to
men of several tongues, though we have but one. O that the sanctifying Spirit
would teach Christians this art, and reform and unite the Churches of Christ,
that they might be no longer a scandal, to hinder the saving of the world about
them! It is the sense of Christ's prayer before his death, John 17.21, 22, 23,
25. that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that the
world may believe that thou have sent me -- I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in One, and that the world may know that thou have
sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me.

Direct. 4. Be sure at least that your holy, loving and blameless loves, be an
example to these that are about you. If you cannot convert Kingdoms, nor get
other men to do their duty toward it, be sure that you do your part within
your reach: And believe that your lives must be the best part of your labors,
and that good works, and love, and good example must be the first part of your
doctrine.

Direct. 5. When you see that the world lies still in wickedness, and there
seems to be no possibility of a cure, yet search the Scripture, and so far as
you can find any Prophecy or Promise of their conversion, believe that God in
his time will make it good.

Direct. 6. But take heed that on this pretense, you plunge not your selves
into any inordinate studies, or conceited expositions of the Revelations, and
other Scripture Prophecies, as many have done, to the great wrong of
themselves, and the Church of God.

By inordinate studies, I mean, 1. When you begin there where you should end,
and before you have digested the necessary greater truths in Theology, you go
to those that should come after them. 2. When an undue proportion of your zeal,
and time, and study, and talk, is bestowed upon these Prophecies, in comparison
of other things. 3. When you are proudly and causlesly conceited of your
singular expositions: That when of ten of the learnedest and hardest studied
Expositors of the Revelation, perhaps in many things scarce two are of a mind;
yet when you differ from them all, or all save one, you can be as peremptory
and confident in your opinion, as if you were far wiser, or more infallible
than they. 4. When you place a greater necessity in it than there is; as if
salvation, or Church Communion lay upon your conceits. Whereas God has made
the points that are of necessity to salvation, to be few and plain.

Direct. 7. When you look on the sin and misery of the world, and see small
hope of its recovery, look up by Faith to that better world, where all is
Light, and Love, and Peace. And pray for that coming of Christ, when all this
sin shall be brought to Judgment, and wisdom and godliness be fully justified
before all the world. Let the badness of this world drive up your hearts to
that above, where all is better than you can wish.

Direct. 8. When you are ready to stumble at the consideration of Gods
desertion of so great a part of the world, quiet your minds in the implicit
submission to his infinite wisdom and goodness. Dare you think that you are
more gracious and merciful than God? Or that it is meet you should know all the
secrets of his providence, who must not know the mysteries o^ Government, in
the State or Kingdom where you live? He that cannot rest in the wisdom, will
and mercies of infinite Goodness it self, but must have all his own
expectations satisfied, shall have no rest.

And think withal, how little a spot of Gods Creation this earthly world is:
and how incomprehensibly vast the superior Regions are in comparison of it.
And if all the upper parts of the world be possessed with none but holy
Spirits, and even this lower earth, have also many millions of Saints, prepared
here for the things above, we have no more reason to judge God to be
unmerciful, because this lower world is so bad, than we have to judge the King
unmerciful, when we look into the common Jayle; nor to judge of his government
by the Rogues in a Jayle, but by his Court, and all the subjects of his Kingdom.

If God should forsake no place but Hell, of all his Creation, you could not
grudge at him as unmerciful: And it is a very hard question whether this earth,
and the air about it, be not the place of Hell; when you consider that the
Devils are cast down from Heaven, and yet that they dwell and rule in the Air,
and compass the Earth, and tempt the wicked, and work in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. Job 1. 2 Timothy 2.26. And that Satan is called, the
God and Prince of this world, Joh. 12.31. and 14.30. and 16.11. 2 Cor. 4.4.
Ephesians. 6.12.

But if it be not the place of final execution, it is the place where they are
kept in prison till the great Assizes, and where they are reserved in chains of
darkness, to the Judgment of the great day, and where they are tormented before
the time, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Matthew. 8.29.

Look then from this Dungeon, to the glorious incomprehensible mansions of the
holy ones; and judge by them, and not by this prison, of the goodness and
infinite benignity of God. And if he will give so many obstinate despisers of
his grace, a place with those Devils that did seduce and rule them, think not
God to be therefore unmerciful; but behold his mercy in the innumerable vessels
of honor and mercy, that shall possess the higher mansions for ever.

CHAP. XXV. How to live by Faith in the love of one another, against Self-love.
Direct. 1. LEt Faith first employ you in the knowledge of God: and when you
know him who is Love it self, you will best learn of him to love. You will see
that that is best, which is likest unto God; and that is worst, which is most
unlike him. And when you consider how universally, though variously, he loves
his creatures, and how he expresses it, and how he loves benevolently,
because he is good, and loves complacentially, because also the thing is good
which he loves, you will learn the art of love from God, Romans 9.13* Deuteronomy.
4.37. and 7.8. and 23.5. and 33.3. 1 John 3.16, 17. and 4.7, 9, 11, 12, 19, 20,
21.

Direct. 2. Study Jesus Christ aright, and you will also learn to love of him.
There you will see Self-denying Love; which stooped to earth, to reproach, to
sufferings, to labors, to death, and spared not life or any thing to do good:
It is the chief Lesson which you go to School to Christ to learn: And it is as
proper to go to him to learn to love, as it is to go to the Sun for light, Romans
5.8. John 13.34. 1 These. 4.9. John 11.36.5. and 13.1. and 15.9. Ephesians. 5.2, 25.
John 15.12.

Direct. 3. Know God in his Works and Image, and then you will see him in his
natural Image, in all men as rational, and in his moral Image in all his
Saints; and then you will see what to love, and why. He that cannot see God in
a glass in this world, cannot see him at all, and cannot love him. Remember
that it is in his servants and creatures, that he exposes himself to be seen,
and known, and loved, 1 John 2.10. and 3.10, 14. and 4.7, 8, 20, 21. and 5.1.
Matthew. 25.40.

Direct. 4. Abhor that proud malignant censoriousness, which is apt to make the
worst of others, and to deny, and extenuate, and overlook Gods graces in them
(as the Devil did by Job:) and which can see no goodness in them that are not
eminently good. For this is but the Devils artifice, to kill men's love to one
another. Though he pretend the honor of Godliness, and the hatred of sin, when
he tells you, [such an one is an Hypocrite, and such an one has nothing but
a form, and no power of Godliness: I can see nothing of God in him; alas, they
are poor carnal people;] all is but to destroy your Love. And thus he mightily
prospers in the malignant spirit of separation; by which he can make you
unchurch whole Churches, and unchristen whole Towns and Parishes, and all
because that you that are strangers to them, and see not their godliness, or
hear of nothing eminent in them. But the world of dividers will take no
warning, any more than the world of the profane. Satan does deceive them all.

Direct. 5. Abhor therefore the sin of backbiting and evil-speaking; and when
you hear a malignant censurer thus unchristen and unchurch men without proof,
behind their backs, if gentler reproofs will not serve the turn, frown them
away, and say [Get thee behind me Satan:] the accuser of the brethren, and the
spirit of hatred, makes it his work in the world to destroy men's love to one
another; and he has no such way to do it, as by making them seem unlovely to
one another: And he that persuades me that my neighbor is not good,
persuades me that he is not lovely, and so persuades me from loving him,
Prove. 25.23. Romans 1.30. Psalm. 15.3. 2 Cor. 12.20. Romans 14.3, 4, 10, 13. James
4.11, 12. Matthew. 7.1, 2. 1 Cor. 4.5.

Direct. 6. Above all, seek to mortify selfishness, which is the great enemy
of love to God and man. A selfish man can faithfully love none but himself; for
he loves all others but for himself: His own opinions, interests and ends, are
the disposers of his Love. Therefore he never heartily loves his enemy: no nor
the best, that do not honor him, but seem to slight him. If any should neglect
him, or speak hardly of him, or do him any real or seeming wrong, or be of
another side, against his party, or his cause, no censures are too sharp, nor
no love too little for such a one. And yet these that can love none heartily
but themselves, will find that they had no greater enemies than themselves, and
that Hell and Earth did not so much as themselves against them.

Direct. 7. Subject your selves truly to Gods authority, and his commands will
further Love: For it is the sum of them all, and the fulfilling of his Law,
both old and new, Gal. 5.14. Romans 13.8, 9, 10. John 13.34. and 15.12, 17.
Matthew. 12.30, 32, 33.

Direct. 8. Remember that Love is the bond, and life, and interest of the
Church, and of the world. Without Love the world would have neither unity,
peace or safety: What were a family without it? Were it not for Love, men that
were not kept fettered in Jayles, or Bedlams, would be as Robbers, or Wolves,
or mad Dogs to one another. Were it not for Love, the Church would be crumbled
into malicious Sects, that would spend their time in prating and militating
against each other; and preach and talk down Love to one another; and would
call this devilish work, the preaching of the Gospel, or the worshipping of
God; while they blaspheme him by offering him a sacrifice of hatred and
reviling, as they do that offer him a sacrifice of man's blood, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
But speaking the truth in Love, you may grow up into him in all things, which
is the head, even Christ. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body to the
edifying of it self in Love.

Yea their own Sects would turn to dust and atoms, if Love, which is there
confined, did not soder them together, when it is dead in them as to all
others, or as to the most.

Direct. 9. Love is our spiritual health, and Selfishness is our sickness, sin
and death. When we fell from the Love of God to our selves, we fell also from
the Love of others to our selves: The individuate creature was contracted in
himself, and all together set upon Propriety, and forgot his relations to God
and man: And when grace destroys this selfish privateness of spirit, it
sets us again in love with God and man together; and the better any man is,
the more public spirit he is of, and the less d^fference he makes between his
neighbors interest, and his own (when God and his interest make not a
difference.) And this is to Love our neighbor as our selves; that is, without
the vice of partial selfishness; not setting up our own interest against his,
but equally measuring both by Gods; and referring them thereunto, Levit. 19.18,
34. Matthew. 19.19. Gal. 15.4.

Direct. 10. Remember that loving others as our selves is our own interest and
benefit, as well as our duty.

And a notable instance it is, how much our duty is our own interest and good;
and how merciful God is in his strictest Laws. As the Love of God is Heaven it
self, and sinners that love him not, do damn themselves, and put themselves
from Heaven and happiness (and to pardon them, is to sanctify them) even so it
is an unspeakable loss and misery which sinners draw upon themselves, by not
loving their neighbors, as themselves, but only in a subordination to
themselves, and for their proper private ends. I pray you mark but these few
particular instances.

1. If I love my neighbor as my self, my very love is my delight and ease. The
form of Love consists in complacency or pleasedness; and therefore it must
needs be pleasant to every one that uses it (However bad Love has bitter
fruits.) And whenever wrath, or envy, or hatred, comes instead of Love, it is
my sickness, I feel my self diseased by it.

2. If I love others, others will love me. They are scarce free to do
otherwise. You may almost constrain any man to love you, if you love him
heartily, and show it plainly, and were within his view to make him see it. All
men love a loving nature; but especially if they be loved by such themselves.

3. If I love my neighbor as my self, to do good to him will be as easy and
pleasant as to my self. I can ride, and run, and labor contentedly for my
self: I can sloop to the most sordid employment for my self: And so I should as
easily do for others: Whereas want of Love does make all tedious that I do, and
makes my duty a continual burden, and too often tempts me to omit it. Love
made both Christ and his Apostles to do so much for souls with ease and
pleasure, which else they could not have undergone, John 15.13.9. 2 Cor. 12.15.
Ephesians. 3.17. and 5.2 Col. 2.2.

4. If I love my neighbor as my self, I can as easily suffer any thing from
him, as from my self. I can easily bear that in my self, as to sight or smell;
the loathsomest sores or ulcers, which others cannot bear. I am easily brought
to forgive my self, and to forbear self-hurting, and self-revenge; and so
should I do to others, if I thus loved them. And then how easy would my life
be among all the injuries of the world!

5. If I loved my neighbor as my self; if my flesh did want, my mind (which is
my self) could never be in want: Because all that my neighbors have is mine,
as to my comfort and content. My house is homely, but my neighbors is comely
and convenient; and to my mind that is as comfortable, as if it were my own: My
Land is small, but my neighbors is large: my grounds are barren, but my
neighbors fruitful: my corn is bad, but his proves good: my cattle die, or
prosper not, but his do well: I am low and despicable, and no man cares for
me; but others are Lords, and Princes, and honorable: and if I love them as my
self, their corn, their cattle, their houses and lands, their Kingdoms and
honors, are as much my comfort, as if they were my own. I know these are
Paradoxes to dapraved selfish nature; but thus it would be if Love were
perfect; and thus it is in that measure that we love. And should that duty be
taken for a burden, which as to my comfort makes all the wealth, and honor,
and Kingdoms of others to be my own?

Obj. If you love your neighbors as your selves, you must mourn with them that
mourn; and all the calamities and sorrows of the world must be yours; which
will overcome your joys.

Ans. 1. I am not to sorrow as much as they do sorrow, but as much as they
rationally ought to do. And men are not to think that a loving correction,
which works for their good and salvation, is worse than the snares of
prosperity: The brother of high degree must rejoice when he is made low, as
well as the brother of low degree must rejoice when he is exalted, Jam 19.10.
And why should that be my sorrow, which is his benefit, and should be his joy?
If Paul and Silas sing in the stocks, why should not I sing with them? Patience
and rejoicing are the duty of all Believers in affliction.

2. The mercies and happiness of every one that fears God* is far more than
his misery: Therefore his joy and gratitude should be more than his sorrows and
complaints. If a man's tooth do ach, and all the rest of his body be well,
should not he and I be more thankful for the health of all the rest, than
troubled for a tooth? A Believer has always the Spirit of God, and a part in
Christ, and the pardon of sin, and a right to Heaven: And then how much greater
should his joy be than his sorrows, and mine also on his behalf?

3. The Goodness and Love of God is manifested to the world more abundantly
than his justice and severity. We know of no afflicted Saints but on this spot
of earth: And we know of no damned ones, but Devils and wicked men: But we know
that the worlds above us are incomparably more vast than this, and that the
glory of the celestial Spirits, is far greater than our sufferings and sorrows
here: Therefore our joy which Love procures, should be a thousand-fold greater
than our sorrows.

4. And as for the wicked, as the consequent Will of God lays by compassion;
so consequently, considering them as the obstinate final refusers of grace,
they are not those neighbors whom we are bound to love as our selves: For they
are enemies to God, and deprived of his Image; and therefore our obligations to
mourn for them, are abated (as Samuels for Saul, when he knew that God had
rejected him (1 Samuel 15.35. and 16.1.) And we are obliged to rejoice in the
declarations of the Justice and Holiness of God, and the universal benefit
which redoundeth from his Judgments, Rev. 18.20. and 12.12. Esther 8.15. So
that it still remains clear, that loving our neighbors as our selves, does
entitle us to the comforts of all men's health, estates, prosperity, honors;
yea and their holiness and wisdom too; and this without any such participation
of their sorrows, as should be any considerable eclipse of our delights; if we
do it all regularly, as God requires us.

6. If I love my neighbor as my self, I am freed from all the trouble of cross
interests; in buying and selling, in trespassing, in Lawsuits; It will comfort
me as much if he get by me, as if I get by him: If his bargain prove the
better, as if mine did; if he have the better at Law, as if it were judged to
my self. Yea all his successes, prosperity, and whatever good befalls any
that I know of in the world, will all be mine.

7. And I shall never be loath by death to leave the world (while I have no
cause to fear the missing of salvation) because whatever I leave behind me,
will be possessed by such as I love as my self. They will have life, and time,
and health, and comforts, and whatever my nature is loath to leave: Therefore
whilst I live, why should it not be as comforting to me to think that so many
shall live and prosper, whom I love as my self, as if I were my self to live
and prosper.

8. Yea, more than so, I have by Love a part in the Joys of Heaven, before I
am actually there. For the Joys of all those blessed souls, and of those holy
Angels, are mine by participation, so far as to cause me to rejoice in their
felicity, as if it were my own, as far as I can now apprehend it.

Yea the Glory of the Lord Jesus, and the eternal blessedness of God himself,
would rejoice us more than our own felicity, if we loved him as much above our
selves, as we ought to do, we should partake of our Masters joy.

And now judge whether loving God as God, and our neighbors sincerely as our
selves, would not cure almost all the calamities of our minds, and give us a
kind of Heaven, and be a cheap and certain way, to have what we can wish in all
the world, and even to make all the world our own. And whether it be not sin it
self, which is the first part of all men's hell and misery?

Object. But my neighbors meat will not fill my belly; nor his health does not
ease my pain; nor his fire keep me warm.

Answ. The flesh has got the dominion indeed, when men cannot distinguish
between soul and body, between the pain and pleasures of the body and of the
mind. I do not say that Love will change the pain or pleasure of your bodies,
but of your minds. Your appetites will not be satisfied with your neighbors
food, but your minds may be comforted to see his welfare. Your pain is not
eased by your neighbors health; but your minds may be pleased by it, as much
as if it were your own, if you loved him as much as you do your self. And
therefore many in a danger have saved the life of a Prince, a Captain, a
Parent, a Child, a Friend, with the voluntary loss of their own.

Object. This is all true; but who is there in the world that does it, or
finds it possible to love another as himself? And how can that be a duty,
which is to nature it self an impossibility? Therefore let us first know what
this duty is, of loving our neighbors as our selves.

Answ. Doubtless if it be the sum of the Law, all true Christians do it in
sincerity, though not in perfection. And as to the sense of it, 1. You must
distinguish between that sensitive and passionate affection, which is in the
soul as sensitive, and is common to beasts with men, and that rational
appetite, which does will, and choose, and is pleased according to the conduct
of pure reason. The first we doubt not will be still more to our selves than
others; and it is not the use of grace to destroy it, but to rule and moderate
it.

2. You must distinguish between Love and outward actions, which are the
expressions of it. When our Love is due as much to one, as to another, yet our
outward actions may be under a particular Law, which obliges us to do that for
one, which we are not bound to do for others. As to maintain our own children,
families, servants, and so our selves rather than others. And the reason is,
because the difference of individuals makes that fit for one, which is not fit
for another; and so makes every man the fittest chuser for himself, and those
that are nearest to him; and nature instigateth him to the greatest care in
doing it: And all good must be done in a regular order, or else confusion will
destroy it. And nature makes this most orderly As every Parish must keep their
own poor, and yet must love other poor as well.

3. You must know that Love is formally nothing but complacence (as aforesaid)
but Love joined with a will and purpose to do good to another, is called Love
of benevolence; when yet the Love there is one thing, and the doing good, or
purpose to do it, is another; and I may in obedience to God, purpose and do
more good to one whom I am bound to Love, not more but less.

And now you may see what it is to love our neighbors as our selves.

1. God must be loved above our neighbors and our selves; and both must be
loved purely as related and subordinate to him, and for his sake. There is a
double respect which all things have to God: 1. As they contain that excellency
which he has put upon them, which is some likeness, representation or
signification of himself; and is called his Glory shining in the creature; that
is, it is derived Goodness. 2. As they conduce to his further service, and may
honor him, and please him. Thus all creatures must be loved only as a means,
even a means declaring God, being derivatively and significantly good and
useful; and as a means to serve and please him.

2. Therefore this being the formal reason of our Rational Love, must also be
the measure of it ( a quatenus ad quantum.) As it is certain that I must love
that best which is best, because I must love it only as good; so it is certain
that that is best which has most likeness to God, and most of his Glory upon
it, and that which is most pleasing to him, and useful to his service.
Therefore if my neighbor be better than I am, I must judge him better, and
love him better.

3. Though natural self-appetite, and self-preservation, by which all creatures
are for themselves only (not feeling the hunger, cold, pain of others) be not
sinful, but the effect of creating individuation, yet Reason was perfect, and
the Will could perfectly follow Reason, in its complacency and choice, till sin
corrupted it: Reason could judge that best which was best, and the Will could
love that best which was best. Therefore where ever any of this is wanting, it
is sin.

4. The principal part or sum of positive sin, does consist in selfishness.
Man is fallen from the Love of God and man, to himself; and grace recovereth
him from this. Therefore it is, that this duty is not only unperformed, but
hardly discerned by unrenewed men: so far as they are selfish, they hardly
believe that they should love their neighbors as themselves.

5. To love our neighbors as our selves, in point of duty, contains these
two things: First, To love them simply according to their goodness, without any
hinderance of selfishness or partiality: Not to forbear loving them, because
they are not our selves, or because they are against any inordinate selfish
interest or appetite of our own. And also comparatively, to love them in the
same degree with our selves, if they have the same degree of loveliness; so
that it cannot extend to the kind, and the end, and reason of the Love, but it
must needs also extend to the degree. If I love him less than my self, who is
better than my self, I love him not as my self, as to ends and reason.

6. Yea I am bound by this Law to love every man better or more than my self,
who is really better, and is so manifest to me: Or else I love him not as my
self, that is, on the same true Reasons as I must love my self (for God and the
goodness of the object.)

7. But as all men fail in the degree of this Love (and therefore none
perfectly keep the Law;) so the sincerity which all Gods servants have, does
consist in this; that 1. Our love to others is for Gods sake, and for the
goodness which he has endued them with, and the service they may do him. 2.
That this God and his service, for whose sake we love them, be preferred before
our selves, and every creature, and loved better than all our sinful pleasures.
3. That our love to them for Gods sake and graces be such, as ordinarily in the
exercise and effects will prevail ag^^^st our Love of sensual interest and
delights; and will bring us effectually to succor, relieve, and do them good,
though to our fleshly loss, when God requires it. He that cannot love Christ
in his servants, better than his carnal pleasures, loves him not at all
sincerely. Gods Image and interest in his servants, and in mankind, must be
practically more precious to us, and more beloved by us, than all our carnal
sinful pleasures. (For as for our own spiritual good, it stands in such a
connection with Gods will and glory, and our neighbors good, that I know not
how to put them into comparison in the try^l, much less in opposition.) 4. That
all carnal self-love and uncharitableness contrary to this, be hated, resisted,
repented of, and subdued, and be not predominant in us, against the Love of God
and man.

8. The meaning of the Command is not that we shall love our neighgours as we
inordinately and sinfully love our selves; but as we ought to love our selves;
and as we regularly and justly do love our selves. He that loves himself too
much and sinfully, must not therefore so love his neighbor.

9. He that loves his neighbor as himself (that is, without selfish
partiality, and for the same reasons as he must love himself, viz. for the
Image and Interest of God) is obliged by this very rule, to love himself more
than his neighbor, when he is better, and more pleasing and serviceable to
God. (Therefore he that would warrantably love himself most, must labor to be
himself the best, and then he may lawfully do it, so far as his own goodness,
and other men's defects are truly known to him.

10. As a Fathers Love may consist with the correction of his children, and
self-love with blood-letting, purging, labor, and other unpleasing things; so
we may love our neighbors as our selves, and yet correct and punish evil
doers: For sometimes their own good requires it; and ordinarily the public
good requires it ( poena debetur Reipublicae) and also Gods command requires
it; so that this is not loving our selves more than our neighbor; but loving
him more than his ease, or his favor and loving God, and the Commonwealth,
more than him.

11. Our love of our neighbors as our selves, does not at all make our natural
selfish appetites and senses, or desire of food, health, ease, rest, etc. to be
sinful: Nor oblige us to have such natural senses and appetites for others; but
only rationally to equal them in estimation and complacence, and to do them so
much good as God requires us.

12. And it does not oblige us to do as much for them as for our selves, for
the reasons before all^dged; but to do them good without the hinderance of self
interest: That selfishness be not to us as a Bile or Imposthume, which draws
the humors and spirits unequally and disorderly from the rest of the body to
it self.

By all this it is evident, 1. That no man has an inequality in his love to
himself and his neighbor, beyond the inequality of goodness, but it is sinful
(speaking of Rational Love.)

2. That all Love to out neighbor is not sincere: There is a real Love to
them, which bad men may have, which is not the sincere love which God requires.

3. Every man that loves another for his goodness and godliness, loves him
not sincerely: For he may have a love to goodness it self, which is not
sincere: As if he love his lusts and pleasures more.

4. Every man that does good to another in Love, does not therefore sincerely
love him. A Dives may give Lazarus his s^^^ps: And the very est sensualist may
give another some of the leavings of his fleshly lusts. And though the giving
of a cup of cold water to a Disciple, when we have no better to give, does show
sincerity, and shall have its reward (because God accepts it, according to
men's will, and to what they have, and not according to what they have not;) yet
it is certain that an unhappy worldling may give much more. And if Christ had
bid him Luke 18.23. sell part, instead of selling all, it is like he might not
have gone away sorrowful.

5. It is not therefore the value or proportion of the gift, which is it that
must try our love to others, in it self considered; for it may often fall out
that a Widows mite may signify truer charity, than the substance of some
others. But it is the prevalency of the Love of God in man, and of man for the
sake of God, against our sinful self-love, and carnal interest.

And now I will add a little more evidence, to the principal thing in question,
viz. that (...) the very degree the Rational Appetite or Will should love
another equal with our selves.

And 1. The forementioned reason is undeniable, that the Will should love that
best which is best, and must measure that by the respect which things have to
God, and not to our own commodity in the world.

2. No man can deny this principle but by setting up natural self-love or
appetite, and making the rational stoop to that, which would infer as well,
that we may love our selves better than God himself; and that our sense is
nobler than our reason, and must rule it.

3. We find our own reason tell us much more of our duty in this, than our
corrupted wills do follow. The best way therefore to discern the truth, is to
treat with reason alone, and leave out the will, till we have dispatched with
reason. And you will find that the common light of nature justifies this Law
of God.

1. He that would not confess that it is better he had no being, than that
there were no God, or no world besides him, is a monster of selfishness. And if
a man say never so much [ I cannot do so] yet while he confesses that this
should be his desire, it suffices to the decision of our present case.

2. He that will not confess that it is better that he himself should die, than
all the Church of Christ, or the whole Kingdom die, is unreasonably selfish in
the eyes of all impartial men. The gallant Romans and Athenians had learnt it,
as one of their plainest greatest Lessons, to prefer their Country before their
lives: And is not that to love their Countries better than themselves.

3. For the same reason many of them saw, that it was the duty of a good
subject, or a gallant soldier, to save the life of his King or General, with
the loss of his own: Because their lives were of more public utility. And the
ground of all this was these natural verities.

[ The best should be best loved: Goodness must be measured by a higher rule
than personal self-interest: Multitudes are better than one. etc.]

4. All men acknowledge that a man of eminent Learning, Piety, Wisdom, and
Usefulness to the Church or World, should be loved and preserved rather than a
wicked, sottish, worthless child of our own. Yea God himself requires that
Parents procure the death of their own children, by public Justice, if they be
obstinately wicked, Deuteronomy. 21.

5. The same Reasons plainly infer, that I ought rather to desire the life of a
much more worthy useful instrument for the Church and State, than my own; and
so to love a better man better than my self, if I be acquainted sufficiently
with his goodness.

And if this be all so sure and plain, hence observe,

1. How much humane nature is corrupted.

Alas, how rare is this equal Love!

2. How few true Christians are; and how defective and imperfect grace is in
the best. Alas! how strange are many Christians to the extent of this duty, and
how far are we all from practicing it in any eminent degree?

3. Wherein it is that natures corruption most consists; and what is the
chief part of the nature and work of sanctifying grace and reformation.

4. Whence come all the oppressions, injuries, persecutions, frauds and
cruelties on the earth: For want of loving men's neighbors as themselves:
Otherwise how tenderly would they handle one another? How easily would they
pardon wrongs? How patiently would they bear the dissent of honest, upright
Christians, who cannot force their judgments to be of other men's mould and
size? How apt would men be to suspect their own understandings, of weakness,
presumption or error, rather than to rave with the fury of the Dragon against
all others, who think them to be mistaken? How safely and quietly might we live
by them in the world, if they loved their neighbors as themselves? I do not
say now, How plentiful would men be in doing good to others? I am but pleading
a lower cause, How seldom they would be in doing hurt? But, alas, miserable
Britain! It was in thee that one extraordinary Emperor, Alexander Sevetus was
betrayed and murdered, who made that Christian precept his Motto, and wrote it
on his doors, and books, and goods [ Do as you would be done by.] In thee it is
that Love has been beheaded, while nothing has been more acknowledged and
professed. If Love be treacherous, hurtful, envious, scandalous, ensnaring and
plotting for men's destruction: If Love teach proud and vicious sots, to take
themselves for Deities, and Oracles, and all for Vermin that must be hunted
unto death, who bow not to their carnal erroneous conceits, and do not with the
readiest prostitute consciences, serve their carnal interests and ends: If Love
be known by reviling those that are much better than our selves; and
stigmatizing the faithfullest servants of Christ with the most odious character
that lies can utter: If it was Love that called Paul a pestilent fellow, and a
mover of sedition among the people, and represented Christ as an enemy to
Caesar and his followers, as the filth and offscouring of the earth; then
happy age in which we live; and happy they that are possessed with the proud
and factious spirit. But if all be otherwise, alas, where be they, and how few
that love their neighbors, or betters, as themselves?

5. You see here what a plague sin is to the earth, and how great (a punishment
may I call it, or rather) a misery to the sinner, and to the world.

6. And you see how joyful and heavenly a life we should live, if we did but
follow Gods commands: And what a felicity Love it self is to the soul.

7. And you see by what measure to try men's spirits, and to know who are the
best among all the pretenders to goodness in the world. Certainly not the most
censorious, contemptuous, backbiters and cruel, that seek to make all odious
that are not for their interest: But those that most abound in Love, which
Faith it self is given to produce.

Object. All this is true; but still we find it a thing impossible to love our
neighbor equally with our selves: Can you teach us how to do it?

Answ. It is that I have been teaching you in the ten Directions before set
down: But it is this which I have reserved to the close that must do the work
indeed, and without it nothing else will do it.

Direct. 11. Make it the work of all your lives, by Faith in Christ, to bring
up your souls to the unfeigned Love of God, and then it will be done. For then
you will love God above all, and love God in all; and love your selves and your
neighbors principally for God: Then Gods Image, and Glory, and Will, will be
Goodness or Amiableness in your eyes; and not carnal pleasure, honor or
commodity. And then it will be easy to you to love that most, which has most
of God. You will then easily see the reason of this seeming Paradox, and that
the contrary is most unreasonable. You will then be as Timothy, who had a
natural Love to others, as others have to themselves, and who sought the things
of Jesus Christ, when all others (even the best Ministers too much) sought
their own, Phil. 2.20, 21. You will understand Paul's charge, Phil. 2.3, 4. In
lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better than themselves. Look not
every man on his own, but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind
be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. You will learn of Christ to take
your nearest friend for a Satan, that would persuade you to save or spare your
self (yea your life) when you ought to lay it down for the Glory of God, and
the good of many, Matthew. 16.22, 23. SELF and OWN are words which would then be
better understood, and be more suspected: And the reason of the great Gospel
duty of SELF-DENIAL would be better discerned.

Therefore set your selves to the study of God, especially in his Goodness;
study him in his Works, and in his Word, and in his Son, and in the Glory where
you hope everlastingly to see him: And if you once love God as God indeed, it
will teach you to love your Brethren, and in what sort, and in what degree to
do it. For many ways are we taught of God to love one another: Even 1. By the
great and heavenly teacher of Love, Jesus Christ: 2. And by Gods own example,
Matthew. 5.44, 45* 3. And by the shedding abroad of his love in our hearts by the
Spirit of Love, Romans 5.5. 4. And by this actual loving God, and so loving all
of God in the world.

Object. But by this doctrine you will prepare for the Levellers and Friars, to
cast down, or cry down Propriety.

Answ. 1. There is a propriety of food, raiment, etc. which individuation has
made necessary. 2. There is a propriety of Stewardship, which God causes by
the various disposal of his talents, and which is the just reward of humane
industry, and the necessary encouragement of wit, and labor in the world: None
of these would we cast down, or preach down. 3. But there is a common abuse of
propriety to the maintenance of men's own lusts, and to the hurt of others, and
of all Societies: This we would preach down if we could: But it is Love only
which must be the Leveller: In the Primitive Church, Love showed its power by
such a voluntary community, Acts 4. And all Politicians, who have drawn the
Idea of a perfect Commonwealth, have been fumbling at other ways of
accomplishing it: But it is Christian Love alone that must do it. Unfeignedly
love God as God, and love your neighbors really as your selves, and then keep
your proprieties as far as this will give you leave.

I will conclude with this considerable observation; that though it is false
which some affirm, that individuation is a punishment for some former sin (for
how could a soul not individuate sin?) And though sensitive self-love, which is
the principle of self-preservation, be no sin it self; nor does grace destroy
it; yet the inordinacy of it is the sum and root of all positive sin, and an
increaser of privative sin: And this inseparable sensitive self-love, was made
to be more under the power of reason, and to be ruled by it, than now we find
it in any the most sanctified person; even as Abraham's love of the life of his
only Son, was to be subject to his Faith.

And holiness lies more in this subjection, than most men well understand. And
the inordinacy of this personal self-love, has so strangely perverted the mind
it self, that it is not only very hard to convince men of the evil of any
selfish principles or sins; but it greatly blinds them, as to all duties of
public interest, and social nature: Yea and makes them afraid of Heaven it
self; where the union of souls will be as much nearer than now it is, as their
Love will be greater and more perfect: And though it will not be by any
cessation of personal individuation, and by falling into one universal soul;
yet perfect Love will make the union nearer than we who have no experience of
it, can possibly now comprehend. (And when we feel the strongest Love to a
friend, desiring the nearest union, we have the best help to understand it.)
But men that feel not the divine and holy love, are by inordinate self-love,
and abuse of individuation, afraid of the life to come, lest the union should
be so great as to lose their individuation, or prejudice their personal divided
interests. Yea true believers, so far as their holy Love is weak, and their
inordinate sensitive self-love is yet too strong, are from hence afraid of
another world, when they scarce know why; but indeed it is much from this
disease; which makes men still desire their personal felicity, too partially*
and in a divided way, and to be afraid of losing their personality or
propriety, by too ne^r a union and communion of souls.

CHAP. XXVI. How by Faith to be followers of the Saints, and to look with
profit to their examples, and to their end.
THE great work of living in Heaven by Faith, I have said so much of as to the
principal part in my [ Saints Rest] that no more of that must be expected here.
Only this subject which is not so usually and fully treated of, to the people
as it it ought (being one part of our heavenly conversation) I think meet to
speak to more distinctly at this time.

As we are commanded first, to look to Jesus the Author and perfecter of our
faith, Heb. 12.2, 3. so are we commanded to remember our guides, and to follow
their faith, and consider the end of their conversation, Heb. 13.7. And not to
be slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promises, Heb. 6.12. To which end we have a cloud of witnesses set before us,
in Heb. 11. that next to Jesus whom they followed, we should look to them, and
follow them, Jam. 5.10. My Brethren, take the Prophets for an example --

The Reasons of this duty are these.

1. God has made them our examples two ways: 1. By his graces, making them
holy and fit for our imitation. He gave them their gifts, not only for
themselves, nor only for that present generation, but for us also, and all that
must survive, to the end of the world. As it is said of Abraham's Justification,
Romans 4.23, 24. It was said that Faith was imputed to him for righteousness, not
for his sake alone, but for us also to whom it shall be imputed if we believe
-- So I may say in this case; their faith, their piety, their patience was
given them, and is recorded, not for their salvation, or their honor only; but
also to further the salvation of their posterity, by encouragement and
imitation. If all things are for our sakes, 2 Cor. 4.15. then the graces of
Gods Saints were for our sakes: For the Churches edification it is that Christ
gives both offices, gifts and graces to his Ministers, Ephesians. 4.5, 12, 14, 15,
16. yea and sufferings too, Phil. 1.12, 20. 2 Cor. 1.4, 6. 2 Timothy 2.10. I
endure all things for the elects sake.

2. By commanding us to follow them, 2 These. 3.7, 9. For your selves know how
ye ought to follow us -- To make our selves an example for you to follow us,
Phil. 3.17. Be followers together of me, and mark them that so walk, as ye have
us for an ensample, 1 Cor. 4.16. I beseech you be followers of me, 1 These. 1.6.
Ye became followers of us, and of the Lord: So well are both examples
consistent.

2. The likeness of other men's cases to ours, is greatly useful to our
direction and encouragement. If we are to travel in dangerous ways, we will be
glad to hear how others have sped before us; and if we were to deal with a
crafty deceiver, we would willingly advise with others that have dealt with
him. If we be to learn any Trade or Artifice, we would learn it of them who
with best success have practiced it before us. If we are sick of any disease,
we are glad to talk with them that have had the same, and have been cured of
it; to hear what means they used for their cure. In all such cases reason
teaches us, both to observe how others were affected; whether their case and
ours were the same; what course they took; and how they sped; especially if
they were persons known to us, and the likeness of their case well known; and
if they were such as for wisdom and fidelity we could trust: So is it in this
great business of our salvation. We have nothing to do, but what many thousands
have done before us; nothing to suffer but what they have suffered; no
temptation to resist, but what they have been assaulted with, and overcame, 1
Cor. 10.13. and we want no grace, no help or comfort, but what they did attain:
And the glory which we seek and hope for, they possess. To look to them
therefore, must needs be useful to us in this our wilderness state.

3. And as experience is a powerful Teacher; so to be the Master of other men's
experiences, and so many, and so wise, and in such various cases, and in so
many ages, must needs be very useful to us. We that are born in the last ages
of the world, have the benefit of the experience of all the world that have
gone before us: Therefore is the Scripture written so much historically; that
all who are there mentioned, may still be our instructors. Even the first
brethren that were born into the world, were so plain a discovery of the nature
of sin and grace, and of the difference of the woman's and the Serpents seed,
that their history is useful to all generations. And Abel by his faith, and
sacrifice, and righteousness, being dead (by malignant cruelty) yet speaks,
Heb. 11.4. He that will but soberly look back to all the worlds experience, may
quickly be resolved, whether wisdom or folly, labor or idleness, godliness or
ungodliness, temperance or sensuality, furthering the Gospel of Christ, or
persecuting it, have sped better at the last, and has proved best to the
actors upon full experience.

I shall therefore here give you some directions how you may believingly follow
the Saints. And first observe that the duty has these parts, which you must
distinctly mind; 1. To take them for your examples under Christ, and so to fix
your eyes upon them, and look at them, and mind them as examples, must be
minded: 2. To improve these examples which you look upon: And that is, 1. For
your direction in duty, and for your warning against sin: 2. To your
encouragement and consolation.

Direct. 1. Look after them to their end, and consider 1. Whither they are
gone: We see nothing of them after death, but the corpse which we leave in dust
and darkness: But Faith can attend their souls to glory, and see where they now
are; even with Christ, according to his promise, John 12.26. Phil. 1.23. John
17.24, with Angels, and with one another, in the heavenly society, the City of
God.

2. What they are doing: And Faith can see that they are beholding God, and
their glorified Redeemer, Matthew. 5.8. Heb. 12.14. 1 John 3.2. They are loving
God with perfect Love, 1 Cor. 12. and 13.1, 2, etc. They are praising him with
perfect alacrity and joy; saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, etc.
Rev. 4.8. They are so far minding the state of the world, as to cry, How long,
O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on the
inhabitants of the earth: And they are waiting in white Robes, till their
fellow servants also, and their brethren that shall be killed as they were,
shall be fulfilled, Rev. 6.10, 11. They are rejoicing when the enemies of
Christ and his Church are subdued, Rev. 18.20. And they shall judge the
malignant Angels and the world, 1 Cor. 4.2, 3. And this seems not to be only
an approbation of Christ's final Judgment: For 1. Judging is very often put in
Scripture for governing: As in the book of the Judges, it is said, such and
such a one judged Israel; that is, ruled them according to the Laws of God. 2.
And a Kingdom and Reign is often promised to the Saints: To him that overcomes
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. Which must needs signify some
participation in power of Government, and not only in splendour of Glory. And so
Christ expounds, Matthew. 19.28. Luke 22.30. Ye which have followed me, in the
regeneration shall sit on twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.
(And of God it is said, Psalm. 9.4. Thou sa^est in the Thrones judging right.)
It is too jejune and forced an exposition of them that say this is spoken only
of the power which the Apostles had in their ministration on earth: And as
absurd is the other, that it is spoken only of Apostles, Pastors, and Saints,
and Martyrs in specie that their successors shall be Popes and Prelates, and
great men in the world, and the Saints be uppermost after Constantines
conversion. As if the promise meant only to reward one man, because another
suffered for Christ, and God had promised these great things, not to the
persons mentioned, but to others that should be their successors; yea as if
that Venom then poured into the Church, were all the benediction. And though I
know not what changes are yet to come before the final Judgment, yet the
Millenaries opinion, who restrain all this to an earthly temporal reign of some
Saints for a thousand years, does seem as unsatisfactory on many accounts. It
is most likely therefore that as the wicked (who are now very like them) must
be hereafter of the same Region and Society with the Devil and his Angels, (
Matthew. 25.41.) And as the godly shall be like and equal to the Angels, Luke
20.36. so we shall be of the same Society with the Angels; and consequently
shall have their employment. And as the Angels have a Ministerial Stewardship
or Superintendency over men and their affairs (as many Scriptures fully show)
so also shall the Saints: And it is not likely that this is wholly deferred
till the resurrection; but as they have a Glory before that with Christ and his
Angels; so they have now their part in this Superintendency before; though both
will be greater at the Resurrection. If any say, what use will there be of our
superiority, after the world is destroyed? I answer, 1. The Apostle Peter
plainly tells us (though some would force his words into the dark) that we
according to his promise, expect a new Heaven and a new Earth, in which
dwells righteousness. And the Creation groaneth to be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21.
And the Heavens must contain Christ, till the times of Restitution of all
things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the
world began, Acts 3.21. 2. And he that said, the Saints shall judge the Angels,
seems so intimate, that the Devils with the wicked will be in a state of
subjection or servitude to them hereafter. Certain it is, that Michael and his
Angels shall be the conquerours of the Dragon and his Angels, Rev. 12.7, 9. And
that the Serpents head shall be bruised by all the woman's seed, though chiefly
by the Captain of our salvation. But this shall now suffice concerning their
employment.

3. Behold also by Faith what the departed Saints are now enjoying. And what is
said of their place and work will tell you that. They enjoy the fight of their
glorified Head, Joh. 17.24. They are with him in Paradise, and therefore also
enjoy the sight of the Glory of God: Being absent from the body, they are
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. They see not as in a glass, as here they
did, but with open face. They enjoy the pleasures of a more perfect knowledge
of God and all his wondrous works, than this world affords. They are happy in
their works, in the perfect Love and Praises of God; and they are filled with
the pleasures of his Love to them. This is their fruition.

4. Let Faith also behold what evils they are delivered from. 1. From a heavy
drossy body which since the fall has been an enemy, a prison and fetters to
the soul: and therefore they here groaned to be better clothed, 2 Cor. 5.4, 5.
Romans 8.21. 2. From the worlds temptations: 3. From wicked men's malice and
persecutions: 4. From sickness, pain, necessities, labors, weariness, and all
the troublesome effects of sin: 5. From all troublesome passions, desires,
anger, discontent, disappointments, griefs, and cares, and fears of evil. 6.
Specially from the fears of Hell, and the doubts of their own sincerity and
salvation; and from the desertions of God, and the terrible sense of his
displeasure. 7. From the troubles and errors of ignorance, and all our natural
imperfection. 8. From the fears of death, which now is more painful than death
it self. 9. From the suggestions of Satan, and his malicious vexing disquieting
temptations, and from his flattering allurements, which are much worse. 10.
From the company, and the tempting or grieving examples of ungodly men. 11.
From all sin it self, and all our moral imperfections and defects. 12. And
finally from all danger, and fear of ever losing the felicity they possess.
These are the immunities of the blessed.

2. When Faith has seen the Saints in Glory, look back and think next what
they were lately here on earth; that it may help you to compare your state and
theirs. And here you will see 1. That they were lately in flesh, as we now are.
They had bodies as drossie, as vile, as frail, as burdensome as ours are. It
cost them as dear (not as it does the sensual, but) as it does the temperate
person now to keep them up a while for the service to which they were
appointed. 2. They had pains and sicknesses as we have. The souls in Heaven
have escaped thither from bodies which have lain as long tormented with the
Stone, with Stranguries, Collicks, Gripes, Convulsions, Consumptions, Fevers,
and other the most tedious, painful and loathsome diseases, as sober men on
earth now feel. 3. Satan was as malicious to them, as he is to us; and to many
of them as troublesome: he haunted them with as ugly temptations, to the
greatest sins, to unbelief, and pride, and despair, and self-murder, and horrid
blasphemy, as he does any of us. (Yea he did so by Christ himself, Matthew. 4.)
4. They met with as many allurements to worldliness, sensuality, pride and lust
in the worlds deceiving baits, and flatteries, as now we do; and were fain to
proceed every step toward Heaven, by conflict and conquest as we must do. 5.
They were in as many wants and straits; in as poor, and low, and despised a
state, as we are now: They were tempted to cares, and murmurings, and
discontents, through their wants and crosses, as well as we. 6. They have been
in dangers, and in fears, and many a time at the brink of death, before it
came: and put to cry to God for deliverance in the terrors and anguish of
their hearts. Their flesh, and heart, and friends have failed them, and all the
creatures cast them off. 7. They have gone through far greater persecutions for
the sake of Christ and righteousness, than ever we did: So persecuted they the
Prophets before you, Mat. 5.11, 12. Which of the Prophets did not your Fathers
kill and persecute? even of them for whom their posterity erected Monuments?
Matthew. 23.36, 37, 38. We have not resisted unto blood, as many of them did,
Heb. 11. The same and greater afflictions which we have undergone, were
accomplished on our brethren in this world, 1 Pet. 5.9. We go through the same
conflict as they did, Phil. 1.30. We are no more falsely nor odiously slandered
in any of our sufferings than they were, Mat. 5.11, 12. 8. They were men of
like passions as we are; for so James says even of Elias, that was carried to
Heaven without our kind of death. They had their ignorances, uncertainties,
doubts, mistakes; their dark thoughts of God, and that world where they now
are. Many of them knew as little of it, till they saw it, as we do now. Many a
fearful trembling hour, many a thought that God had forsaken them, and that the
day of grace was past, have many of them had as well as we. 9. Yea they were
imperfect in all their graces; they had an imperfect faith, an imperfect hope,
an imperfect Love to God and man, and many an hour in such groans as ours now
are, O when shall we be saved from our darkness and unbelief! when shall we
better love the Lord! 10. They had their actual sins also. (Though none that
were regnant after conversion) their obedience was imperfect as ours now is.
Many of their faults and falls are left on record for our warning. There is not
one humane soul in Heaven besides our Saviors, that was not once a sinner:
They all came thither by a Redeemer as we must do. They had their too great
selfishness, Phil. 2.21. They had their pusillanimity and fears of men (as
Peter and the Apostles.) They had their sinful controversies, as Paul and
Barnabas; and sinful separations in compliance with the censorious, as Peter
and Barnabas had, Gal. 2.16, 17. They had their carnal sidings, factions and
divisions in the Church, 1 Cor. 1. and 3. Many a time have they been put to
groan, O wretched man, who shall deliver me from this body of death, Romans 7,
etc. 11. They had as difficult duties to go through, as any of us: They were
put upon as many tears and troubles, watchings and travels, fastings and
self-denial, as the most laborious and suffering Christians now. 12. They had
as long delays of the accomplishment of their desires, as any of us. 13. And
lastly, they past through death it self, as we must do. They lay gasping on
their beds of langu^shing, and death broke in upon every part, and they
underwent that separation of soul and body, as we must do: Their flesh was
turned to rottenness and dust, and laid out of the sight of man in darkness,
and remains to this day as common earth.

All this the Saints in Heaven have undergone. This was their case a while ago,
who are now in glory. And this was not only the case of some few, but of
thousands and millions, and that in the most of these particulars, even of all
that are gone before us unto blessedness: It is not we that are tempted first,
that are persecuted or afflicted first, that have sinned first, that must die
first; but all this host has broke the Ice, and are safely past through this
Red Sea, and are now triumphing in felicity with their Savior.

Direct. 3. Let Faith next look back, and see by what way these Saints have
come to this felicity; I mean, by what means they did overcome, and win the
Crown. And briefly, you will find, 1. That they all came to Heaven by the
Mediation, the Sacrifice, the meritorious Righteousness of a Redeemer, Jesus
Christ (either as promised, or as incarnate) none of them were justified by the
works of the Law, or the Covenant of Innocence.

2. That their common way was by Faith, Repentance, Love and Obedience; Not by
works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which
he shed o^ us abundently through Christ, Titus 3.5. Even by the triple Image of
the Divine perfections, Power, Love and Wisdom, 2 Timothy 1.7. They lived soberly,
righteously and godly in the world, and were zealous of good works, looking for
the blessed hope which they have attained, Titus 2.14, 15. Knowing that
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, are the sum
of saving doctrine and duty, Acts 20.21. And that to fear God and keep his
Commandments, is the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. And that the end of the
Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. and that Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

3. They studied the Word of God, or such means of knowing him as God afforded
them, in order to the attaining and maintaining of these graces, Psalm. 1.2. and
sought the Lord with all their hearts, while he might be found, and called upon
him while he was near, Isa. 55.6, 10. And did not presumptuously neglect Gods
helps, and despise his Word, while they trusted for his mercy.

4. They lived in a continual conflict against the temptations of the Devil,
the world and the flesh, and in the main did conquer as well as strive. They
made it their work to mortify those fleshly lusts, which others make it their
interest and work to please, Gal. 5.17.21, 22. and 6.14.

5. They suffered afflictions and persecutions patiently; and being reviled,
they did not revile: They loved their enemies, and blessed those that curse them,
and prayed for those that despitefully used and persecuted them, Matthew. 5.44
45. 1 Cor. 4.11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 1.6, 7. Heb. 11. They would not accept of
deliverance from imprisonment, torments and death, upon sinning terms.

6. They endured to the end, and did not fall off and forsake the Covenant of
their God, Rev. 2. and 3.

7. Lastly, They did all this by the motive of their hopes of Heaven, and by a
confidence in the promises of it, and in a heavenly mind and conversation, as
knowing that they did not labor or suffer in vain, 1 Cor. 15.58. 2 Cor. 4.17.
1 Timothy 4.10. Romans 8.18. Matthew. 5.11. 2 These. 1.6, 7. Heb. 12.2.

This was the way by which the Saints have gone to Heaven; the only true
successful way.

Direct. 4. Consider next what helps and means God gave them for this work, and
compare our own with them, and see whether ours be not as great.

1. We have the same natural capacity as they: we are intellectual free agents,
made for another world, and capable of all that they attained. There is no
difference in our natural faculties.

2. We have the same God to show us mercy, 1 Cor. 12.5, There are diverse
operations, but the same God, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. There is one God, one Lord, etc.
even the Lord over all, good to all that call upon him, Romans 10.12. The same
mercy which called them, and waited on them, calls us, even a God who has no
respect of persons; but in every Nation he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him, Acts 10.37. Though he be a free benefactor,
he is a righteous Judge, and he is good to all, and the Father of every member
of his Son.

3. They had the same Savior as we have; the same sacrifice for their sins;
the same Teacher, and the same example; the same intercessor with the Father:
For though there be diverse administrations, there is the same Lord, 1 Cor.
12.5. Ephesians. 4.4. For other foundation can no man lay, than him who is the
chief corner stone, 1 Cor. 3.11. They all did eat of the same spiritual meat,
and drank of the same rock as we do, which is Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. It was
the reproach of Christ which Moses in Egypt esteemed better than their
treasures, Heb. 11.26. The same Physician of souls who has us in cure, did
cure all them: The same Captain who is conducting us to salvation, is he that
saved them. The same Prince of the Covenant, and Lord of life, who conquered
death and all their enemies, has conquered them for us, and is preparing us
for life with them. They had no greater, or better High Priest and Mediator
with God than we have.

4. They had the same Rule to walk by, and the same way to go, as all we have,
Gal. 1.7, 8. and 6.16. Phil. 3.14, 15. The same Gospel and Word of God, in the
main, though under various promulgations and administrations: Those before the
flood were under the Covenant of the promised seed, made universally to mankind
in Adam. Those after the flood were under the same Covenant renewed universally
to mankind in Noah. The Israelites were under the same Covenant renewed to them
specially in Abraham, with special additions; and after under that Covenant
seconded with the Law which was given to Moses: And all Christians after
Christ's Resurrection are under the perfected Covenant of Grace, and have the
same word of salvation for their rule; even the Gospel of Christ, which is the
power of God, to the salvation of every one that believes, Romans 1.16.

5. They had but the same Promises in this Covenant to believe, and to assure
them of the salvation which they now possess. They had no other charter from
God to show, nor any but this universal act of oblivion to trust to for the
pardon of all their sins, which we have to trust to for the pardon of ours,
John 3.16.18. Mark 16.16. The promise which was made to the Jews, and to their
children, was made also to them that are afar off, and to as many as the Lord
shall call, Acts 2.39. For the promise that he should be heir of the world, was
not to Abraham or his seed through the Law, but through the righteousness of
faith, Romans 4.13. And therefore it was of faith, that it might be by grace, to
the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, not only to that which is of
the Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father
of us all, v. 16. That it might appear that God justified not Abraham for any
peculiar carnal privilege, but as a Believer, which is a reason common to him
with all Believers: To whom also their faith shall be imputed for
righteousness, v. 24. Godliness still is profitable to all things, having the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Yea what difference there is in both these forementioned respects, it is to
our advantage: we have the most perfected Rule, and the fullest Promises; and
we have many Promises fulfilled to us, which were not fulfilled to them in
their days, Heb. 11. last. And we are nearer the final accomplishment of all
the promises.

6. They had the same Motives to faith, and patience, and godliness as we have:
They could have no greater happiness offered them, nor any greater punishment
threatened, to drive them from sin by fear: They could have no higher ends than
ours; nor any nobler reasons to be religious. The same reasons and ends did
bring them through all temptations and difficulties, to everlasting life, which
we have also to satisfy us, and to carry us on, 2 Timothy 4.8.

7. The same spirit did illuminate, sanctify and quicken them, which is
illuminating, sanctifying, and quickening us. All the most excellent and
heavenly endowments and workings of their souls, were wrought by the same
operator who is still at work in all the Saints, Romans 8.9. There are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4. We have the same Spirit
of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. All that are Sons have the same Spirit of the Son, even
the Spirit of Adoption, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.16.26. which is the Spirit of Power,
of Love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. We have the same Almighty Power
within us, to destroy our sins, to raise up our sluggish hearts to God, to keep
us in his Love, to overcome the flesh, which did all these excellent works in
them. We are sealed with the same seal, and are known by the same mark, 1 John
3.24. and are actuated by the same heavenly principle as they were.

8. We are members of the same universal Church, which is the body of Christ:
For there is but one body, whatever diversity of the members there be, Ephesians.
4.4, 5, 6, 7, 12. 1 Cor. 12. We are members of the same City and Family of God,
Ephesians. 2.19. We are in the same Ship which conveyed them to the Haven: We are
Disciples in the same School, where they learnt the way to life eternal: We are
workmen in the same Vineyard, where they procured their reward.

9. They had the same work to do as we have; the same God to love and serve;
the same Christ to believe in; the same Spirit to obey; the same things to
believe (in the main) the same things to desire and pray for; the same things
to love, and the same to hate; the same things (in the main) which are sin to
us, were sin to them, and the same life of holiness, temperance and
righteousness, which is commanded us, was commanded them. They had the same
temptations to resist, and the same fleshly mind to overcome, and the same
senses, and appetites, and passions to rule; the same enemies to overcome; and
the same or greater sufferings to bear, as is said before.

10. They had but the same means and helps as we have (except some Prophets and
Apostles, and extraordinary persons in one age:) And what they received of the
Lord, they have delivered unto us, 1 Cor. 11.23. We have the same Gospel to to
teach us; the same Sacraments to initiate and confirm us* the same Pastors and
Teachers, for office, to instruct us, Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14, 16. Matthew. 28.20.
Fasting, and Prayer, and Thanksgiving, and Church Communion, and mutual
Exhortation, which are our helps and means, were theirs.

11. The same method of Providence which carried them on, is still on foot for
all the Saints, Psalm. 145.9, 18. and 86.5. He broke them, and bound them up; he
cast them down, and raised them, as he does us now: He made them contrite, and
then did comfort them: He led them through as rude a wilderness, and they had
as many wild beasts to assault them, and as many dangers round about them as we
have: They had seasons of adversity, and seasons of prosperity; their stormy
and their sunshine days; their troubles, which quickened their cries to God,
and the gracious answer of those cries; and were led to Heaven in the same
course of providence as we are.

12. And, to conclude, the same Heaven is prepared for us, and offered, yea
given to us, which they possess. It is ours in right, though our title be not
absolutely perfect, till we have finally presevered and overcome: We are heirs
of God, and coheirs with Christ, having his seal and earnest; if so be that we
suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him, Romans 15.16.17. The Kingdom
is prepared for all them that love him. Christ prayed for all that the Father
had given him; and for all that should believe by his Word, John 17.2, 20, 27.
even that they may have eternal life, and may be with him where he is, to see
his glory: Whosoever believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life,
John 3.16.

In all this you may see, how like their condition in this world was unto ours,
and that our way is the same which all those have gone, that are now past all
these snares and dangers, sins and miseries, in the presence of their Lord.

Direct. 5. When you have made these comparisons, think next what an excellent
benefit it will be to you, to look thus believingly and frequently to the
Saints, that are gone before you into glory. All these unspeakable benefits
will follow it.

1. It will much quicken and confirm our faith: As we do the more easily trust
the boat, and boat-man, when we see many thousand passengers safely landed by
him: And we easily trust the Physician, when we see many thousands cured by
him, who were once in our case; so it will greatly satisfy the soul against
the suspicions and fears of unbelief, when faith sees all the glorified
Saints, that are actually, saved by Christ already, and have obtained all that
we believe and seek: Methinks I hear Henoch, Joshua, Abraham, Peter, Paul,
John, Cyprian, Macarius, Augustine, Melancthon, Calvin, Zanchius, Rogers,
Bradford, Hooper, Jewel, Grindal, Usher, Hildersham, Ames, Dod, Baines, Bolton,
Gataker, with thousands such, as men standing on the further side of the river,
and calling to us that must come after them [Fear not the depths, or storms, or
streams; trust boldly that vessel, and that faithful Pilot; we trusted him, and
none of us have miscarried, but all of us are here landed safe: We were once in
storms, and doubts, and fears, as you now are; but it is our diffidence, and
not our confidence, which proved our infirmity and shame.] Who would not boldly
follow such a multitude of excellent persons, who have sped so well?

2. It will also much confirm our hope (that is, our glad expectation of the
Crown) when our apprehensions of it grow dull and slack, and our fear do grow
upon us, and we are ready to question whether ever such a happiness will be our
lot, the sight of these that are now triumphing in the actual possession, will
banish despair, and much revive us: We cannot but think, they were once as low
and bad as I, and had as many difficulties to overcome: and why may not I then
be as holy and as happy as they?

3. Such a sight will greatly quicken our desires, to attain their happiness,
and to go their way: As when worldlings see the grandeur, and honors, and
power of Great men (as they are yet called) it makes them think, how brave a
life is this? And as the sensual, when they see their companions in the Tavern,
or Gaming-house, or Playhouse, or the merry fool-house, as Solomon accounts
it, Eccles. 7.4. do long to be with them, and to partake of their beloved
pleasure: so when by faith we see the departed Saints in glory, and think where
our old acquaintance are, and the multitudes of wise and holy souls, that are
gone before, it will greatly stir up our sluggish desires, and make us long for
the same felicity, and to be as near to God as they are.

4. And it will do much to direct us in the way: For we must follow them as
they followed Christ. As the history of the Wars of Alexander, Caesar,
Tamerlane, etc. will teach men how to fight for temporal tyrannical domination;
so the history of the Saints do teach us how to fight against spiritual
wickednesses and powers, and how to take the prospering way. It is easy there
to find, whether laziness or labor, whether sensuality or spirituality has
always been the way to Heaven? Whether Saints were gluttons, drunkards,
whoremongers, riotous, licentious and proud, or temporate, chaste, mortified
and humble? whether the Saints were the scorners, or the scorned, the
oppressors, or the oppressed, the persecutors, or the persecuted; the burdens,
or the blessings of the times they lived in: When the world is divided about
matters of Religion, and every Party has a several way, for the Unity, and the
Reformation, and the Communion of the Churches, and the right Government,
Discipline and Worshipping of God; how easy and safe is it (in the main, and in
all things of necessity) to look back and see which way it was that Peter and
Paul did go to Heaven by; and what terms they were on which their Union,
Communion, Government, Discipline and Worship were performed.

5. The sight of blessed souls by faith, will also increase the Resolution and
Fortitude of the mind. Faintness and pusilanimity seize upon us when we look
only on the difficulties and dangers: But when we see the thousands that have
overcome them all, by the same means which we are called to use; it steeleth
our courage, and makes us resolve to break through all: When we think only how
mortal our diseases are, our hearts do fail us: But when all that were cured of
the very same, do call to us, and say, [Never fear; there is no disease too
hard for your Physician; he has cured us of the very same, and cures all that
ever trust him, and use his remedies] This will embolden a fainting mind.
Therefore in the forecited text, Heb. 6.12. It is said, Be not slothful (which
there means, such as faint with despondency, despair or fears) but followers
of them who by faith and patience inherit the promises.] When we look on the
Saints tribulations for the faith, we are apt to faint (as some do that stand
by another that is under the Surgeons hands) Ephesians. 3.13. But when we see them
in triumph, it cures our cowardice (and it is they only that labor and faint
not, that are crowned, and that reap in due season, etc. Rev. 2.3. Gal. 6.9.)
that is, who faint not into cessation, or so as to be overcome.) Do you think
when the Israelites passed through the Red Sea, that the Leaders had not the
greatest trial? and that it was not an exceeding increase of their courage, who
came after in the rear, when they saw most of their brethren safely passed
through? Look believingly upon the souls in Heaven, and you will do or suffer
any thing to follow them.

6. And it will greatly provoke us to diligence in well doing: Look up to your
Brethren, and you will mend your pace. If a horse be going toward his Pasture,
he will go cheerfully; especially when he sees his companions there. It will
make us pray hard, and meditate studiously, and work laboriously, and watch
diligently, that we may be with Christ, where our Brethren are, and receive the
end of our faith and labor.

7. And to see our Brethren in Heaven before us, will greatly help us to suffer
for Christ, and to be patient in any tribulation which befalls us. When we
see them in glory, we shall source stay to complain of the soulness or
narrowness of the way: but look before us, and go on through all. Or if the
flesh do repine, and our hearts begin to fail us, it will make us lift up the
hands which hang down, and the feeble knees, and make strait paths for our
feet, Heb. 12.12, 13. and to gird up the loins of our minds, and be sober, and
hope to the end, 1 Pet. 1.13. When we look forward to the end of former
sufferers, it will cause us to possess our souls in patience, and to let it
have its perfect work.

8. It will much overcome the fears of death: It is no small abatement of them
that Cicero, and such honest Heathens had, to think of the thousands of their
worthiest Ancestors, and that they were to go the common way of all mankind:
But how much more may it encourage a Believer, to think that he is not only to
go the way of all the world, through the gate of mortality; but the way also
which all Gods Saints have gone (save Henoch and Elias) who are now in Heaven.
Thus died all the Prophets, and the holy men of God; yea Jesus Christ himself,
before us; that death might be conquered when it seemed to have conquered, Heb.
2.14.

9. It will do much to raise us from hypocritical reserves, and temporizings,
and from lukewarmness, and resting in low degrees. When our conversation is
with the holy ones above, we shall have upon our minds an ambition to attain to
their degrees; and to do Gods will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. It will
much incline us to the highest and noblest sort of duty, which the spirits of
the just made perfect do perform. He that converseth only with his own sad,
tempted, sinful heart, and with tempted, faulty, mourning Christians, may learn
to confess, and mourn, and weep, and pray: But he that also converseth with
glorified spirits, will be so rapt up with their heavenly melody, that he will
learn and long to love God more fervently, to praise him more cheerfully, and
to give him thanks more abundantly for his mercies. Heaven-work is learnt by a
heavenly mind, in the use of a heavenly conversation.

10. And to look much at our Brethren that are now in glory, will also fill our
lives with pleasures, and make our Religion our continual joy; and will help us
to a foretaste of Heaven on Earth: For we shall as it were take our selves to
be almost with then; and their melodies will be our delight; and love to them,
will make their joys to be our own. And though it is the sight of God and our
Mediator by faith, which must be our chiefest hope and joy; yet while we are
here men in flesh, yea more when we have laid by flesh and blood, the presence
of all the blessed spirits, and heavenly host, will be a great, though
subordinate part of our heavenly felicity and delight.

Direct. 6. When you have gone thus far, consider what obligations lie upon you
to converse by Faith with your Brethren in Heaven, and to look up frequently to
their state and work.

1. Your necessary Love to God requires it: For as your Love to him must be
showed by your loving his Image in your Brethren; so it requires you, to love
them most that are likest God: or else you love them not for his likeness. And
it requires you to love them most whom God loves most; and that is those that
are likest him, and nearest him. And he that loves God in his creatures, and
loves any one truly for God, must love the Angels and perfected Spirits best,
because they love him best, and are nearest him, and likest to him, and are
also most beloved by him.

2. The common nature of Love and Humanity requires it: For it requires us to
love that best which is best; (as is said) But the blessed ones in Heaven are
better than any here on Earth; and therefore should be better loved.

3. The nature of our Love to the Saints requires it: For if we love them as
Saints and Godly, we shall love those most that are most holy; and that is the
blessed ones above. And if we love them most, we shall certainly mind them, and
converse with them by Faith, and not be voluntary strangers to them.

4. It is part of that heavenly conversation, which is commended to us, Phil.
3.20, 21. When it is said, that our conversation is in Heaven, it signifies
that our Burgeship is there, and our interest and great concerns are there, and
our dwelling is there, and our trading and thriving business is there, and for
it; and our friends and fellow-citizens, and those that we daily trade and
converse with, in love and familiarity, are there; even as our God, and our
Head, and our Inheritance is there. He never knew a heavenly conversation, that
pretending there to know God alone, has no converse with his holy ones that
attend him; and does not live as a member of their society in the City of God;
that does not with some delight behold their holiness, unity and order, etc.

5. The honoring of God and our Redeemer does require it, (that we daily
converse with the Saints in Heaven:) Because it is in them that God is seen, in
the greatest glory of his Love; and it is in them that the Power, and Efficacy,
and Love of our dear Redeemer most appears. You judge now of the Father by
his Children, and of the Physician by his Patients, and of the Builder by the
House, and of the Captain by his Victories. And if you see no better children
of God, than such childish crying, feeble, froward, diseased, burdensome ones
as we are, you will rob him of the chief of this his honor. And if you look at
none of the Patients of our Savior, but such lame and languid, pained,
groaning, diseased, half-cured ones as we; you will rob him of the glory of his
skill and cures. And if you look but to such an imperfect broken fabric, as
the Church on Earth, you will dishonor the Builder. And if you look to no
other Victories of Christ and his Spirit, but what is made in this confused,
dark, and bedlam world, you will be tempted to dishonor his conduct and his
conquests. But if you will look to his Children in Heaven, who are perfected in
his Love and Likeness, and to Christ's Patients which are there perfectly cured,
and to his Building in the heavenly unity and glory, and to all his Victories
as there complete, then you will give him the glory which is his due, Rev. 21.
and 22. 2 These. 1.10, 11, 12.

6. So also you will dishonor Religion, and the Church, if you converse not
with the Saints above. For the reasons last given: For you will judge of the
Church, and of Religion, by such imperfect things as here you see, where men
turn Religion to the service of their worldly interests and ends, and fight for
ambition, faction, tyranny, usurpation, and worldly lusts, under the sacred
names of Religion and the Church; and for the pretended Love of Christ, and one
another, do tear the Church into shreds, and worry, and hunt, and devour one
another: You will be tempted to be Infidels, if you do not here converse with
the sincere, humble, holy, charitable Christians and look up to Heaven to
perfect souls: And then you will see a Church that is truly amiable, holy,
unanimous and glorious in perfect Love.

7. If you look not up to those in Heaven, you will quite misunderstand the
providence of God, in the prosperity of the wicked, and the sufferings of the
Saints, and the changes that are usually made on Earth: You will begin to
think, that sin is safe, and the wicked are not so miserable as they are, nor
godly diligence so profitable a thing; you will not know the reasons of
providence, unless you can see unto the end: And the ultimate end is not on
Earth. But go into the Sanctuary, and take the prospective of the promise, and
look to the blessed souls with Christ, and all the riddle will be expounded to
you, and you will be reconciled to all the providence of God: You are strange
to truth, if you are strange to the triumphing Saints in Heaven.

8. The progressive nature of your faith and godliness requires it. You are
traveling to Heaven, where the blessed are, and are nearer to them than when
you first believed: And the nearer you are to them, the more you should mind
them, and by Faith and Love be familiar with them: And when you are almost at
home, you should be even ready to embrace your friends at the meeting.

9. Your Relation to the blessed Spirits does require it; and your Christian
and ingenuous disposition toward them. 1. Are they not such as were latety
near you in the flesh; some of them your dearest companions and friends; and
should you causlesly forget them? 2. Are they not not now your friends who love
you better than they could do on earth? Doubtless their knowledge and memory is
not grown less, to forget you, if once they knew you; but they are like to know
much more: And their Goodness being increased, their Love is increased, and not
diminished. 3. And you belong to the same Society with them; even to the Body
or Church of Christ, whose nobler part above, and inferior part on Earth, do
make up the whole. Is it not expressly said, Heb. 12.22, 23. that we are come
unto Mount Zion, and unto the City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
and to an innumerable company of Angels, and to the general Assembly, and
Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven? (that is, to those which
as the first born, are most noble, and possessed of the heavenly inheritance,
and are there entered inhabitants already:) And to God the Judge of all, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, etc. And what is it to come to them, but to come, or be joined to
that Society, of which they are the nobler part? Will you be Fellow-Citizens
with them, and have no communion with them, nor seriously remember them? How
can you remember God himself, and not remember those that are his Courtiers,
and nearer to him than you are? And how can you think of Christ, and not think
of his Body? Or how can you think of his Body, and forget the most excellent
and honorable parts? Or how can you remember your selves, and forget your
chiefest Friends and Lovers?

10. The very nature of the Life of Faith requires us, to look much to the
departed Saints: The Life of Faith consists in our conversing with the things
unseen; as the life of sight or sense is our conversing with things seen: If
you love, and think on none of the Saints, but those that are within your
sight, you live (so far) but as by sight: Though Faith live not upon Saints
properly, but on God, and our Redeemer; yet it lives and converseth with the
Saints: If it work aright, it will as it were set you among them, and make you
live on Earth, as if you heard their songs of praise, and saw their Thrones of
Glory.

11. The present necessities of your condition in this world, do require you to
look much to the Saints above (as is before showed in the benefits recited:) We
live here among such persons and things as are objects of continual sorrow to
us: And have we not need of some more comfortable company? If you had nothing
at home but chiding, and discontent, and poverty, you will be willing of so
much recreation, as to be invited to feast sometimes, where there is plenty,
pleasure and content. If you lived among groaning, sick or melancholy persons
in an Hospital, you would be glad sometimes of merryer company, a little to
refresh your minds. Alas, what a deal of sin do we daily see or hear of? and
what a deal of sorrow is round about us? What are our News-books filled with,
or the daily reports which come to our ears, but sin, and sorrow, vanity and
vexation? what is the employment of most of the world? what is it that Court
and Country, City, and all Societies ring of, but vanity and vexation, sin and
sorrow? And is not a walk in Heaven with better company, a pleasure desirable
in such a case? What grief must needs dwell on the minds of sober Catholic
Christians, to see the Church on earth so torn, so worryed; so reproached as it
is throughout the earth? so torn in pieces by its zealous ignorant
self-conceited Pastors and Members? so worryed by its open and secret enemies;
even by the usurping tyrannizing Wolves in Sheeps clothing, who spare not the
flock? Matthew. 7.15. and 10.16. Acts 20.29. so reproached by the world of
Infidels and Heathens, who fly from it as from an infected City, and say
[Christians are drunkards, and deceivers, and liars; they are all in pieces
among themselves; they revile and persecute one another; we will therefore be
no Christians.] How sad is it to see the one part of the world professing
Christianity, to make it odious by their wickedness, and their divisions; and
the rest of the world abhorring it, because these have made it seem odious to
them? How sad is it to hear all Christians speak of love and Concord, Unity and
Peace, while few of them know the way of Peace, or how to hold their own hands
from tearing the Church into more pieces, while these peaceable words are in
their mouths? To see the Pastors and People, as if it were for Unity and Peace,
contriving the ruin of all that are not of their Party and Way, and studying
how to extirpate one another; and multiplyjng snares and stumbling blocks, as
necessary means to heal the Church! How sad is it to see* so great a faction as
the Roman Kingdom (for it is more properly a Kingdom than a Church) to lay the
necessary Unity and Communion of all the Churches, upon so many forgeries of
their own; upon the supposed certainty of the falseness of all men's senses (in
the point of Transubstantiation) and upon the subjection of the Church to an
universal usurpes, and to keep up ignorance, lest knowledge (by reading the
translated Scriptures, and such Books as do detect their frauds) should mart
their markets, and spoil their trade? To see their Prelates take their own
domination, wealth and greatness, to be really the prosperity of the Church,
and the interest of the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ; and to promote the Gospel
by silencing or prohibiting the most able, zealous, faithful Preachers of it;
and to go with a drawn sword among the people, and say, Love us, or we will
kill you: Love Christ and us, or the inquisition and wrack shall reach you
love: To see them take the terrifying of men by corporal penalties, to be their
chiefest work, and the way of Love to be but such popularity as destroys the
Church* Will not now and then a walk in Heaven, be a great refreshing to the
mind that has been long haunted with such hideous and ugly specters as all
these? Will not some converse with the most wises and holy, and peaceable
Society, whose Life is Love, be a great recreation to your minds, when such
sights as these have made them sad?

Moreover, you have many burdens of your own to bear; your own ignorance, your
own temptations, your passions, your wants, and worst of all, the relics of
your sin, which you cannot bear with that hope and support which is needful to
you, without often looking to the happiness of those that have overcome all
these, and are now at rest.

And you have many excellent duties to perform, which will not be so well done
without looking often on such a Copy. Yea you have the fears of death to
overcome, which will not be so easily done, as by looking to all the world of
souls, that have already gone that way before you.

Yea in your converse with God himself, though you have one only sufficient
Mediator, you will cast your selves upon great disadvantages, if your thoughts
leave out the blessed society of Saints and Angels, who are nearest to him: You
cast away your stepping-stones, or stairs of ascent, and you will but tempt
your selves to look at God, as through the great interposing gulf; and hinder
the needful familiarity of your thoughts above. Neglect not then a help so
needful to you in your present state.

12. Lastly, The remembrance and observation of the heavenly inhabitants, is
the way that is commended and commanded to all Believers, and that as part of
their ordinary duty, in their prayers to God. He has not only minded us that
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are still living, to prove the resurrection, Matthew.
12.27. but has also comforted the expectants of Heaven, by describing the joy
of Lazarus as in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22, 23. and introduced Abraham as
pleading Lazarus's cause, v. 25, 26. And has made it a part of the comfortable
description of his Kingdom, that we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in it, Matthew. 8.11. And when he would appear transfigured in a glimpse of
his glory, to Peter, James and John, he would not do it alone, but with Moses
and Elias talking with him, Matthew. 17. And the comfort which Paul gives to the
suffering Thessalonians, is Rest with us, 2 These. 1.6. not only Rest with
Christ, but with his servants: And when he describes the glory of Christ's
appearing, it is, that He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired
in all them that do believe, verse. 11, 12. As himself describes his appearing
as with his glorious Angels, Mat. 25.31. All the holy Angels with him. Whether
it be all the blessed Spirits of the higher worlds, or only all those of them,
who were deputed to the service of the Church on earth ( Matthew. 18.10.) and so
were made Angels to man, I pass over. And Henoch the seventh from Adam
prophesied, saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints,
etc, Jude v. 14. Many other Scriptures tell us, that we must not leave out the
Saints and Angels, when we look toward Heaven by faith, and when we converse
and walk above.

But this is but as on the by: That which I intend for your special
observation, is, the third Petition of the Lords Prayer, where the annexed
clause (which seems to referr to all the three first Petitions) does set the
heavenly Church before us, as the Pattern of that obedience to the will of God,
which both we, and all the world must imitate, and pray to God that we may
imitate. [Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven.] Here Christ
requires all Christians in Prayer, to look up to the Heavenly Society, and to
consider how they do the Will of God, and to make it their Pattern, and in
their daily Prayers, as men that long for their celestial perfection, to pray
that they may become their imitators: even as the Scholars in the lowest form
in the school, must look at those in the highest form, and desire and endeavor
to attain to their degree. You see them that this is a commanded ordinary duty.

Direct. 7. Consider next wherein it is that your converse with Angels, and the
perfected spirits of the just consists; that you may neither by your mistake,
neglect it, nor carry it too far.

I. Negatively: 1. It is not a Deifying them, as the Heathen did their Hero's,
and their Divi: They are still but Gods Ministers, and must have nothing
ascribed to them of the Divine Prerogative.

2. Nor does it consist in building Temples and Altars to their honor, which
savoureth at least of a compliance with Idolatry.

3. Nor does it at all consist in praying to them. 1. Because, as we know that
they are not omnipresent, or omniscient; so 2. We know not at all when they are
present, and when they do hear us, and when not. 3. Nor do we know which of
them it is that is at any time present with us. 4. Nor have we any precept,
president, promise, or other encouragement to such prayers in Gods Word, but
rather much to keep us from it.

4. Nor yet is it in desiring them to pray for us: For that which is their
duty, they better know than we; and it is little that we know of their
capacities or opportunities. And we have no Word of God neither to encourage us
to this.

5. Nor does it consist in choosing any one of them above the rest, for our
guardian and protector; and so committing our selves to their care. For we have
no reason to be so presumptuous, as to think that we have the choice of our own
Protector; or that it is a matter at all referred to us; or that they will
undertake it ever the more for our choice.

6. Nor yet may we pretend to know what particular Saint or Angel is deputed of
God to our protection: For there is not the least discovery of it in Nature, or
in the Word of God: And he that pretends extraordinary revelation of it, must
be sure to prove it.

7. Nor may we pray for them, as if they were in purgatory, or in any misery or
danger which did need our prayers for them: For we have neither reason to
believe the thing, nor any precept or encouragement to the work.

And as all these seven are unlawful things, so these also that follow must be
meddled with very tenderly and cautelously.

1. Our Praises of them, must be sober and wary; and such as are in a plain
tendency to the praises of God and godliness, lest before we are aware, we
kindle superstition in the minds of the auditors. Praise them we may; but with
a care of the manner, measure and consequents, and with a due respect to the
praise of God.

2. Our Prayers for the Resurrection of their bodies, and their solemn
Justification at the day of Judgment, though lawful in it self, yet must be
done with very great caution. And it is fitter that we pray together in general
for the Resurrection of All the members of Christ, both those that are dead,
and those that will be, than to fix upon the dead distinctly, because as we
have no precept or example for it in the Scriptures; so the minds of the
hearers (if it be public) may easily abuse our example to error and excess.

3. Our thankfulness to them for their love and benefits, must be very
cautelously expressed: Not by a verbal thanksgiving to them, of whom we are
uncertain when they hear us: Nor yet in any such language as tends to
encroach upon the honor of our great Benefactor; nor to acknowledge any more
as from them, than as the Ministers of Christ.

4. And in our acknowledgements of their general prayers for the Church, we
must take heed of feigning them to be more particular than we can prove that
they are.

5. And we must take heed of all such Rhetorical Prosopopeia's as tend to
delude the hearers or the readers; as if we would draw them to believe the
presence and audience of those spirits which we intend not to express.

6. And our honoring of the memory of their Martyrdom or Holiness, must be so
cautelous, that it tend not to Idolatry or Superstition: It is lawful in it
self to keep the relics of a Saint or a Friend, and to keep a solemn thankful
memorial of Gods mercy to his Church, in her most excellent helpers, and
successfullest instruments of her good: But in a time when these are commonly
abused to superstition, the consequents may make that evil, which in other
circumstances might be good. When the Primitive Pastors led their people,
sometimes to the places where their neighbors suffered Martyrdom for Christ,
and there praised God for their praised constancy, to encourage the people, and
engage themselves to be true to Christ, and die as constantly as others did;
this then had good effects; and if it had been used more cautelously, had been
laudable: But they did not foresee the great inconveniences of relics,
pilgrimages, prayers to Saints, etc. which in after-ages it introduced: And
now, it must be with very great caution indeed, if we will imitate them.

7. To pray to God to hear their general prayers for the Church, (such as those
mentioned, Rev. 6.9, 10.) does intimate no false doctrine that I know of. But
it is a practice that has danger, and no Scripture precept or example to
encourage it, nor solid reason, that I remember: And if God would have had us
used it, it is like he would have made it known.

II. Affirmatively: Our converse with those in Heaven consists in all these
parts.

1. We must acknowledge our Relation to them, and not think that they are
nothing to us.

2. We must not forget them, but see them by faith, and take it as part of our
daily business to have some daily conversation with them.

3. We must love them with a peculiar love; even better than we love the godly
upon earth: because they are better, and liker unto God, and love him more, and
are more beloved by him.

4. We must specially rejoice that God is glorified in and by them; and look
often to them as the more illustrious representers of the Divine Perfections,
than any of the Saints on Earth.

5. We must greatly rejoice in their own felicity and glory; even as if it were
our own. If we did see with our eyes our old dear friend, as Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom, triumphing now in the glory of the blessed, we could not
choose but be daily very glad on their behalf; to see and think, O what felicity
do my friends enjoy! And faith should make it in some measure to you, as if you
saw it.

6. We must have a grateful sense in our minds of their love to us; and must
give God thanks for his Angels ministrations for us. For doubtless, as they are
wiser and better than any of our friends on earth; so they have a better, a
purer and diviner kind of Love to us, than these below have. And the Angels
disdain not to be Christ's servants for our good; yea for our salvation, Heb.
1.14. For, are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
them, who shall be heirs of salvation, Matthew. 18.10. Their Angels always
behold the face of my Father in Heaven, Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord
campeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them, Psalm. 91.11. He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They
shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone,
Luke 15.10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner
that repents, Luke 16.22. The beggar dyed and was carried by Angels into
Abraham's bosom. Though the great Love is that of God our Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier, and our chiefest gratitude is due to him; even for the benefit
which we have by any of his creatures; yet love and mental thankfulness is due
to the rational creatures which are his voluntary instruments; because they do
what they do out of real love to us; otherwise we should owe thankfulness to
none, either benefactor, friend or parents.

7. And our believing converse with the blessed spirits, must make us earnestly
desire to be like them; even to be as like them here as possibly we may, and to
be with them, that we may be perfect as they are perfect. We must long to be
near God, as they are, and to know him, and love him, as they do; and this holy
ambition is well pleasing to God: Though we must not desire to be as God, we
must desire to know and love him perfectly.

8. And hence we must proceed to a sober imitation of them as they are now
employed in Heaven: Not in those particulars wherein their case and ours differ
(as to thank God for that conquest which they have made, and that glory which
they do possess, etc.) But in all those duties, which in some degree, belong to
us as well as them.

For instance, Ask what kind of Religion is likest to that which is in Heaven?
Is it studying bare words, and disputing about things unprofitable, or
contending and quarrelling about precedence, pre-eminence or domination? Or is
it not rather the clearest knowledge, and the ferventest Love of God, and all
his holy ones, and the fullest content, delight and rest of the soul in God,
and the highest praises and thanksgivings, with the readiest and chearfullest
obedience.

And what kind of Religious performances are most excellent which we must
principally intend? Groans, and tears, and penitent confessions, and moans, are
very suitable to our present state, while we have sin and suffering: But surely
they are duties of the lower rank: For Heaven more abounds with praises and
thanksgiving; and therefore we must labor to be fitter for them, and more
abundant in them; not casting off any needful humiliations, and penitent
complaints; but growing as fast as we can above the necessity of them, by
conquering the sin which is the cause.

So ask, what is it that would make the Church on Earth to be likest to that
part which is in Heaven? Is it striving what Pastors shall be greatest, or have
precedence, or be called gracious Lords or Benefactors? Luke 22.24, 25, 26. 1
Pet. 5.3, 4, 5. Or is it in making the flock of Christ, to dread the secular
power of the Shepherds, and tremble before them, as they do before the Wolf? Or
is it in a proud conceit of the peoples power to ordain their Pastors, and to
rule them and themselves by a major vote? Or in a supercilious condemning the
members of Christ, and a proud contempt of others as too unholy for our
communion, when we never had authority to try or judge them? Is it in the
multitude of Sects and divisions* every one saying, Our party, and our way is
best? Surely all this is unlike to Heaven: It is rather in the Wisdom, and
Holiness and Unity of all the members: When they all know God, especially in
his Love and Goodness, and when they fervently love him, and cheerfully and
universally obey him; and when they love each other fervently, and with a pure
heart, and without divisions do hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace; and with one heart, and mind, and mouth, do glorify God and our
Redeemer. Leaving that Church-Judgment to the Pastors which Christ has put
into their hands; and leaving Gods part of Judgment unto himself. This is to be
like to our heavenly exemplar, and to do Gods Will on Earth as it is done in
Heaven, Ephesians. 4.2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 16.

9. And we must also look back to the examples of their lives, while they were
on earth; and see wherein they are to be imitated as the imitators of Jesus
Christ: which way went they to Heaven before us?

10. Lastly, We must give God thanks on their behalf; for making them so
perfect, and bringing them so near him, and saving them from sin, and Satan,
and the world, and bringing them safe to Heaven, through so many temptations,
difficulties and sufferings: For making them such instruments of his glory, in
their times, and showing his glory upon them and to them in the Heavens? For
making them such blessings to the world in their generations, and for giving us
in them such patterns of faith, obedience and patience, and making them so
great encouragements to us, who may the more boldly follow them in faith, duty
and sufferings, who have conquered all, and sped so well: For, showing us by
faith their present state of glory with Christ, for our confirmation and
consolation. Thus far, in all these ten particulars, we must have a heavenly
conversation with the glorified by Faith.

Direct. 8. Consider next wherein your imitation of the example of their lives
on earth consists.

And it is 1. Not in committing any of their sins, nor indulging any such
weaknesses in our selves, as any of them were guilty of. 2. Nor in extenuating
a sin, or thinking ever the better of it, because it was theirs. 3. Nor in
doing as they did in exempted cases, wherein their Law and ours differed (as in
the marriage of Adams children, in the Jews Polygamy, etc. 4. Nor in imitating
them in things indifferent, or accidental, that were never intended for
imitation, nor done as morally good or evil. 5. Nor in pretending to, or
expecting of their extraordinary Revelations, Inspirations, or Miracles. 6. Nor
in pretending the high seize of the more excellent, to be the necessary
measure of all that shall be saved, or the Rule of our Church Communion: Our
imitation of them consists in no such things as these.

But it consists in these.

1. That you fix upon the same ultimate Ends as they did. That you aim at the
same Glory of God, and choose the same everlasting felicity.

2. That you choose the same Guide and Captain of your salvation; the same
Mediator between God and man; the same Teacher and Ruler of the Church, and the
same sacrifice for sin, and Intercessor with the Father.

3. That you believe the same Gospel, and build upon the same Promises, and
live by the same Rule, the Word of God.

4. That you obey the same Spirit, and trust to the same Sanctifier, and
Comforter, and Illuminater, to illuminate, sanctify and comfort your souls.

5. That you exercise all the same graces of Faith, Hope, Love, Repentance,
Obedience, Patience, as they did.

6. That you live upon the same Truths, and be moved by the same Motives as
they lived upon, and were moved by.

7. That you avoid the same sins as they avoided; and see what they feared, and
fled from, and made conscience of, that you may do the same.

8. That you choose and use the same kind of company, helps and means of grace
(so far as yours and theirs are the same) as they have done: And think not to
find a nearer, or another way to that state of happiness which they are come
^o, Phil. 3.16. Walk by the same Rule, and mind the same things, and if in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. If any
preach another Gospel, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.7, 8. Mark them which cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and
avoid them, Romans 16.17. Heb. 6.11. We desire that every one of you do show the
same diligence, to the full assurance of hope to the end, that you be not
slothful, but followers of them, etc.

9. That you avoid, resist, and overcome the same temptations, as they did, who
now are crowned.

10. That you bear the same cross, and exercise the same faith, and hope, and
patience, unto the end, 1 Pet. 4.1. Arm your selves with the same mind, etc.

In brief, this is the true imitation of the Saints.

Direct 9. Never suffer your life of sense to engage you so deeply in sensible
converse with men on earth, as to forget your heavenly relations and society;
but live as men that unfeignedly believe, that you have a more high, and noble
converse every day to mind.

If you are Believers indeed, let your faith go along with the souls of your
departed friends, into glory: And if you have forgot them by an unfriendly
negligence, renew your acquaintance with them. Think not that those only that
live on earth, are fit for our converse, and our comfort: Will you converse
with none but ignorant, selfish, worldly sinners? Are you more contemptuous of
the heavenly inhabitants, than the Gentleman in hell torments was, Luke 16.26,
27. that thought one from the dead, though it had been but a beggar, would have
been reverenced even by his sensual brethren on earth, so far as to have
persuaded them unto saving Repentance. I tell you, a dead man's skull is
oft-times a more profitable companion, than most that you shall converse with
in the common world. The dust of your departed friends, and the clay that corpse
are turned into, is a good medicine for those eyes that are blinded with the
dust of worldly vanities. Much more should you keep your acquaintance with the
soul, which may, for all the distance, be perhaps more useful to you, than it
was in the flesh. Alas, how carnally, and coldly, or seldom, do most Professors
look at their Brethren, and at the Angelical hosts that are above. They long
for our conversion, and mind our great concernments, and rejoice in our
felicity; and shall we be so swinishly ungrateful, as seldom to look up, and
remember their high and blessed state?

Many think that they have no more business with their deceased friends, than
to see them decently interred, and to mourn over them, as if their removal were
their loss; or to grieve for our own loss, when we perceive their places empty;
but we scarce look up after them with an eye of faith, much less do we daily
maintain our communion with them in Heaven: When Christ was taken up, his
Disciples gazed after him, Act. 1.10. Stephen looked up steadfastly into Heaven,
and saw Christ sitting at the right hand of God, Acts 7.55. And how seldom,
how slightly do we look up, either to Jesus, his Angels, or his Saints.

I tell you Sirs, you have not done with your friends when you have buried
their flesh. They have left you their holy examples: They are entered before
you into rest: You are hastening after them, and must be quickly with them, if
you are true Believers: You must see them every day by faith: When you look to
Christ, you must look to them, as his beloved friends, entertained by him in
his family of glory. When you look up to Heaven, remember that they are there:
When you think of coming thither, remember that you must there meet them. You
must honor their memories more than you did on earth, because they are more
honorable, being more honored of God. You must love them better than you did
when they were on earth, because they are better, and so more lovely: You must
rejoice much more for their felicity, than you did whilst they were on earth;
because they are incomparably more happy than they were. Either you believe
this, or you do not. If you do not believe that the dead are blessed that die
in the Lord, and rest from their labors, and are with Christ in Paradise, why
do you seem Christians? If you do believe it, why do you not more rejoice with
your glorified friends, than you would have done, if they had been advanced to
the greatest honors in the world? It is the natural duty of friends, to mourn
with them that mourn, and to rejoice with them that rejoice; and if one member
be honored or dishonored, the rest of the body are accordingly affected. Do
not your sorrows then instead of joys, tell all men that you believe that your
friends are gone to sorrow, and not to joy? If not, you are very selfish or
inconsiderate.

Direct. 10. Lastly, Let not your aversation to Popery, turn to a facti^us
partial forsaking of Gods Truth, and your own duty and consolation, in this
point. Abundance of Christians have taken up opinions in Religion, upon the
love and honor of the parties that they took them of; and being possessed with
a just dislike of Popery in the main, they suspect and cast away, not a few
great truths and duties upon a false information, that they are parts of
Popery. It has grieved (...) ^han once to hear religious persons come from
heari^g (...) Ministers with disdain and censure, saying that they prayed for
the dead; and all their proof was that [ Thanksgiving is a part of prayer: but
they gave God thanks for the glorification of the spirits of the Just;
therefore they prayed for them.] And so have they argued, because they have
read the 1 Cor. 15. at the grave; or because they have preached a Funeral
Sermon while the Corpse was present, or because they prayed then for
themselves, or for the Church. Alas, for the childish ignorance, and
pievishness, and foolish wranglings of many Christians, who think they are
better than their neighbors! How much is Christ's family dishonored by his
silly froward children? And they will not be instructed by their friends; and
therefore they are posted up, and openly reproached by their enemies. Have
Angels or heavenly Saints deserved so ill of God or us, that we should be so
shy of their communion? Are they nothing to us? Have we nothing to do with
them? Have we cause to be ashamed of them? Is their honor any dishonor to God
or us; if it be no more than what is their due? Can we give so much love,
respect and honor to Magistrates, Ministers, and Friends on earth (imperfect,
sinful, troublesome mortals:) and shall we think that all is idolatrous, or
cast away, which is given to them that so far excel us? Is it your design to
make Heaven either contemptible or strange to men on earth? Or would you
persuade the world, that the souls of the Saints are not immortal, but perish
as the bruits? Or that there is no Heaven? Or that God is there alone without
any company? Are so many fond of the opinion of a Personal Reign on Earth, for
Christ with his holy ones; and yet is it Popery so much as to speak honorably
and joyfully of the Saints in Heaven? My Brethren, these things declare you yet
to be too dark, too factious, and too carnal; and to hold the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with respect to parties, sides and persons. Christ takes not his
Saints as strangers to him: He that judges men as they love and use him, in
the least of his Brethren upon Earth, will not so soon censure and quarrel with
us as the Sectary will do for loving and honoring him in his Saints in Heaven;
for it is his will and prayer that they be with him where he is to behold his
glory, John 12.26. and 17.24. And he will come with his holy Angels to be
glorified in his Saints (who shall judge the world and Angels) and to be
admired in all them that do now believe, 2 These. 1.10, 11, 12.

CHAP. XXVII. How to receive the Sentence of Death; and how to die by Faith.
HAving said so much of this elsewhere (in my Books called, A Believers last
work: The last Enemy: My Christian Directory: Treatise of Self-denial, etc.) I
shall be here but very brief.

I. For the first Case, before sickness comes:

Direct. 1. Be sure that you settle your Belief of the life to come, that your
Faith may not fail.

Direct. 2. Expect Death as seriously all your life, as wise Believers are
obliged to do: That is, as men that are always sure to die; as men that are
never sure to live a moment longer; as men that are sure that life will be
short, and death is not far off; and as foreseeing what it is to die; of what
eternal consequence; and what will then appear to be necessary to your safe,
and to your comfortable change.

Direct. 3. All your days habituate your souls to believing, sweet enlarged
thoughts of the infinite Goodness and Love of God, to whom you go, and with
whom you hope to live for ever.

Direct. 4. Dwell in the studies of a crucified and glorified Christ, who is
the way, the truth and life; who must be your hope in life and death, Ephesians.
3.17, 18, 19.

Direct. 5. Keep clear your evidences of your right to Christ, and all his
Promises; by keeping grace or the heavenly nature, in life, activity and
increase, 2 Pet. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.5. John 15, 1, etc. 1 John 3.

Direct. 6. Consider often of the possession which your nature in Christ has
already of Heaven; and how highly it is advanced, and how near his relation is,
and how dear his love is to his weakest members upon earth: And that as souls
in Heaven have an inclination and desire to communicate their own felicity to
their bodies; so has Christ as to his body the Church, John 17.24. Ephesians.
5.25, 27, etc.

Direct. 7. Look to the Heavenly Host, and those who have lived before you, or
with you in the flesh, to make the thoughts of Heaven the more familiar to you
(as in the former chapter.)

Direct. 8. Improve all Afflictions, yea the plague of sin it self, to make you
weary of this world, and willing to be gone to Christ, Romans 7.

Direct. 9. Be much with God in Prayer, Meditation, and other heart-raising
duties; that you may not by strangeness to him be dismayed.

Direct. 10. Live not in the guilt of any wilful sin, nor in any slothful
neglect of duty, lest guilt breed terror, and make you fly from God your
Judge. But especially study to redeem your time, and to do all the good you can
i^ the world, and to live as totally devoted to God, as conscious that you live
to no carnal interest, but desire to serve him with all you have; and your
consciences testimony of this, will abundantly take off the terrors of death
(whatever any erroneous ones may say to the contrary, for fear of being guilty
of conceits of merit.) A fruitful life is a great preparative for death, 2 Timothy
4.8. 2 Cor. 1.12* etc.

Direct. 11. Fetch from Heaven the comforts which you live upon through all
your life: And when you have truly learned to live more upon the comforts of
believed glory, than upon any pictures or hopes below, then you will be able to
die in and for those comforts, Matthew. 6.20, 21. Col. 3.1, 4. Phil. 3.20, 21. 1
These. 4.18. Phil. 1.21, 23.

Direct. 12. The Knowledge and Love of God in Christ is the beginning or
foretaste of Heaven, (John 17.3. 1 Cor. 13. etc.) and the foretastes are
excellent preparations: Therefore still remember that all that you do in the
world, for the getting and exercising the true Knowledge and Love of God in
Christ; so much you do for the foretastes (and best preparations) for Heaven, 1
Cor. 8.3. If any man love God, the same is known of him (with approbation and
love.)

II. In the time of sickness, and near to death.

Direct. 1. Let your first work, when God seems to call you away, be, to
renew a diligent search of your hearts and lives, and to see lest in either of
them there should be any sin which is not truly hated and repented of.

Though this must be done through all your lives, yet with an extraordinary
care and diligence when you are like to come so speedily to your trial. For it
is only to Repenting Believers, that the Covenant of Grace does pardon sin: And
the impenitent have no right to pardon. Though for ordinary failings which are
forgotten, and for sins which you are willing to know and remember, but cannot;
a general Repentance will be accepted; (as when you pray God to show you the
sins which you see not, and to forgive those which you cannot remember or find
out:) Yet those which you know must be particularly repented of: And Repentance
is a remembering duty, and will hardly forget any great and heinous sins, which
are known to be sins indeed. If your Repentance be then to begin, alas it is
high time to begin it: And though if it be sound, it will be saving (that is,
If it be such as would settle you in a truly godly life, if you should
recover;) yet you will hardly have any assurance of salvation, or such comfort
in it as is desirable to dying man: Because you will very hardly know whether
it come from true conversion, and contain a Love to God and Godliness; or
whether it be only the fruit of fear, and would come to nothing if you were
restored to health: But he that has truly repented heretofore, and lived in
uprightness toward God and man, and has nothing to do, but to discern his
sincerity, and to exercise a special Repentance for some late or special sins;
or to do that again which he has done unfeignedly before, will much more
easily get the assurance and comfort of his forgiveness and salvation.

Direct. 2. Renew your sense of the Vanity of this world: Which at such a time
one would think, should be very easy to do. When you see that you are near an
end of all your pleasures, and have had all (except a grave to rot in) that
ever this world willd o for you, may you not easily then see, whether the godly
or the worldly be the wiser and the happier man? And what it is that the life
of man should be spent in seeeking after? Matthew. 6.33. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. Eccles.
7.3, 4, 5, 6.

Direct. 3. Remember what Flesh is, and what it has been to you, that you may
not be too loath to lay it down.

Of the dust it was made, and to the dust it must return: Corruption is your
Father, and the Worm is your Mother, and your Sister, Job 17.14. Drought and
beat consume the Snow-waters; so does the grave those which have sinned: The
womb shall forget him; the Worm shall feed sweetly on him, Job 24.20. Flesh and
blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; but this mortal must put on
immortality, by being made a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.

And this flesh has cost you so dear to carry it about; so much care and
labor to provide it food, to repair that which daily vanishes away; and so
many weary, painful hours; and so many fearful thoughts of dying, that methinks
you should quietly resign it to the grave, which has been so long calling for
it.

Especially considering what it has done, by the temptations of a vitiated
appetite and sense, against your souls: into how many sins it has drawn you,
and what grief and shame it has procured you; and what assurance and heavenly
pleasures it has hindered; and how many repentings, and purposes, and promises
it has frustrated, or undone: Methinks we should conceive that we have long
enough dwelt in such an habitation.

Direct. 4. Foresee by Faith the resurrection of the body, when it shall be
raised a spiritual body unto Glory; and shall be no more an enemy to the soul.

Direct. 5. Renew your familiarity with the blessed ones above. Remember that
the great Army of God (the souls of the just from Adam till now) are all got
safe through this Red Sea, and are triumphing in Heaven already; and that it is
but a few straglers in the end of the world that are left behind: And which
part then should you desire to be with? And remember how ready those Angels
which rejoiced at your conversion, are to be your Convoy unto Christ, Luke
16.23.

Direct. 6. But especially think with greatest confidence and delight, that
Jesus your Head is entered into the Heavens before you, and is making
intercession for you, and is preparing you a place, and loves your company,
and will not lose it. You shall find him ready to receive your souls, and
present them spotless unto God, as the fruit of his mediation: He will have you
be with him to behold his glory; and none shall take you out of his hands. Let
his Love therefore draw up your desires, and stablish your hearts in confidence
and rest.

Direct. 7. Remember, that all that are living must come after you; and how
quickly their turn will come; and would you wish to be exempt from death alone,
which the whole world below must needs submit to?

Direct. 8. Think still of the Resurrection of Christ your Head, that you may
see that death is a conquered thing, and what a pledge you have of a life to
come.

Direct. 9. Dwell still in the believing fore thoughts of the blessedness of
the life to which you go, as it is your personal perfection, and the perfect
Love and fruition of God, with his perfect joyous praise.

Remember still what it is to see and know the Lord, (and all things else in
him, which are fit for us to know. And labor to revive your Love to God, and
then you revive your desires and preparations.

Direct. 10. Give up your selves wholly to the Will of God; and think how much
better it is for upright Souls to be in Gods hand, than in your own. The Will
of God is the first and last, the Original and End of all the creatures.
Besides the Will of Infinite Goodness, there is no final Rest for humane souls.
But man's will is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning or first efficient, and the
ultimate end of all obliquity and sin: Be bold then and thankful in your
approach to God, remembering how much more safe and comfortable it is to be (for
life and death) at Gods disposal, than our own.

Besides these, read the Directions against the fear of death, in my Book of
Self-denial; and what is said in my Saints Rest, and other the Treatises before
mentioned.

CHAP. XXVIII. How by Faith to look aright to the Coming of Jesus Christ in
Glory.
BEcause I have said so much of this also, in my Saints Rest, and in many other
Treatises, I will now pass it over with these brief Directions.

Direct. 1. Delude not your souls, nor corrupt your faith and hope, by placing
Christ's Kingdom in things too low, or that are utterly uncertain.

Think not so carnally of the second coming of Christ, as the Jews did of the
first who looked for an earthly Kingdom, and despised the spiritual and
heavenly: And make not the unknown time, or other circumstances of his coming*
to be to you as the certain and necessary things; lest you do as many of those
called Millenaries, or Fifth-Monarchy men among us, who have turned the
doctrine of Christian hope into an outrageous fury, to bring Christ down before
his time, and to make themselves Rulers in the world, that they might presently
reign under the name of the Reign of Christ* and have by seditious, rebellious
railing at Christ's Ministers, and hating those that are not of their mind, done
much to promote the Kingdom of Satan, while they cried up nothing but the
Kingdom of Christ.

Direct. 2. Do all that you can in this day of grace, to promote Christ's
present Kingdom in the world, and that will prove your best preparation for his
glorious coming.

To that end labor with all your might, to set up Life, and Light, and Love,
abhorring Hypocrisy, Ignorance, and Incharitableness; turn not Religion into a
ceremony, carcass or dead Imagery or Form: Nor yet into Darkness, Error, or a
humane wandering, distracting maze: Nor into selfish, proud, censorious
faction: Build not Christ's Kingdom as the Devil would do, by hypocritical dead
shows, or by putting out his Lights, or by schism, division, hatred and strife.
Read James 3.

Direct 3. Yet leave not out of your faith and hope, any certain part of
Christ's glorious Kingdom. We know that we shall for ever be with the Lord, and
in the presence of the Father in heavenly glory; and withal, that we shall be
in the New Jerusalem; and that there shall be a new Heaven, and a new Earth, in
which shall dwell righteousness; and that we shall judge the Angels and the
world. And if we know not the circumstances of all these parts, let not
therefore any of them be denied, 1 These. 4.11. 2 Cor. 5.1, 3, 8. Rev. 20. and
22. 2 Pet. 3.13.

Direct. 4. Think what a day of Glory it will be to Jesus Christ, Matthew. 25.31.
O how different from his state of humiliation! He will not come again to be
despised, spit on, buffeted, blasphemed and crucified: Pilate and Herod must be
arraigned at his bar; it is the marriage-day of the Lamb; a day appointed for
his glory, Rev. 21, and 22.

Direct 5. Think what a day of honor it will be to God the Father; how his
Truth will be vindicated, his Love and Justice gloriously demonstrated, Matthew.
25. 2 These. 1.8, 9.

Direct. 6. Think what a day it will be to all the children of God; to see
their Lord, when he purposely comes to be admired and glorified in them, 2
These. 1.11, 12. To see him in whom they have believed, whom they loved and
longed for, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 13. and 1 Pet. 1.8. To see him who is their
dearest Head and Lord; who will justify them before all the world, and
sentence them to life eternal: To see the day in which they must receive the
end of all their faith, and hope; their prayers, labors and patience to the
full, 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. Rev. 2, and 3. Matthew. 25. 2 Pet. 4.13.

Direct. 7. Thinks what a day it will be to the shame of sin, when it shall be
the reproach and terror of the world, and to the Honor of Holiness, when
faith, obedience and love shall be the approved honor of all the Saints: And
what a day of admirable Justice it will be, when all that seems crooked here,
shall be set strait: O the difference that there will then be in the thoughts
of sin and holiness, in comparison of those that men have of them now!

Direct. 8. Think what a confounding day it will be to the infernal Serpent,
and all his seed, Matthew. 25.41, 16. When impudent boasters shall then be
speechless, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth, Matthew. 25.44. and 22.12.
Psalm. 107.42. And when Lazarus shall be seen in Abraham's bosom; and the
enemies of the Saints shall see them advanced (as Haman did M^rdecai, and
rejoicing when the Glory of Christ is revealed, 1 Pet. 4.13. When every
scorners mouth shall be stopped, and all stand guilty before their Judge, (
Romans 3.4.19.) and the wretched unprepared souls must for departing from God, be
sentenced to depart into misery for ever, Matthew. 25.41, 46. Jude v. 6.

Direct. 9. And think what a change that day begins both with the Saints,
and with the world: What a glory is it that we must immediately possess, in
body and soul; and how we must partake of the Kingdom of our Lord: Saints shall
be scorned and persecuted no more: The threatenings and promises of Christ shall
be no more denied by unbelievers: Sin will be no more in honor, nor pride and
sensuality bear sway: The Church will be no more ecclipsed, either by its
lamentable imperfections, and diseased members, or by the divisions of sects,
or the scatterings of the cruel, or the slanders of the lying tongue, Ephesians.
5.17. Satan will no more tempt or trouble us ( Rev. 12.9.) Matthew. 25.41. Sin
and death will be excluded; and all the fears and horrors of both: For the
face of Infinite Love will perfectly and perpetually shine upon us, and shine
us into perfect perpetual Glory, Love and Joy; and will feed these, and the
thankful and pra^seful expressions of them, to all eternity, Matthew. 5.46. 2
Cor. 4.17. Rev. 2, and 3.

Direct. 10. Lastly, Think how near all this must needs be: If the day of the
Lord was near in the times of the Apostles, it cannot be far off to us. If the
worlds duration be to six thousand years (the time which arrogant presumption
most plausibly guesseth at) it will be less than 350 years to it. Though we
know not the time, we know it cannot be long.

And let me conclude with a warning to both sorts of Readers: And 1. To the
ungodly unprepared sinner. Poor soul! do thou believe this dreadful day or
not? if not, why do thou dissemble, by professing it in thy Creed? if thou
do, how (...) thou live so merrily or quietly in a careless unprepared state?
Can thou possibly forget so great, so sure, so near a day? Alas, it will be
another kind of meeting, than Christ had with sinners upon earth; when he came
in meekness and humiliation, not to judge and condemn the world, b^t to be
falsely judged and condemned by them, John 3.17. and 12.47. Nor will it be such
a meeting as Christ had with thee, either by his Ministers that called thee to
repent, who were men whom thou could easily despise; or by his Spirit which
thou could resist and quench; or by his afflicting Rod, which did but say to
thee, Go, sin no more, lest worse befall thee, Joh. 5.14. Heb. 12.10, 12. 1 Timothy 5.24. Nor as the Judgment of man's Assize, which passes sentence only
against a temporal life, Luke 12.4. Nor like the treaty of a Judas with his new
awakened conscience here. O no! It will be a more glorious, but more dreadful
day: It will be the meeting, not only of a creature with his Creator; but of a
sinner with a just and holy God, and of a despiser of grace, with the God whom
he despised: O terrible day to the unbelieving, ungodly, carnal and impenitent!
Heb. 10.31. and 2.3. and 10.12. Luke 19.27. There must thou appear to receive
thy final doom; to hear the last word that ever thou must hear from Jesus
Christ (unless his everlasting wrath be called his Word) And O how different
will it be from the words which thou wast wont to hear! Thou wast wont to hear
the calls of grace: Mercy did entreat thee to return to God: Christ by his
Ministers did beseech thee to be reconciled: But if thou entreat him for pardon
and peace, with the loudest cries, it would be all in vain, Matthew. 7.21, 22,
23. Prev. 1.27, 28. Now the voice is, Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away
the sins of the world, John 1.29. But then it will be, [ Behold he comes with
clouds, end every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him, and all
the kindreds of the earth shall wail, because of him, Rev. 1.7. And [ behold
the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds,
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 14, 15. Now he entreats you to
come to him that you may have life, John 5 40. But then you will cry to the
Mountains to fall upon you, and the hills to cover you from his presence, Luke
23.30. Rev. 6.16. Now he says, Behold I stand at the door and knock; If any
man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with
him, and he with me, Rev. 3.20. But when once you hear that midnight cry,
Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth and meet him; then they that are
ready shall go in, and the door shall be shut against the rest, Matthew. 25.9,
10. The door of mercy shall be shut: Your Reprobation will be then made sure,
Romans 9.22. and 2.5. The day of thy visitation is then past, ( Luke 19.41, 42.)
No more offers of Christ and mercy: No more entreaties to accept them: No more
calls to turn and live: Min^sters must no more preach, and persuade, and
entreat in vain. Friends must no more warn thee, and pray for thee. All is done
already that they can do for thy soul for ever. No more strivings of the Spirit
with thy conscience; and no more patience, health or time to be abused upon
fleshly lusts and pleasures: All these things are past away, 1 Cor. 7.31. 2
Cor. 4.17. And the door of Hope will be also shut: No more hope of a part in
Christ: No more hope of the success of Sermons, of Prayers, or of any other
means: No hopes of pardon, of justification, of salvation; or of any abatement
of thy woe, Luke 16.25.26. Behold this is the accepted time; behold this is the
day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 8 Psalm. 5.4, 5. and 9.7. James
1.15.

By this time, methinks you should better know what the use and meaning of the
Gospel, and Grace, and Ministers is; and what is the design of Preaching, and
in what manner it should be done. Would you have us silent, or talk to you as
in jest, while we see such a day as this before us? Every true Preacher
spaketh to you with Judgment and Eternity in his eye. Our work is to prepare
you, or to help you to prepare to meet the Lord, and to be ready for your final
sentence: O then with what seriousness should we speak, and should you bear,
and should both we and you prepare! It Is pity to see people hear Sermons many
years, and not so much as know what a Sermon is; or what is the use and nature
of it. If our business were to draw away Disciples after us, and to make our
selves the admired heads of factions, then we would speak those perverse things
contrary to the doctrine which you have been taught, by which our ends might be
carried on, Acts 20.30. Romans 16.17. Or if our design were to be high, and
great, and rich, we would flatter the great ones of the world, that we might
rule you with violence instead of love: Or if we consulted our case, we should
spare much of this labor, and let you silently alone, at cheaper rates to the
flesh, than now we speak to you. But O who can be silent, who is engaged in
this sacred office, when he foreseeth what will shortly be the issue of our
prevailing, or not prevailing with you! Now as we love Christ, we must feed his
sheep; and necessity is laid upon us, and woe be unto us if we preach not the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. Our preaching Christ is to warn every man, and teach every
man, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.22. And to
persuade men as knowing the terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor. 9.10, 11. Heb. 12.25,
29. If it were only that we loved so to hear our selves talk; or to be cried up
by many followers, we deserved to pay dear indeed for such Preaching. But when
our Lord loved and pitied souls at the rate of his sufferings and bloody
death, surely our rates are not above the worth of souls. O what a doleful
sight is it to us, to foresee by faith how loud, how earnestly you would knock
and cry, when the door is shut, and hope is gone! And what you would then give
for one of these days which you now are a weary of; and for a drop of that
mercy which now does beg your entertainment!

What then remains, but as ever you believe that day; and as ever you care
what becomes of your souls and bodies for ever; and as ever you would not be
charg^d and condemned, as final and obstinate refu^ers of mercy and salvation;
yea and for wronging the Ministers of Christ, by making them study and preach
in vain: That you harden not your hear^s, but hear Christ's voice, to day, while
it is called to day* before the door of grace be shut: O cry while crying and
begging may do good: Meet Christ now as may best prepare you to meet him then.
Meet him now as the Prodigal met his Father, Luke 15. Saying, I have sinned,
and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me one of thy hired servants.

Meet God as Abigail met David, 1 Samuel 25.32, 34. with an offering of peace
(even Christ apprehended by an obedient faith:) When she heard from David,
Except thou had hasted and come to meet me, all had been destroyed.

Meet him to enquire of his sacred Oracle, what is like to become of thy soul;
as the King of Syria sent Hazael with a present to Elisha, to meet him, saying,
Shall I recover of this disease? 2 King. 8.8. Or as Paul met with Christ when
he humbled and converted him, saying, Who art thou, Lord? and what would thou
have me do? Acts 9.

Meet him as the men of Israel and Juda did David their King, 2 Samuel 19.
striving who should first own and honor him, Amos 4.12. Meet God thus n^w when
h^ ca^^eth you by his Word, when he persuades you by his M^^^sters, when he
moves you by his Spirit, when he allureth and obliges you by his mercies,
while he drives you by affliction, while he waits on you by his patience,
and by all th^se calls you to repent, to love him, and to obey; to set your
hearts on Heaven if ever you hope it should be your portion: Meet him thus now,
and then you may joyfully meet him in his glory.

II. And O all you that are true Believers, lift up your heads with hope and
joy, for your final deliverance draws nigh. The world has but a little while
longer to abuse you: Satan has but a little while more to molest you: The
blinded Sodomites shall not long be groping for your doors: You shall not long
walk among snares and dangers; nor live with enemies, nor with troublesome
unsuitable friends: You have not long to bear the burden of that wearisome
body, of that seducing flesh, of those unruly passions, or those disordered
thoughts; you have not long to groan under the misery of that troubled and
doubting conscience, that darkened mind, those dull affections, those remnants
of unbelief, stupidity and carnality; nor to cry out with weariness from day to
day, O when shall I know God better, and love him more! Death is coming, and
quickly after, Christ is coming: One will begin, and the other perfect your
full deliverance, and put an end to these complaints.

And remember, that though Death has somewhat in it, which to nature is
terrible (God having made the love of Life to be the pondus, or spring of
motion to the great engine of the sensitive world) yet what is there in the
second coming of Christ, that should seem unwelcome to you? You shall not meet
an enemy, but a friend; your surest, and your greatest friend; one that has
done more for you than all the world has done; and one that is ready now to do
much more, and show his love and friendship to the height. One that will be
then your surest friend, when all the world shall cast you off. You go not to
be condemned, but to be openly justified; yea honored before all the world,
and sentenced to endless glory. You go not to be numbered with the enemies of
holiness, or with the slothful and unprofitable servants; but to be perfectly
incorporated into the heavenly society, and to see the glorified faces of
Henoch, Moses and Elias, of Peter, and John, and Paul, and Timothy, and all the
Saints that ever you knew, or whose writings you have ever read, or whose names
you ever heard of, and millions more. You go to be better acquainted with those
Angels that rejoiced at your repentance, and that ministered for your good, and
that bore you in their hands, and were your continual guard both night and day.
You go to join in consort with all these, in those seraphick praises which are
harmoniously sounded forth continually, through all the intellectual world, in
the greatest fervours of perfect Love, and the constant raptures of perfect
Joy, in the fullest intuition of the glory of the Eternal God, and the
glorified humanity of your Redeemer, and the glory of the celestial world and
society, and under the streams of Infinite Life, and Light, and Love, poured
forth upon you to feed all this, to all Eternity: And all this in so near and
sweet an union with the glorified ones, who are the body and Spouse of Christ,
that it shall be all as one Praise, one Love, one Joy in all.

O for a more lively and quick-sighted faith, to foresee this day in some
measure as affectingly, as we shall then see it! Alas, my Lord, is this dark
prospect all that I must here hope for? Is this dull, and dreaming, and amazing
apprehension, all that I shall reach to here? Is this senseless heart, this
despondent mind, these drowsy desires, the best that I must here employ in the
contemplation of so high a glory? Must I come in such a sleepy state to God?
and go as in a dream to the beatifical vision? I am ashamed and confounded to
find my soul, alas, so dark, so dead, so low, so unsuitable to such a day and
state, even whilst I am daily looking toward it, and whilst I am daily
talking of it, and persuading others to higher apprehensions than I can reach
my self; and even whilst I am writing of it, and attempting to draw a Map of
Heaven, for the consolation of my self, and fellow-believers. Thou have
convinced my Reason of the truth of thy predictions, and of the certain
futurity of that glorious day: And yet how little do my affections stir? and
how unanswerable are my joys, and my desires, to those convictions? when the
light of my understanding should cure the deadness of my heart, alas, this
deadness rather extinguisheth that light, and cherishes temptations to
unbelief; and my faith, and reason, and knowledge, are as it were asleep, and
useless, for want of that Life which should awaken them unto exercise and use.
Awakened Reason serves Faith, and is always on thy side: But sleepy Reason in
the gleams of prosperity, is ready to give place to flesh and fancy, and has a
thousand distracted, incoherent dreams. O now reveal thy Power, thy Truth, thy
Love and Goodness effectually to my soul, and then I shall wait with love and
longing, for the revelation of thy Glory: Thy inward, heavenly, powerful Light,
is kin to the glorious brightness of thy coming; and will show me that which
books and talk only, without thy Spirit, cannot show. Thy Kingdom in me, and my
daily faithful subjection to thy Government there, must prepare me for the
glorious endless Kingdom: If now thou would pour out thy Love upon my soul,
it would flame up toward thee, and long to meet thee, and think with daily
pleasure on that day: And my perfect Love would cast out that fear, which
makes the thoughts of thy coming to be a torment: O meet me now when my soul
does seek thee, and secretly cry after thee; that I may know thou will meet me
with love and pity at the last. O turn not now thine ears from my requests:
For if thou receive me not now as thy humble supplicant, how shall I hope that
thou will receive me then? And if thou will not hear me in the day of grace and
visitation, and in this time when thou may be found, how can I hope that
thou will hear me then, when the door is shut, and the seeking and finding time
is past? If thou cast me out of thy presence now, and turn away thy face from
my soul and my supplication, as a loathed thing, how can I then expect thy
smiles, or the vital embracements of thy glorifying Love? or to be owned by
thee before all the world, with that cordial and consolatory Justification,
which may keep my conscience from becoming my Hell. If thou permit my flesh and
sense to conquer my faith, and to turn away my love and desire from thee; how
shall I then expect that Joy, that Heaven, which consists in thy Love: And if
thou suffer this unstedfast heart to depart from thee now, will it not be the
forerunner of that dreadful doom, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know
you not: And if for the love of transitory vanity, I now deny thee, what can I
then expect but to be finally denied by thee? Come Lord and dwell by thy Spirit
in my soul, that I may have something in me to take my part, and may know that
I shall dwell with thee for ever: If now thou will make me thy temple and
habitat^on, and wilt dwell by faith and love within me; I shall know thee by
more than the hearing of the ear, and thy last appearing will be less terrible
to my thoughts: Thou will be health to my soul, when my body lies languishing
in pain: And when flesh and heart fail, my failing heart will find reviving
strength in thee: And when the portion of worldlings is spent, and at an end, I
shall find thee a never-ending portion. Why would thou come down from Heaven
to Earth in the days of thy voluntary humiliation, but to bring down grace to
dwell where God himself has dwelt? If the Eternal Word will dwell in flesh,
the Eternal Spirit will not disdain it, whose dwelling is not by so close an
union, but by sweet unexpressible inoperations: This world has had the pledge
of thy bodily presence, when thou broughtest life and immortality to light: O
let my dark and fearful soul, have the pledge of thy illuminating, quickening,
comforting Spirit, that life and immortality may be begun within me! Thy word
of promise is certain in it self; but knowing our weakness, thou will give us
more: Thy seal, thy pledge, thy earnest, will not only confirm my faith, as
settling my doubting mind; but it will also draw up my love and desire, as
suited to my intellectual appetite; and will be a true foretaste of Heaven: How
often have I gazed in the glass, and yet overlookt, or not been taken with the
beauty of thy face? But one drop of thy Love, if it fall into my soul, will
fill it with the most fragrant and delectable odor, and will be its life, and
joy, and vigor. I shall never know effectually what Heaven is, till I know
what it is to love thee, and to be beloved by thee: For what but Love will tell
me what a life of Love is? If I could love thee more ardently, more absolutely,
more operatively, I should quickly know and feel thy Love. And O when I shall
know that prosperous life, and live in in the delicious entertainments of thy
love, and in the sweet and vigorous exercise of mine, then I shall know the
nature of Heaven, the wisdom of believers, and the happiness of enjoyers! And
then foretaste will do more than foresight alone, and will make me love the day
of thy appearing, and long to see thy glorious Love!

But alas, this feeble sleeping Love, does threaten, if not the thrusting of me
out of doors (for none but friends and hearty Lovers dwell with thee) at least,
that I shall be set behind the door, and be one of the lowest in thy Kingdom,
as I was in thy Love. For if I have the least degree of Love, I must needs have
the least degree of Glory, seeing that blessedness is Love it self: And if I
have the least in this life, how can I hope to have proportionably with others,
the most in that? I know that it is better to be a doorkeeper in thy house,
than to reign in the Palaces of earthly sordid and polluting pleasures: And
that the least in thy Kingdom, is greater than Emperors in the Kingdoms of
darkness. But how can I have faith indeed, and not desire intuition? or grace,
and not desire glory? Or who can love thee truly, and yet be contented to love
thee but a little? Or who ever tasted truly of thy Love, that desired not the
fullness of it? If sincerity consist in the desire of Perfection; and if mutual
Love be heaven it self, I am not sincere then, if I desire not the highest
place in Heaven, which is suited to the measure of my natural capacity, and
with the freedom and wisdom of thy bounteous Will. Did I grudge at my natural
capacity, and my rank among my fellow creatures, and aspired after the Divine
Prerogatives, or a Greatness without Goodness, or any prohibited station or
degree, I might then expect the reward of Pride, and to fall into Satan's
condemnation for falling into his sin. But when wast thou ever offended at the
ambition of loving thee with the most perfect Love? Thou forbiddest our carnal
Pride, as our self-abasing folly: Not thinking preferments, Lordships and
domination to be things too high for us, but too low: Thou allowest and
command the poorest Lazarus to seek and hope for things ten thousand times
more high; in comparison with which these pleasures are pain, these Lordships
are losses; this wealth is dung; these Courts are de^^ of uncleanness, wild and
ravenous beasts; and all this earthly pomp is shame. Thou forbiddest not the
pleasures and glory of the world, as too good for thy servants, but as too bad,
and base, and hurtful.

O therefore encourage in my drooping soul, that holy ambition which thou
command! Disappoint not the desires which thy self, by thy Precept and thy
Spirit have excited. I know thou have promised to satisfy them that hunger and
thirst after Righteousness: And (if my soul be acquainted with it self) it is
Righteousness which I desire. Though the soliciting calls of vanity have drawn
me too often to look aside, it is the Knowledge and Love of my Creator, and
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, which I pursue; and my prayer is, that thou will turn
away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken me in thy way. But it is the
dullness of my desires which I fear; lest they are not the hungring and
thirsting which have thy promise; and lest they should prove but as the desires
of the slothful which kill him, because his hands refuse to labor: But thou
know that I hate the sluggishness and indifferency of my soul, and the
coldness and interruptions of my desires: And what is there in this world which
I desire more, than more desires after thee; even more of that Desiring,
Seeking Love, which is the way to enjoying and delighting Love. O breath upon
my soul, by thy quickening Spirit, that it may pant, and gasp, and breath after
thy presence! The most dolorous motions of Life and Love, have more contenting
sweetness in them, than my dead insensibility and sleep. When I can but long to
love thee, or when I lie in tears for want of love, or when I am hating and
reviling this sluggish, carnal, disaffected heart, even in my very doubts, and
fears, and moans, I find my self nearer to content and pleasure, than when I
neglect thee with a dead and drowsy heart. If therefore my vileness make me
unfit to enjoy that pleasure in the daily prospect of thy Kingdom, which reason
it self adjudgeth to a serious lively faith; O yet keep up the constant fervor
of desire, that I may never grow in love with vanity and deceit, nor never be
indifferent whether I stay on earth, or come to thee! And that in my greatest
health I may never think of Thee without desire; nor never kneel in prayer to
thee with such an unbelieving, and unprayer-like heart, which does not
unfeignedly say, Let thy glorious Kingdom come: That so when on the bed of
languishing, I am waiting for the dissolution of this frame, I may not draw
back, as flying from thy presence; nor look at Heaven as less desirable than
Earth; nor be driven unwillingly from a more beloved habitation; but with that
Faith, Hope and Love which animateth all thy living members, I may in consort
with thy Saints to the last sincerely break forth, our common suit; Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books written and published by the same Author.
1. THE Aphorisms. 2. The Saints Everlasting rest, in quarto. 3. Plain
Scripture proof of Infant Church Membership and Baptism, in quarto. 4. The
right Method for a settled Peace of Conscience and Spiritual Comforts, in
thirty two Directions, in octavo. 5. Christian Concord; or the Agreement of the
Associated Pastors and Churches of Worcestershire, in quarto. 6. True
Christianity; or Christ's Absolute Dominion, etc. in two Assize Sermons preached
at Worcester, in twelves. 7. A Sermon of Judgment preached at Paul's, London,
December. 17. 1654. and now enlarged, in twelves. 8. Making light of Christ and
Salvation too often the Issue of Gospel-Invitations, manifested in a Sermon
preached at Lawrence Jury, in London, in octavo. 9. The Agreement of diverse
Ministers of Christ in the County of Worcester, for Catechizing, or Personal
Instructing all in their several Parishes that will consent thereunto;
containing 1. The Articles of our Agreement. 2. An Exhortation to the People to
submit to this necessary work. 3. The Profession of Faith and Catechism, in
octavo. 10. Guildas Salvianus, The Reformed Pastor, showing the nature of the
Pastoral work, especially in private Instruction and Catechizing, in octavo.
11. Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments, and the True Nature of Visible
Christianity, in quarto. 12. Of Justification: four Disputations clearing and
amicably defending the Truth, against the unnecessary Oppositions of diverse
Learned and Reverend Brethren, in quarto. 13. A Treatise of Conversion,
preached and now published for the use of those that are strangers to a true
Conversion, etc. in quarto. 14. One sheet for the Ministry against the
Malignants of all sorts. 15. A Winding Sheet for Popery. 16. One Sheet against
the Quakers. 17. A second Sheet for the Ministry, etc. 18. Directions to
Justices of Peace, especially in Corporations, to the discharge of their duty
to God, etc. 19. The Crucifying of the World by the Cross of Christ, etc. in
quarto. 20. A Call to the Unconverted to Turn and Live, and accept of mercy,
while mercy may be had, as ever they would find mercy in the day of their
extremity: From the Living God: To be read in Families where any are
unconverted, in twelves. 21. Of Saving Faith: That it is not only gradually,
but specifically distinct from all Common Faith. The Agreement of Richard
Baxter with that very Learned consenting Adversary, that has maintained his
Assertion by a pretended Confutation in the end of Sergeant Shepherds Book of
Sincerity and Hypocrisy, in quarto. 22. Directions and Persuasions to a sound
Conversion, etc. in octavo. 23. The Grotian Religion discovered, at the
invitation of Mr. Thomas Pierce in his Vindication: With a Preface, vindicating
the Synod of Dort from the calumnies of the new Tilenus; and David, Peter, etc.
and the Puritans, and Sequestrations, etc. from the censures of Mr. Pierce, in
octavo. 24. Confirmation and Restoration, the necessary means of Reformation
and Reconciliation, etc. in octavo. 25. Five Disputations of Church Government,
in quarto. 26. A Key for Catholics, to open the juggling of the Jesuits, and
satisfy all that are but truly willing to understand, whether the Cause of the
Roman or Reformed Churches be of God; and to leave the Reader utterly
unexcusable that after this will be a Papist, in quarto. 27. A Treatise of
Self-denial, in quarto. 28. His Apology against the Exceptions of Mr. Blake,
Kendall, Crandon, Eires, L* Moulin, in quarto. 29. The unreasonableness of
Infidelity, in four parts, etc. in octavo. 30. The Worcestershire Petition to
the Parliament, for the Ministry of England, defended, etc. in quarto. 31. His
Holy Commonwealth; or Political Aphorisms, opening the true Principles of
Government, etc. in octavo. 32. His Confession of Faith, etc. in quarto. 33.
His humble Advice; or the heads of those things which were offered to many
honorable members of Parliament, in quarto. 34. The Quakers Catechism; or the
Quakers questioned, in quarto. 35. An account of his present Thoughts
concerning the Controversies about the perseverance of the Saints, in quarto.
36. His Letter to Mr. Drury for Pacification, in quarto. 37. The Safe Religion;
or three Disputations for the Reformed Catholic Religion, against Popery, etc.
in octavo. 38. Catholic Unity; or, the only way to bring us all to be of one
Religion, etc. in twelves. 39. The true Catholic, and Catholic Church
described, etc. in twelves. 40. The Successive Visibility of the Church of
which Protestants are the soundest members, etc. in octavo. 41. The Sermon of
Repentance. 42. Of Right Rejoicing. 43. Sermon of Faith before the King. 44.
Treatise of Death. 45. The Vain Religion of the Formal Hypocrite, etc. in
several Sermons preached at the Abbey in Westminster, in twelves. 46. Two
Sheets for Poor Families, etc. 47. Short Instructions for the sick: a sheet.
48. A Saint or a Bruit, etc. in quarto. 49. The mischief of Self-ignorance, and
benefit of Self-acquaintance, in octavo. 50. Universal Concord, etc. in octavo.
51. The last work of a Believer, etc. in twelves. 52. The Divine Life in three
Treatises: The first of the Knowledge of God: The second, of Walking with God:
The third, of Conversing with God in Solitude, in quarto. 53. The Reasons of
the Christian Religion, etc. 54. Directions for weak distempered Christians, to
grow up into a confirmed state of grace, etc. 2. The Characters of a sound
confirmed Christian: written to imprint on men's minds the true Idea or
Conception of Godliness and Christianity, in octavo.
These Books following are also printed for Nevill Simmons at the three Crowns
near Holborn Conduit.
THE Novelty of Popery opposed to the Antiquity of true Christianity. By Peter
Dumoulin, D. D. in folio. A Commentary or Exposition upon the five Books of
Moses together with the following Books; Joshua, Judges, Ruth, first and second
of Samuel; first and second of Kings; and first and second of Chronicles, in
folio. The Beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposition on Psalm. 82. By Thomas Hall,
B. D. The Souls Looking-glass; wherein a man may discern what estate his soul
stands in toward God, and what evidences he has for Heaven, etc. By Edward
Bury, late Minister of great Bolas in Shropshire, in octavo. The Profit of
Godliness, set forth in five Sermons, on 1 Timothy 4.8. The unprofitableness of
worldly gain in four Sermons on Mark 8.36, 37. The Parable of the barren
Fig Tree, in seven Sermons on Luke 13.6, 7, 8, 9. Victorious Violence, in two
Sermons, on Matthew. 11.12. By Thomas Brindall, late Minister of Walshall in
Staffordshire, in octavo. The Girdle of Holy Resolution, in two Sermons, on 1
Pet. 1.13. By William Gearing, Minister of the Gospel, in quarto. The Lovesick
Spouse, in four Sermons on Cant. 2.5. By William Gearing, Minister of the
Gospel, in quarto. A Discourse on Prodigious Abstinence, occasioned by the
twelve months fasting of Martha Tailor. By John Reynolds, in quarto. The Dead
Pastor yet speaking, in two Sermons, preached on Bartholmew day, Aug. 24. 1662.
in Bewdley Chapel. By Henry Osland, then Minister there, in octavo. The
Christians daily Walk; a sheet. By the same Author. A Sinners Justification on
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord our Righteousness; in several Sermons. By
Obadiah Grew, D. D. late Minister in Coventry, in octavo. The Repenting Sinner
pardoned, being a brief Relation of the wicked life, and penitent death of
James Wilson of Wolverhampton, in Staffordshire, in octavo. The English School;
or the readiest way to teach children, or elder persons, to read, spell, and
rightly pronounce English; fitted to the use of common English-Schools,
illustrated with five brass Cuts. By Tobias Ellis, in octavo.
FINIS.
LET the Reader know, that whereas the Bookseller has in the Catalogue of my
Books, named my [ Holy Commonwealth, or Political Aphorisms] I do hereby
recall the said Book, and profess my Repentance, that ever I published it, and
that not only for some by-passages, but in respect of the secondary part of the
very scope. Though the first part of it, which is the defense of God, and
Reason I recant not.

But this Revocation I make with these proviso's, 1. That I reverse not all the
Matter of that Book, nor all; that more than ONE have accused; As e. g. the
Assertion that all humane Powers are Limited by God: And if I may not be
pardoned for not defying DEITY and HUMANITY, I shall prefer that ignominy
before their present Fastus, and Triumph, who defy them.

2. That I make not this Recantation to the Military fury, and rebellious pride
and tumult, against which I wrote it; nor would have them hence take any
encouragement for impenitence.

3. That though I dislike the Roman Clergies writing so much of Politics, and
detest Ministers meddling in State matters without necessity, or a certain call;
yet I hold it not simply unbeseeming a Divine, to expound the fifth
Commandment, nor to show the dependence of humane Powers on the Divine; nor to
instruct Subjects to obey with judgment, and for Conscience sake.

4. That I protest against the judgment of Posterity, and all others, that
were not of the same TIME, and PLACE, as to the (mental) censure, either of the
BOOK or the REVOCATION; as being ignorant of the true reasons of them both.

Which things Provided, I hereby under my hand, as much as in me lies, reverse
the Book, and desire the World to take it as non-Scriptum.

April. 15. 1670. R. B.


