A SERMON OR The Survey of Man.

Taken by J. B.

As it was Delivered at his Fathers Funeral, September 4th. 1638.

Vt tibi Mors foelix contingat, vivere disce.
Vt foelix possis vivere, disce mori.
Cael. Calcagninus. LONDON, Printed in the Year, M.DC.LII.

THE APOLOGY.
Hearken, O people, as fellow-feeling members: and look not but with moistened
Eyes on my Complaints.
THe Lord has filled my Cup full, even to the brim; yea, it does overflow: but
woe, and alas, it is with afflictions! Did not these The small Pox.
Tokens of Gods wrath, that here you see to be fixed on my Face, portend the
evils for to come, (just punishments for sin) at once to be bereft of both my
nearest Friends? When Epaphroditus escaped death, God was merciful unto me,
said Paul, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow: Phil. 2.17.
I have escaped death; God be merciful unto me, that have sorrows upon sorrow;
not one or two, but an heap of sorrows. The sorrows of Death have compassed me
about on every side, may say now, as once said Psalm. 18.3.
David: I meet with them at every turn; on my right hand, and on my left hand
too: Here, on this, we have these my Fathers Corpse, sad spectacle of Mortality,
present before our eyes: There, on that, we may soon behold the place where
she, good Woman, dear Mother, Twenty days before.
lately has been interred. And which way now should I turn my self? no place
can be free from Grief, I have no sanctuary to fly unto; how then should the
Pulpit shelter me? In this perplexity you may perhaps expect to see a flood of
Tears distilling from my blubbering eyes: yet how should I weep at all? when
you know that where the water stands it is the deepest; great Parva loquuntur
curae, ingentes stupent
sorrows strike dumb; and the less the sound is of our grief, the greater is
the sense thereof. In this perplexity, you may perhaps expect to hear more
sighs and sobs, then words to issue through my mouth: yet how should I be
silent, when the dead shall bid me speak. Then blame not (I pray, my brethren)
though I presume to take this heavy task upon me; and think not that I soar to
high above my Sphere, being thus deeply plunged in this Gulf of misery: but
rather beseech Almighty God to enable me in the performance of this my last
duty, which I owe to my Fathers Will; and that my Passion may be overruled by
Patience, which will best manifest my self to be the true Son of this my
deceased Parent, who here remains a lively pattern of Patience unto us, and Job
was a pattern of Patience unto him, that even in the midst of his afflictions
offended not with his tongue: only perchance he did (like Job) bewail the
estate of our humane misery: and therefore out of the complaints of Job, I
shall now derive the grounds of my present Discourse, as it is written in his
fourteenth Chapter, and the tenth Verse. Job the 14th and the 10th it is thus
written. Man dies, and wastes away: Yea, man yields up the Ghost: and where
is he? The latter part of the Verse: Man yields up the Ghost: and where is he?

THE PROLOGUE.
Job 14.10. Text.
Man gives up the Ghost: and where is he?


BOsrah, a City on this side Jordan, the Metropolis of Idumea, was the
Birthplace of most patient Job, born not long before the days of Moses,
Johan. Boldung.
since the Creation 2270. The fifth or sixth in descent from Esau: Zerah was his
Father, and himself called Jobab, at Genesis 36. No less then a Duke by birth;
being Heir apparent and Lord Controuler of his Fathers Family. One of great
Hopes even from his Infancy: and grown up unto riper years, he begins to look
about the World, traveling a little Northward toward the land of Huz, Job 1.
Ver. 1.
the confines of his Native Soil: where his present conversation does soon
express the goodness of his disposition, to be both temperate and wise, just,
perfect, and upright in all things. This it is that won the hearts of the
common people, and their King Bela is no sooner dead, but they set him in his
Regal Throne: where he soon became the most renowned Potentate of all the East:
for the name of Job was exceeding famous, together with his wealth: nothing was
wanting to advance his happiness. But stay a little, and see the Vanity of our
frail nature, even in its best condition. Job all this while is thus
prosperous, but to be made the more unhappy: he is now climbed up to the height
of Fortunes wheel; and at the next turn his fall will be but the greater. What
though God had placed him above the reach of humane malice? yet his uprightness
shall never want a Devil, as long as hell can yield him one. Satan now is
become his Calumniator, and said unto the Lord; Verse 9.
Does Job serve God for naught? only destroy his wealth and substance; then he
will curse thee to thy face. On this false suggestion, 11.
the Lord lets the Devil loose: who begins with his asses and his oxen, which
he caused the Sabeans to steal away; 15.
and left but one servant alive to bring the news: next, fire from Heaven
consumed his sheep: then the Chaldeans fell upon his camels: 16.
last of all, 19.
he lost his Children by the downfall of their feasting-house: and still (as
the Devil would have it) to augment their grief, one only escaped to bring the
news. 20.
Notwithstanding all this Job was still upright, he fell upon his face and
worshipped. Hereupon Satan renews his suit unto the Lord, Chap. 2.
and gets a larger commission, Verse 4.
even to tempt Job in his proper person; then he smote him with boils and
blanes in every part, 6.
no place was left to rest him on; all sick from top to toe; 7.
as many diseases as members in his body. The most general was the worst of
ulcers: hence issued worms and streams of corrupted Humors, whereunto is joined
a Vt scripsit Galenus.
flesh-consuming leprosy. He had the Quinsie in his neck and throat: diseases
of the joints and gout: morbus pedicularis: the Dysenterie or bloody flix:
Colic, and torments of the Chap. 39.
Reins: 16.
Astma, Difficulty of breathing. Chap. 19.17.
and the Hectic Fever: Plurisie and a frightful sleep: Sore eyes and
Headache: and a whole diseased body: all inflamed by the inward heat of a
pestilent and biting humor: The dunghill is now become his Throne, and he that
not long before did abound in silks, Chap. 2.8.
for want of linen and sound nails, does scrape his scabs with a broken
Potsheard. Oh the exceeding misery of a man that had a Kingdom at command, yet
now is ready to famish for want of bread! He had not a morsel for his belly,
before his Basil. (Chrysostom. Olymp.) Jobi uxorem ad suam virique vitam
sustentendam ostiatim mendicasse.
Wife (from door to door) had begged it: who ( Tempore multo transacto, as it
is in the Septuagint.
after his fifteen If Theodoret speak true. Chap. 3. verse. 1.3, etc.
years continuance in this calamity) said unto him; Do thou still retain
thine integrity? curse God, and dye. Lo here the malice of the Devil, which had
left him nothing but his Wife and Tongue, that with the latter he might
blaspheme the Lord, and the former might serve as an instrument for to tempt
him to it. Notwithstanding this Job did not sin. But although he did not curse
his God, yet he did his birthday in his third Chapter: neither blame him for
it, for the anguish of his soul was exceeding great, that at length burst forth
into this (or the like) most doleful exclamation.

Ah me most miserable! let that night be never had in remembrance, when it was
said, a man child is conceived. Cursed be that day with darkness wherein I
was born: let not God regard it from above, that the clouds may cover it as a
Canopy with blackness to make it terrible: let not the Sunshine come near it;
no, not so much as the twilight of the lesser stars, because it hid not these
grievous sorrows from my weeping eyes. Alas; why dyed I not before I saw my
being? Better it had been for me to have perished in the Haven, then thus to
have lanched forth into this sea of troubles. O that I had been buried before I
was born; and my Mothers Womb would have proved my Tomb; then should I sleep at
quiet, and have been at rest: but now my days are lengthened to increase my
sorrow. Deliver me, O God, out of this distress: O spare me a little before I
go hence, Chap. 14.7.
and be no more seen. For there is hope of a tree, 8.
although the spreading top thereof be lopt, and the whole bulk cut down; yet
it will spring again, and not cease to send forth his tender Branch: 9.
yea, though the root wax old and die, yet by the sent of moistning water, it
will bud again, and flourish like a new set plant. But we must needs die, and
are as water spilt upon the ground, 2 Samuel 14.14.
which cannot be gathered up again. A man dies and wastes away: yea, a man
gives up the Ghost, and where is he?

Man gives up the Ghost: and where is he? Text.
These words will bear a double consideration. Division.


One is Relative: 1. Relative.
and so they have dependence on the three precedent verses of this Chapter: and
thus my Text were a piece of Jobs comparison, setting forth the distressed
estate of a dying man, by the new and hopeful growth of an old consuming tree.
But this is not that which now I intend to follow.

The other is Absolute: 2. Absolute.
and (in this respect) if you will be pleased (with me) to look upon the words,
at the first view, 1. Affirmative Proposition.
you may behold, First an affirmative Proposition. Man yields up the Ghost.

Secondly, words of Consequence, 2. Inference.
or a slight Inference by way of Questioning or Quere: where is he!

In the Proposition you have 1. The Subject, Man. 2. The Act of this Subject,
yields up. Man yields up. 1. Part.
3. The object of this Act, or the Depositum, which is, the Ghost. Man yields
up the Ghost.









2. Part.
and will tell you as (near as I can) where a man is, when he shall die.

Of these in their order, according to my Method of Division. And first of the
first; The Subject of this Discourse, Man.

MAN.
We will take a Survey of Man before he die.

The last thing that received any Breath from God was Man, First Part.
not that he was least, but perhaps because the Lord should have made so great
a Prince in vain, if he had had no place wherein to rule. When the Lord had
drawn out that large and real Map of the spacious world; he did then abridge it
into the little Table of Man; which alone did consist of Heaven and of Earth;
of Soul and of a Body.

The Body of Man.
That the Body was created of Earth, I think that there is none does doubt
thereof: yet (says Arias Montanus) it was not, Ex qualibet humo sed
pinguissima; Ghaphar Adamah, that is the Original, of a reddish soft, and the
fattest Earth. Nor is it so, that God made an Image molded out of Clay, but
out of it (by the power of his word) came blood, flesh and bones, with all the
other parts of man, whose body is compounded of the four Elements, and does
partake of all their qualities, though earth predominates and nominates,
whereunto the flesh does bear resemblance; his vital Spirits agree with Air and
Fire; his humors to the Water: yea, there is no piece so small in the whole
Frame of man, wherein every one of the Elements do not intermeddle their power,
although one of them does always command above the rest, and bear the sway.
Now as the parts of man are many, so the principal is the head; there dwell
those majestic powers of Reason, that make a man. The Senses, as they have
their original from thence, so do they all agree there to manifest their
Virtue. How goodly proportions has the Lord set in the face of man; in the
Breast, the Arms, the Legs, and the whole structure of every member? all as
decent, as necessary. It were long for to speak of the Homogeneous or similary
parts, which are nine, the Bone, Ligament, and the Gristle; Sinew, Panicle, and
the Cord or Filament; the Flesh, the Artery, and the Veins. How has the Lord
disposed of all the inward Vessels, for the offices of Life, nourishment, and
egestion; there is none of those (forementioned) idle; there is no piece in
this exquisite frame, whereof the place, the use, and the form, do not admit
wonder, and exceed it.

The Soul.
But what is this Body if compared to the Soul, no more then a clay wall that
encompasseth a treasure, or a mask to a beautiful face? Man was made last,
because he was the worthiest: the Soul inspired last, because yet more noble.
God that breaths upon Man, and gives him the Holy Spirit; the same God did
breath upon this Carcass, and gave it a living spirit. He alone did create our
souls in their infusion; and infused them in their creation. Our knowledge in
the beginning, and our righteousness was perfect like the first Copy from
which we were drawn. O too too happy estate of man, had not his untimly fall so
cancelled the divine character! His fall and misery.
whence all the faculties of our soul are corrupted, continually prone to sin.
This now is the law of our members, and the wages thereof is death. O the hard
condition of a man, that before he can offend, (even from the womb) he is
necessitated to it. Heraclitus therefore still wept in the consideration of our
humane misery: and Pliny accounted him most happy, which should die unborn; or
being born should die. Usually the new born babe that is a Male, cries A: and
the Female E.

Dicentes E vel A, quotquot nascuntur ab Evah And what means Evah, but Heu Ha?
both are interjections of sorrow, expressing the greatness of their calamity.
There was some reason then for that custom amongst the Scythians, who still
wept at the birth of their children, and did feast it out at the death of their
parents: because that then they were delivered out of all their troubles. O how
full of anxiety are minds of mortal men? cares and crosses still set upon
them; they are encompassed with afflictions on every side: Experto creed
Magistro: Job 19.
Job spoke it by experience in his nineteenth Chapter; If I am ungodly, then
woe is me: and if just, I cannot lift up my head, being filled with misery. And
from this no estate, condition, nor age is free: all is vanity and vexation of
spirit. Our infancy is full of folly: youth of disorder and toil: elder years
of infirmity: each time has its burden, and that which may justly work our
weariness. Art thou poor, O man? why then thou shall be oppressed with need,
hunger, nakedness, and with cold. But art thou rich? why, hereby then thine
abundance will prove to be thine overthrow: this gives thee reins to run after
thy impious lust; and to rush upon all unlawful Acts. Again art thou a
servant? why then, either thy mind is terrified with threats; or thy body
afflicted with many stripes. Or art thou a Master, and have others at command?
why then, if thou art cruel, fear will possess thee of rebellious servants, and
if kind and affable, they will soon neglect thee, and wax insolent. Either thy
rigor will draw hatred on thy head, or familiarity contempt. So that there is
no estate on earth can make a man completely happy. Yea, who ever lived one day
in perfect joy? wherein either the guilt of conscience, the violence of wrath,
or the motions of concupiscence, did not trouble him? wherein neither the spite
of envy, the love of avarice, or swelling pride, did not touch him? and
wherein neither loss, offense, or passion did not move him? Yea, that very
time, the night which is granted us for our rest and quiet, is not granted to
be quiet: for dreams do terrify, and visions do molest us, and although those
things are not truly terrible and sorrowful, which Dreamers dream; yet they
are truly terrified, and are sorrowful: insomuch that sometimes sleeping they
do weep, and waking are much disturbed. Yet above and besides all this, there
are diverse sicknesses whereunto our nature is continually incident. All the
industry of Physicians have not hitherto found out so many names for diseases,
as our humane frailty do daily suffer, Suffer (did I say) unsufferablenesse of
diseases; or unsufferable (did I say) sufferance. The sense will be best if we
take both: for it is unsufferable from the bitterness of the passions: and
sufferable for the necessity of it. JESUS therefore when he saw Mary lamenting
her late diseased Brother, John 11.35.
was troubled in the spirit, and wept: John 11. perhaps not because that
Lazarus was dead: but rather for that being dead and at rest, he was about to
recall him into the misery of this present life. But the Lord again will
deliver both him and us out of all our troubles: Job 14.5.
for our time is determined, and he has appointed our bounds which we cannot
pass: therefore we must die: Death is the wages of sin; therefore we all shall
die: and for to die is the law of nature; therefore we cannot choose but die:
which shows you my second part, The necessity of death: The act in man's
departing, He yields up.

Homo moritur. Man yields up. Second part. Eccles. 3.2.
There is a time to be born, and a time to die, says the Preacher: but this
Preacher could not tell us what year, The necessity of Death.
or in what time of the year, this time of Death should be. And that she is
most to be feared in March, and in Autumn, is no more then a popular
persuasion. Every month, every day is fitted unto death. The Church yard is
always open; and every hour may be heard the doleful sound of the passing
Bell. sooner or later we must all shake hands with impartial death. Genesis 5.24.
Thom. Aquin. in Haebr. c. 11.
It is true that Enoch is not yet dead; yet (says Aquinas) he must sometime
die; for it is an irrevocable sentence laid on sin: Morte moriemini, ye shall
surely die; or dying, you shall die; Motthamoth, as it is in the original, Genesis
2.17. Genesis 2.17.
Which kind of speech we may not call a Pleonasm; or a vain Grammatical
repetition, and doubling of the word moriendi: for in the Hebrew Dialect, by
this is meant, Certissime mori, the certainty and necessity of death: and not
only this, but citissime mori, the suddenness of death: and not only this, but
violenter mori, the violence of death. For as often as the Scripture makes
mention of death and doubleth it; there is not meant a natural death, but
Philo-Judaus.
violent and judicial. Our first parents died against nature, their death being
an act only of Gods Justice toward them for their disobedience. The Lord made
a Covenant with Adam, wherein Adam tied himself, his Heirs, and Executors, but
he forfeited his Bond; and we that succeed him in his sin, are liable to the
debt: Death is the debt that we must all pay though never so unwilling, as the
word [moriendum] shows; it would be bootless to resist. Do we not receive our
life but upon condition? why then should we grieve to pay it at the first
asking? A wise man will make a virtue of necessity; and when his soul that was
lent him is required, he (will be thankful unto God for its use, and) is very
ready to render it to him again: he yields it up. By death we restore but
what was borrowed. Homo vitae commodatus ( Publius Mimus.
says one) non donatus est. But I may well alter the case, and say, (non homo
vitae, sed) vita homini commodata est, non donata. Does God then lend us one
another, and do we grudge when he calls for his own? So have I seen ill
Debtors, that borrow with prayers, keep with thanks and repay with enmity. We
much mistake our Tenure, and account that for gift, which God intends for loan.
We are no more then Tenants at will yet think our selves to be owners. If this
condition were proper only to our selves and Climate; how unhappy should we
seem to be? But behold, no place is secure from death. Zachary shall meet her,
though it be between the Temple and the Altar. Men had a Sanctuary to fly unto
of old, yet there did Priamus, there did Joab die: and when is a man more sure
then sitting? yet Eli fell down backward from his bench, and died. And do not
every Prince, and Monarch dance with us in the same ring? But what speak I of
Earth? the God of Nature, the Savior of men have trod the same steps: and
should we think much to follow him? No. Consider but a little the Emblem of
impartial death, Vt pingitur per Gabrielem Inchinum.
as * some have pictured it and we need not. A Carcass (it is) of man, that
only does consist of bones united by the nerves: ears, eyes, and nose it has
none: naked and terrible to behold: brandishing a sharp fickle with both her
hands, Mortis Icon.
as if cutting down of corn. This is the Icon, the image of death: wherein look
how many parts, so many mysteries.

First, Death is pictured without eyes, as an indifferent Judge, (...); 1. Sine
oculis.
she is no respecter of persons, which have no fear of the mighty, nor pity on
the poor: no noble dignity, nor resplendent show; no riches, not the greatest
treasure can procure her peace. O you Emperors, Popes, and Kings; Princes, and
the greatest Potentates; your Thrones, Diadems, and purple robes; Sceptres,
Crowns, and Miters, death casts to the ground. You that are clothed in
glorious garments and adorned to pomp shall die like men. Thou shall not be
safe, O Caesar, in the Senate House: Death will as well find an entrance to
the stately Palace, Horat.
as the poorest Cottage: Pallida mors aequo pede pulsat pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres.

2. Sine auribus
Secondly, without ears: that will admit no prayers, no supplications to pacify
her rage and fury. O you wise and learned Doctors, your eloquence, your
knowledge shall not now prevail; she is deaf, and hears not your Reasons and
Arguments of Philosophy; not the pleading of the wrangling Lawyer, or the
sweet tongued Orator. The Poet with his pleasant Jests; the subtle Sophister
with his fallacies shall not now deceive her. She yields not to the sighs of
the afflicted, nor their tears: Finally the prayers of the humble; the vain
smooth speeches of Flatterers she does not, she cannot hear.

Boet- de consolat. Philos.
Heu, heu! quam surd a miseros avertitur aure:
Et flentes oculos claudere saeva negat.
Next Death is said to have no nose: 3. Sine naribus
as not to be deceived by any delightful smell. O you wanton and lascivious
Girls! your fragrant odours will now be nothing worth: the apparel that is all
perfumed, and your sweetest powders, 2 Reg. 9.30.
Death will esteem as dust. Jezabel no sooner looks through the Window with her
painted face, but it is torn in pieces by the ravenous Dogs. To what purpose
then are all these kinds of savours, so many strange distilled waters, your
Musk, Perfumes, and Ambers?

Death also is represented naked; 4. Nuda.
to show the small regard she has of Coin, rewards, and Earths abundance. O
you rich and wealthy men, whose hope is placed in your large possessions! think
not when your Barns are full to be freed from death. Thou fool if this night
thy soul be required, Luke 12.20.
then whose are these?

Again, Death is fained to have no flesh, no blood, nor skin: 5. Sine carne.
no esteem of tender Age, of strength, nor of complexion.

Ipsa rapuit Juvenes, prima florente juventa. Lastly, Death does shake her
Sith; 6. Vibrans falcem.
to declare how she cuts down men like corn: the good together with the chaff,
all shall down; that which is ripe for the celestial Garner; and the green as
straw to be burnt in eternal fire. Luke 16.
When Lazarus is conveyed into Abraham's bosom, the rich Glutton shall be cast
into the pit of Hell.

So thus (Beloved) by this Mortis imago, Deaths image, you may well conceive,
how that all assuredly shall die. There is a necessity, it cannot be avoided,
why then are we unwilling for to die?

Morieris, thou shall die: why it were foolishness to fear what I cannot shun.
I shall not be the first nor last: many have gone before, all shall follow.

Morieris, thou shall die: Why it is our humane nature, not a punishment. I had
a beginning, and must therefore end.

Morieris, thou shall die: Why it is no news, I am sworn to it, and should I
then repent? to this purpose I came into the world, and every day am walking to
the Grave.

Morieris, thou shall die: Good God! what can be better unto mortal man? if
Heaven be our country, earth is but a place of Banishment.

Morieris, thou shall die! This is Jus Gentium, to pay the Creditor what we
have received: why then should a man repine? he knows this Coin not to be his
own; that his Soul is only lent him, and he yields up the Ghost, which is the
depositum, the Act of this Subject, and now comes next to be handled. Homo
moritur, Man yields up the Ghost.

Third part.
GHOST.
That divine Essence, the Soul of man, is in Scripture sometimes called a
Spirit, and sometimes a Ghost. Stephen, when he was stoned, Acts 7.59. John
19.30.
cried out, Lord receive my Spirit, Acts 7. JESUS bowed, and gave up the Ghost,
John 19. But there has been great contention amongst Philosophers, what this
Soul, this Ghost should be. Thales Milesius, the Athenian, (who lived in Kings
Ahabs days) was the first that ever would undertake to define it; Of the Souls
Essence:
and that was thus. The Soul is a nature always moving it self. Pythagoras did
make it no more then a number; and Plato, A moving substance that went by
Harmony. But Aristotle (comes nearer to the purpose, Aristotle lib. 2. de anim.
cap. 1. text. 6.
and) calls it (...), a continual Act of a natural, of an instrumental Body,
that may have life. But indeed we may more truly say what the Soul is not, then
what it is: the greatest perfection we describe by Negatives. She cannot
proceed from the matter, from the figure, or qualities of the Body: neither
from the Harmony, Conjunction, and Agreement of the same: this the soul is not.
The vital and animal spirits, are only the Instruments of the soul, and not the
soul it self: if otherwise, she were not immortal, but would perish together
with the Body. Now the soul can be without the body, and vital spirits; though
the body and vital spirits cannot be without the soul: without her the body
moves not all. She in a moment by the cogitations passes through the whole
Heavens, encompasseth the Earth and Seas: this is invisible, and cannot be
perceived by sense. For the operations of her Essence, she has Spirit, Will
and Judgment; Sense, Understanding, Reason: and for her Beauty, Temperance,
Justice, and other Virtues of the Mind: in fine, she is so divine, that she
can hardly be comprehended by Reason, much less then be perceived by sense. God
has given us a soul more to use it, then to know it: He only knows it
perfectly that is above it; we now know it only by the effects, but shall come
to a cleerer revelation in the eternal Heavens.

Neither do the Philosophers wrangle more concerning the Essence of our souls,
then they differ about the parts thereof. Of the parts of the Soul.
Most and the latest writers would have them to be four: Understanding, Reason,
Anger, and Desire: but yet the best received opinion will allow no more then
two, under which they comprize the rest. The one is spiritual, intellectual,
and therein you have the discourse of Reason: the other sensual, brutish, which
is the Will, wandering of it self, disordered, wherein all evil desires have
their dwelling. However the soul (that is immortal) cannot properly be said to
be divided: because what is divided, dissolveth; and what is dissolved,
perishes: yet it may be said to be compounded, and made subject (during the
union with the body) to these two principal parts, the Will and Understanding.
The causes of Death.
The soul indeed may be said to be divided (but in another sense) to be
separated from the body; which may happen even in the best complexions: Wherein
Life consists.
if there be any excess or defect in the Humors, then it causes Death; in the
Radical Humor I mean, which is the root of Life: for as the heat consumes this
Humidity, so does the party languish, he dies: just like the flame which
lesseneth her light and vigor, as the oil wastes in the Lamp, till it be
extinguished. Again, the life of man consists in his breath, which is no more
then wind or Air that refresh the Heart, which if retained either in the Mouth
or Artery, the man is surely dead. What then is death, but the taking down of
these sticks whereof this earthly Tent is built? But the separation of two
great Friends until they meet again: but the Jail-delivery of a long Prisoner
that rejoices to be at liberty. The sleep of the Body, and the awaking of the
Soul which hastneth to be gone, flies away, and where is she? my last
particular, the Quere. Man yields up the Ghost, and where is he?

Fourth part.
Vbi est? Where is he? Where the Body is.
Although it has been a custom, amongst some Heathenish people, to burn the
bodies of their dead; and the more Barbarous for to eat them: yet still the
most civil nations had the humanity to bury the Corpse of their deceased
Friends; for keep them we cannot, because they corrupt, they putrify. Their
Bodies therefore are committed to the ground, dust to dust, and ashes to ashes,
as in THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER. That the Bodies of the dead do return to the
Earth from whence they were taken, no man can deny. But what is become of the
soul? Where the Soul.
there is the question. Where is she? Does she vanish into nothing, or wander
in the Air? does she enter into beasts, and so inform them? is she idle and
falls asleep? or else does she hasten into Purgatory, or fly to Heaven? There
is the question; Where is she? Does she vanish into nothing?

Sadduces dare not die, for fear of not being; and do merrily sing with the
Hogs of the Epicures Stye, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. But the
Christian is assured that the soul is immortal (otherwise he denies the hope
of his resurrection, and his faith is also vain) he does well know that his
soul survives his body; she cannot be annihilated, nor vanish like a vapor:
why then, where is she? In the Air?



No. The transmigration of Souls was but a fable that the Chrysostom. hom. 2. of
Lazarus.
Egyptians had taught Pythagoras, and Pythagoras the Platonists; who Herodian.
Lib. 2. Aug. Lib. 12. de civit. Dei.
believed how that (that in tract of time) there should come a certain year,
wherein all causes and effects long past, should return again, and continue
constant: as for example, that at Athens, Plato himself, who once had many
Pupils there, after a long appointed season (36000 thousand years) the same
Plato, City, and School, should return again; in which space Ptolomy the great
Astronomer did conceive that the course and motion of the Sphere would be
finished from West to East. And in the mean time it is taught by these brutish
men, that when the soul does depart the body, she does inform some Beast
answerable to her former life: that the soul of an hasty and an angry man
should degenerate into a Serpent: Thieves into Wolves; and those that are
delighted in swinish pleasure into Hogs: Homer into a Peacock, and Orpheus into
a Swan. Yea, and Origin writes, Origin. lib. de proverb. Solom.
that this Heresy of the souls departed) happened among some (in his days) that
were seeming Christians, occasioned by that they did not rightly understand the
Scriptures: as where it is said by Christ of John the Baptist, He is Elias,
they refer that speech to the soul of John; which was only meant to be in the
Spirit or power of Elias, to convert their souls unto God: They did not know
how a man does become a Dog or an Ass; Herod is a Fox: it is by their
resemblance in condition: not that the soul does depart into a Beast. Why then,
where is she? is she always idle, or asleep?

No. I (says the Lord) am the God of Abraham, the God 22. And if the soul
departed live, Matthew. 22.32.
she cannot be asleep nor idle; for to live is to be in action: and what action
does better agree unto a departed Soul then the love and contemplation of her
God? although Irenaeus, (and some others) will not grant thus much before the
resurrection day. Whose opinion does seem to be grounded on that in the sixth
of the Apocalypse, and the ninth verse: Apoc. 6.9.10.
where S. John saw lying under the Altar, the souls of them that were slain:
but this is answered in the next verse, That they cried unto God, and therefore
were not asleep. But where then does this Altar stand? when the soul is under
it, where is she? In Purgatory?

No. The Papists strangely talk of four infernal places in the bowels of the
Earth: Hell, Purgatory, Limbus patrum, and Infantium. Perhaps Hell may be
there, but the rest are fabulous. Hell they account to be the lowest, and would
have Purgatory to be next: where the soul shall be sure to bear enough, not
only poena damni, Aug. lib 21. cap. 13. de civit. Dei. Eusebius. de praefat.
Evang. lib. 1. cap. ult.
but sensus too. As for the antiquity of this Purgatory, even Plato is cited
(by S. Augustine and Eusebius) to be the Patron of it. Yea, and may not Homer
and Virgil too be alleged for it? for who doubts but that Poets are always
Orthodox? Yet (O the cold devotion of those times!) this fire never began to
burn out, before Pope Gregory's days, and since that, the Authority of the
Turkish Alcoran has much added to the flames thereof; where there is seven
years punishment for every sin. But see now (I pray) the vanity of this new
invention. Are not all the Articles of our Faith declared in sacred Writ: yet
there we hear nothing of this fained Purgatory. Sap. 3.1.
Solomon does utterly quench this fire,: The souls of the righteous are in the
hands of God (says he) and no torment shall come nigh them. Wisd. 3. Behold
then, either souls without a Purgatory, Matthew. 11.18.
or a Purgatory without pain. Come unto me all you that labor, and are heavy
laden (says Christ) and I will ease you. Mat. 11. Lord, whither will thou send
us? into Purgatory? Surely there is little ease, if the fire be so hot as the
Papists tell us. Esaias 44.
Thy sins (says God) I will no more remember. Esaias 44. Call you that no
remembrance of them to cast us into Purgatory? Philip. 1.23.
I desire (says S. Paul) to be loosed, and to be with Christ. Phil. 1. Verily
if he had thought to have gone through Purgatory he would not have been so
hasty: for there he should be sure to have met with a hot Bath, to have cooled
his courage. Doubtless his soul that is departed did escape this place of
torment: And where then is she? Is she gone and ascended up the Heavens?

Yes. If Abraham's bosom be in Heaven: a Heaven it may be, though not the Heaven
of Heavens: In Coelo beatorum, though not In sancto sanctorum: the highest and
most glorious Heaven. Chrysostom. 2. hom. de Lazaro.
There are but two ways for Souls departed (says Chrysostom) some are
hurried to the place of punishment; and others are conveyed by Angels into
Heaven: not in an instant (for that were an act of the Deity it self) but they
pass by a Physical, by a local motion, though it be no longer then the
twinkling of an Eye. This Abraham's Bosom is a place of bliss, and receptacle of
souls departed, wherein there is peace and tranquillity of mind, being in the
sight of God; yet that sight of God is as through a veil, not clear: for how
(says Origin) can they have the full vision, Origin. hom. 7. in Levit.
and perfect happiness, as long as they grieve at our errors, lament our sins,
and have a longing desire to be united to their bodies? Bellar. lib de Sanctis.
Bellarmin indeed takes great pains, to prove (in six long Chapters) that the
Saints departed do presently enjoy the full sight of God, and enter into
perfect bliss; and reproves M. Calvin, because he says, that the Saints are
yet in hope of the full fruition. But the Fathers generally deny, that the
souls of the Saints are yet in the very same place where the glorified Body of
Christ remains. S. Chrysostom, S. Hillary, and S. Augustine: Chrysostom. i. Epist.
ad Corinth. hom. 39. Hillar. in psalm. 36. Just. q 1. 75. Ambr. tract. de bono
mortis cap. 10. Tert. advers. Marcionem l. 4.
Justine the Martyr, S. Ambrose, and Tertullian, I could here allege, who do
all agree that the souls of the righteous are carried into Paradise or Abraham's
Bosom, there to remain in hope and joy, but yet uncrowned, until the end of
things bring the fullness of reward by the resurrection of all men. But what
this Abraham's bosom is, whether Lazarus soul was conveyed by the Angels, or
where it is, the most learned hitherto could not know; and therefore I dare
not, I cannot determine it: Only by the words of S. Bernard in his third sermon
on All Saints day, Bern. in Festum omnium sanctorum. sermon. 3.
I conceit it to be next unto the highest Heavens, immediately without the
glorious presence of Almighty God. There are three estates of the soul (says
he) in the corruptible body, without the body, and in perfect blessedness. The
first is in the Tabernacles the second in the Courts; and the third in the
house of God: But into this most happy house, the souls of the Saints shall not
enter before us, without us, or without their bodies.

Art thou grieved, O departing soul, because at (an instant) thou shall not
receive thy full reward? Why what then should Abel do, who overcame so long
since, and not yet glorified? what Noah, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and the
rest of those times? for behold (they expected thee, and expect others after
thee) they prevented us in their conflicts, but they shall not in their crowns.
What though this Carcass be left to rottenness for a time, when my soul at the
very instant of separation, knows her self to be happy? What although my
friends mourn about my Bed and Coffin, when my soul is gone to enjoy the the
loving embracements of my Lord and Savior? And what matter is it though my
name be forgotten amongst men, when I live above, so near unto the God of
spirits? that part which is corrupted feels it not: but my soul finds an
abundant recompense, and foreseeth a joyful reparation, in the resurrection of
the just. When this mortality shall be clothed with immortality; then all tears
shall be wiped from our eyes, both body and soul shall be made partakers of
eternal happiness. When the veil shall be taken away, then we shall all enter
into that Sanctum Sanctorum, Gods chamber of presence, where we shall have a
full, even a clear sight of the beatifical vision. When the day shall no more
give place to night, and time shall cease to be, by the consummation of all
things, then we shall live, and reign with God the Father, with God the Son,
and with God the holy Ghost, in perfect joy, in perfect bliss, and in perfect
Glory; for ever everlastingly, even world without end.

ENCOM -- EPILOGUE.
Now here at this Funeral Solemnity, you may well expect something to be spoken
of this our deceased, dearest Friend: and indeed (although it might better
beseem another man's tongue then mine own, yet being my lot to be now in this
place) I cannot omit it, without incurring the guilt of an injury to the dead:
for as I utterly disallow the custom of some men, that justify the ungodly,
by often abusing the Pulpit with their pleasing tongues, that savor more of
Flattery then of Truth; so neither would I be perverse to condemn the Innocent,
and rob virtue of her reward, which does here principally consist in praise.

The Object here set before our eyes, is the subject of my Text, a sad
spectacle of Mortality, Man. If we search the Records for his antiquity and
descent, it appears that his Father was an Amorite, and his Mother a Hittite,
even one of Adams own offspring, in that he was made subject to the Act, the
curse, when he yielded up the Ghost: Morte morieris, thou shall surely die; an
irrevocable sentence denounced by Gods own mouth, for our former fault and
disobedience. But, and if we come nearer to our selves, of his Descent and
Parentage I will not speak, for he was known as well to many others here
present, as my self: only I shall desire thus much, that none here amongst you
will despise him, because he was your Neighbor, and your Country man; nor to
say of him disdainfully (as the Nazarites did once of Christ) His Father and
his Mother we well did know: his Brethren, his Sisters, and his Children are
they not all with us? whence then has this man any virtuous or religious Works?

In the first place, at his Birthday, when the curtain of the attiring room
was drawn, he then did enter upon the Stage of this present world, where his
Prologue was but short, and he spoke but little by reason of his Infancy; only
he showed to the world the meekness of his disposition, and good inclination of
his nature. But when he came to some riper years of Judgment, he then well
acted his part which was variable and full of changes, to the life expressing
the vanity and uncertainness of humane kind; where he left his paths for our
feet to tread upon, and drawed forth a pattern for us to imitate by a pious
conversation. His Zeal to God was expressed not only by his delight he had to
frequent the Temple of the Lord; but also by his daily prayers in his private
family. The chastity of his words and actions did declare that he never
violated his plighted troth to his loving wife, for his soul solely clave unto
her: And the love that he always had to his needy neighbor did promulge his
charity: who only not omitted the occasion of well doing, but also sometimes
sought it, well knowing that he had lost that day wherein he had not done some
good. It would here be tedious to speak of his domestic discipline; to recite
his public conversation, which was always just, honest and virtuous: and that
the words I utter may the better appear to be impartial, I take all you to
record that hear me this day, how that he was pure from offense to all men, and
I am verily persuaded that no man can justly say as much as black unto his eye.
Truth was placed in his words, and constancy in his deeds. There was a freedom
in his presence, and in his visage cheerfulness. He was easy to forgive,
courteous unto all, yea even to his enemies, for some he had, because virtue
cannot be without them. In a word, he carried himself in all his Fortunes with
an equal mind, not too much puffed up with the swelling floods of prosperity;
neither sinking to despair at the lowest ebb of adversity. Of whom (me thinks)
the more I say, the more is still behind and unsaid. I am taken with the
largeness of his goodness, even the plenty of his praises were enough to make
me eloquent. What shall I say of this man's uprightness, when that of Horace
might more then an hundred times be repeated of him: Integer vitae scelerisque
purus? and what shall I say of his Constancy, Faith, and Patience? with all
which he was so excellently well adorned, that whereas he was not second unto
any, so you shall find out few that can equal him, but to be excelled by none.

Thus have I in him represented to your view a short platform for your
imitation in the way of Godliness; a moral Comedy which the soul of our
dearest departed Friend has here acted amongst us, in this now dead Trunk,
this Carcass, to the general applause of all the Spectators, only I shall
desire you to hear his Epilogue, and I have done, to finish his Pilgrimage,
although it be Tragical.

The same magnanimity of spirit that kept him all his life time, did not now
forsake him, even in his greatest sickness, for being visited of the Lord by
diverse (as I suppose) and strong diseases, he bore them all most patiently,
insomuch (that although I was after my own recovery, very often with him, yet)
could not at any time observe him, either to grudg, groan, or sigh for grief
under the rod of Gods correction: neither was his heart any thing dismayed at
the remembrance of his dissolution, for he told me again and again, that
although his body was weak, yet his soul was strong by Faith in Christ, for
the remission of his sins: he well knew, it was that man's property to be afraid
of death, who is unwilling for to go to Christ: accounting that the earth was
not given us for a dwelling place, but an Inn; that our being here which we
call [Life,] is not so properly a life indeed, as a journey to it: that his
Hope was not here fixed on Earth, but Heaven: that he knew full well whither he
was going, not by his own merits, but the mercies of Christ, in whom alone he
had placed his confidence of eternal safety. And in this assurance he devoutly
took the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper (at my hands) to furnish him with
fit provision for his journey to his long home: so that at length when his
glass was run, he willingly gave an ear to his Makers call; and in the midst of
his childrens tears, and their pious invocations, he departed hence from this
vale of misery: He yielded up the Ghost, and where is he? As for his soul, it is
fled: we may go to him, he cannot come to us: why do we weep and mourn? his
gain does far exceed our loss: he is now in Paradise, in Abraham's Bosom, for
the Angels have conveyed him to his place of rest. But as for his Corpse, this
breathless body, which does here remain with us, let us accompany it unto the
Grave, the last kind office we can show to our dearest Friend, and interre it
in the dust, where it may lie in peace and rest until the resurrection at the
last, when we with him again may receive a joyful union both of body and of
soul, and enter into that most glorious Heaven of everlasting happiness; Sing
an eternal Halleluiah; Salvation, and Honor; Justice, and Power; Mercy, and
Thanksgiving, be ascribed unto him that sits upon the Throne and unto the
Lamb for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

