THE Divine Appointment OF THE Lords Day Proved: As a separated Day for Holy
Worship; especially in the Church Assemblies. And consequently the Cessation of
the Seventh day Sabbath.

Written for the satisfaction of some Religious Persons who are lately drawn
into Error or doubting in both these Points.

By Richard Baxter.

Rev. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Loras Day. Col. 2. 16, 17. Let no (...)
judge you in Meat, or in Driak, or in respect of an Holy day, (or Feast) or of
the New (...), or Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to come, but the Body
is of Christ.
LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the three Crowns near Holborn Conduit.
1671.
THE PREFACE.
Reader,
IF thou think this Treatise both superfluous and Defective, when so many
larger have better done the work already, I shall not at all gainsay the
latter, nor much the former. The reason of my writing it was the necessity and
request of some very upright Godly persons, who are lately fallen into doubt or
Error, in point of the Sabbath day, conceiving that because the fourth
Commandment was Written in Stone, it is wholly unchangeable, and consequently
the seventh day Sabbath in force, and that the Lords day is not a Day separated
by God to holy Worship. I knew that there was enough written on this Subject
long ago; But, 1. Much of it is in Latin; 2. Some Writings which prove the
abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath, do withal treat so loosly of the Lords day,
as that they require a Confutation in the latter as well as a commendation for
the former. 3. Some are so large that the persons that I write for will hardly
be brought to read them. 4. Most go upon those grounds, which I take to be less
clear; and build so much more than I can do on the fourth Commandment and on
many passages of the old Testament, and plead so much for the old Sabbatical
notion and rest, that I fear this is the chief occasion of many peoples
Errors; who when they find themselves in a wood of difficulties, and nothing
plain and convincing that is pleaded with them, do therefore think it safest to
stick to the old Jewish Sabbath The friends and acquaintance of some of these
persons importuning me, to take the plainest and nearest way to satisfy such
honest doubters, I have here done it according to my judgment: not contending
against any that go another way to work, but thinking my self that this is very
clear and satisfactory; viz. to prove, 1. That Christ did Commission his
Apostles to Teach us all things which he commanded, and to settle Orders in his
Church, 2. And that he gave them his spirit to enable them to do all this
Infallibly, by bringing all his words to their remembrance, and by leading them
into all truth. 3. And that his Apostles by this spirit did de facto separate
the Lords day, for holy Worship, especially in Church Assemblies, and declared
the cessation of the Jewish Sabbaths. 4. And that as this change had the very
same Author as the Holy Scriptures (the Holy Ghost in the Apostles) so that
fact has the same kind of proof, that we have of the Canon and the integrity
and uncorruptness of the particular Scripture Books and Texts: And that, if so
much Scripture as mencioneth the keeping of the Lords day, expounded by the
Concent, and Practice of the Universal Church from the days of the Apostles,
(all keeping this day as holy, without the dissent of any one Sect, or single
person that I remember to have read of,) I say if all this History will not
fully prove the point of fact, that this day was kept in the Apostles times,
and consequently by their appointment, then the same proof will not serve to
evince that any text of Scripture is Canonical, and uncorrupted; nor can we
think that any thing in the world, that is past, can have Historical proof.

I have been put to say somewhat particularly out of Antiquity for this
evidence of the fact, because it is that which I lay the greatest stress upon.
But I have not done it so largely as might be done, 1. Because I would not lose
the unlearned Reader in a Wood of History, nor overwhelm him instead of
edifying him. 2. Because it is done already in Latin by Dr. Young in his Dies
Dominica (under the name of Theophilus Loncardiensis;) which I take to be the
moderatest, soundest and strongest Treatise on this subject that I have seen;
Though Mr. Cawdry, and Palmer (jointly) have done well and at greater length:
and Mr. Eaton, Mr. Shephard, Dr. Bound, Wallaeus, Rivet, and my dear friend Mr.
George Abbot against Broad have said very much: And in their way, Dr. White,
Dr. Heylin, Bishop Ironside, Mr. Brierwood, etc. 3. I chose most of the same
Citations which Dr. Heylin himself produces, because he being the man that I
am most put to defend my self against, his confessions are my advantage. 4. And
if I had been willing, I could not have been so full in this, as the Subject
will bespeak, because I have almost eleven years been separated from my
Library, and long from the neighborhood of any ones else.

I much pity and wonder at those Godly men, who are so much for stretching the
words of Scripture, to a sense that other men cannot find in them, as that in
the word [ Graven Images] in the second Commandment, they can find all set
Forms of Prayer, all composed studied Sermons, and all things about Worship of
man's invention to be Images or Idolatry; and yet they cannot find the
abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath in the express words of Col. 2. 16. nor the
other Texts which I have cited; nor can they find the Institution of the Lords
day in all the Texts and Evidences produced for it. But though Satan may
somewhat disturb our Concord and tempt some men's Charity to remissness, by
these differences, he shall never keep them out of Heaven, who worship God,
through Christ, by the Spirit, even in spirit and truth: Nor, shall he, I hope
ever draw me, to think such holy persons as herein differ from me, to be worse
than my self, though I think them in this to be unhappily mistaken: much less
to approve either of their own separation from others, or of other men's
condemning them as Heretics, and inflicting severities upon them, for these
their opinions sake.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1.
THE state of the Question, with the summary proof of the Divine separation of
the Lords Day, page 1.
CHAP II.
That Christ commissioned his Apostles as his principal Church-Ministers, to
teach the Churches all his Doctrine, and to deliver them all his Commands and
Orders, and so to settle and guide the first Churches. p. 5.
CHAP. III.
Christ promised his Spirit to his Apostles to enable them to do what he had
commissioned them to do, by leading them into all truth, and bringing his words
and deeds to their remembrance, and by guiding them at his Churches Guides. p.
9.
CHAP. IV.
Christ performed all these Promises to his Apostles, and gave them his Spirit
to enable them to all their commissioned work. p. 11
CHAP. V.
The Apostles did actually separate and appoint the first day of the Week for
Holy Worship, especially in Church Assemblies. Which is explained in several
subordinate Propositions; And proved 1. By Scripture; 2. By unquestionable
History; And the validity of this proof evinced; and the denyers of it proved
to subvert the Churches certainty of greater matters. p. 12
CHAP. VI.
This act of the Apostles appointing the Lords Day for holy Worship, was done
by the especial inspiration and guidance of the Holy Ghost. p. 69
CHAP. VII.
Whether the seventh day Sabbath should be still kept by Christians, as of
Divine obligation? Neg. proved. Where is showed how far the fourth Commandment
is abrogated (and all the Law of Moses.) p. 71
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Beginning of the Day. p. 91
CHAP. IX.
How the Lords Day should be kept. Of the length of the time, and the Objection
about weariness. p. 93
CHAP. X.
How the Lords Day should not be spent or what is unlawful on it; Of worldly
business: Of recreations: of Idleness, etc. p. 108
CHAP. XI.
What things should not be scrupled as un lawful on the Lords Day. p. 129
CHAP. XII.
Of what importance the due observing of the Lords Day is. Many great Reasons
for it. p. 139
CHAP. XIII.
What other Church Festivals, or separated Days are lawful. p. 148
THE CONTENTS OF THE Appendix.
CHAP. I.
An Answer to certain Objections against the Lords Day, p. 157
CHAP. II.
An Answer to more Arguments for the seventh day Sabbath, p. 180
CHAP. III.
Whether the seventh day Sabbath be part of the Law of Nature; or only a
Positive Law? p. 202
CHAP. IV.
Whether every word in the Decalogue be of the Law of Nature? and of perpetual
obligation? And whether all that was of the Law of Nature was in the Decalogue?
p. 214
CHAP. V.
Whether the truest Antiquity be for the seventh day Sabbath, as kept by the
Churches of Christ? p. 220
The Divine Appointment of the LORDS DAY, proved, as a separated Day for holy
Worship, especially in the Church Assemblies: And consequently the Cessation of
the Seventh-daySabbath.
CHAP. I.
Though the principal thing desired by the Enquirers is, That I would prove to
them the Cessation of the Seventh-day Sabbath, yet because they cast off the
Lords day, which I take to be a far greater error and sin, than the observation
of both days; and because that when I have proved the Institution of the Lords
Day, I shall the more easily take them off the other, by proving that there are
not two weekly days set apart by God for holy Worship: Therefore I will begin
with the first Question, Whether the Lords day, or first day of the week, be
separated by Gods Institution for holy Worship, especially in public
Church-conventions? Aff.

And here for the right stating of the Question, let it be noted, 1. That it is
not the Name of a Sabbath that we now meddle with, or stand upon. Let us agree
in the Thing, and we shall easily bear a difference about the name. Grant that
it is [ A day separated by Gods Institution for holy Assemblies and Worship]
and then call it a Sabbath or [ the Lords day] as you please. Though for my
self, I add That [ the Lords day] is the name that the Holy Ghost has set upon
it, and the name which the first Churches principally used; and that they call
it also sometimes by the name of the Christian Sabbath; but that is only
Analogically, as it is resembled to the Jewish Sabbath; and as they used the
names [ Sacrifice and Altar] I speak only de facto, how the Ancients used these
words.
at the same time, for the Christians Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and for the Table, or as Dr. Young says, page
23. As in Scripture, Baptism is called Circumcision. And that very rarely too.

2. That the Question of the manner of observing the Lords day, and what
exercises of Worship it must be spent in, and what Diversions are lawful or
unlawful, as also when the day begins, are not to be here meddled with in the
beginning, but afterward, when the Divine Institution of the Day it self is,
first sufficiently proved. Which is done as follows.

Arg. That day which was separated to holy Worship by the Holy Ghost, was
separated to holy Worship by God the Father and the Son. But the first day of
the Week was separated to holy Worship by the Holy Ghost: Therefore the first
day of the Week was separated to holy Worship, by God the Father and the Son.

The Minor only needs proof among Christians.

That day which was separated to holy Worship by the Apostles, by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, was separated to holy Worship by the Holy Ghost.
But the first day of the Week was separated to holy Worship by the Apostles by
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Therefore the first day of the Week was
separated to holy Worship by the Holy Ghost.

The Minor which only needs proof, is thus proved.

That day which was separated to holy Worship by the Apostles who had the Holy
Ghost promised them by Christ, and given them, to lead them into all truth, and
to bring all his Doctrines to their remembrance, and to teach the Churches to
do all his Commands, and to feed, and guide, and order them, as his principal
commissioned Church-Minister, was separated to holy Worship by the Apostles by
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

But such is the first day of the Week:

Therefore the first day of the Week is separated to holy Worship by the
Apostles by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

I have five Propositions now distinctly to be proved: four for the proof of
the Major, and one for the proof of the Minor.

The first Proposition is, That Christ commissioned his Apostles as his
principal Church-Ministers, to teach the Churches all his Doctrine, and deliver
them all his Commands and Orders, and so to settle and guide the first Churches.

The second Proposition is, That Christ promised them his Spirit, to enable
them to do what he had commissioned them to do, by leading them into all truth,
and bringing his words and deeds to their remembrance, and by guiding them as
his Churches Guides.

The third Proposition is, That Christ performed this promise, and gave his
Spirit accordingly to his Apostles, to enable them to all their commissioned
work.

The fourth Proposition is, That the Apostles did actually separate or appoint
the first day of the Week, for holy Worship, especially in Church Assemblies.

The fifth Proposition is, That this act of theirs was done by the Guidance or
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, which was given them.

And when I have distinctly proved these five things, no sober understanding
Christian can expect that I should prove any more, toward the proof of the
Question in hand, Whether the first day of the Week be separated by Gods
Institution for holy Worship, especially in Church Assemblies?

CHAP. II.
Prop. I. That Christ Commissioned his Apostles, or his principal
Church-Ministers, to teach the Churches all his Doctrine, and deliver them all
his Commands and Orders, and so to settle and guide the first Churches.
This I prove, 1. By their Commission it self: 2. By their performance with its
proper seal. 3. By the Consent of all the Christian world.

1. Luke 6. 13. He called to him his Disciples, and of them he chose twelve,
whom also he named Apostles. Their first Commission is recited, Matthew. 10. at
large.

Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. All Authority is given me in Heaven and in Earth: Go ye
therefore and disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. And, lo, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world; Amen.

John 20. 21. Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you; As the Father
has sent me, even so send I you: And when he had said this, he breathed on
them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.

Luke 10. 16. Even of the seventy it is said, He that hears you, hears me,
and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me. And to the twelve, Matthew. 10. 40. He that receives you,
receives me, etc.

Acts 26. 17. Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom
now I send thee, to open their eyes.

1 Cor. 15. 3. For I delivered to you first of all that which I also received,
etc.

1 Cor. 11. 23. For I received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto
you.

1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God.

Gal. 1. 11, 12. But I certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was
preached of me, is not after man; For I neither received it of man, neither was
I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

John 21. 15, 16, 17. Simon Son of Jonas love thou me -- Feed my Lambs.

Matthew. 16. 19. I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever
thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.

John 17. 18. As thou have sent me into the world, so have I also sent them
into the world. See John 13. 16, 20.

Acts 1. 24, 25. Show whether of these two thou have chosen, that he may take
part of this Ministry and Apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell.

Gal. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ
and God the Father.

Acts 1. 2. After that he through the Holy Ghost, had given commandment to the
Apostles whom he had chosen; to whom also he presented himself alive after his
passion, by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and
speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

Acts 2. 42. They continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship,
etc.

Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc.

1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. First Apostles, secondarily Prophets, etc. Are all
Apostles, etc.

Ephesians. 2. 20. Being built on the foundation of the Apostles, etc.

2. Pet. 3. 2. That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by
the holy Prophets, and of the Commandments of us the Apostles of the Lord and
Savior.

Acts 10. 5. Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon, etc. and be shall tell
thee, etc.

They that will not take all this plain evidence of Scripture for a proof of
this first Proposition, I suppose would not be ever the more moved by it, if I
should be so needlessly tedious, as to stay to fetch Arguments from each Text.

2. The Apostles exercised such a power, as the Proposition mentions, and God
s^t to it, the seal of Miracles. Therefore such a Power or Office was given
them by Christ.

The Consequence is undeniable. The Antecedent of this Enthimeme is so plainly
expressed in Scripture, that I am loath to take up much of my own or the Readers
time, in proving so known a thing.

They founded the Churches; they delivered them the Doctrine and Commands of
Christ; they settled the Churches, as to Officers, Orders, and Discipline,
according to Christ's Commands and the Spirits determinations: Thus they
ordained the new Office of Deacons, and Deaconeffes or Widows; and they
ordained them Elders in every Church, or City; and they determined of Church
Controversies; and gave the Church Decrees; and delivered the Will of Christ
about the Sacrament, Church Assemblies, Prophecyings, etc. Acts 2. and 14. 23.
Acts 6. 3, 4, etc. 1 Timothy 3. Titus 1. Acts 15. 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor. 14 etc.

3. That all Christians (save Heretics) did acknowledge their power, and
acquiesce in their Decrees and Conduct, being a matter of fact, needs no other
proof, than the common History of former Ages, and practice of this. Which are
so well known, that I will not injure the Reader by proving it.

CHAP. III.
Prop. 2. Christ promised his Spirit to his Apostles, to enable them to do,
what be had commissioned them to do, by leading them into all truth, and
bringing his words and deeds to their remembrance, and by guiding them as his
Churches Guides.
In the Old Testament it is prophesied and promised, Jer. 3. 15. And I will
give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge
and understanding.

See all the Texts that promise the pouring out of the Spirit, Isa. 44. 3.
Ezck. 36. 27. and 37. 14. and 39. 29. Joel 2. 28, 29. Which were principally
fulfilled on the Apostles.

Luke 24. 49. And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: But tarry
ye in the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.

John 15. 26, 27. But, when the Advocate is come, whom I will send unto you
from the Father, he shall testify of me: and ye also shall bear witness,
because ye have been with me from the beginning.

John 16. 7, 12, 13, 14, 15. It is expedient for you, that I go away; for if I
go not away, the Advocate will not come unto you: But if I depart, I will send
him unto you -- I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now. Ho^beit when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
the truth. For he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear,
that shall he speak: And he shall show you things to come. He shall glorify
me; for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. All things that the
Father has are mine. Therefore said I that he shall take of mine, and shall
show it unto you.

John 17. 8. I have given to them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them -- V. 17, 18. (...) then through thy truth: thy word is truth: As
thou have sent me into the world, so have I also sent them into the world: And
for their sakes I (...) my self, that they also might be sanctified through the
truth.

Matthew. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you; and lo I am with you always to the end of the world.

Acts 1. 4. And being assembled together with them, commanded them that they
should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father which
ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. V. 8. But ye shall receive
Power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses
uitto me, both in Jerusalem, and to all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the
uttermost parts of the earth.

By these Texts it is most evident that Christ promises the Apostles an
extraordinary Spirit, or measure of the Spirit, so to enable them to deliver
his Commands, and execute their Commission, as that he will own what they do by
the guidance thereof; and the Churches may rest upon it as the Infallible
revelation of the Will of God.

CHAP. IV.
Prop. 3. Christ performed all these promises to his Apostles, and gave them
his Spirit to enable them for all their commissioned work.
This is proved both from the fidelity of Christ, and from the express
assertions of the Scripture. He is faithful that has promised. Heb. 10. 23.
Titus 1. 2. God that cannot lie has promised. 2 Cor. 1. 18. As God is true --
Rev. 6. 10. H w long O Lord, Holy and True -- Rev. 19. 11. He was called
faithful and true -- Romans 3. 4. Let God be true, and every man a liar -- 1 John
5. 10 He that believes not God, has made him a liar.

John 20. 22. He breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost.

Acts 2. Contains the Narrative of the comeing down of the Holy Ghost upon
them, at large.

Acts 15. 28. seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us --

Heb. 2. 4. God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and
with diverse mighty works, and distributions of the Holy Ghost according to his
own will.

1 Pet. 1. 12. The things which are now reported unto you, by them that have
preached the Gospel unto you, by the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven --

Romans 15. 19, 20. Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit
of God, so that from Jerusalem, and round about to Illyricum I have fully
preached the Gospel of Christ.

Read all the Texts in Acts and elsewhere, that speak of all the Apostles
Miracles, and their giving of the Holy Ghost, etc. And 1 Cor. 7. 40. Acts 4. 8,
31. Acts 5. 3. and 6. 3. and 7. 51, 55. and8. 15, 17, 18, 19. and 9. 17. and
10. 44, 45, 47. and 11. 15, 16, 24. and 13. 2, 4, 9, 52. and 16. 6. Romans 5. 5.
and 9. 1. 1 Cor. 2. 13. 2 Timothy 1. 14. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, etc. and3. 5.
But this Proposition is confessed by all Christians.

CHAP. V.
Prop. 4. The Apostles did actually separate and appoint the first day of the
Week for holy Worship, especially in Church Assemblies.
Here the Reader must remember, that it is (...) matter of fact, that is to be
proved in the proof of this Proposition; and that all till this, is clearly and
undenyably proved; so that the whole Controversy rests upon the proof of the
fact! That indeed The Apostles did separate (...) set apart this day for
ordinary (public) Worship.

And in order to the fuller proof of this, I have these (...) Propositions to
prove.

Prop. 1. Matter of past fact is to be known to us by History (Written, Verbal
or Practical.)

This is evident in the nature of the thing. History is the Narration of facts
that are past. We speak not of the fact of mere natural agents, but of Moral or
humane facts. It may be known without History what Eclipses there have been of
the Sun; what changes of the Moon, etc. But not what in particular Morals have
been done by man.

The necessity of other distinct ways of knowledge, are easily disproved. 1.
It need not be known by Divine supernatural Revelation. Otherwise no men could
know what is past, but Prophets or inspired persons: nor Prophets but in few
things: For it cannot be proved, that God ever revealed to Prophets or inspired
persons, the general knowledge of things past; but only some particulars of
special use (as the Creation to Moses, etc.) so that if Revelation by
Inspiration, Voice or Visions, were necessary, Scripture it self could be
understood by none but inspired persons, or that had such revelation.

2. It is not known by Natural Causes, and by arguing from the Natural Cause to
the Effects. It is no more possible to know all things past this way, (by
knowing the Causes) than all things future. Therefore it must be ordinarily
known by Humane report, which we call History or Tradition.

Prop. 2. Scripture History is not the only certain History; much less the only
credible.

Without Scripture History we may be certain, that there was in 1666. a great
Fire in London, and a great plague in 1665. and that there were Wars in
England, 1642, 1643, etc. and that there have been Parliaments in England which
have made the Statutes now in force; and that there have been such Kings of
England for many Ages, as our Records and Histories mention, etc.

Prop. 3. Scripture History is not the only certain History of the things of
the Ages in which it was written, or of former Ages; much less the only
credible History of them.

We may know by other History certainly, that there were such persons as Cyrus,
Alexander, etc. That the Macedonians had a large extended Empire; that the
Romans after by many Victories obtained a spacious Empire; that there were such
persons as Julius Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, Nero, Cicero, Virgil, Horace,
Ovid, etc.

Prop. 4. Scripture History is not the only means appointed by God, to help us
to the knowledge of Ecclesiastical matters of fact, transacted in Scripture
times.

1. For if Humane History be certain or credible in other cases, it is certain
or credible in these. There being no reason why these things, or much of them,
should not be as capable of a certain delivery to us by humane History as other
matters. As that there were Christians in those times, may be known by what
Tacitus, Suetonius, etc. say. And the ancient Writers often appeal in many cases
to the Heathens own History. And no man pretends as to the Civil matters
mentioned in the Scriptures, that no other History of the same is credible or
certain. As of the Government of Augustus, Tiberius, Herod, Pilate, Foelix,
Festus, etc.

2. There are other certain means known to us; of which I must refer the Reader
to what I have written in my Reasons of the Christian Religion, Part 2. Cap. 7.
specially page 335. to 340.

3. No man can doubt but that the Christians of that same age, (as till the
year one hundred) might easily and certainly know such a matter of public
fact, as whether the Lords day was constantly set apart and observed by all the
Christian Churches for holy Worship: For 1. It is certain that they did know it
by sight and sense, and therefore had no need of History.

2. It is certain that they knew it before the Scriptures were written, which
we now speak of: For it is not possible that for all those years time before
any of the New Testament was written, the Christians who assembled to worship
God, should not know on what day they used to assemble.

And if they knew it in the year 100. they must needs know it as well in the
year 101. and 102. and 103. and so on. For those that were young Christians
fifty years after Christ, would be aged at an hundred: And those that were
young at an hundred, would be aged at an hundred and fifty, and so on. So that
an age of people, not ending at the age of a single person, Congregations and
societies are like Rivers, that keep the same channel, and name, while one part
of water follows another. Nay, some of the same men are there anno 100. who
were there anno 50. some anno 150. who were there anno 100. and so on. Ten
thousand thousand men, women and children, can tell on what day the
Congregations of England use to assemble; whereas if an Apostle were among us,
and should write on what day we assemble; fewer would know it by that means;
And they that knew it but by his writing, would know it less confidently, than
they that knew it by sense and experience.

Yet, forget not, that I am far from ascribing a certainty or a credibility to
all humane History: Much more from equalling any with the credit of Divine
History. But only I say, 1. That sense is more assuring, as to the subject,
than any History whatever: 2. And that some History besides Divine is certain:
3. And that much History is credible: 4. And that this instance of the Day on
which all Churches in the world assembled for holy Worship, is one of the most
palpable for certainty that possibly could be imagined.

4. And I add, that if some humane History or Tradition be not certain, there
can be no certainty of much of the Divine History, to any but the persons who
were themselves inspired, or that saw the Visions, or Miracles that confirmed
them. For as internal sense or intuition must assure the Inspired persons
themselves, and external sense must assure those that saw the matters of fact;
so all the rest have no way to know them, but either still by a succession of
New Revelations from Heaven, (which God does not give) or else by Report. And I
can no otherwise know what was revealed to an Apostle, nor what was done in
those times: (Of which more anon.)

Prop. 5. The first institution of Church Offices, and Orders, and so of the
Lords day, was not by Scripture.

The proof is undeniable: Because the Old Testament did not contain the
Institution, ( e. g. of particular Churches, Sacraments, Presbyters, Deacons,
Deaconesses, and the Lords day, etc.) And the New Testament was none of it
written till anno 40. at soonest when some (as Bucholtzer, Bellarm, etc.) think
Matthews Gospel was written, though others say many years after,) and it was
not all written till ann. 99. Now it is certain that the Church was not all
these years without the Orders now in question, nor without a day to meet on
for public Worship. Even as Baptism and the Lords Supper were instituted by
Christ himself, long before the writing of any part of the New Testament, and
the Church was in long possession of them, upon the bare verbal declaration of
the Apostles.

Prop. 6. Therefore it is certain that no part of the New Testament was written
to any such end as to institute Sacraments, or Church Offices, or standing
Orders; but to instruct men about those that were already instituted, ( as to
the use of those times.)

For it could not be written to institute that which was instituted before, so
many years.

Prop. 7. No part of the New Testament was written to make known to the
Churches of those times, the said Sacraments, Offices, stated Orders, and Time
of Worship; (Still observe that by a part I mean any book; And I except the
Decree, written in a Letter of the Apostles, Elders and Brethren, Act. 15.
concerning Circumcision, not to be imposed on the Gentiles; which yet made no
new institution, nor declared any, but only determined of the continued
forbearance of some things forbidden before of God, in the precepts called
Noah's; and Paul's Epistles, which reduce the Churches to Orders before settled,
and urge them to duty, and decide some doubts about particular cases of
Conscience.)

The proof is visible, 1. In the Writings themselves: 2. In that all the
Churches were in the possession and use of all the things in question, long
before: (For mutable Orders and Circumstances are none of the things in
question.) It would be vain to write a history now, to tell English men of this
present age, that the Lords day is used in England as a day set apart for
public worship; or that persons are Baptized, or receive the Lords Supper in
England. For seeing it is the common usage of all the Christians almost of the
Land, it is needless to tell men among us by writing that it is so (unless it
be to infer somewhat else from it.)

Prop. 8. Yet those holy Scriptures which were written to men of those times,
were also intended for the instruction of all succeeding ages; And so the four
Evangelists wrote the history of Christ, and Luke wrote the history of Paul
till his coming to Rome and longer, and of some more of the Apostles; And on
the by, in the Epistles extant, the Churches Customs of those times are much
intimated, And all this together with the subordinate history and the universal
tenure and practice of the Churches, is that history by which we must know the
matters of fact of those times; Nor is there any room left for a rational
pretense of Rome or any other Church, to produce Divine Institutions, which
were committed only to them, or entrusted to their particular keeping only, and
were not delivered in Scripture, nor in Common to the whole Church.

Prop. 9. Thus according to the use of the writings of the New Testament, the
matter of fact in question ( of the Lords days separation) is historically
touched on, and proved; though but briefly and on the by, as a thing as well
known to the Church before, as what day goes over their head.

The Historical hints of the New Testament must be taken together, and not a
part only; that they may prove a usage.

And, 1. That Christ rose on that day is past doubt among Christians. Joh. 20.
1. Luke 24. 1. Mar. 16. 2. Matthew. 28. 1.

2. On that same day he taught the two disciples, Luke 24. 13. And the same day
he appeared to the Disciples, and instructed them, and did eat with them, Luke
24. 33, 36. The^ the Disciples were assembled, and the^ he blessed them, gave
them their Commission, and the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20. 19, 20, 21, 22.

3. The next first day of the week Christ chose to appear to them again, when
Thomas was with them, and convinced him, Joh. 20. 26.

4. In Act. 20. 7. It is mentioned as the day of their Assembling to break
bread (which though they did often on other days, yet no day else was peculiarly
appointed for it,) As for the dissenters cavil about the Translation of (...).
Beza has given them Reason enough against it; And Grotius and almost all
expositors are against them: And most that translate it literally una
Sabbatorum, take Vna and Prima here to be all one. And Calvin with others
notes, that the same phrase being used of the day of the Resurrection, Matthew.
26. 1. Luke 24. 1. Joh. 20. 1. will direct us to expound this; unless you mean
also to deny the Resurrection to have been on the first day.

And 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. (...) must needs have the same signification; And Mark
26. 9. compared with the other Evangelists so expounds them as Beza notes; who
also tells us that in one old Copy he found added [ the Lords day] and cites
Hierome adv. Vigilant. saying [ Per unam Sabbati; hoc est, in die Dominico,
etc.] And Dr. Hammond well notes that it plainly relates to the Christian
assemblies, to which they were not to come empty, but to deposite what they
brought into the treasury of the Church; or if it were in their private
repositories, it does not much difference the case. Calvin's exception against
Chrysostom here is groundless, as the reasons before evince. So that by this
Text the custom of holding Church meetings on the Lords day, as a peculiar
day, is intimated, though but on the by, as most Expositors agree.

And the denomination of the Lords day, Joh. 1. 10. being the same which the
Christian Churches ever used of the First day, puts it yet further out of
doubt. As for his conjecture who doubts whether it may be meant of the
Anniversary day of Christ's Resurrection, when as the constant use of the name
by all the Churches, shows that it was taken ever since for the weekly day,
it deserves no other refutation.

Now though all this set together show that Scripture is not silent of the
matter of fact; yet it is the full and unquestionable expository evidence of
the practice of all Churches in the world, since the very days of the
Apostles, which beyond all doubt assures us that de facto the Lords day was by
the Apostles separated for holy Worship, especially in public
Church Assemblies. But these several intimations being seconded with so full an
Exposition, tell us that the Scripture is not silent in the case, nor does pass
it by. I was loath to name the day of the sending down of the Holy Ghost as a
proof: Because that some do controvert it. But it seems to me a very
considerable thing. 1. That the day (that year) (...) of Pentecost on which the
Holy Ghost was given, was indeed the first day of the week, even Dr. Heylin
grants without any question or stop. And the Churches observation of
Whitsunday as the day, and that so very early as Epiphanius and many others
say, from the Apostles, does seem a very credible history or tradition of it.
2. Its agreed on that the Passoever that year fell on the Sabbath day, and that
Pentecost was fifty days after the Passover: which falls out on the Lords
day. And Grotius notes from Exodus 19. 1. that it was the day that the Law was
given on, and so on which the Spirit was given for the new Law. 3. And
considering that this great gift of the Holy Ghost which was to make the
Apostles Infallible, and to enable them for their commission-work, and bring
all Christ's Doctrines and Commands to their remembrance, was so memorable a
thing, that it was as it were the Beginning of the full Gospel-state of the
Church, and Kingdom of Christ, (which through all Christ's abode on Earth, was
as the Infant, existent indeed but in the womb, and on this day was as it were
Born before the world, and brought into the open light;) the Lords day also
seems to me to be as it were Conceived on the day of Christ's Resurrection,
but Born on this day of the Holy Ghosts descent.

But Dr. Heylin has one poor reason against it, viz. Because it was but an
accidental thing that the day fell out that year on the first day.

Answ. 1. Was it not according to the course of Nature? How then can that be
called Accidental? 2. But however it was no contingent accidental thing (in his
sense) that the Holy Ghost was sent down on that day rather than another. If a
sparrow fall not to the ground without Gods providence, did God choose that day
He knew not why? Or did it fall out hap hazard or by chance?

I need not insist on the confutation of his Cavi^s about the other Texts
forecited. Note only, 1. That as to his exception about Christ's travel on his
Resurrection day, I have after answered it. 2. That he freely grants that
(...), signifi^th The first day of the week, both in Act. 20. 7. and 1 Cor. 16.
2. 3. That he himself cites afterward many testimonies that oblations and
contributions were in the Churches a usual Lords days work. 4. That he
confesses that Rev. 10. 1. is meant of the Lords day, as by that time grown
into reputation. 5. That he thinks it was in small reputation before, because
Paul chose the Sabbath so often to Preach on, to the Jews and Hellenists, or
Greeks: whereas he himself is forced to confess that it was not for the days
sake, but the Assemblies, to do them good. 6. That he vainly conceiteth [that
Because the Lords day was kept on the account of Christ's Resurrection,] it
implies that it was not kept by Gods command, which needs no confutation. 7.
That his labor to prove that Paul meant the Jewish Sabbath as abrogated is
vain; for we deny it not. 8. That he cannot deny that Christians had all that
time of the Apostles a stated day (as Pliny himself witnesses) for solemn
worship, above other days. 9. That he vainly snatcheth a little countenance
from Calvin and Beza, etc. when as no man since Cochlaeus writes more
detestably of them. 10. That after he confesses that [ its no doubt but the
Religious observation of the day began in the Apostles age with their
approbation and Authority, and has since continued in the same respect.] And
what needs he more for confutation?

And as to his allegations of the Judgment of the Reformed, Lutheran and Roman
Church, 1. We take none of them for our Rule (so impartial are we) But, 2. He
himself cites Beza, Mercer, Paraeus, Cuchlinus, Simler, Hospinian, Zanchius,
etc. as holding that It was, an Apostolical and Truly Divine Tradition, that
the Apostles turned the Sabbath into the Lords day, that it was an Apostolical
custom, or a custom received in the Apostles times, etc.

And whereas afterward he would persuade us that they spent but a little of the
day in holy worship, he himself cited Mr. George Sandys Travels; saying of the
Copties, that [ On Saturday presently after midnight, they repair unto their
Churches, where they remain well nigh till Sunday at noon (of the Evening he
speaks not, but of their first meeting) during which time they neither sit
nor kneel, but support themselves on Crutches; And they sing over the most part
of David's Psalms at every meeting with diverse parcels of the New Testament]
(This is like the old way; And such a Liturgy we do not contradict nor
scruple.)

Sandys also informs us of the ArmenianChristians that coming into the place
of the Assembly on Sunday in the afternoon (no doubt they had been there in the
Morning) be found one sitting in the midst of the Congregation, in habit not
differing from the rest, reading on a Bible in the Chaldaean tongue: That anon
after, came the Bishop in a hood or Vest of black, with a staff in his hand?
That first he prayed, and then sung certain Psalms assisted by two or three.
After all of them singing jointly, at interims praying to themselves, the
Bishop all this while with his bands erected and his face toward the Altar;
That Service being ended, they all kissed his hand, and bestowed their Alms,
he laying his other hand on their heads, and blessing them, etc.

And of the Abaffines he recites out of Brierwood, (and he from Damianus a
Goes) that they honor the Lords day as the Christian Sabbath, and the Saturday
as the Jews Sabbath, because they receive the Canons called the Apostles which
speak for both.

And King Edgar in England ordained that the Sabbath should begin ou Saturday
at three a Clock Afternoon, and continue till break a Day on Monday. These Laws
for the Sabbath of Alfred, Edgar, etc. were confirmed by Etheldred, and more
fully by Canutus.

But of these things I shall say more anon under the Proposition following; In
the mean time only remembering you, 1. That it is well that we are required
after the fourth Commandment to pray [ Lord have Mercy upon us, and incline our
hearts to keep this Law] And we accept his Concession, that this includes all
of that Commandment which is the Law of Nature (Though I have told you that it
reaches somewhat further.) 2. That we approve of the plain Doctrine of the
English Homilies on this point, and stand to the Exposition of sober
impartiality.

Prop. 10. It has been the constant practice of all Christ's Churches in the
whole world, ever since the days of the Apostles to this day, to assemble for
public worship on the Lords day, as a day set apart thereunts by the Apostles.
Yea so universal was this judgment and practice, that there is no one Church,
no one writer, or one heretic ( that I remember to have read of) that can be
proved ever to have dissented or gainsaid it, till of late times.

The proof of this is needless to any one that is versed in the writings of the
ancients; And others cannot try what we shall produce. I have been these ten
years separated from my Library, and am therefore less furnished for this task
than is requisite: But I will desire no man to receive more, than the
Testimonies produced by Dr. Pet. Heylin himself, which with pitiful weakness
he would pervert. And he being the Grand Adversary with whom I do now contend,
I shall only premise these few Observations, as sufficient to confute all his
Cavils and Evasions.

1. When his great work is to prove that the Lords day was not called the
Sabbath (unless by allusion) we grant it him (as to a Jewish Sabbath) as
nothing to the purpose.

2. Whereas he strenuously proves that the Lords day was not taken for a
Sabbath de re, we grant it him also, taking the word in the primitive Jewish
sense.

3. When he labors to prove that Christians met on other days of the week
besides the Lords day (though not for the Lords Supper) we grant it him as
nothing to the purpose. So Calvin Preached or Lectured daily at Geneva, and yet
kept not every day as a holy day separated to Gods worship, as they did the
Lords day, though too remisly. So we do still keep Weekday Lectures, and the
Church of England requires the Reading of Common Prayer on Wednesdayes and
Fridays, and holy day Evens; Do they therefore keep them Holy as the Lords day?

4. When he tells us that Clemens Alexandrinus and Origin, plead against them
that would hear and pray on that day only, we grant it him; and we are ready to
say as they do, that we should not confine Gods Service to one day only, as if
we might be profane and worldly on all other days; but should take all fit
opportunities for religious helps, and should all the week keep our minds as
near as we can in a holy frame and temper. Of the rest of his Objections I
shall say more in due place.

5. But I must note in the beginning that he grants the main cause which I
plead for, acknowledging, Hist. Sab. l. 2. page 30. it thus; [ So that the
Religious observation of this day, beginning in the age of the Apostles, no
doubt but with their Approbation and Authority, and since continuing in the
same respect for so many ages, may be very well accounted amongst those
Apostolical Traditions, which have been universally received in the Church of
God.] And what need we more than the Religious Observation, in the Apostles
time, by the Apostles Approbation and Authority, and this delivered to us by
the universal Church, as an Apostolical Tradition.

But yet he says that the Apostles made it not a Sabbath. Answ. Give us the
Religious observation, and call it by what name you please. We are not fond of
the name of the Sabbath.

6 And therefore we grant all that he laboriously proves of the abolition of
the Jewish Sabbath, and that the Ancients commonly consent, that by the
abolished Sabbath, Col. 2. 16. is meant inclusively the weekly Jewish Sabbath:
Epiphan. l. 1. haeres. 33. n. 11. Ambros. in loc. Hieron. Epist. ad Algus. qu.
10. Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in Haebr. 7. August. cont. Jud. cap. 2. and cont. Faust.
Manich. l. 16. c. 28. I recite the places for them that doubt of it.

Now let us peruse the particular Testimonies.

1. I begin with Ignatius, (though Dallaeus have said so much to prove the best
Copy of him of latter date and spurious; because others think otherwise, and
that Copy is by him thought to be written Cent. 3.) who says [ Let us not keep
the Sabbath in a Jewish manner in sloth and idleness, but after a spiritual
manner; not in bodily ease, but in the study of the Law; not eating meat dressed
yesterday, or drinking warm drinks, and walking out a limited space, but in the
contemplation of the works of God -- And after the Sabbath let every one that
loves Christ keep the Lords day Festival, the Resurrection day, the Queen and
Empress of all days, in which our life was raised again, and death was
overcome by our Lord and Savior.]

Either these Epist. of Ignatius (ad Philip. etc.) are genuine or spurious. If
genuine, than note how clearly it is asserted that the Lords day was to be
observed as the Queen of all days, by all that were lovers of Christ. And that
the seventh day Sabbath was kept with it then and there (in Asia so near the
Apostles days) no wonder; when it was but the honorable, gradual, receding
from the Mosaical Ceremonies, with an avoiding the scandalous hinderance of the
Jews Conversion. And Dr. Heylin well notes, that it was only the Eastern
Churches next the Jews that for a time kept both days, but not the Western,
who rather turned the Sabbath to a fast.

But if Ignatius Ep. be spurious written Cent. 3. then as Dallaeus would prove,
they were written by some heretical or heterodox person; And so it will be no
wonder that holy days are pleaded for, when (as Dr. Heylin observes)
Cerinthus and his followers in the Apostles times, stood up for the Jewish
Sabbath and Ceremonies, and so were for both days: But it will be our
Confirmation that even the Heretics held with the universal Church for the
Lords day.

2. The great Controversy about the Day of Easter, which spread so early
through all the Churches is a full Confirmation of our matter of fact. For when
the Western Churches were for the Passover day (the better to content the Jews
says Heylin) the Eastern thought it intolerable that it should not be kept on
a Lords day, because that was the weekly day observed on the same account of
the Resurrection: The Eastern Churches never questioned their supposition of
the Lords day; And the Western (after Victors rash excommunicating the Asian
Bishops) never rested till they brought them to keep it on the Lords day: Pius,
Anicetus, Victor, etc. prosecuting the cause.

3. The Book (though perished) which Melito wrote of the Lords day, Eusebius. l.
4. c. 25. by the title may be well supposed to confirm at least the matter of
fact or usage.

4. All those little Councils, mentioned by Heylin, p. 48. held at Osroena,
Corinth, in Gaul, in Pontus, in Rome prove this, The Canons of them all, says
Heylin, being extant in Eusebius' s time, and in all which it was concluded for
the Sunday.

But says Heylin by this [ You see that the Sunday and the Sabbath were long
in striving for the Victory] p. 49. Answ. I see that some men can outface the
clearest light. Here was no striving at all which day should be the weekly day
set apart for holy worship, but only whether Easter should follow the time of
(...), or be confined to the Lords day.

5. Justin Martyrs Testimony is so express and so commonly cited, that I need
not recite the words at large [ Upon the Sunday all of us assemble in the
Congregation -- Upon the day called Sunday all within be Cities or in the
Country, do meet together in some place, where, etc.] He proceeds to show
the worship there performed.

Now 1. Here being mention of no other day, no man can question but that this
day was set apart for these holy assemblies in a peculiar manner as the other
week days were not. 2. This being the writing of one of the most Learned and
ancient of all the Christian Writers. 3. And being purposely written to one of
the wisest of all the Emperors, as an Apology for all the Christians: 4. And
being written at Rome, where the matter of fact was easily known, deserves as
much credit as any Christian History or Writing since the Apostles can deserve.
Nor has Heylin any thing to say against it.

6. The next remembered by Heylin is Dionysius Corinth. who lived 175. cited out
of Eusebius Hist. l. 4. c. 22. [ To day we keep the Holy Lords day, wherein we
read the Epistle you wrote to us, etc.] Against this Heylin says not a word.

7. The next is Clemens Alexander. who expressly asserteth the matter of fact,
that the Lords day was then kept by Christians. Yea, Heylin derideth him for
fetching it as far as Plato Strom. l. 7. But Heylin thinks he was against
keeping any days: But he that will examine his words shall find, that he
speaks only against them that would be Ceremonious observers of the day, more
than of the work of the day, and would be religious on that day alone. And
therefore he says, that [ He that leads his life according to the Ordinances
of the Gospel does keep the Lords Day, when he casts away every evil thought,
and doing things with knowledge and understanding, does glorify the Lord in
his Resurrection.] This is not to speak against the Day, but to show how it
ought to be sincerely kept. But if he had been against it, its all one to my
cause, who only prove that de facto all Christian Churches kept it.

8. The next witness is Tertullian, who often asserteth this to be the holy day
of the Christians Church Assemblies, and holy Worship: His testimony in Apolog.
cap. 16. is so commonly known that I need not recite it. It is the same in
sense with Justin Martyrs, and written in an Apology for the Christians,
purposely describing their custom of meeting and worshipping on the Sunday (as
he calls it there) as Justin did. And that it was not an hours work only, he
shows in saying, that The day was kept as a day of rejoicing, and then
describes the work. And de Idolol. c. 14. he says, that every eighth day was
the Christians festival. And de Coron. Mil. c. 3. and often he calls it the
Lords day, and says it was a crime to fast upon it. And the work of the day
described by Justin, and by him Apolog. c. 39. is just the same that we desire
now the day to be spent in: we plead for no other.

But most grossly says Heylin, page 55. [ But sure it is that their assemblies
held no longer than our Morning Service; that they met only before noon; for
Justin says, that when they met they used to receive the Sacrament, and that
the service being done, every man went again to his daily labors.] Answ. Is
this a proof to conclude a [ Certainty] from? Most certainly abundance of
testimonies might be produced to prove that they came together early in the
Morning, and stayed till Evening, if not till within Night. The former Pliny
and many others witness: And the later many accusations of the Heathens, that
censured them for night-crimes at their meetings: And all that report it
almost, tell us of the Sacrament administered, and Tertullian and others, of
their feasting together (their Love Feasts) as a Supper before they parted: Now
let but the time be measured by the work: By that time the Scriptures of the
Old Testament and New were read, and all the prayers then made, and all the
Preaching and Exhortations, and then all the Prayers and Praises at the
Celebration of the Lords Supper (especially if they were half as long as the
Liturgies ascribed to Basil, Chrysostom, and the rest in the Biblioth. Patrum)
and by that time the Sacrament it self was administered, with all the action and
singing of Psalms, and all the Oblations and Collections made; and besides
this, all the Church Discipline on particular persons exercised, where
Questions and Answers and Proofs must take up a great deal of time, sure one
day would be at an end, or very near it. And after when the Love Feasts were
left off, and the Church met twice, and made an intermission, they did as we do
now. And the very Custom of Preaching all the Morning to the Audientes and
Catechumens, till almost Noon, when they were dismissed with a Missa est, and
spending the rest of the day in Teaching the Church, and Celebrating the
Sacrament with all the larger Eucharistical acts, do fully show how the day was
spent: Which I would quickly prove by particular Testimonies, but that I am
separated from my Library; and Dr. Young has fully done it to my hand. The
very Context of these testimonies, with what Albaspinaeus has of their
Catechizing and Church order will soon satisfy the impartial searcher.

As for what he says out of Justin, of returning to their labors, I can find
no such word in him; nor do I believe there is any such to be found, unless of
returning to their six days weekly labor, when the Religious work was ended
with the day: And I imagine the Reader will find no more, if so much.

9. The next proof is universal, even the consent of all the Christian Churches
without one contradicting Vote that ever I read of, that the Lords days
worship was to be performed standing, and that it was not allowed them to pray
or worship kneeling, upon any Lords day in the year (or any week day between
Easter and Whitsontide): And the difficulty of these stations is expressed (see
Albaspinaeus of it) which shows that it was for a long time. Whatever they
did in Hearing (its like they sat, for Justin says, We rise to pray) but it
is certain they stood in worshipping acts, as prayer and praise. This Justin
Martyr has before mentioned: Tertullian has it expressly, and Heylin himself
cites him de Coron. Mil. and Basil l. de Spir. S. c. 27. and Hieron. advers.
Luciferian. August. Epist. 118. Hilar. Praef. in Psalm. Ambros. Sermon. 62. To
which he may add Epiphanius, and diverse Councils, especially Nic. 1. and Trul.
of which after. (I once pleaded this ancient custom with them that would have
all excluded from the Sacrament that kneel not, to prove that kneeling at the
Sacrament on the Lords days could not be in the Church of many hundred years
after the Apostles, when the universal Church condemned kneeling on all Lords
days worship.) And Dr. Heylin himself says [ What time this custom was laid
by I can hardly say; but sure I am, it was not laid aside in a long time after;
not till the time of Pope Alexander the third, who lived about the year 1160.
etc.] Now from all this it is most evident that the Lords day was then observed.

10. In this place though by anticipation I add the two General Councils now
named: The first great General Council at Nice, Can. 20. which renews and
confirms this ancient custom of not kneeling in prayer on the Lords days,
that there might be an uniformity kept in the Churches. And the Cano^. Con^^^
Trul. have the same again; which proves what we seek, the matter of fact of
the days general observation.

11. The next is Origin, who is not denied to witness to the matter of fact;
but Heylin thinks he was against the Right of it: But his mistake is the same,
as about Clemens Alex. Origin did but desire that other days might be kept
also as profitably as they could; as our Lecture days are.

12. Cyprian is the next, whose testimonies for matter of fact are full, and
Heylin has nothing to say against him, but that it is his private opinion,
that the Lords day was prefigured in the eighth day destined to Circumcision.
Which is nothing at all to our business in hand.

13. And he himself cites Pope Fabians Decretal Anno 237. (a testimony
therefore that he is not to refuse) [ for every man and woman on the Lords
days to bring a quantity of bread and wine to be first offered on the Altar,
and then distributed in the Sacrament]

The Canon of Clem. before mentioned I now pretermit.

But says Dr. Heylin 1. All days between Easter and Whitsunday had adoration
by genuflection also prohibited on them. 2. And the Church had other Festivals
also.

Answ. 1. The Reason of Station was to signify Christ's Resurrection and ours:
Therefore it continued for these days: But that was for the short occasional
meetings of those days, which he himself will not say were separated to
worship. 2. And the other Festivals of the Church make nothing against us: For
1. Some of them (as Easter and Whitsunday) were but the same Lords day. 2. And
some of them were but Anniversary, and not weekly Holy days; as the Nativity,
etc. 3. And he confesses even these were brought in long after the Apostles
days, and therefore can lay no claim to Apostolical institution. Page 62. he
himself says, that [ The Feast of Christ's Nativity was ordained or instituted
in the second Century, and that of his Incarnation in the third.] And besides
Easter and Whitsunday (which are the Lords day) Christmas is all that he names
out of Beda (so long after) as the Majora Solennia. The Eves were but hours for
preparation.

14. To these (though in the fourth Century) I may add Epiphanius, who
records the Station (and Adoration to the East) on the Lords days as those
Traditions received by the Universal Church.

And here I would have it specially noted, that when Tertullian, Epiphanius and
others note standing on the Lords days to be an unwritten Tradition received
by the whole Church, they do not say the same of the Lords day it self, (though
the Ancients often say, that we received it from the Apostles:) Now by this it is
plain, that they took the Lords day to be of Apostolic Institution past all
question, and the unwritten Universal Traditions to be somewhat lower (which
there was no Scripture for at all.) (Among which the white Garment, and the
Milk and Honey to the Baptized, and the Adoration toward the East are numbered.)
For he that is appointed to worship on the Lords days standing, or toward the
East, is supposed to know that on that day he is to worship. If the Mode on
that day be of Universal Tradition as a Ceremony, the day is supposed to be
somewhat more than of unwritten Tradition.

15. I add here also (though in the fourth Century, because it looks back to
the Institution) the words of Athanasius cited by Heylin himself, Homil. de
Semente (though Nannius question it) [ That our Lord transferred the Sabbath to
the Lords day.] But says Dr. Heylin [ This must be understood, not as if done
by his Commandment, but on his occasion: the Resurrection of our Lord on that
day, being the principal Motive which did influence his Church to make choice
thereof for the Assemblies -- For otherwise it would cross what formerly had
been said by Athanasius in his (...), etc.] Answ. It expresses the common
judgment of the Church, that Christ himself made the Change by these degrees:
1. Fundamentally and as an Exemplar by his own Resurrection on that day; giving
the first cause of it, as the Creation-rest did of the seventh day: 2. Secretly
commanding it to his Apostles. 3. Commissioning them to promulgate all his
Commands. 4. Sending down the Spirit on that very day. 5. And by that Spirit
determining them by promulgation to determine publicly of the day, and settle
all the Churches in long possession of it before their death. That which is
thus done, may well be said to be done by Christ, 2. And what show of
Contradiction has his (...) to this? [ It was commanded at first that the
Sabbath day should be observed in memory of the accomplishment of the World: so
do we celebrate the Lords day as a Memorial of the beginning of a new
Creation.] Had not he a Creating head here that out of these words could
gather, that we celebrate the Lords day without a command Voluntarily? One
would think [so] should signify the contrary.

But ib. page 8. he cites Socrates for the same, saying that [ The design of
the Apostles was not to busy themselves in prescribing festival days, but to
instruct the people in the ways of Godliness.]

Answ. Socrates plainly rebukes the busy Ceremonious arrogance of after Ages,
for making new holy days; and does not at all mean the Lords day; but says
that to make festivals, that is, other and more, as since they did, was none of
the Apostles business. Nor is this any thing at all to the matter of fact,
which none denied.

16. I will add that as another Testimony which p. 9. he cites against it. The
Council at Paris, An. 829. c. 50. which as he speaks ascribes the keeping of
the Lords day to Apostolical Tradition, confirmed by the Authority of the
Church: The words are [ ut creditur Apostolorum traditione, immo Ecclesiae
authoritate descendu, etc.] Now I have proved that if the Apostles did it, they
did it by the Holy Ghost, and by Authority from Christ,

But he cites p. 7, 8. the words of Athanasius, Maximus Taurinensis and
Augustine, saying that [ We honor the Lords day for the Resurrection, and
because Christ rose, and (Aug.) The Lords day was declared to Christians by the
Resurrection of our Lord, and from that (or from him rather) began to have its
festivity] From whence he gathers that it was only done by the authority of
the Church and not by any precept of our Savior.

Answ. As if Christ's Resurrection could not be the fundamental occasion, and
yet Christ's Law the obliging cause? Would any else have thus argued, [ The Jews
observed the seventh day Sabbath, because the Creator rested the seventh day:
Therefore they had no command from God for it?] Woe to the Churches that have
such expositors of Gods commands! Or as if Christ who both Commissioned and
Inspired the Apostles by the Holy Ghost, to teach all his commands, and settle
Church Orders, were not thus the chief Author of what they did by his
Commission and Spirit: What Church can show the like Commission or the like
Miraculous and Infallible Spirit as they had?

See further August. de Civitat. Dei l. 22. c. 30. and Sermon. 15. de Verb.
Apostol.

But, says he, Christ and two of his Disciples traveled on the day of his
Resurrection from Jerusalem to Emaus, seven miles, and back again, which they
would not have done if it had been a Sabbath.

Answ. 1. They would not have done it if it had been a Jewish Sabbath of
Ceremonial Rest; But those that you count too precise will go as far now in
Case of need to hear a Sermon: And remember that they spent the time in Christ's
preaching and their Hearing and Conferring after of it. 2. But we grant that
though the Foundation was laid by Christ's Resurrection, yet it was not a Law
fully promulgate to, and understood by the Apostles till the Coming down of the
Holy Ghost (nor many greater matters neither) who was promised and given to
teach them all things etc.

And it is worth the noting how Heylin begins his Chap. 3. l. 2. [The Lords
day taken up by the common consent of the Church, not instituted or established
by any Text of Scripture, or Edict of Emperor, or Decree of Council, save that
some few Councils did reflect upon it: In that which follows we shall find both
Emperors and Councils very frequent in ordering things about this day and the
Service of it.]

Answ. Note Reader, What could possibly besides Christ and the Holy Ghost in
the Apostles be the Instituter of a day, which neither Emperor nor Council
instituted, and yet was received by the common consent of all Churches in the
World, even from and in the Apostles days? Yea, as this man confesses by
their Approbation and Authority?

But hence forward in the fourth Century I am prevented from bringing in my
most numerous witnesses, by Heylins Confession that now Emperors, Councils and
all were for it. But yet let the Reader remember, 1. How few and small Records
be left of the second Century, and not many of the third. 2. And that
Historical copious Testimonies of the fourth Century, that is Emperors,
Councils, and the most pious and learned Fathers, attesting that the Universal
Church received it from the Apostles, is not vain or a small Evidence; when as
the fourth Century began but 200 years after St. John's death, or within less
than a year.

And that the first Christian Emperor finding all Christians unanimous in the
possession of the day, should make a Law (as our Kings do) for the due
observing of it; And that the first General Council should establish uniformity
in the very Gesture of Worship on that day, are strong Confirmations of the
matter of fact, that the Churches unanimously agreed in the holy use of it as a
separated day even from and in the Apostles days.

Obj. But the Emperor Constantines Edict allows Husbandmen to labor.

Answ. Only in case of apparent hazard lest the fruits of the Earth be lost; as
we allow Seamen to work at Sea, in case of necessity. And so though by his
second Edict Manumission was allowed to the Judges as an act of Charity, yet
they were forbidden Judging in all other ordinary causes, lest the day be
profaned by wranglings.

Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius by their Edict forbad public spectacles
or shows on the Lords day. And all seeking and judging of Debts and litigious
Suits. and afterward Valentinian and Valens make an Edict that no Christian
should on that day be convented by the Exactors or Receivers.

Ob. But ( says H.) for 300. years there was no Law to bind men to that day.

Answ. The Apostles Institution was a Law of Christ by his spirit, Mat. 28. 20.
And how should there be a humane Law before there was a Christian Magistracy?

Obj. Says H. p. 95. The powers which raised it up, may take it lower if they
please, yea take it quite away, etc.

Ans. True: that is, Christ may: And when he does it by himself, or by new
Apostles, who confirm their Commission by Miracles, we will obey: But we expect
his presence with the Apostolical constitutions to the end of the World, Mat.
28. 20.

Theodosius also enacted that on the Lords day and in the Christmas, and on
Easter and to Whitsuntide the public Cirques and Theaters should be shut up.
(For we grant that when Christian Magistrates took the matter in hand, other
Holy days were brought in by degrees; whereas before the Christians indeed met
(yea and Communicated) as often as they could, even most days in the week; but
did not separate the days as holy to Gods service as they did the Lords day:
Only Christmas day, and the Memorials of those Martyrs that were near them (to
encourage the people to constancy) they honored somewhat early; But those were
anniversary, and not weekly. And the Wednesdays, and Fridays, were kept by them
but as we keep them now, or as a Lecture day.

I grant also that when Christian Magistracy arose, as the Holy days
multiplied, the manner of the days observation altered. For whereas from the
beginning, the Christians used to stay together from morning till night,
(partly through devotion, and partly for fear of persecution, if they were
noted to go in and out;) Afterward being free, they met twice a day, with
intermission as we do now. Not that their whole days Service was but an hour
or two as Heylin would prove from a perverted word of Chrysostomes and another
of Origenes (or Ruffinus) and from the length of their published Homilies: For
he perverteth what was spoken of the length of the Sermon, as spoken of the
length of all the Service of the whole day: whereas there was much more time
spent in the Eucharistical and Liturgick offices, of Prayer, Praise,
Sacraments, and Exhortations proper to the Church, than was in the Sermon. When
I was suffered to exercise my Ministry my self, having four hundred or five
hundred if not six hundred to administer the Sacrament to (though twice the
number kept themselves away) it took up the time of two Sermons usually to
administer it, besides all the ordinary Readings, Prayers and Praises Morning
and Evening.

Heylin notes by the way, 1. That now officiating in a white garment begun; 2.
And Kneeling at the Sacrament; which last he proves from two or three words
where Adoration only is named: But, 1. A late Treatise has fully proved that
the White garment was not a Religious Ceremony then at all, but the Ordinary
splendid Apparel of honorable persons in those times, which were thought meet
for the honor of the Ministry when Christian Princes did advance them. 2. And
he quite forgot that Adoration on the Lords days was ever used standing, and
that he had said before, that it was above a thousand years before the custom
was altered.

The inclinations to overmuch strictness on the Lords day. The destruction of
the Gothish Army by the Romans in Africa because they would not fight on that
day, etc. see in Heylin, p. 112, 113, etc. His translation of the words of the
Synod or Council at Mascon, 588. I think worthy the transcribing.

[It is observed that Christian people do very rashly slight and neglect the
Lords day; giving themselves thereon as on other days, to continual labors,
etc. Therefore let every Christian, in case he carry not that name in vain,
give ear to our instruction; knowing that we have care that you should do
well, as well as the power to bridle you, that you do not ill. It follows,
Custodite Diem Dominicum qui nos denuo peperit, etc. Keep the Lords day, the
day of our new birth, whereon we were delivered from the snares of sin. Let no
man meddle in Litigious Controversies, or deal in actions or Law suites* or put
himself at all on such an exigent, that needs he must prepare his Oxen for
their daily work, but exercise your selves in Hymns, and singing praises unto
God; being intent thereon both in mind and body. If any have a Church at hand,
let him go unto it, and there pour forth his soul in tears and Prayers; his
Eyes and Hands being all that day lifted up to God. It is the everlasting day
of rest, insinuating to us under the shadow of the seventh day or Sabbath, in
the Law and Prophets: And therefore it is very meet that we should celebrate
this day with one accord, whereon we have been made what at first we were not.
Let us then offer to God our free and voluntary service, by whose great
goodness we are freed from the Goal of error: not that the Lord exacts it of
us, that we should celebrate this day in a corporal abstinence or rest from
labor, who only looks that we do yield obedience to his holy will, by which
contemning earthly things, he may conduct us to the Heavens of his infinite
mercy. However if any man shall set at naught this our Exhortation, be he
assured, that God shall punish him as he has deserved; and that he shall be
also subject unto the Censures of the Church. In case he be a Lawyer, he shall
lose his cause; if that he be an Husbandman, or Servant, he shall be corporally
punished for it: But if a Clergyman or Monk, he shall be six Months separated
from the Congregation.]

His reproof of Gregorius Turonensis for his strictness for the Lords day,
shows but his own dissent from him and from the Churches of that Age.

King Alfreds Laws for the observation of the Lords day, and against Dicing,
Drinking, etc. on it, are visible in our own Constitutions, in Spelman and
others. And many more Edicts and Laws are recited by H. himself of other
Countries.

Two are worthy the observation for the Reasons of them. 1. A Law of Cl^tharius
King of France, forbidding servile labors on the Lords day [ Because the Law
forbids it, and the holy Scripture wholly contradicts it.] 2. A Constitution
of the Emperor Leo Philosophus, to the same purpose [ Secundum quod Spiritui
sancto ab ipsoque institutis Apostolis placuit; As it pleased the Holy Ghost
and the Apostles instructed by him.] You see that then Christian Princes judged
the Lords day to be of Divine Institution. Yea, to these he adds two more
Princes of the same mind, confessing that Leo was himself a Scholar, and
Charles the Great had as Learned men about him, as the times then bred, and yet
were thus persuaded of the day; yea, and that many Miracles were pretended in
confirmation of it; yet he affirms, that the Church and the most learned men
in it were of another mind. Let us hear his proofs.

1. Says he, Isidore a Bishop of Sevil makes it an Apostolical Sanction only,
no Divine Commandment: a day designed by the Apostles, for Religious Exercises
in honor of our Saviors resurrection; and it was called the Lords day
therefore: to this end and purpose, that resting in the same from all earthly
acts and the temptations of the world, we might intend Gods holy Worship,
giving this day due honor for the hope of the resurrection which we have
therein. The same verbatim is repeated by Beds l. de Offic. and by Raban.
Maurus l. de inst. Chr. l. 2. c. 24. and by Alcuinus de Die Offic. c. 24. which
plainly shows, that all these took it only for an Apostolical usage, etc.

Answ. Reader, is not here a strange kind of proof? This is but just the same
that we assert, and I am proving; save that he most grossly puts an Apostolical
usage, and sanction (sanxerunt) as distinct from, and exclusive of a Command,
which I have fully proved to be Christ's own Act and Law to us, by virtue of 1.
Their Commission: 2. And the infallible Spirit given them.

And having brought the History to so fair an account by our chief Adversaries
own Citations and confessions, I will not tire my self and the Reader with any
more; but only wish every Christian to consider, whether they that thus
distinguish between Apostolical Sanctions, and Divine Institutions as this man
does, do not teach men to deny all the holy Scriptures of the New Testament, as
being but Apostolical writings: and go far to deny or subvert Christianity it
self; by denying the Divine Authority of these Commissioned Inspired men, who
are foundations of the Church, and sealed their Doctrine by Miracles, and from
whom it is that our Christian Faith, and Laws, and Church constitutions which
are Universal and Divine, are received.

I only remember you of Pliny a Heathens testimony, of the Christians practice
stato die. No man can question Pliny on the account of Partiality: And
therefore though a Heathen, his Historical testimony as joined with all the
Christian Church History, has its credibility. He tells Trajan, that it was
the use of Christians on a stated day, before it was light to meet together, to
sing a Hymn to Christ as to God secum invicem, among themselves by turns; and
to bind themselves by a Sacrament, not to do any wickedness, but that they
commit not Thefts, Robberies, Adulteries; that they break not their word (or
trust) that they deny not the pledge (or pawn); which being ended they used to
depart, and to come again together to take meat, but promiscuous and harmless.]
Epist. 97. p. 306, 307.

Where note, 1. That by a stated day, he can mean no other than the Lords day,
as the consent of all other History will prove. 2. That this is much like the
testimonies of Justin and Tertullian, and (supposing what they say of the use
of Reading the Scripture, and Instructing the Church) it shows that their
chief work on that day, was the Praises of God for our Redemption by Christ,
and the celebration of the Lords Supper; and the Disciplinary exercises of
Covenanters thereto belonging. 3. That they had at that time where Pliny was
two meetings that day, that is, they went home, and came again to their Feast
of Love, in the Evening. (Which, no doubt, was varied, as several times, and
places, and occasions required; sometimes departing and coming again, and
sometimes staying together all day.) 4. That this Epistle of Pliny was written
in Trajans days, and it is supposed in his second year: And Trajan was
Emperor the year that St. John the Apostle died, if not a year before; so that
it is the Churches custom in the end of the Apostles days, which Pliny here
writes of. 5. That he had the fullest testimony of what he wrote, it being the
consent of the Christians whom he, as Judge, examined; even of the timorous
that denied their Religion, as well as of the rest. And many of them upon his
prohibition forbore these meetings. 6. And the number of them he tells Trajan
in City and Country was great, of persons of all degrees and ranks.

So that when 1. Christian History, 2. And Heathen, acquaint us with the matter
of fact, that the day was kept in the Apostles time; 3. Yea, when no Heretics
or Sects of Christians are found contradicting it, but the Churches then and
after universally practiced it without any controversy; what fuller historical
evidence can there be? And to say, that 1. The Apostles would not have reproved
this, if it had not been their own doing: 2. Or that it could be done, and they
not know it: 3. And that all Christians who acknowledged their authority, would
have consented in such a practice superstitiously before their faces, and
against their wills, and no testimony be left us of one faithful Church or
Christian that contradicted it, and stuck to the Apostolical authority, even
where the Churches received their writings, and publicly read them, all this
is such, as is not by sober Christians to be believed.

But the great Objection will be, That other things also were then taken for
Apostolical Traditions, and were customs of the universal Church, as well as
this; which things we now renounce as superstitious.

Answ. Though I answered this briefly before, I now give you this fuller
answer: I. It is but few things that come under this charge, viz. the Unction,
white Garment, with the taste of Milk and Honey at Baptism, Adoration toward
the East, and that standing; and not kneeling on the Lords days, and the
Anniversary Observation of Easter and Whitsuntide: And the last is but the
keeping of one or two Lords days in the year with some note of distinction
from the rest, so far as there was any agreement in it. 2. That these are not
usually by the Ancients called Apostolical Traditions, but Customs of the
Universal Church: 3. That when they are called Traditions from the Apostles, it
is not with any assertion that the Apostles instituted them, but that they are
supposed to be from their times, because their Original is not known. 4. That
the Ancients join not the Lords day with these, but take the Lords day for an
Apostolical institution written in Scripture, though the universal practice of
all Churches fullier deliver the certain History of it: But the rest they take
for unwritten Customs, as distinct from Scripture Ordinances. (As Epiphanius
fully shows.) 5. That most Christians are agreed, that if these later could
be proved Apostolical Institutions for the Church universal, it would be our
duty to use them, though they were not in Scripture. So that we reject them
only for want of such proof: But the proof of the Lords days separation being
far better (by concurrence of Scripture and all ancient History) it follows
not that we must doubt of that which has full and certain proof, because we
must doubt of that which wants it. 6. And if it were necessary that they stood
or fell together (as it is not) it were necessary that we did receive those
three or four Ceremonies, for the sake of the Lords day, which ^ath so great
evidence, rather than that we cast off the Lords day, because of these
Ceremonies. Not only because there is more Good in the Lords d^y, than there is
evil to be any way suspected by a doubter in these Ceremonies; but especially
because the Evidence for the day is so great, that if the said Ceremonies had
but the same, they were undoubtedly of Divine authority or institution. In a
word, I have showed you somewhat of the evidence for the Lords day; Do you now
show me the like for them, and then I will prove that both must be received:
But if you cannot, do not pretend a parity. 7. And the same Churches laying by
the Customs aforesaid, or most of them, did show that they ^^ok them not indeed
for Apostolical institutions, as they did the Lords day which they continued to
observe; not as a Ceremony, but as a necessary thing. 8. And the ancient
Churches did believe, that even in the Apostles days some things were used as
Indifferent which were mutable, and were not Laws, but temporary customs. And
some things were necessary, settled by Law for perpetuity: Of the former kind
they thought were, the greeting one another with a holy kiss, the Women's
praying covered with a Veil, (of which the Apostle says, that it was then and
there so decent, that the contrary would have been unseemly, and the Churches
of God had no such custom, (by which he answers the contentious) yet in other
Countries, where custom alters the signification, it may be otherwise: Also
that a man wear not long hair; and that they have a Love Feast on the Lords
day, (which yet Paul seems to begin to alter in his rebuke of the abusers of
it, 1 Cor. 11.) And if these ancient Churches thought the Milk and Honey, and
the white Garment, and the Station and Adoration Eastwards, to be also such
like indifferent mutable customs, as it is apparent they did, this is nothing
at all to invalidate our proof, that the Lords day was used (and consequently
appointed) in the days of the Apostles.

Obj. At least it will prove it mutable as they were.

Answ. No such matter: Because the very nature of such Circumstances, having no
stated necessity or usefulness, shows them to be mutable. But the reason of
the Lords days use is perpetual: And it is founded partly in the Law of
nature, which tells us that some stated days should be set apart for holy
things; and partly in the positive part of the fourth Commandment; which
tells us, that once God determined of one day in seven, yea, and this upon
the ground of his own Cessation of his Creation-work, that man on that day
might observe a Holy Rest in the worshipping of the great Creator, which is a
Reason belonging not to the Jews only, but to the whole world. Yea, and that
Reason (whatever Dr. Heylin say to the contrary, from the mere silence of the
former History in Genesis) does seem plainly to intimate that this is but the
repetition of that Law of the Sabbath which was given to Adam: For why should
God begin two thousand years after to give men a Sabbath upon the reason of his
rest from the Creation, and for the Commemoration of it, if he had never called
man to that Commemoration before.

And it is certain that the Sabbath was observed at the falling of Manna before
the giving of the Law: And let any considerate Christian judge between Dr.
Heylin and us in this; 1. Whether the not fal^ing of Manna, or the Rest of God
after the Creation, was like to be the Original reason of the Sabbath. 2. And
whether if it had been the first, it would not have been said, Remember to keep
holy the Sabbath day; for on six days Manna fell, and not on the seventh,]
rather than [ For in six days God created Heaven and Earth, etc. and rested
the seventh day.] And it is causally added, [ Wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day and hallowed it.] Nay, consider whether this annexed Reason
intimate not, that the day on this ground being hallowed before, therefore it
was that God sent not down the Manna on that day, and that he prohibited the
people from seeking it.

And he that considers the brevity of the History in Genesis, will think he
is very bold, that obtrudeth on the world his Negative Argument: [ The Sabbath
is not there mentioned: therefore it was not then kept.]

And if it was a Positive Law given to Adam on the reason of the Creation Rest,
it was then such a Positive, as must be next to a Law of Nature, and was given
to all mankind in Adam, and Adam must needs be obliged to deliver it down to
the world.

So that though the Mosaical Law (even as given in Stone) be ceased, yea, and
Adams Positives too, formally as such; yet this is sure, that once God himself
determined by a Law, that one stated day in seven, was the fittest proportion
of time to be separated to holy Worship. And if it was so once, yea, to all the
world from the Creation, it is so still: Because there is still the same reason
for it: And we are bound to judge Gods determination of the proportion to be
wiser than any that we can make. And so by parity of Reason consequentially
even those abrogated Laws do thus far bind us still; not so far as abrogated;
but because the record and reason of them, is still a signification of the due
proportion of time, and consequently of our duty.

Now the Lords day, supposing one weekly day to be due, and being but that day
determined of, and this upon the Reason of the Resurrection, and for the
Commemoration of our Redemption, and that by such inspired and authorized
persons, it follows clearly, that this is no such mutable ceremony, as a Love
Feast, or the Kiss of Love, or the Veil, or the washing of feet, or the
anointing of the sick, which were mostly occasional actions and customs taken
up upon reasons proper to those times and places.

Obj. But by the reason aforesaid, you will prove the continuance of the
seventh day Sabbath; as grounded on the Creation rest.

Answ. This is anom to be answered in due place. I only prove that it
continued, till a successive dispensation, and Gods own change did put an end
to it; but no longer.

Obj. But to commemorate the Creation, and praise the Creator is a Moral work,
and therefore cease not.

Answ. True: but that it be done on the seventh day; is that which cease. For
the same work is transferred to the Lords day; and the Creator and Redeemer to
be honored together in our Commemoration. For the Son is the only way to the
Father; who has restored us to Peace with our Creator; And as no man comes to
the Father but by the Son, and as we must not now worship God, as a Creator and
Father never offended, but as a Creator and Father reconciled by Christ, so is
it the appointment of Christ by the Holy Ghost, that we commemorate the work of
Creation now as repaired and restored by the work of Redemption, on the Lords
day, which is now separated to these works.

That the Sabbath was appointed to Adam, Wallaeus on the fourth Commandment,
cap. 3. and Rivet dissert. de sab. c. 1. have most copiously proved. And Clem.
Alex. Strom. l. 5. out of Homer, Hesiod, Callimachus and others proves that
the Heathens knew of it.

We may therefore sum up the prerogatives of the Lords day, as Leo did, Ep.
81. c. 1. On this day the world began; on this day by Christ's Resurrection,
Death did receive Death, and Life its beginning; on this day the Apostles take
the trumpet of the Gospel to be preached to all Nations; on this day the Holy
Ghost came from the Lord to the Apostles, etc. See more in Athanas. de Sab. and
Circ. and August. Sermon. 154. de Tempore. Therefore says Isychius in Levit. l.
2. c. 9. The Church sets apart the Lords day for holy Assemblies. And in the
times of Heathenish persecution, when men were asked, Whether they were
Christians, and kept the Lords days, they answered that they were, and kept
the Lords day, which Christians must not omit: as you may see Act. Marty^. apud
Baron. an. 303. n. 37, 38, 39. They would die rather than not keep the holy
assemblies and the Lords days: For says Ignatius, After the Sabbath every
lover of Christ celebrateth the Lord day (...) to ( or by) the Lords
resurrection, the Queen and chief of (...) d^yes ( as is before cited.) For
says Augustine, The Lords Resurrection has promised us an eternal Day, and
consecrated to us the Lords day; which is called the Lords, and properly
belongs to the Lord, Sermon. 15. de Verb. Apost. And says Hilary Pr^leg. in
Psalm. Though the name and observance of a Sabbath was placed to the seventh
day, yet is it the eighth day, which is also the first, on which we rejoice
with the perfect festivity of the Sabbath.

Of the f^^l keeping of the whole day, and of the several Exercises in which it
was spent, and of the more numerous testimonies of Antiquity hereupon. Dr.
Y^ung in his Dies Dominica has said so much, with so much evidence and
judgment* (...) I purposely omit abundance of such Testimonies, because I will
not do that which he has already done; The Learned Reader may there find
unanswerable proof, of the matter of fact, that the Lords day was kept in the
Apostles days, and ever since as by their appointment; And for the unlearned
Reader, I fear lest I have too much interrupted him with Citations already. I
only tell him in the Conclusion, that If Scripture Hi^tory interpreted and
seconded by fullest practice and History of all the Churches of Christ, and by
the consent of Heathens and Heretick^, and not contradicted by any Sect in the
world, be to be believed, then we must say, that the Lords day was commonly
kept by the Christians in and from the Apostles times.

Prop. 11. This evidence of the Churches universal constant usage, is a full
and sufficient proof of the matter of fact, that it was a day set apart by the
Apostles for holy Worship, especially in the public Church Assemblies.

1. It is a full proof, that such Assemblies were held on that day above
others, as a separated day. For if it was the usage in Anno 100. (in which the
Apostle John dyed) it must needs be the usage in the year 99. in which he wrote
his Revelations, where he calls it the Lords day: For all the Churches could
not silently agree on a sudden to take up a new day, without debate and public
notice, which could not be concealed. And if it was the universal usage in the
days of Ignatius or Justin Martyr, it was so also in the days of St. John,
(and so before) For the Churches were then so far dispersed over the world,
that it would have taken up much time to have had Councils and meetings or any
other means for agreement on such things.

And it is utterly improbable that there would have been no dissenters? For, 1.
Did no Christians in the world so near to the Apostles days make any scruple
of superstition? or of such an addition to Divine institutions? 2. Was there no
Country, nor no persons whose interest would not better suit with another day,
or an uncertain day? or at least their opinions? when we find it now so hard a
matter to bring men in one Country, to be all of one opinion. 3. And there was
then no Magistrate to f^rce them to such an Union; And therefore it mast be
voluntary. 4. And they had in the second age such Pastors as the Apostles
themselves had ordained, and as had conversed with them, and been trained up by
them and knew their mind, and cannot soberly be thought likely to consent all
on a sudden to such a new institution, without and contrary to the Apostles
sense and practice. 5. Yea, they had yet Ministers that had that extraordinary
spirit which was given by the laying on of the Apostles hands: For if the aged
Apostles ordained young men, it is to be supposed that most of those young men,
(such as Timothy) overlived them. 6. Yea and the ordinary Christians in those
times had those extraordinary gifts by the laying on of the Apostles hands, as
appears evidently in the case of Samaria, Act. 8. and of the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 12. and 14. and of the Galathians, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. And it is not to be
suspected that all these inspired Ministers and people would consent to a
superstitious innovation, without and against the Apostles minds.

2. Therefore this history is a full proof, that these things were done by the
consent and appointment of the Apostles. For, 1. As is said, the inspired
persons and Churches could not so suddenly be brought to forsake them
universally in such a case. 2. The Churches had all so high an esteem of the
Apostles, that they took their Authority for the highest, and their judgment
for infallible, and therefore received their writings as Canonical and Divine.
3. The Churches professed to observe the Lords day as an Apostolical Ordinance,
And they cannot be all supposed to have conspired in a lie, yea to have belyed
the Holy Ghost. 4. The Apostles themselves would have controlled this course,
if it had not been by their own appointment. For I have proved that the usage
was in their own days. And they were not so careless of the preservation of
Christ's Ordinances and Churches, as to let such things be done, without
contradiction; when it is known how Paul strove to resist and retrench all the
corruptions of Church Order in the Churches to which he wrote. If the Apostles,
silently connived at such corruptions, how could we rest on their authority?
Especially the Apostle John in an. 99 would rather have written against it as
the superstition of Usurpers (as he checked Diotrephes for contempt of him) than
have said that he was in the Spirit on the Lords day when he saw Christ, and
received his Revelation and message to the Churches. 5. And if the Churches had
taken up this practice universally without the Apostles, it is utterly
improbable that no Church writer would have committed to memory either that one
Church that begun the custom, or the Council or means used for a sudden
Confederacy therein. If it had begun with some one Church, it would have been
long before the rest would have been brought to an agreeing Consent. It was
many hundred years before they all agreed of the Time of Easter; And it was
till the middle of Chrysostomes time (for he says it was but ten years ago,
when he wrote it) that they agreed of the time of Christ's Nativity.

But if it had been done by Confederacy at once, the motion, the Council called
about it, the debates, and the dissenters and resistances would all have been
matter of fact, so notable, as would have found a place in some Author or
Church History: Whereas there is not a Syllable of any such thing; either of
Council, letter, messenger, debate, resistance, etc. Therefore it is evident
that the thing was done by the Apostles.

Prop. 12. They that will deny the validity of (...) Historical evidence, do by
consequence betray the Christian faith, or give away or deny the necessary
means of proving the truth of it, and of many great particulars of Religion.

I suppose that in my Book called The Reasons of the Christian Religion, I have
proved that Christianity is proved true, by the SPIRIT as the great witness of
Christ, and of the Christian Verity; But I have proved withal, the necessity
and certainty of historical means, to bring the matters of fact to our notice,
as sense it self did bring them to the notice of the first receivers. For
instance,

I. Without such historical Evidence and Certainty, we cannot be certain what
(...) of Scripture are truly Canonical and of Divine authority, and what not.
This Protestants grant to Papists in the Controversy of Tradition. Though the
Canon be it self complete, and Tradition is no supplement to make up the
Scriptures, as if they were i^ su^ genere imperfect, yet it is commonly granted
that our Fathers and Teachers Tradition is the hand to deliver us this perfect
Rule, and to tell us what parts make up the Canon.

If any say that the Books do prove themselves to be Canonical or Divine, I
answer, 1. What man alive could tell without historical proof that the
Canticles, or Esther, are Canonical? yea or Ecclesiastes, or the Proverbs, and
not the Books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus?

2. How can any man know that the Scripture histories are Canonical? The
suitableness of them to a holy soul, will do much to confirm one that is
already holy, of the truth of the Doctrines: But if the spirit within us assure
us immediately of the truth of the History, it must be by Inspiration and
Revelation, which no Christians have, that ever I was yet acquainted with. For
instance, that the Books of Chronicles are Canonical, or the Book of Either, or
the Books of the Kings, or Samuel, or Judges. And how much does the doctrine of
Christianity depend on the history? As of the Creation, of the Israelites
bondage, and deliverance, and the giving of the Law, and Moses miracles, and of
Chronology and Christ's Genealogy; and of the History of Christ's own Nativity,
Miracles and Life; and the History of the Apostles afterward? To say that the
very History so far proves its own truth, as that without subsequent History
we can be sure of it, and must be, is to reduce all Christ's Church of right
believers into a narrow room; when I never knew the man that (as far as I could
perceive) did know the History to be Divine by its proper evidence, without
Tradition, and subsequent History.

3. And how can any man know the Ceremonial Law to be Divine, by its proper
evidence alone? Who is he that reads over Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers, that
will say that without knowing by History that th^^ is a Divine Record, he could
have certainly perceived by the Book it self, that all these were indeed Divine
institutions or Laws?

4. And how can any mere Positive institutions o^ the New Testament be known
proprio lumine, by their own evidence to be Divine? As the institution of
Sacraments, Officers, Orders, etc. What is there in them that can infallibly
prove it to us?

5. And how can any Prophecies be known by their own evidence to be Divine,
(till they are fulfilled and that shall prove it.)

I know that the whole frame together of the Christian Religion (...) its
sufficient Evidence, but we must not be guilty of a peevish rejecting it. The
(...) part (...) its witness within us, in that state of holiness which it
imprinteth on the soul; and the rest are witnessed, to or proved partly by
that, and partly by Miracles, and those and the records by historical evidence.
But when God has made many things necessary to the full evidence, and
wranglers through partiality and Contention against each others will some throw
away one part and some another, they will all prove destroyers of the faith (as
all dividers be.) If the Papist will say, It is Tradition and not inhaerent
Evidence, or if others will say that it is inhaerent evidence alone, and not
history or Tradition, where God has made both needful hereunto, both will be
found injurious to the faith.

II. Without this historical evidence we cannot prove that any of the books of
Scripture are not maimed or depraved. That they come to our hands as the
Apostles and Evangelists wrote them, uncorrupted. It is certain by History,
that many Heretics did deprave and c^rrupt them, and would have obtruded those
Copies or Corruptions on the Churches: And how we shall certainly prove that
they did not prevail, or that their copies are false, and ours are true, I know
not without the help of History. Mahomet and his followers (more numerous than
the Christians) pretend that Mahomets name was in the Gospel of John as the
Paraclet or Comforter promised by Christ, and that the Christians have blotted
it out, and altered the Writings of the Gospel. And how shall we disprove them
but by Historical Evidence? As the Arrians, and Socinians pretend that we have
added, 1 John 5. 7. for the Trinity, so others say of other Texts; And how
shall we confute them without Historical Evidence?

III. Therefore we cannot make good the Authority of any one single Verse or
Text of Scripture which we shall allege, without historical evidence. Because
we are not certain of that particular text, (or words,) whether it have been
altered or added, or corrupted, by the fraud of Heretics, or the partiality of
some Christians, or the oversight of Scribes: For if a Custom of setting apart
one day weekly, even the first, for public Worship, might creep into all the
Churches in the World, and no man know how, nor when; much more might one or a
few corrupt Copies become the exemplar of those that follow. For, what day all
the Churches meet, men, women, and children know; Learned and unlearned know;
the Orthodox and Heretics know; and they so know, as that they cannot choose
but know. But the alterations of a Text, may b^ u^^nown to all save the
Learned, and the observing ^iligent part of the learned only, and (...) that
they tell it to. And besides Origin ((...) a Heretic) and Hierome, alas, how
few of the Fathers were ^ble and diligent Examiners of such things? Therefore
in the case of various Re^dings such as Ludov. Capellus treats of in his (...)
Sacra, contradicted in many things by Bishop Usher and others, who are those
Divines that have hitherto appealed either to the Spirit, or to the proper
light of the words, for a decision? Who is it that does not presently fly to
historical evidence? And what that cannot determine we all con^ess to be
uncertain? And if Copies and History had delivered to us as various Readings o^
every Text as they have done of some, every Text would have remained uncertain
to us.

Let none say that this leaves the Christian Religion, or the Scriptures
uncertain: I have fully answered that elsewhere. 1. Christian Religion, that
is, The Material parts of the Scripture on which our salvation lies, has much
fuller evidence, than each particular Text or Canonical Book has. And we need
not regard the perverse zeal for the Scriptures of those men that would make
all our Christianity as uncertain, as the authority of a particular Text or
book is. And therefore God in mercy has so ordered it, that a thousand Texts
may be uncertain to us, or not understood (no not by any or many Divines) and
yet the Christian faith be not at all shaken, or ever the more uncertain for
this: When as he that understands not or believes not every essential
Article of the faith, is no Christian. 2. And those books and Texts of
Scripture, are fully certain by the subservient help of History and usage,
which would be uncertain without them. Therefore it is the act of an enemy of
the Scriptures, to cast away, and dispute against that History which is
necessary to our knowledge of its certainty, and afterward to plead that they
who take in those necessary helps do make it uncertain: Even as if they should
go about to prove that all writings are uncertain, and therefore that they make
Christ's doctrine uncertain, who rest upon the credit of writings, that is, the
Sacred Scriptures.

IV. Without historical notice, how should we know that these Books were
written by any of the same men that bear their names? As Matthew, Mark, Luke,
John, Paul, Peter, etc. Especially when the Heretics did put forth the Gospel
of Thomas, Nicodemus, the Itinerary of Peter and many Books under venerable
names? Or when the name of the Author is not notified to all Christians
certainly, either by the spirit within us, or by the matter? And though our
salvation depend not on the notice of the Penman, yet it is of great moment in
the matter of faith.

V. And how should we be certain that no other Sacred Books are lost, the
knowledge of which would tell us of that which these contain not, and would
help us to the better understanding of these? I know that a priore we may argue
from Gods Goodness, that he will not so forsake his Church, As a Jew might have
done before Christ's incarnation, that the Gospel should be written, because it
is best for the world or Church. But when we consider how much of the world and
Church, God has forsaken, since the Creation, and how dark we are in such
Prognostics, and how little we know what the Churches sins may provoke God to,
we should be less confident of such reasonings, than we are of Historical
Evidence, which tells us de facto what God has done. So much of the use of the
History, as to the Cause of the Scriptures themselves.

Next you may observe that the denial of the certainty of humane History and
usage, does disadvantage Christianity in many great particular concernments.
As, 1. Without it we should not fully know whether de facto the Church and
Ministry dyed, or almost dyed with the Apostles? And whether there have been
any true Churches since then till our own days? Christ's promise indeed tells
us much; but if we had no History of the performance of it, we should be ready
to doubt that it might be yet unperformed; as far as the promise to Adam (Genesis
3. 15.) and to Abraham ( in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed) were till the coming of Christ. Nor could we easily confute the Roman
or any heretical Usurpation, which would pretend possession since the Apostles
days, and that all that are since gone to Heaven, have gone thither by their
way, and not by ours.

II. Nor could we much better tell de facto, whether Baptism have been
administered in the form appointed by Christ, In the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost? Indeed we may well and truly argue a priore, Christ
commanded it, Ergo the Apostles obeyed him: But, 1. That Argument would hold
good as to none or few but the Apostles: And, 2. It would as to them, be though
true, yet much more dark than now it is, because, 1. We read that Peter
disobeyed his command, in Gal. 2. And, 2. That after he had commanded them to
Preach the Gospel to every Creature, and all the World, Peter scrupled still
going to the Gentiles, Act. 10. And, 3. That when he said to them, Pray thus [
Our Father, etc.] yet we never read that they after used that form of words; so
when he said to them [ Baptize in the name of the Father, etc.] yet the
Scripture never mentions that they or any other person, ever used that form
of words. But yet usage and History assures us that they did.

III. Nor have we any fuller Scripture proof, that the Apostles used to require
of those that were to be Baptized any more than a general Profession of the
substance of the Christian faith, in God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; Or of the ancient use of the Christian Creed, either in the words now
used, or any of the same importance. From whence many would infer that any one
is to be Baptized, who will but say, that [ I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God] with the Eunuch, Act. 8. 37. or that Christ is come in the flesh, 1 John 4. 2, 3.

But Historical evidence assures us, that it was usual in those times, to
require of men a more explicit understanding profession of the Christian faith
before they were admitted to Baptism; And that they had a summary or Symbol,
fitted to that use, commonly called The Apostles Creed; at least as to the
constant tenor of the matter, though some words might be left to the speakers
will, and some little subordinate Articles may be since added. And that it was
long after the use to keep men in the state of Catechized persons, till they
understood that Creed. And it is in it self exceeding probable that though
among the intelligent Jews, who had long expected the Messiah, the Apostles did
Baptize thousands in a day, Act. 2. Yet where the Miraculous communication of
the Spirit did not antecede (as it did Act. 10.) they would make poor Heathens
who had been bred in ignorance to understand what they did first, and would
require of them an understanding profession of their Belief in God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; which could not possibly (if understanding) contain much
less than the Symbolum fid^i, the Apostles Creed.

IV. Nor have we any Scripture proof, (except by inferring obedience from the
precept) that ever the Lords Prayer was used in words, after Christ commanded
or delivered it: Whence some infer that it should not be so used: But Church
History puts that past doubt. Other such instances I pretermit.

I think now that I have fully proved to sober considerate Christians, that the
matter of fact (that the Lords day was appointed by the Apostles peculiarly for
Church-Worship) is certain to us by historical Evidence, added to the
historical intimations in Scripture as a full exposition and confirmation of
it: And that this is a proof that no Christian can deny without unsufferable
injury to the Scriptures and the Christian cause.

CHAP. VI.
Prop. 5. This Act of the Apostles appointing the Lords day for Christian
Worship, was done by the special inspiration or guidance of the Holy Ghost.
THis is proved, 1. Because it is one of those Acts or works of their Office,
to which the Holy Ghost was promised them.

2. Because that such like or smaller things are by them ascribed to the Holy
Ghost, Act. 15. 28. [ I^ seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us] when they did
but declare an antecedent duty, and decide a Controversy thereabout. See also,
Act. 4. 8. Act. 5. 3. and 6. 3. with 7. 55. Act. 13. 2, 4. and 16. 6, 7. and
20. 23, 28. and 21. 11. 2 Timothy 1. 14. Jud. 20. Act. 11. 12, 28. and 19. 21. and
20. 22. 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4. and 14. 2, 15, 16. And 1 Cor. 7. 40. When Paul does but
counsel to a single life, he ascribes it to the Spirit of God.

3. And if any will presume to say, that men purposely endued with the Spirit,
for the works of their commission, did notwithstanding do such great things as
this, without the conduct of that Spirit, they may by the same way of
proceeding pretend it to be as uncertain, of every particular Book and Chapter
in the New Testament, whether or no they wrote it by the Spirit: For if it be a
sound inference, [ They had the promise and gift of the Spirit, that they might
infallibly leave in writing to the Churches, the doctrines and precepts, of
Christ: Ergo whatever they have left in Writing to the Churches as the doctrine
and precepts of Christ, is Infallibly done by the Guidance of that Spirit,]
Then it will be as good an inference [ They had the promise and gift of the
Spirit, that they might infallibly settle Church-orders for all the Churches
universal^y: ergo, Whatever Church-orders they settled for all the Churches
universally, they settled them by the infallible guidance of that Spirit.]

But this few Christians will deny, except some Papists, who would bring down
Apostolical Constitutions to a lower rank and rate, that the Pope and his
General Council may be capable of ^^ying claim to the like themselves; and so
may make as many more Laws for the Church as they please, and pretend such an
authority for it as the Apostles had for theirs. By which pre^ense many would
make too little distinction between Gods Laws, given by his Spirit, and the
Laws (...) a Pope and Popish Council; and call then all but The Laws of the
Church. Whereas there is no Universal Head of the Church but Christ, who has
reserved Universal Legislation to Himself alone, to be performed by himself
personally, and by his Advocate the Holy Ghost, in his Authorized and
Infallibly-inspired Apostles, who were the Promulgators and Recorders of them;
All following Pastors, being but (as the Jewish Priests were to Moses and the
Prophets) the preservers, the expositers, and the applyers of that Law.

CHAP. VII.
Qu. 2. Whether the seventh day Sabbath should be still kept by Christians, as
of Divine obligation? Neg.
I Shall here premise, That as some superstition is less dangerous than
profaneness (though it be troublesome, and have ill consequents,) so the
Error of them who keep both days as of Divine appointment, is much less
dangerous than theirs that keep none: yea and less dangerous, I think, than
theirs who reject the Lords day, and keep the seventh day only. Because these
latter are guilty of two sins, (the rejecting of the right day, and the keeping
of the wrong; but the other are guilty but of one (the keeping of the wrong
day.) Besides that if it were not done, with a superstitious conceit (that it
is Gods Law) in some cases a day may be voluntarily set apart for holy duties,
as days of Thanksgiving and Humiliation now are.

But yet, though the rejecting of the Lords day be the greater fault (and I
have no uncharitable censures of them that through weakness keep both days) I
must conclude it as the truth, that We are not obliged to the observation of
the Saturday or seventh day as a Sabbath, or separated day of holy Worship.

Arg. 1. That days observation which we are not obliged to, either by the Law
of Nature, the Positive Law given to Adam, the Positive Law given to Noah, the
Law of Moses, nor the Law of Christ incarnate, we are not obliged to by any Law
of God ( as distinct from humane Laws:) But such is the observation of the
seventh day as a Sabbath: Ergo we are not obliged to the observation of the
seventh day as a Sabbath by any Law of God.

The Minor I must prove by parts (For I think none will deny the sufficient
enumeration in the Major.)

And, 1. That the Law of Nature binds us not to the seventh, or any one day
of the seven more than other, appears, 1. In the nature and reason of the
thing: There is nothing in nature to evidence it to us to be Gods will. 2. By
every Christians experience: No man finds himself convinced of any such thing
by mere nature. 3. By all the Worlds experience: No man can say that a man of
that opinion can bring any cogent evidence or argument from nature alone to
convince another, that the seventh day must be the Sabbath. Nor is it any where
received as a Law of Nature, but only as a Tradition among some few Heathens,
and as Law positive by the Jews, and some few Christians. I am not solicitous
to prosecute this argument any further; because I can consent that all they
take the seventh day for the Sabbath, who can prove it to be so by mere natural
Evidence: which will not be one.

II. That the Positive Law made to Adam (before or after the fall) or to Noah,
binds not us to keep the seventh day as a Sabbath, is proved.

1. Because we are under a more perfect subsequent Law; which being in force,
the former more imperfect cease. As the force of the Promise of the
Incarnation of Christ is ceased by his incarnation, and so is the precept which
bound men to believe that he should de future be incarnate; and the Law of
Sacrificing (which Abel doubtless received from Adam, though one of late would
make it to be but will worship;) so also is the Sabbath day, as giving place to
the day in which our Redemption is primarily commemorated, as the imperfect is
done away when that which is more perfect comes.

2. Because that the Law of Christ contains an express revocation of the
seventh day Sabbath, as shall be showed anon.

3. Because God never required two days in seven to be kept as holy: Therefore
the first day being proved to be of Divine institution, the cessation of the
seventh is thereby proved: For to keep two days is contrary to the command
which they themselves do build upon, which requires us to sanctify a Sabbath,
and labor six days.

4. And when it is not probable that most or many Infidels are bound to Adams
day, for want of notice (at least;) For no Law can bind without promulgation
(though I now pass by the question, how far a promulgation of a positive to our
first Parents may be said to bind their posterity, that have no intermediate
notice) It seems leis probable that Christians should be bound by it, who
have a more perfect Law promulgate to them.

5. Nor is it probable that Christ and his Apostles and all the following
Pastors of the Churches would have passed by this Positive Law to Adam, without
any mention of it, if our universal obligation had been thence to be collected.
Nay I never yet heard a Sabbatarian plead this Law, any otherwise than as
supposed to be employed or exemplified in the fourth Commandment.

III. And that the fourth Commandment of Moses Law binds us not to the
seventh day Sabbath is proved.

1. Because that Moses Law never bound any to it but the Jews, and those
Proselites that made themselves inhabitants of their Land, or voluntarily
subjected themselves to their policy. For Moses was Ruler of none but the Jews;
nor a Legislator or deputed officer from God to any other Nation. The Decalogue
was but part of the Jewish Law, if you consider it not as it is written in
Nature, but in Tables of Stone: And the Jewish Law was given as a Law to no
other people but to them. It was a National Law, as they were a peculiar people
and holy Nation. So that even in Moses days it bound no other Nations of the
World. Therefore it needed not any abrogation to the Gentiles, but a
declaration that it did not bind them.

2. The whole Law of Moses formally as such is ceased or abrogated by Christ. I
say, As such, Because Materialy, the same things that are in that Law, may be
the matter of the Law of Nature, and of the Law of Christ: of which more anon.
That the whole Law of Moses as such is abrogated, is most clearly proved, 1. By
the frequent arguings of Paul, who ever speaks of that Law as ceased without
excepting any part, And Christ says, Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets
were until John, that is, were the chief doctrine of the Church till then,
Joh. 1. 17. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth comes by Jesus
Christ. No Jew would have understood this, if the word [ Law] had not contained
the Decalogue. So Joh. 7. 19, 23. Act. 15. 5, 24. It was the whole Law of
Moses, as such which by Circumcision they would have bound men to. Gal. 5. 3.
The Gentiles are said to sin without Law, even when they broke the Law of
Nature, meaning [ without the Law of Moses] Romans 2. 12, 14, 15, 16. In all
these following places its not part but the whole Law of Moses, which Paul
excludes (which I ever acknowledged to the Antinomians, though they take me
for their too great Adversary,) Romans 3. 19, 20, 21, 27, 28, 31, and 4. 13, 14,
15, 16. and 5. 13. 20. and 7. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16. and 9. 4, 31, 32. and 10. 5.
Gal. 2. 16, 19, 21. and 3. 2, 10, 11, 12, 13, 19, 21, 24. and 4. 21. and 5. 3,
4, 14, 23. and 6. 13. Ephesians. 2. 15. Phil. 3. 6, 9. Heb. 7, 11, 12, 19. and 9. 19.
and 10. 28. 1 Cor. 9. 21.

2. More particularly there are some Texts which express the cessation of the
Decalogue as it was Moses Law, 2 Cor. 3. 3, 7, 11. Not in Tables of Stone, but
in fleshly tables of the heart -- But if the Ministration of death written and
engraven in stones was glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his Countenance, which was
to be done away (or is done away.) They that say the Glory, and not the Law is
here said to be done away, speak against the plain scope of the Text: For the
Glory of Moses face, and the glorious manner of deliverance ceased in a few
days, which is not the cessation here intended; But (as Dr. Hammond speaks
it) [ that Glory and that Law so gloriously delivered is done away] And this
the eleventh verse fullyer expresses [ For if that which is done away was
glorious (or, by Glory,) much more that which remains is glorious, or ( in
glory) so that as it is not only the Glory, but the Glorious Law, Gospel or
Testament which is said to remain, so it is not only the Glory, but the Law
which was delivered by Glory which is expressly said to be done away: And this
is the Law which was written in Stone -- Nothing but partial violence can evade
the force of this Text.

So Heb. 7. 11, 12. [Vnder it ( the Levitical Priesthood) the people received
the Law -- And the Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a change
also of the Law. 18. For there is verily a disanulling of the Commandment going
before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. For the Law made nothing
perfect; but the bringing in of a better hope -- 22. By so much was Jesus made
a surety of a better Testament] In all this it is plain that it is the whole
frame of the Mosaical Law that is changed, and the New Testament set up in its
stead.

Heb. 9. 18, 19. Neither was the first Dedicated without blood; For when Moses
had spoken every precept to all the people according to the Law, etc. Here the
Law which is before said to be changed is said to contain Every Precept.

And Ephesians. 2. 15. It is the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, which
Christ abolished in his flesh; which cannot be exclusive of the chief part of
that Law.

Obj. This is the Doctrine of the Antinomians, that the Law is abrogated, even
the Moral Law.

Ans. It is the Doctrine of the true Antinomians that we are under no Divine
Law, neither of Nature nor of Christ; But it is the Doctrine of Paul and all
Christians, that the Jewish Mosaical Law as such is abolished.

Obj. But do not all Divines say that the Moral Law is of perpetual obligation?

Ans. Yes; Because it is Gods Law of Nature, and also the Law of Christ.

Obj. But do not most say that the Decalogue written in stone, is the Moral Law
and of perpetual obligation.

Answ. Yes: for by the word [ Moral] they mean [ Natural,] and so take Moral,
not in the large sense as it signifies a Law de moribus as all Laws are
whatsoever, but in a narrower sense as signifying, that which by Nature is of
Universal and perpetual obligation. So that they mean not that it is perpetual
as it is Moses Law and written in Stone formally, but as it is Moral, that is
Natural; And they mean that Materially the Decalogue contains the same Law
which is the Law of Nature, and therefore is materially still in force: But
they still except certain points and circumstances in it, as the prefatory
reason [ I am the Lord that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, etc.] And
especially this of the seventh day Sabbath.

Q 1. How far then are we bound by the Decalogue?

Answ. 1. As it is the Law of Nature; 2. As it is owned by Christ, and made
part of his Law. Therefore no more of it binds directly, than we can prove to
be either the Law of Nature, or the Law of Christ. 3. As it was once a Law of
God to the Jews, and was given them upon a^ reason common to them with us or
all mankind, we must still judge, that it was once a Divine determination of
what is most meet, and an exposition of a Law of Nature, and therefore
consequentially, and as that which intimates by what God once commanded, what
we should take for his will, and is most meet, it obliges still. And so when
the Law of Nature forbids Incest, or too near marriages, and God once told
the Jews what degrees were to be accounted too near, this being once a Law to
them directly, is a Doctrine and Exposition of the Law of Nature still to us;
and so is consequentially a Law, by parity of reason. And so we shall show anon
that it is by the fourth Commandment.

IV. The Law of Christ binds us not to the observation of the seventh day
Sabbath. Proved.

1. Because it is proved that Christ abrogated Moses Law as such; and it is no
where proved that he reassumed this, as a part of his own Law. For it is no
part of the Law of Nature (as is proved) (which we confess now to be part of
his Law.)

Object. Christ says, that he came not to destroy the Law and Prophets, but to
fulfill them, and that a jot or tittle shall not pass till all be fulfilled.

Answ. He is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes,
Romans 10. 4. The Law was a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. He
has therefore fulfilled the Law according to his word, by his incarnation,
life, death and resurrection. It is past away, but not unfulfilled: And
fulfilling it, is not destroying it. The ends of it are all attained by him: 2.
And though having attained its end, it cease formally, as Moses Law; yet
materially, all that is of natural obligation continues under another form;
that is, as part of his perfect Law. Therefore as our childish knowledge is
said, as knowledge to be increased and not done away; when we come to maturity;
but as childish to be done away, so the Mosaical Jewish Law, as Gods Law in
general is perfected by the cessation of the parts which were fitted to the
state of bondage, and by addition of more perfect parts (The natural part of it
is made a part of a better Covenant or frame:) But yet as Mosaical and
imperfect it is abolished.

Briefly this much suffices for the answer of all the allegations, by which
any would prove the continuation of Moses Law, or any part of it formally as
such. I only add, That all Moses Law, even the Decalogue was Political, even
Gods Law for the Government of that particular Theocrcratical Policy, as a
Political body. Therefore when the Kingdom or Policy ceased, the Law as
Political could not continue.

2. It is proved that Christ by his Spirit in his Apostles did institute
another day. And seeing the Spirit was given them to bring his words to
remembrance, and to enable them to teach the Churches all things whatsoever he
commanded them, it is most probable that this was at first one of Christ's own
personal Precepts.

3. And to put all out of doubt, that neither the Law of Nature, nor any
Positive Law, to Adam, Noah, or Moses, or by Christ does oblige us to the
seventh day Sabbath, it is expressly repealed by the Holy Ghost, Col. 2. 16. [
Let no man therefore judge you in meats or in drink, or in respect of an Holy
day (or Feast) or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbaths, which are a shadow of
things to came; but the body is of Christ.] I know many of late say, that by
Sabbaths here is not meant the weekly Sabbath, but only other Holy days, as
Monthly or Jubilee rests: But 1. This is to limit without any proof from the
word of God: When God speaks of Sabbaths in general without exception, what is
man that he should put in exceptions without any proof of Authority from God?
By such boldness we may pervert all his Laws. Read Dr. Young upon this Text. 2.
Yea, when it was the weekly Sabbath, which then was principally known by the
Name of a Sabbath, above all other Festivals whatsoever, it is yet greater
boldness without proof to exclude the principal part, from whence the rest did
receive the name. 3. Besides the Feasts and New Moons being here named as
distinct from the Sabbath, are like to include so much of the other separated
days, as will leave it still more unmeet to exclude the weekly Sabbath in the
Explication of that word [ Sabbaths] when so many Feasts are first
distinguished: (...) incuit Grotius, hic sunt Azyma dies omer, scenopegia, dies
(...).

Obj. But the Sabbath mentioned in the Decalogue could not be included.

Answ. This is spoken without proof, and the contrary is before proved.

Obj. By this you will make the Christian Sabbath also to be excluded. Is not
the Lords day a Sabbath?

Answ. I am here to speak but of the name; of which I say, that the common
sense of the word Sabbath was, a Day so appointed to Rest, as that the bodily
Rest of it, was a primary part of its observation, to be kept for it self; and
such the Jewish Sabbaths were. Though spiritual Worship was then also
commanded, yet the corporal Rest was more expressly or frequently urged in the
Law, and this not only subordinately as an advantage to the spiritual worship,
but for it self, as an immediate and most visible and notable part of
Sabbatizing. Even as other Ceremonies under the Law were commanded, not only as
doctrinal Types of things spiritual, but as external Acts of Ceremonious
operous obedience suited to the Jews Minority, which is after called the yoke
which they and their Fathers were unable to bear, Acts 15. Whereas the Lords
day is appointed but as a seasonable time subserviently to the spiritual work
of the day; And the bodily Rest, not required as primary obedience for it self,
but only for the spiritual work sake: and therefore no bodily labor is now
unlawful, but such as (...) hinderance to the spiritual work of the day, (...)
or accidentally a scandal and temptation to others) whereas the breach of the
outward Rest of the Jews Sabbath, was a sin directly of it self, without
hinderance of, or respect to the spiritual Worship. So that the first notion
and sense of a Sabbath in those days being (in common use) A day of such
Ceremonial Corporal Rest, as the Jewish Sabbath was, the Lords day is never in
Scripture called by that name; but the proper name is [ The Lords day.] And the
ancient Churches called it constantly by that name, and never called it the
Sabbath, but when they spoke Analogically by allusion to the Jews Sabbath; even
as they called the holy Table, the Altar, and the Bread and Wine, the
Sacrifice. Therefore it is plain, that Paul is to be understood of all proper
Sabbaths, and not of the Lords day, which was then and long after distinguished
from the Sabbath.

And this Ceremonial, Sabbatizing of the Jews was so strict, that the
Ceremonicusness made them the scorn of the Heathens, as appears by the
derisions of Horat. li. 1. sat. 9. Persius sat. 5. Juvenal. sat. 6. Martial.
lib. 4. and others: whereas they derided not the Christians for the Ceremonious
Rest, but for their Worship on that day. The Lords day being not called a
Sabbath in the old sense then only in use, but distinguished from the Sabbath
cannot be meant by the Apostle in his exclusion of the Sabbath.

Obj. But the Apostles then met in the Synagogues with the Jews on the
Sabbaths; Therefore it is not those days that he means here Col. 2. 16.

Answ 1. You might as well say, that therefore he is not for the cessation of
the Jewish manner of Worship, or Communion with them in it, because he met with
them.

2. And you may as well say, that he was for the continuance of Circumcision
and Purification, because he purified himself and circumcised Timothy.

3. Or that he was for the continuance of their other Feasts, in which also he
refused not to join with them.

4. But Paul did not keep their Sabbaths formally as Sabbaths, but only take
the advantage of their Assemblies, to teach them and convince them; and to keep
an interest in them: And not scandalize them by an unseasonable violation and
contradiction.

5. And you must note also, that the Text says not [ Observe not Sabbath
dayes] but [ Let no man judge you] that is, Let none take it for your sin, that
you observe them not; nor do you receive any such Doctrine of the necessity of
keeping the Law of Moses.] The case seems like that of things strangled and
blood, which were to be forborne among the Jews while they were offensive, and
the use of them hindered their conversion.

Obj. But the ancient Christians did observe both days.

Answ. 1. In the first Ages they did as the Apostles did; that is, 1. They
observed no day strictly as a Sabbath in the notion then in use: 2. They
observed the Lords day, as a day set apart by the Holy Ghost for Christian
Worship. 3. They so far observed the Jews Sabbath materialy, as to avoid their
scandal, and to take opportunity to win them.

2. But those that lived far from all Jews, and those that lived after the Law
was sufficiently taken down, did keep but one day, even the Lords day, as
separated to holy uses: except some Christians who differed from the rest, as
the followers of Papias did in the Millenary point.

3. And note that even these dissenters, did still make no question of keeping
the Lords day, which shows that it was on foot from the times of the
Apostles. (...) (whoever it was, and whenever he wrote) says that [ After the
Sabbath we keep the Lords day.] And Pseudo-Clemens Can. 33. says [ Servants
work five days, but on the Sabbath and Lords day, they keep holy day in the
Church, for the Doctrine (or Learning) of Godliness]

The Text of Gal. 4. 10. is of the same sense with Col. 2. 16. against the Jews
Sabbath, and therefore needs no other defense.

And I would have you consider, whether as Christ's Resurrection was the
foundation of the Lords day; so Christ's lying dead and buried in a Grave on the
seventh day Sabbath, was not a fundamental abrogation of it: I say not the
Actual and plenary abrogation: For it was the Command of Christ by his Word,
Spirit, or both to the Apostles before proved, which fully made the change: But
as the Resurrection was the Ground of the new day so his Burial seems to
intimate, that the day with all the Jewish Law which it was the symbolical
profession of, lay dead and buried with him. Sure I am that he says, when the
Bridegroom is taken from them, then shall they fast and mourn; but he was most
notably taken from them, when he lay dead in the Grave; And if they must fast
and mourn that day, they could not keep it as a Sabbath, which was a day of joy
Therefore as by death he overcame him that had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14.
and as he nailed the handwriting of Ordinances to his Cross; so he buried the
Sabbath in his Grave, by lying buried on that day.

And therefore the Western Churches, who had fewer Jews among them, did fast on
the Sabbath day, to show the change that Christ's burial intimated: Though the
Eastern Churches did not, lest they should offend the Jews.

And that the ancient Christians were not for sabbatizing on the seventh day,
is visible in the writings of most, save the Eastern ones before mentioned.
Tertull. cont. Marcion li. 1. cap. 20. and Chrysostom. Theodoret, Primasius, etc.
on Gal. 4. expound that Text, as that by Days is meant the Jewish Sabbath, and
by Months, the New Moons, etc.

Cyprian 59. Epist. ad Hidum says, that the eighth day is to Christians, what
the Sabbath was to the Jews, and calls the Sabbath, the Image of the Lords
day. Athanasius de Sab. and Circumcis. is full and plain on it. See Tertullian
Advers. Judae. c. 4. Ambros. in Ephesians. 2. August. Ep. 118. Ch^ys^st. in Gal. 1.
and Him. 12. ad pop. Hilary before cited Prolog. in Psalm. Origin Hom. 23. in
Number. Item Tertull. de Idol. c. 14. Epipban. l. 1. number. 30. noting the Nazaraei
and Ebionaei Heretics, that they kept the Jews Sabbath. In a word, The Council
of Laodi^aea does Anathematize them that did Judaize by forbearing their
Labors on the Sabbath or seventh day. And as Sozomen tells us, that at
Alexandria and Rome they used no Assemblies on the Sabbath, so where they did,
in most Churches they communicated not in the Sacrament.

Yea, that Ignatius himself (true or false) who says as aforecited [After the
Sabbath let every lover of Christ celebrate the Lords day] does yet in the same
Epistle (ad Magnes.) before say [Old things are passed away, behold all things
are made new: For if we yet live after the Jewish Law, and the Circumcision of
the flesh, we deny that we have received Grace -- Let us not therefore keep the
Sabbath ( or sabbatize) Jewishly, as delighting in Idleness (or Rest from
labor.) For be that will not labor, let him not eat. In the sweat if thy
brows thou shall cat thy bread.] I confess I take the cited Texts to have been
added since the body of the Epistle was written; but though the Writer favor
of the Eastern custom, yet he shows they did not sabbatize on the account of
the fourth Commandment, or supposed continuation of the Jewish Sabbath as a
Sabbath: For bodily labor was strictly forbidden in the fourth Commandment.

Dionysius Alexandr. has an Epistle to Basilides a Bishop on the Question,
When the Sabbath Fast must end, and the observation of the Lords day begin,
Biblioth. Patr. Graec. Lat. Vol. 1. p. 306. In which he is against them that
end their Fast too soon. And plainly intimates that the seventh day was to be
kept, but as a preparatory Fast (being the day that Christ lay in the grave)
and not as a Sabbath, or as the Lords day.

I cite not any of these, as a humane authority to be set against the authority
of the fourth Commandment; But as the certain History of the change of the day
which the Apostles made.

Qu. How far then is the fourth Commandment Moral? you seem to subvert the old
foundation, which most others build the Lords day upon.

Answ. Let us not entangle our selves with the ambiguities of the word [ Moral]
which most properly signifies Ethical, as distinct from Physical, etc. By
Moral here is meant that which is (on what ground soever) of perpetual or
continued obligation: And so it is all one as to ask how far it is still
obligatory or in force; To which I answer,

1. It is a part of the Law of Nature, that God be solemnly worshipped, in
families and in holy assemblies.

2. It is a part of the Law of Nature, that where greater things do not forbid
it, a stated time be appointed for this service, and that it be not left at
Random to every man's will.

3. It is of the Law of Nature, that where greater matters do not hinder it,
this day be one and the same in the same Countries; yea, if it may be through
the world.

4. It is of the Law of Nature, that this day be not so rarely as to hinder the
ends of the day, nor yet so frequently as to deprive us of opportunity for our
necessary corporal labor.

5. It is of the Law of Nature, that the holy duties of this day be not
hindered by any corporal work, or fleshly pleasure, or any unnecessary thing
which contradi^teth the holy ends of the day.

6. It is of the Law of Nature, that Rulers, and in special Masters of
families, do take care that their inferiors thus observe it.

In all these points the fourth Commandment being but a transcript of the Law
of Nature, which we can yet prove from the nature of the reason of the thing,
the matter of it continues (not as Jewish, but) as Natural.

7. Besides all this, when no man of himself could tell, whether one day in six
or seven or eight were his duty to observe, God has come in, and 1. By
Doctrine or History told us, that he made the world in six days, and rested
the seventh. 2. By Law; and bath commanded one day in seven to the Jews; by
which he has made known consequential^y to all men, that one day in seven is
the fittest proportion of time. And the case being thus determined by God, by a
Law to others, does consequentially become a Law to us, because it is the
determination of Divine Wisdom; unless it were done upon some reasons in which
their condition differs from ours. And thus the Doctrine and Reasons of an
abrogated Law, continuing, may induce on us an obligation to duty. And in this
sense the fourth Commandment may be said still to bind us to one day in seven.

But in two points the obligation (even as to the Matter) cease. 1. We are
not bound to the seventh day, because God our Redeemer who is Lord of the
Sabbath, has made a change. 2. We are not bound to a Sabbath in the old
notion, that is, to a day of Ceremonial Rest for it self required; but to a day
to be spent in Evangelical Worship.

And though I am not of their mind who say, that the seventh day is not
commanded in the fourth Commandment, but a Sabbath only; yet, I think that it
is evident in the words, that the Ratio Sabbati, and the Ratio diei septimi are
distinguishable: And that the Sabbath as a Sabbath, is first in the precept,
and the particular day is there but secondarily, and so mutably; as if God had
said, I will have a particular day set apart for a holy Rest, and for my
Worship, And that day shall be one in seven, and the seventh also on which I
rested from my works.

And thus I have said as much as I think needful to satisfy the considerate
about the day: Again professing 1. That I believe that he is in the right that
makes Conscience of the Lords day only. 2. But yet I will not break Charity
with any Brother that shall in tenderness of Conscience keep both days;
especially in times of profaneness when few will be brought to the true
observation of one. 3. But I think him that keeps the seventh day only and
neglects the Lords day, to sin against very evident light, with many
aggravations. 4. But I think him that keeps no day (whether professedly, or
practicing contrary to his profession; whether on pretense of avoiding
Superstition, or on pretense of keeping every day as a Sabbath) to be far the
worst of all. I shall now add somewhat to some appendant Questions.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the beginning of the Day.
Quest. 1. When does the Lords day begin? Answ. 1. If we can tell when any day
begins, we may know when that begins. If we cannot, the necessity of our
ignorance, will shorten the trouble of our scruples by excusing us.

2. Because the Lords day is not to be kept as a Jewish Sabbath ceremoniously,
but the Time and the Rest are here commanded subserviently for the work sake,
therefore we have not so much reason to be scrupulous about the hours of
beginning and ending, as the Jews had about their Sabbath.

3. I think he that judges of the beginning and ending of the day, according
to the common estimation of the Country where he lives, will best answer the
ends of the Institution. For he will still keep the same proportion of time;
and so much as is ordinarily allowed on other days for work, he will spend
this day in holy works; and so much in rest as is used to be spent in rest on
other days; (which may ordinarily satisfy a well informed Conscience) And if
any extraordinary occasions (as journeying or the like) require him to doubt of
any hours of the night, whether they be part of the Lords day or not, 1. It
will be but his sleeping time, and not his worshipping time, which he will be
in doubt of: and 2. He will avoid all scandal and tempting others to break the
day, if he measure the day by the common estimate: whereas if the Country
where he lives do esteem the day to begin at Sunsetting, and he suppose it to
begin at Midnight, he may be scandalous by doing that which in the common
opinion is a violation of the day. If I thought that this short kind of
solution, were not the fittest to afford just quietness to the minds of sober
Christians in this point, I would take the pains to scan the Controversy about
the true beginning of days: But left it more puzzle and perplex, than edify
or resolve and quiet the Conscience, I save my self and the Reader that trouble.

CHAP. IX.
Quest. 2. HOw should the Lords day be kept or used?

Answ. The Practical Directions I have given in another Treatise. I shall now
give you but these generals.

I. The day being separated or set apart for Holy Worship, must accordingly be
spent therein. To sanctify it, is to spend it in holy exercises: How else
should it be used as a Holy Day? I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, says
St. John, Rev. 1. 10.

II. The principal work of the day is, the Communion of Christians in the
public exercises of Gods worship. It is principally to be spent in holy
assemblies. And this is the use that the Scripture expressly mentions, Acts
20. 7. and intimates 1 Co^. 16. 1, 2. And as most Expotors think, John 21.
when the Disciples were gathered together with the door shut for fear of the
Jews. And all Church History assures us, that in these holy Assemblies
principally, the day was spent by the ancient Christians. They spent almost all
the day together.

3. It is not only to be spent in holy exercises, but also in such special holy
exercises as are suitable to the purposes of the day. That is, it is a day of
Commemorating the whole wo^^ of our Redemption; but especially the Resurrection
of Christ. Therefore it is a day of Thanksgiving and Praise; and the special
services (...) it must be Laudatory and Joyful exercises.

4. But yet because it is sinners that are called to their work, who are not
yet fully delivered from their sin and misery, these praises must be mixed with
penitent Confessions, and with earnest Petitions, and with diligent Learning
the will of God.

More particularly, the public exercises of the day are 1. Humble and penitent
Confessions of sin. 2. The faithful and fervent prayers of the Church. 3. The
Reading, Preaching and Hearing of the Word of God. 4. The Communion of the
Church in the Lords Supper. 5. The Laudatory Exhortations which attend it. And
the singing and speaking of the praises of our Creator and Redeemer and
Sanctifier; with joyful Thanksgiving for his wonderful benefits. 6. The
seasonable exercise of holy Discipline on particular persons, for comforting
the weak, reforming the scandalous, casting out the obstinately impenitent, and
absolving and receiving the penitent. 7. The Pastors blessing the people in the
name of the Lord. 8. And as an appurtenance in due season, Oblations or
Contributions for holy and Charitable uses, even for the Church and Poor, which
yet may be put off to other days, when it is more convenient so to do.

Qu. But who is it that must be present in all these exercises?

Answ. Where there is no Church yet called, the whole day may be spent in
Preaching to, and teaching the unconverted Infidels: But where there is a
Church, and no other persons mixed, the whole exercises of the day must be such
as are fitted to the state of the Church. But where there is a Church and other
persons (Infidels, or impenitent ones) with them, the day must be spent
proportionably in exercises suitable to the good of both; yet so that
Church-exercises should be the principal work of the day. And the ancient
laudable practice of the Churches was, to Preach to the Infidel auditors and
Catechumens in the morning, on such Subjects as were most suitable to them, and
then to dismiss them, and retain the faithful (or baptized) only; And to Teach
them all the Commands of Christ; To stir them up to the Joyful commemoration of
Christ and his Resurrection, and to sing Gods praises, and celebrate the Lords
Supper with Eucharistical acknowledgments and joy. And they never kept a Lords
day in the Church, without the Lords Supper; In which the bare administration
of the signs was not their whole work; but all their Thanksgiving and Praising
exercises, were principally then used, and connexed to the Lords Supper; which
the Liturgies yet extant do at large express.

And I know no reason but thus it should be still; or at least but that this
course should be the ordinary celebration of the day.

Qu. But seeing the Sabbath was instituted in the beginning, to commemorate the
work of the Creation, must that be laid by now, because of our commemoration of
the work of our Redemption?

Answ. No: Our Redeemers work is to restore us to the acknowledgement and Love
of our Creator. And the Commemoration of our Redemption fitteth us to a holy
acknowledgement of the Almighty Creator in his works: These therefore are still
to go together; according to their several proper places: Even as the Son is
the way to the Father, and we must never separate them in the exercise of our
Faith, obedience or Love. A Christian is a sanctified Philosopher: And no man
knows or acknowledges Gods works of Creation and Providence aright, in their
true sense, but he that sees God the Creator and Redeemer, the Beginning, the
Governor and the End of all. Other Philosophers are but as those Children,
that play with the Book and Letters, but understand not the matter contained in
it; or like one that teaches boys ^litide literas pingere, to write a curious
hand, while he understands not what he writes.

Obj. But to spend so much of the day in public as you speak of, will tire out
the Minister by speaking so long* Few men are able to endure it.

Answ. 1. How did the Christians in the Primitive Churches? They met in the
morning, and often (as far as I can gat^^er) parted not till night, (And when
they did go home between the Morning and Evening Service, it was but for a
little time.)

Obj. Then they made it a fast and not a festival.

Answ. It was not the use then to eat dinners in those hot Countries; much less
three meals a day, as we do now. And they accounted it a sufficient feasting,
to feast once, at Supper, which they did at the first all together at their
Church-meeting, with the Sacrament; But afterward finding the inconvenience of
that they feasted at home, and used only the Sacrament in the Church: which
change was not made without the allowance of the Apostles; Paul saying, 1. Cor.
11. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God?

2. I further answer that the work of the day being done according to the
primitive use, it will be no excessive labor to the Minister: Because in the
Celebration of the Lords Supper, he is not still in one continued speech, but
has the intermission of Action, and uses shorter Speeches which do not so
much spend him. And the people bear a considerable part, to wit, in Gods
praises, which were spoken then in their laudatory tone, and are now uttered by
the singing of Psalms (which should not be the least part of the work.) And
though their manner of singing was not like ours, in Rithmes and Tunes
mel^diously, (as neither were the Hebrew, Greek or Latin Poems so sung;) but
as most think, more like to our Cathedral singing, or saying; yet it follows
not that this is the best way for us, seeing use has made our Tunes and
Meeter, and way of singing more meet for the ends to which we use them, that
is, for the cheerful consent of all the Church; Neither should any think that
it is a humane unlawful invention, and a sinful change, to turn the old way of
singing (used in Scripture times and long after) into ours; For the old way of
singing was not a Divine institution, but a use; and several Countries had
their several uses herein: And God commands us but to Praise him, and sing
Psalms, but does not tell us what meeter or tunes we shall use, or manner of
singing, but leaves this to the use and convenience of every Country: And if
our way and tunes be to us by custom more convenient than those of other
Nations in Scripture times, we have no reason to forsake them, and return to
the old (Though yet the old way is not to be judged a thing forbidden.) And we
see that custom has so far prevailed with us, that many thousand Religious
people, do cheerfully sing Psalms in the Church in our Tunes and way, who
cannot endure to sing in the Cathedral or the ancient Scripture or primitive
way, nor to use so much as the Laudatory Responses.

3. And I further answer that every Church should have more Ministers than one,
as the ancient Churches had besides their Readers; and then one may in speaking
ease another.

4. But lastly I answer, that These circumstances being alterable according to
the state of Countries and Conveniences, I do not discommend the custom of our
Country, and of most Christian Churches in our times, in making an
intermission, and going home to dinner; as being fittest to our condition. And
then there remains the less force in the objection, as to the weariness of
the Ministers, or the people.

I (...) to say more of the public Church-performances, having described them
all in a small Book called Universal Concord, and having exemplified all
except. Preaching, in our Reformed Liturgy given in to the Bishops at the
Savoy.

Only here, I will answer them, who object much that the Ancient Churches spent
not the whole day in exercises of Religion, nor farbad other exercises out of
the time of public worship, because we read of little other observation of it
by them, but what was done in the public Assemblies.

Answ. 1. We find that they took it to be a sanctified or separated day; And
they never distinguish, and say, that Part of the day only was separated and
sanctified to such uses. If they did, which part is the sanctified part of the
day? what hours were they which they thought thus separated? But there is no
such distinction or limitation, in the writings of the ancient Doctors. 2. What
need you find much mention, what they did out of the time of public Worship,
when they spent all the day frequently at first, and almost all the day in
after times (with small intermission) in public Worship? Do you stay but as
long at Church as they did, even almost from Morning till Night, and then you
will find little time to Dance or Play in. But yet, 3. There want not
Testimonies that they thought it unlawful to spend any part of the day, in
unnecessary diversions from holy things, as Dr. Young has showed.

III. So much of the day as can be spared from public Church-worship, (and
diversions of necessity) should be next spent most in holy family-exercises.
And in those unhappy places where the public worship is slenderly and
negligently performed, (on some small part only of the day) or not at all, or
not so as it is lawful to join in it, (as in Idolatrous Worship, etc.) there
Family worship must take up most of the day: And in better places, it must take
up so much as the public Worship spares.

And here the sum of holy exercises in Families is this (which having
elsewhere directed you in, I must but briefly name.)

1. To see that the Family rise as early on this day as on others, and make it
not a day of sleep and idleness: And not to suffer them to violate profane or
neglect the day, by any of the sins hereafter named.

2. To call them together before they go to the solemn Assembly, and to Pray
with them and praise God, and if there be time, to read the Scripture, and tell
them what they have to do in public.

3. To see that Dinner and other common employments make no longer an
intermission than is needful; And to advise them that at their meat and
necessary business, they show by their holy speeches, that their minds do not
forget the day, and the employments of it.

4. To sing Gods praises with them, if there be time, and bring them again
together to the Church-assembly.

5. When they return either to take some account of them what they have
learned, or to call them together to pray for a blessing on what they have
heard, and to sing praises to God, and to urge the things which they have heard
upon them.

6. At Supper to behave themselves soberly and piously: And after Supper to
shut up the day in Prayer and Praise; And either then or before, either to
examine or exhort inferiors, according as the case of the persons and families
shall require (For in some Families it will be best on the same day to take an
account of their profiting, and to Catechize them: And in other Families that
have leisure, other days may be more convenient for Catechizing and
Examinations, that the greater works of the Lords day may not be shortened.)

IV. So much of the day as can be spared from public and family worship, must
be spent in secret, holy duties: such as are, 1. Secret Prayer. 2. Reading of
the Scriptures and good Books. 3. Holy Meditation; 4. And the secret Conference
of bosom friends. Of which I further add*

1. That where public or family worship cannot be had (as in impious places)
there secret duties must be the chief, and make up the defect of others. And it
is a great happiness of good Christians who have willing minds, that they have
such secret substitutes and supplies; That they have Bibles and so many good
Books to read, That they may have a friend to talk with of holy things; But
much more that they have a God to go to, and a Heaven to Meditate on, besides
so many Sacred Verities.

2. That my judgment is, that in those places where the public Worship takes
up almost all the day, it is no sin to attend on it to the utmost, and to omit
all such Family and secret exercises as cannot be done, without omission of the
public. And that where the public exercises allow but a little time at home,
the Family duties should take up all that little time, except what some shorter
secret Prayers or Meditations may have, which will not hinder family duties.
And that it is a sinful disorder to do otherwise. Because the Lords day is
principally set apart for public worship; And the more private or secret is as
it were included in the public: Your Families are at Church with you; The same
Prayers which you would put up in secret, you may (usually) put up in public,
and in Families: And it is a turning Gods Worship into a Ceremony and
Superstition, to think that you must necessarily put up the same Prayers in a
Closet, which you put up in the Family or Church, when you have not time for
both. (Though when you have time, secret prayer, has its proper advantages,
which are not to be neglected.) And also, what secret or family duty you have
not time for on that day, you may do on another day, when you cannot come to
Church Assemblies. And therefore it is an Error to think that the day must be
divided in equal proportions, between Public, Family, and Secret Duties:
Though yet I think it not amiss that some convenient time for Family and Secret
duties be left on that day; but not so much as is spent in public, nor nothing
near it.

If any shall now object, [ I do not believe that we are bound to all this ado,
nor so to tire out our selves in Religious exercises: Where is all this ado
commanded us?]

I answer, 1. I have proved to you that in Nature and in Scripture set together
as great a proportion of time as this for holy exercises is required.

2. But O what a Carnal unthankful heart; does this objection signify? What,
do you account your Love to God, and the Commemoration of his Love in Christ, a
toil? What if God had only given you leave, to lay by your worldly business,
and idle talk and Childish play, for one days time, and to learn how to be
like Christ and Angels, and how to make sure of a Heavenly Glory, should you
not gladly have accepted it as an unspeakable benefit? O what hearts have these
wretched men that must be constrained by fear to all that is good, and holy,
and spiritual; and will have none of Gods greatest mercies, unless it be for
fear of hell (And they shall never have them indeed till they love them!) What
hearts have those men, that had rather be in an Alehouse, or a Playhouse, or
asleep, than to be in heart with God? That can find so much pleasure in jesting
and idle talking and foolery, that they can better endure it, than to peruse a
Map of Heaven, and to read and hear the Sacred Oracles! Who think it a toil to
praise their Maker and Redeemer, and a pleasure to game and dance and drink!
Who turn the glass upon the Preacher, and grudge if he exceed his hour; and can
sit at a Tavern or Alehouse, or hold on in any thing that's vain, many hours and
never complain of weariness! Do they not tell the world what enemies they are
to God, who love a pair of Cards, or Dice, or Wanton Dalliance, better than his
Word and Worship? Who think six days together little enough for their worldly
work and profit, and one day in seven too much to spend in the thoughts of God
and life Eternal? Who love the dung of this present World, so much better than
all the joys above, as that they are weary to hear of Heaven above an hour at
a time, and long to be wallowing in the dirt again? Is it not made by the Holy
Ghost, a mark not only of wicked men, but of men notoriously wicked, to be
Lovers of pleasures more than of God? 2 Timothy 3. 4.

O Sinners, that in these workings of the wickedness and malignity of your
hearts, you would at last but know your selves! Is it not the Carnal mind that
is thus at enmity to God, and neither is nor can be subject to his Law, Romans 8.
6, 7, 8? Which will you take to be your friend; Him that loves your company,
or him that is a weary of it, and is glad when he has done with you, and is
got away? What would you think of Wife, or Child, or Friend, if they should
reason as you do, and say, What Law does bind (...) to be so many hours in the
House, or Company, or (...) of my Husband, my Father, or my Friend^ You do not
use if you have a Feast, or a Cup of Wine before you, to ask, Where does God
Command me to Eat or Drink it? You can do this without a Command! If you hear
but of a gainful Market* you ask not, Where does God make it my duty to go to
it? If one would give you Money or Land, you would scarcely ask, How prove you
that I am bound to take it? You would be glad of Leave, without Commands. If
the King should say to you* Ask what you will, and I will give it you, you
would not say, Where am I bound of God to ask? And when God says, Ask and it
shall be given you, you say, How prove you that I am bound to ask? You can sing
ribbald Songs, and Dance without a Command; You can Feast, and Play, and Prate,
and Sleep, and Loyter in idleness without a Command; But you cannot learn how
to be saved, nor praise your. Redeemer without a Command. A Thief can Steal, a
Fornicator can Play the Bruit, a Drunkard can be Drunk, an Oppressor can make
himself hateful to the Oppressed, not only without Law, but against it? But you
cannot Rejoice in God, nor live one day together in his Love and Service,
without a Law, no nor with it neither. For because you had rather not Love him,
it is certain that you do not Love him: And because you had rather play than
pray, and serve the flesh than serve your Maker; it is a certain sign that you
do not serve him, with any thing which he will accept as Service. For while he
has not your hearts, he has nothing which he accepts. Your Knee and Tongue
only is forced against your will to that which you call serving him: But your
Hearts or Wills cannot be forced. When you had rather be elsewhere, and say
When will the Sermon and Prayer be done, that I may be at my Work or Play? God
takes it as if you were there where you had rather be.

I pray you deal openly, and tell me, you that think a day too long for God,
and are weary of all holy work, What would you be doing that while, if you had
your choice? Is it any thing which you dare say is better? Dare you say, that
playing is better than Praying, and a Piper or Dancing is better than praising
God with Psalms? Or that your Sleep, or Games, or Chat or Worldly business is
better than the Contemplation of God and Glory! And will those deceivers of the
people also say this, who teach them that it is a tedious uncommanded thing, to
serve God so long? I think they dare not speak it out. If they dare, let them
not grudge that they must be for ever shut out of Heaven, where there will be
nothing else but holiness. But if you dare not say so, Why will you choose the
worse, before the better? Why will you be weary of well doing, that you may do
ill? Why are you not more weary of every thing than of holiness, unless you
think every thing better than holiness.

Especially those men, 1. Whose judgment is for will worship, should not ask,
where is there a Command, for any good which they are willing of. But does not
this show that you had rather there were no Command for it? Be judges your
selves. 2. And they that are for making the Churches a great deal more work
than God has made them, (O what abundance has Popery made; and what a
multitude of new Religious particles!) methinks should not for shame say that
God has tired them out, and made them too much work already? Do you cry out,
What a weariness is this one day, when you would add of your own such a
multitude of more days, and more work?

Yet though I talk of doing it willingly if you had no forcing Law of God, but
bare leave to receive such Benefits, my meaning is not that God has left any
such things indifferent or made them only the matter of Counsels and not of
Commands: For he has made it our duty to receive our own benefits, and to do
that which tends to our own good and Salvation. But if it had been so, that
we had only leave to receive so great mercies without any other penalty for
refusing, than the loss of them, it should be enough to men that Love
themselves, and know what is for their good. Much more when commands concur.

CHAP. X.
How the Lords day should not be spent: Or, What is unlawful on it?
AS to the resolving of this Question also, I would wish for no greater
advantage on him that I dispute with, but that he be a man that Loves God and
Holiness, and knows somewhat of the difference between things temporal and
things Eternal; and knows what is for the good of his soul; and prefers it
before his body; and has an appetite to relish the delights of Wisdom, and of
things most excellent and Divine. And that he be one that knows his own
necessities, and repents of his former loss of time; and lives in a daily
preparation for death; that is, that he be a real Christian; And then by all
this it will appear, how the Lords day must not be spent; or what things are
unlawful to be done thereon.

I. Undoubtedly it must not be spent in wickedness: In gluttony or drunkenness,
chambering or wantonness, strife or envying, or any of those works of the
flesh, which are at all times sinful. An evil work is most unsuitable to a holy
day. And yet, alas, what day has more ryotting and excess, of meat, and drink,
and wantonness, and sloth, and lust, than it?

II. It ought not to be spent in our worldly businesses, which are the labors
allowed us on the six days; unless Necessity or Mercy make them at any time
become such duties of the Law of Nature, as Positives must for that time give
place to. For how is it a day separated to holy employments, if we spend it in
the common business of the world? It is the great advantage that we have by
such a separated day, that we may wholly call off our minds from the world, and
set them on the world to come, and exercise them in holy communion with God and
his Church, without the interruptions and distractions of any earthly
cogitations. A divided mind does never perform any holy work, with that
integrity and life, as the nature of it requires. Heavenly contemplations are
never well managed with the intermixture of diverting wordly thoughts: So great
a work as to converse in Heaven, to be rapt up in the admirations of the Divine
perfections, to kindle a fervent Love to God, by the contemplation of his Love
and Goodness, to triumph over sin and Satan with our triumphing glorified Head,
to Commemorate his Resurrection, and the whole work of our Redemption with a
lively working faith, does require the whole heart, and will not consist with
aliene thoughts, and the diversion of fleshly employments or delights. Nay, had
we no higher work to do, than to search our hearts, and lament our sins, and
beg for mercy, and learn Gods Word, and treat with our Redeemer about the
saving of our souls, and to prepare for death and judgment, surely it should
challenge all our faculties, and tell us that voluntary diversions, do too much
savor of impiety and contempt. It is the great mercy of God, that we have
leave to lay by these clogs and impediments of the soul, and to seek his face
with greater freedom, than the encumbrances of our week day labors will allow
us. No slave can be so glad of a Sabbaths ease from his sorest toil and basest
drudgery, as a believer should be to be released from his earthly thoughts and
business, that he may freely, entirely and delightfully converse with God.

III. The Lords day must not be spent in tempting, diverting, unnecessary
recreations, or pleasures of the flesh. 1. For these are as great an impediment
to the holy employment of the soul, as worldly labors, if not much more. It is
easier for a man to be exercised in heavenly cogitations, at the Plow or Cart,
or other such labors of his place and Calling, than at Bowls, or Hunting, or
Cards, or Dice, or Stage Plays, or Races, or Dancing, or Bear-baitings, or
Cock-fights, or any such sensual sports. I need no proof of this to any man,
that has himself any experience, of the holy employments of a believing soul,
or that ever knew what it was to spend one Day of the Lord aright; And no proof
will suffice them that have no experience, because they know not effectually
what it is that they talk of.

2. We find that even on other days, the worst men are most addicted to these
sports, and are the greatest pleaders for them, and that the more they use them
the worse they grow; yea that the times of using them are frequently the times
of the eruption of many heinous sins. I have lived in my Youth in many places
where sometimes Shows or uncouth Spectacles have been their sports at certain
seasons of the year, and sometimes Morrice-dancings, and sometimes
Stage Plays, and sometimes Wakes and Revels; And all men observed that these
were the times of the most flagitious crimes, and that there was then more
drunkenness, more fighting, more horrid Oaths and Curses uttered than in many
weeks at other times; Then it was that the enraged sensualists did act the part
of furious Devils, in scorning and reviling all that were soberer and better
than themselves, and railing at those that minded God and their everlasting
state, as Precisians, Puritans and Hypocrites; Then it was that they were ready
in their fury, if they durst, to assault the very persons and houses of them
that would not do as they did. Whatever is done in such Crowdes and Tumults, is
done with the impetuosity of rage and passion, and with the greatest audacity,
and the violation of all Laws and regulating restraints. As many waters make a
furious stream, and great fires where much fuel is conjunct do disdain
restraint, and quickly devour all before them; so is it with the raging folly
of Youth, when voluptuous persons once get together, and their lusts take fire,
and they fall into a torrent of profuse sensuality. Yea those that at other
times are sober, and when they come home do seem of another mind, yet do as the
rest when they are among them, and seem as bad and furious as they: As we see
among the London Apprentices on the day called Goodtides Tuesday, or May day,
when they once get out together and are in motion, they seem all alike, and
those that are most sober and timorous alone, in the rowt are heightened to the
audacity of the rest; And as in an Army the sight of the multitude, and the
noise of Drums and Guns, puts valor into the fearful; and they will go on with
others, that else would run away from a proportionable single combat and
danger; And as Boys at School that fear to offend singly, yet fear not to bar
out their Master in a combination when all concur; so all seem wicked in a
crowd and rowt of wicked persons; And sensuality and licentiousness is not the
smallest part of wickedness.

O how unfit is Youth in such a Crowd, to think of God, or Eternity, or Death;
or to hear the sober warnings of a Preacher, in comparison of what the same
persons be, when they are at Church, and Congregated purposely to hear Gods
Word. Go among them and try them then, with any grave and wholesome Counsel:
Ask them whether they are penitent Converts, and whether they are prepared for
another world. Try what answer they will give you, and whether they will not
deride you more than at another time? I would those that write and plead for
this under the name of harmless recreations, would go amongst them sometimes
with sober Counsel, and learn to be wise by their own experience; that their
errors might not be of such pernicious consequence to men's souls as it has
been. Reason it self has no place or audience in the noise of youthful furious
lusts. They will laugh at Reason, as well as at Scripture; and scorn sobriety,
as well (though not so much) as holiness. If even in the meetings of grave
persons, it have ever been observed that individual persons are apt to be
carried by the stream, and otherwise than their talk imports at other times
when they are single, what wonder if it be so in evil with unbridled youth?

If you say that the Law forbids rowts and riots, and it is no such unruly
assemblies that we defend.

Answ. Disclaim not the name only while you defend the thing. Be not like them
that say, We persuade men to voluntary untruths but not to lying; to break
their Vows and Oaths in lawful matters, but not to perjury; to kill those that
anger them, but not to murder; to take other men's goods by force, but not to
robbery, etc. Is not a Wakes and Revels and Morrice-Dances, and
Dancing-assemblies, and Spectacles, and Stage plays, and the like, such a
concourse as I am speaking of. Do you limit Dancers, and Players to any
numbers? I speak not of the Laws. I am too much unacquainted with them. If they
say, that above four meeting to Dance or Drink on the Lords day shall be
accounted a Conventicle or unlawful Assembly, it is more than ever I heard of,
But I am speaking of the common practice of the contrary, and of those that
ordinarily defend it, and labor to bring both Godly Ministers, and sober
people, under the scorn of foolish preciseness and superstition, because they
would hinder the sin and ruin of the people. If you will allow them to
assemble for their Dancings, Shows, and Sports, you will encourage them to
break the Laws both of God and Man, though you pretend never so much care that
they be observed. You may as well allow them to be Drunk, and when you have
done, forbid them to break Gods Laws and the Kings in their Drunkenness. There
are few in such sportful Assemblies that are not Drunk with Concupiscence, and
whose reason is not drowned in voluptuousness and vain imaginations. Let those
Divines (if I may so call the Advocates of Sensuality and Sin) which are
otherwise minded, give us leave to oppose against all their Cavils, and the
false names of harmless recreations, but, 1. Our own experience, who in our
youth, have always found such sports and revelling Assemblies to be corrupters
of our minds, and temptations to evil, and quenchers of every holy motion, and
enemies to all that's good. 2. The experience of the visibly corrupted undone
sensual youth, that are round about us, in all Countries where we have lived.
3. And the judgment of S^lomon, (who says as much for pleasure as any Sacred
Writer) Eccl. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It is better to go to the house of mourning,
than to the house of feasting: For that is the end of all men, and the living
will lay it to his heart: Sorrow is better than laughter; for by the sadness of
the Countenance the heart is made better. The heart of the wise is in the house
of mou^ning, but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth (I pray you do not
say I rail at you by the reciting of these words, nor that I diminish the
honor of the Reverend Advocates for Wakes and Lords day Sports and Dancings:)
It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the Song of
fools. For as the sound of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool.]

3. Moreover, these sports, and pleasures, and riotings, are worse than Plowing
and Laboring on the Lords day, because (as they are more adverse to spiritual
and heavenly joys, so) they do less good to recompense the hurt. A Carpenter,
a Mason, a Plowman, etc. may do some good by his unlawful, unseasonable labor;
some one may be the better for it: But, Dancing, and Sports, and Gaming, do no
good but hurt. They corrupt the Fantasy; They imprint upon the Thinking
faculty, so strong an inclination to run out after such things; and upon the
Appetite so strong a list and longing for them, that carnality is much
increased by them, Mortification hindered; Concupiscence gratified; the flesh
prevails, the spirit is quenched; and the soul made as unfit for heavenly
things, as a Schoolboy is for his Book, whose heart is set upon his play: Yea
abundance more; as Nature by Corruption is more averse to spiritual things,
than to the things of Art or Nature.

4. These Dancings, and Plays, and Wakes and other riotous sports, are a
strong temptation also to them that are not of the riotous societies, but have
convictions on their hearts, that they have greater and better things to mind.
Without accusing others, I may say that I know this by bad experience. I cannot
forget, when my Conscience was against their courses, and called me to better
things, how hardly when I was young, I passed by the Dancing, and the Playing
Congregations; and especially when in the Passage I must bear their scorn.

And I was one Year a Schoolmaster, and found how hard it was for the poor
Children, to avoid such snares, even when they were sure to be whipped the next
day for their pleasures.

5. And those Riots and Plays are injurious to the pious and sober persons who
dislike them. For it is they that shall be made the Rabbles Scorn, and the
Drunkards Song; Besides that the noise often times annoyeth them when they should
be calmely serving God. And they are hindered from governing and instructing
their Families, while their Children and Servants are thus tempted to be gone,
and their hearts are all the while in the playing place. Never did a hungry dog
more grudge at his restraint from meat, than Children and young Servants
usually grudge, to be Catechized, or kept to holy exercises, when they hear the
pipe, or the noise of the licentious multitude in the Streets. I cannot forget,
that in my Youth in those late times, when we lost the labors of some of our
Conformable Godly Teachers, for not Reading publicly the Book for Sports and
Dancing on the Lords days, one of my Fathers own Tenants was the Town Piper,
hired by the Year (for many Years together) and the place of the Dancing
Assembly was not an hundred yards from our door; and we could not on the Lords
day, either read a Chapter, or Pray, or sing a Psalm, or Catechize or instruct
a Servant, but with the noise of the Pipe and Taber, and the Whootings in the
Street, continually in our Ears; And even among a tractable people, we were the
common Scorn of all the Rabble in the Streets, and called Puritans, Precisians
and Hypocrites, because we rather chose but to read the Scriptures, than to do
as they did (Though there was no favor of any Nonconformity in our Family.)
And when the people by the Book were allowed to Play and Dance, out of public
Servicetime, they could so hardly break off their Sports, that many a time the
Reader was fain to stay till the Piper and Players would give over; And
sometimes the Morrice-Dancers would come into the Church, in all their Linen
and Scarfs and Antic Dresses, with Morrice-bells jingling at their legs. And
as soon as Common Prayer was read, did haste out presently to their Play again.
Was this a Heavenly Coversation? Was this a help to holiness and Devotion? or
to the Mortification of fleshly Lusts? Was this the way to train up youth in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord? And were such Assemblies like to the
primitive Churches? Or such Families governed Christianly and in the fear of
God? O Lord set wise and holy Pastors over thy poor Flocks, that have learnt
themselves the holy Doctrine which they Preach, and who love, (or at least
abhor not) the service and imitation of a Crucified Christ, and the practice
of that Religion which they themselves profess.

Obj. But poor laboring people must have some recreation, and they cannot
through their poverty have leisure any other day.

Answ. 1. A sad Argument to be used by them that by racking of Rents do keep
them in Poverty. They that cannot live without all those superfluities, which
requires many hundred pounds a Year to maintain them must for this gratifying
pride and fleshly lusts, set such bargains to their poor Tenants, as that they
confess they cannot live, without taking the Lords day to recreate them from
the toil and weariness of their excessive labors: And will not God judge such
self-condemning oppressors as these are?

2. But is this an Argument fit for the mouth of a Minister or any Christian,
who knows how much the soul is more worth than the body? and Eternity more
valuable than the pleasures of this little time? If Poverty deny the people
liberty to play on the week days, does it not as much deny them liberty to
Pray, and to read the Scriptures, and to learn their Catechisms, and the Word
of God? Surely it better beseems any man that believes another life, a
Heaven and a Hell, to say, Poor Laborers have so little time, to Learn, to
Meditate, to Read, to Pray, on the week days, that if they do not follow it
close upon the Lords day, they are like to perish in their ignorance: (For if
the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3.) which do you
think it better to leave undone, if one of them must be left undone? Whether
the learning of Gods Word, or the Pleasures and Recreations of the flesh?

3. It is either their Bodies or their Minds, that need Recreation. When the
Body is tired with toilesome labor, it is ease, rather than toilesome Dancings
or Plays, that are fit to recreate it. Or else God will be charged with mistake
in the reasons of the ancient Sabbath. But if it be the Mind that needs
recreation, why should not the Learning of Heavenly truth, and the Joyful
Commemoration of our Redemption, and the foresight of Heaven and the Praises of
God, be more delightful than the noise of Thorns under a pott; even than the
laughter and sport of fools, or than the Dancings and Games that now you plead
for? But the truth is, It is not the Minds of poor laboring men, that are
over-workt and tired on the week days, but it is their bodies: And therefore
there is no Recreation so suitable to them, as the ease of the body, and the
holy and joyful exercise of the mind, upon their Creator, their Redeemer, and
their Everlasting Rest.

4. But if you will needs have days of temptation and sinful sports and
pleasures for them, let Landlords abate their Tenants as much Rent, as one
days vacancy from labor in a Month or a Fortnight will amount to, or let the
Common `Saints days, which of the two are more at man's disposal, be made their
sporting days, and rob not their souls of that one weekly day, which God has
separated for his Worship.

Obj. But there are Students, and Lawyers, and Ministers, and Gentlemen, whose
labor is most that of the Brain, and not the Plow-mans bodily toil; and these
have need of bodily Recreation.

Answ. And there are few of these so poor but they can take their bodily
Recreation on the week days: And many of them need as much the whole Lords day
for their souls Edification as any others: And no one that knows himself will
say that he needs it not. If any men need remission of Studies, and bodily
Exercise it is Ministers themselves: And is it themselves that they plead for
Sports and Dancing for? Would they be companions of the vain in such like
vanities?

Obj. But the mind of man is not able to endure a constant intension and
elevation of devotion all the day long without recreation and intermission; And
putting men upon more than they can do, will but hinder them; when a little
recreation will make them more fresh and fervent when they return to God.

Answ. O what an advantage is it to know by experience what one talks of? And
what an inconvenience to talk of Holiness and Heavenliness by hearsay only! 1.
To poor people that have but one day in seven, that one day should not seem too
long. 2. If it be from a Carnal enemity to God and spiritual things, shortness
and seldomeness will be no Cure. But they have need rather to be provoked to
diligence till they are cured, than to be indulged in that averseness and
floth, which till its cured will prevail, when you have done your best against
it. 3. But if it be a weariness of the flesh; as the Disciples when they slept
while Christ was Praying; or a weariness through such imperfection of Grace and
Remnant of Carnality, which the sincere are liable to, then giving way to it
will increase it, and resisting it is the way to overcome it. 4. How many
necessary intermissions are there, which confute this pretense of weariness?
Some time is taken up in dressing; And some with poor Servants in waiting on
their Masters and Mistrisses, and in preparing Meat and drink; some in going to
Church and coming home; some in eating, usually more than once; some in
preparing again for sleep; besides what Cattle and by-occasions will require?
And is the remainder of one day in a week yet too much for the business which
we are Created, preserved, and Redeemed for, and on which our endless life
depends? O that we knew what the Love of God is? and what it is to regard our
souls according to their worth! Would not a soul* that loves God rather say,
Alas, how short is the Lords day? How quickly is it gone? How many
interruptions hinder my delight? Shall I think a Week short enough for my
worldly labors,) and one day (thus parcelled) too long to seek the face of
God? I see blind Worldlings and sensualists can be longer unwearied at Market,
in their Shops and Fields, especially when their gain comes in; and at Cards
and Dice, and Bowling and idle Prating, etc. And shall I be weary so soon of
the most noble and necessary Work, and of the sweetest pleasures upon Earth?

An Hypocrite that draws near to God but with the lips, whilst his heart is
far from him, as he never truly seeks God, so he never truly finds him, and
has none of the true spiritual delights of holiness, nor ever feels the
pleasure of exercising his Love to God by the help of faith, in the hopes of
Heaven: And therefore no wonder if he be weary of such unprofitable, sapless
and unpleasant work, as his dead formalities and affectations are. But it is
not so with the sincere experienced Christian, who serving God in spirit and
truth, has true and spiritual recreation, pleasure and benefit in and by his
Service. And therefore we see that the holy experienced believers, are still
averse to these sensual diversions, and do not think the Lords da* or his
Service too long. And O Christian what happy advantage in such controversies
have you, in your holy sincerity and sweet experience?

5. But yet I am not such a stranger to man, to my self or others, as to deny
that our naughty hearts are inclined to be weary of well doing: But mark what a
cure God in Wisdom and mercy has provided for us: As it is but one day in
seven which is thus to be wholly employed with God, and as much of this day is
taken up with the bodily necessaries aforesaid; so for the rest, God appoints
us variety of exercises, that when we are weary of one, another may be our
recreation. When we have heard we must pray, and when we have prayed we must
hear again: We must Read, we must Sing and speak Gods Praises, we must
celebrate the memorial of Christ's death in the Sacrament; we must Meditate; we
must Conferr, we must instruct our Families: And we have variety of subjects
for each of these. As a student that is weary has variety of Books and Studies
to recreate his mind; so has every Christian variety of holy employment on the
Lords day. And all of it excellent profitable and delightful!

Christian, believe not that Minister or Man whatever he be, that tells thee
that Christ's Yoke is heavy, or that his Commandments are grievous. Has he done
so much to deliver us from the strait Yoke, the heavy Burden, and the grievous
Commandments? and now shall we accuse him of bringing us under a toylesome
task? Is it a toil to love or count your money? to love and look upon your
Corn and Cattle? to love and converse with your Friend? to feast your Body on
the pleasantest Food? If not, why should it be a toil to any but a wicked
heart, to spend a day in Loving God, and hearing the Messages of his Love to
us, and in the foresight and foretasts of everlasting love.

Caviller, come but unto Christ, and cast off the wearisome, toilesome burden
of thy sin, and Satan's drudgery, and take Christ's Yoke and Burden on thee, and
learn of him, and try then whether his days and work be grievous. Come and
spend but a day in Loving God, as thou do in talking of him, and try whether
Love, and the holiest Love, be a wearisome work. But if thou will make a
Religion of all Shell and no Kernel, all Carcass and no Life, like that which
the Jansenists charge the Jesuits with, that say, We are bound to love God but
once in four or five years, or once in all our lives, no wonder if thou be
weary of such a Religion.

6. But I will tell them that are the Teachers of the people, an honester way
to Cure the peoples weariness, than to send them to a Piper or to a Play to
cure it. Preach with such life and awakening seriousness; Preach with such
grateful holy eloquence, and with such easy method, and with such variety of
wholesome matter, that the people may never be aweary of you. Pour out the
rehearsal of the Love and benefits of God, open so to them the privileges of
faith, and the Joys of hope, that they may never be aweary. How often have I
heard the people say of such as these, I could hear him all day and never be
aweary! They are troubled at the shortness of such Sermons and wish they had
been longer. Pray with that Heavenly life and fervor as may rap up the souls
of those that join with you, and try then whether they will be aweary: Praise
God with that joyful alacrity which beseems one that is ready to pass into
Glory, and try whether this will not Cure the peoples weariness.

Misunderstand me not. I am now speaking to none but guilty hypocrites, and not
to any faithful holy Ministers; And to such I say, when you have done nothing
but coldly read over the public Prayers, or as coldly and crudely added your
own, and tired the hearers, with a dry, a sapless, lifeless, unexperienced
discourse, and then send them as a wearied people, to dancing and sports for a
needful recreation, is this like the work of a Pastor of Souls. When you have
cried down other men's Praying and Preaching, and then tell the people that the
Praying and Preacing which you recommend to them as better, will not digest
well, without a Dance or Recreation after it, to expel the peoples weariness;
is not this to disgrace your own Prayers and Preaching which you before
commended to them? And when you have done, if after this you speak against
others for their long Praying, and for so much Preaching and Hearing, as if
they never had enough, is not this to commend what you discommend? and to tell
the people that those men's Praying and Preaching whom you revile, is such as
does not weary their Auditors; when yours is such, as will tiremen, if it be
long, or if they be not Recreated after it with a Piper, a ^idler, or a Dance?
O that the Ithacian Bishops of the World, and all the Clergy of their mind,
would at least hear Hooker in the Preface to his Eccles. pol. how little their
cause is beholden to such Patrons, and how well it might spare them!

For my own part, as my flesh is weak, so my heart is too bad, too backward to
these Divine and Heavenly works! And yet I never have time to spare. God
knows that it is my daily groans, How great is work, yea and how sweet; and
how short is the day, the week, the year! How quickly is it night! How fast do
weeks and years roll away! And shall any man that is called a Minister of
Christ, persuade poor Laborers and Servants who have but one day for
retirement from the world, to converse with God without distraction, that this
one day is too long, and that their work must be ^ased by carnal sports? Nay
shall a man that would be called a Minister or a Christian, persuade men
against all the experience of the World, that the diversions and interruptions
of a Dance or May game, or a Race or a Comedy, will dispose their minds to
return to God with more Heavenly alacrity and purity than before, or than
variety of holy exercises will do? Or rather, are we constrained to say (though
it displease) that Hypocrites are all for Imagery and hypocritical Religion;
and that whether he be at Church or at home, in Praying or in drinking and
sensuality and voluptuosness, a Worldling is every where a Worldling still, and
an hypocrite is an hypocrite still; And it is not his Book or Pulpit that
makes him another man. And that as the man is, such will be his Work. Operari
sequitur esse. And that the Jesuits are not the only men in the world, that
would make a Religion to suite men's lusts, and would serve Satan and the flesh,
in the livery of Christ. But I fear I have been too long on this objection.

IV. The Lords day must not be spent in Idleness: not in unnecessary sleep, or
in vain walking, or vain talking, or long dressings, or too long feastings, or
any thing unnecessary which diverteth our souls from their Sacred seasonable
work. It is not a Jewish Ceremonious Sabbath of bodily rest which we are to
keep: But it is a day of holy and spiritual works: of the needfullest work in
all the world: To do that which is ten thousand times more necessary and
excellent, than all our labors and provision for the flesh. And if no man has
time to spare on the week day, but he that knows not aright what it is to be
a Christian or a man or why God maintains and continues him in the world;
What shall we think of them that can find time to spare on the Lords own day,
and can walk and idle away the most precious of all their time? If it be folly
to cast away your Silver, it is not wisdom to cast away your gold. O that God
would but open men's eyes, to see what is before them, and how near to Eternity
they stand, and awaken men's sleepy sensual souls, to live as men that do not
dream of another world, but unfeignedly believe it; and then a little reasoning
would serve turn to convince them, that the Lords day should be spent in the
duties of serious holiness, and not in Idleness, or unnecessary works or sports.

Obj. But by all this you seem to cast a great reproach on Calvin, Beza, and
most of the great Divines of the foreign Churches, who have not been so strict
for the observation of the Lords day.

Answ. Let these things be observed by the impartial Reader. 1. It cannot be
proved to be most of them, that were so faulty herein as the objection
intimates. Many of them have written much for the holy spending of the day. 2.
It must be noted, that it is a superstitious Ceremonious Sabbatizing which many
of them write against, who seem to the unobservant to mean more. It is not the
spending of the day in spiritual exercises. 3. And you must remember that they
came newly out of Popery, and had seen the Lords day and a superabundance of
other Humane Holy days imposed on the Churches to be Ceremoniously observed,
and they did not all of them so clearly as they ought, discern the difference
between the Lords day and those holy days or Church Festivals, and so did too
promiscuously conjoine them in their reproofs of the burdens imposed on the
Church. And it being the Papists Ceremoniousness, and their multitude of
Festivals that stood all together in their eye, it tempted them to too
undistinguishing and unaccurate a reformation. 4. And for Calvin you must know
that he spent every day so like to a Lords day, in hard Study, and Prayer, and
numerous Writings, and public Preaching, or Lecturing and Disputings, either
every day in the week, or very near it, scarce allowing himself time for his
one only spare meal a day, that he might the easilier be tempted, to make less
difference in his judgment between the Lords day and other days, than he
should have done* and to plead for more recreation on that day for others, than
he took on any day himself. 5. And then his followers having also many of the
same temptations, were apt to tread in his steps through the deserved
estimation of his worth and judgment and lest they should seem to be of
different minds. But as England has been the happyest in this piece of
reformation, so all men are unexcusable that will encourage idleness,
sensuality or neglect of the important duties of the day.

CHAP. XI.
What things should not be Scrupled as unlawful on the Lords day.
As I have told you the Lords day is not a Sabbath in the Jewish sense, or a
day of Ceremonious Rest, but a Day of Worshipping our Creator and Redeemer with
thankful Commemorations and with holy Joy, etc. And a day of vacancy from such
earthly things as may be any hinderance to this holy work; so now I must
resolve the Question first in the General, that nothing lawful at another time
is unlawful on this day, which has not the Nature of an Impediment to the holy
duties of the day; unless it be accidentally on the account of scandal or ill
example unto others, or disobeying the Laws of Magistrates, or crossing the
Concord of the Churches, or such like. Therefore hence I deduce these
particular resolutions following.

I. It is not unlawful to be at such bodily or mental labor as is needful to
the spiritual duties of the day. If the Priests in the Temple (says Christ)
did break the Sabbath and were blameless (that is, not the Command of God to
them for keeping the Sabbath, but the external Rest of the Sabbath, which was
commanded to others with an exception to their case,) we may well say that it
is no sin, for a Minister now to spend his strength in laborious Preaching and
Praying; or for the people to travel as far as is needful, to the Church
Assemblies: nor do we need to tie our selves to a Sabbath days journey, (that
is, according to the Scribes 2000 Cubits, which is 3000 feet, and quinque
stadia:) It is lawful to go many miles when it is necessary to the work of the
day.

II. It is not unlawful to be at the labor of dressing our selves somewhat
more ornately or comely than on another day. Because it is suitable to the
rejoicing of a Festival. But to waste time needlessly in curJosity, and proud
attiring, to the hinderance of greater things, is detestable.

III. It is not unlawful to dress meat, even in some fuller and better manner
than on other days; Because it is a Festival, or day of Thanksgiving. And it
is a vain self-contradiction of some men, who think that another day of
Thanksgiving is not well kept, if there be not two feasting meals at least, and
yet think it unlawful to dress one on the Lords day: But yet to make it a day
of Gluttony, or to waste more of the day in eating or dressing meat than is
agreeable to the spiritual work of the day, which is our end; or to make our
selves sleepy by fullness, or to use our servants like Beasts, to provide for
our bellies, with the neglect of their own souls; or to pamper the flesh to the
satisfaction and irritation of its lusts; All this is to be detested.

IV. It is not unlawful to do the necessary works of mercy to our selves or
others, to man or beast; Those which must be done, and cannot be delayed
without more hurt than the doing of them will procure (for that is the
description of a necessary work.) As to eat and drink and cloth our selves, and
our Children; To carry meat to the poor that are in present necessity; To give
or take Physic; and to go for advice to the Physician or Surgeon: To travel
upon a business of importance and necessity; To quench a fire; or prop a house
that is about to fall; To march or fight in a necessary case of War; To Sail
or labor at Sea in cases of necessity; To Boat-men over a River that go to
Church; To pursue a Robber, or defend him that is assaulted; To pull a man out
of fire or water; To dress a man's sores, or to give Physic to the sick; To
pull an Ox or Horse or other Cattle out of a pit or water; To drive or lead
them to water, and to give them meat: To save Cattle, Corn or Hay from the
sudden inundations of the Sea, or of Rivers, or from Floods; To drive Cattle or
Swine out of the grounds where they break in to spoil; such necessary actions
are not unlawful but a duty; It being a Moral or Natural precept, which Christ
twice bid the Ceremonious Pharisees learn [ I will have mercy and not Sacrifice.]

And it is not only works of necessity to a man's life, that are here meant by
necessary works* But such also as are necessary to a smaller and lower end or
use.

And yet it is not all such necessity neither that will allow us to do the
thing. Otherwise a Tradesman or Plowman might say that his labor is necessary
to the getting or saving of this or that small commodity; I shall be a loser if
I do not work. And on the other side, if it were only a necessity for life,
limbs or livelihood that would allow us labor, than it would be unlawful to
dress Meat, and to drive Cattle out of the Corn, and many such things before
mentioned; And then it would be lawful to give meat only (...) Oxen or Horses
of great pri^e, and not to Hens, Ducks, Geese, Dogs, and other Animals of
little value.

Therefore there is a great deal of prudent discretion necessary to the
avoiding of extream^ God has not enumerated all the particulars which are
allowed or forbidden in their generals. What then shall we do? Shall we violate
the outward rest of the day for the worth of (...) Groat or two Pence (as the
feeding of Hens or such like may be?) Or shall we suffer the lo^^ of many
pounds rather than sti^r to save them? As for instance, Is it lawful to open,
or turn, (...) carry in Corn or Hay, which in all rational probability (though
not certainly) is like to be lost o^ very much spoiled, if it be let alone to
the next day? The Cor^ or Hay may be of many pounds value, when the feeding of
Swine o^ Hens may be little: The Cor^ or Hay is like to be lost; when the
Swine, or Hens, or Horses, or Oxen, may easily recover the hunger or abstinence
of a day? What must be done in such cases as these?

I answer, 1. It is necessary to know that where God has not made particular
determinations, yet general Laws do still oblige us.

2. And that Christian Prudence is necessary to the right discarning how far
our actions fall under those General Laws of God.

3. That he that will discern these things must be a man, that truly
understands, valueth and loves the true Ends and Work of the Lords day, and
not a man that hates it, or cares not for it; And a man that has a right
estimate also of those outward things, which stand in question to be meddled
with. And he must be one that has no superstitious Jewish conceits of the
external Rest of the day: And he must be one that looks, not only to one
thing or a few, but to all things how numerous soever which the determination
of his case depends on.

4. And because very few are such, it is needful that those few that are such,
be Casuists and Advisers to the rest, and that the more ignorant consult with
them (especially if they be their proper Pastors) as they do with Physicians
and Lawyers for their health and their estates.

5. It must be known that often times the Laws of the Land do interpose in such
cases; And if they do determine so strictly, as to forbid that which else would
to some be lawful, they must be obeyed; Because bad men cannot be kept from
doing ill by excesses unless some good men be hindered by the same Laws from
some things that are to them indifferent, nay possibly eligible, if there were
no such Law.

6. And accordingly the case of Scandal or Temptation to others, that will turn
our Example to their sin, must be considered in our Practice. Yea it is not
only things merely Indifferent that we must deny our liberty in, to prevent
another fall, but often times that which would else be a Duty may become a sin,
when it will scandalize another, or tempt him to a far greater and more
dangerous sin. As it may be my duty to speak some word, or do some action, as
most useful and beneficial, when there is nothing against it; And yet if I may
foresee that another will turn that speech or action to his ruin, to the
hatred of piety, or to take occasion from it to exercise cruelty upon other
Christians, etc. it may become my heinous sin. So it must here be considered,
who will know of the Action which you do? and what use they are like to make of
it?

7. And a little public hurt must be more regarded than more private benefit;
And the hurt of a man's soul cannot be countervailed by your corporal
Commodities.

8. These things being premised, I suppose that the great Rule to guide you in
such undetermined Circumstances is the Interest of the End; All things must be
done to the Glory of God, and to Edification. A truly impartial prudent man can
discern by comparing all the circumstances whether his action (as if it were
carrying in Endangered Corn) were likely to do more good or harm? On one side
you must put in the balance the value of the thing to be saved; your own
necessity of it; the poors need of it; and Christ's command, Gather up the
fragments that nothing be lost: on the other side you must consider, how far it
will hinder your spiritual benefit and duty; and how far the example may be
like to encourage such as will do such things without just cause; And so try
which is the way of Gods honor and your own and your neighbors good; and that
is the way which you must take (As in the Disciples rubbing the ears of Corn,
etc.) For the Rule is, that your labor is then lawful and a duty, when in the
judgment of a truly judicious person, it is like to do more good than hurt;
And it is then sinful when it is like to do more hurt than good. Though all
cannot discern this, yet (as far as I know) this is the true rule, to judge
such actions by. As for them that suppose our Lords day to be under the same
Laws of Rest with the Jewish Sabbath, and so think that they have a readyer way
to decide these doubts, I will not contend with them, but I have told you why I
am not of their mind.

V. From hence I further conclude, that whereas there are some actions which
bring some little benefit, but yet are no apparent hindrances of any of the
work of the day, it seems to me too much Ceremoniousness, and too
ungospel-like, to trouble our own or other men's Consciences, by concluding such
things to be unlawful. If one have a word to speak of some considerable worldly
business, which may be forgotten if it be not presently spoken; or if I meet
one with whom I must speak the next day about some worldly business, and if I
then wish him not to come speak with me, I must send a great way to him
afterward, I will not say that it is a sin to speak such a word. I will first
look at a man's positive duties on the Lords day, how he hears, and reads,
and prays, and spends his time, and how he instructs and helps his
Family; And if he be diligent in seeking God, ( Heb. 11. 6.) and ply his
Heavenly business, I shall be very backward to judge him for a word or action
about wordly things that falls in on the by without any hinderance to his
spiritual work. And if another speak not a word of any common thing, and yet do
little in spiritual things, for his own or others edification, I shall think
him a great abuser or neglecter of the Lords day. A few words about a common
thing that falls in the way, may be spoken without any hinderance of any holy
duty: But still we must see that it be not a scandalous temptation to others.
If I see a man that unexpectedly finds some uncomely hole or rent in his
Clothes, either pin it up, or few it up before he goes abroad, I will not
blame him: But if he do it so as to embolden another who uses needlessly to
mend his Clothes on the Lords day, it will be a sin of scandal. If I see one
cut some undecent straggling hairs before he go forth, I will not blame him:
But if he do it before one who will be encouraged by it, to be barbed needlessly
on that day, he will offend. And so in other cases.

VI. By these same Rules also we may judge of Recreations on the Lords day. The
Recreations of the mind must be the various holy employments of the day. No
bodily Recreations are lawful which needlessly waste time, or hinder our duty,
or divert our minds from holy things, or are a snare to others. Unless it be
some weak persons whose health requires bodily motion, few persons need any
other than holy recreations on that day. I know no one man that so much needs
it as my self, who these twenty years cannot digest one days meat, unless I
walk, or run, or exercise my body before it, till I am hot or sweat; And
therefore necessity requires me to walk or fast: But I do it privately on that
day, left I tempt others to sin. But I will not censure one whom I see walking
at fit hours, when for ought I know he may be taken up in some fruitful
Meditation. But if persons will walk in the Streets or Fields in idleness, or
for vain delight, or discourse, as if the day were too long for them, and they
had no business to do for their souls, this is not only a sin, but a very ill
sign of one that is senseless of his souls necessity and his duty.

VII. To read History, Philosophy, or common things, unnecessarily on the Lords
day, is a sinful diversion from the more spiritual work of it; and unsuitable
to the appointed uses of the day (much more Romances, Play Books, or idle
stories:) Yea or those parts of Divinity it self, which are less practical and
useful to the raising of Thankful and Heavenly affections. But yet sometimes
such other matter may fall in, at a Sermon, or Conference, or in Meditation,
which will require a present satisfaction in some point of History,
Philosophy, or controversal Divinity, which may be subserviently used to
Edification, without sin. Here therefore we must judge prudently.

VIII, A thing that may be lawful singly in it self, unless it be of great
necessity is unlawful when he that serves us in it is drawn or encouraged to
make a trade of it. As to use a Barber to cut your hair; or a Tailor to mend
your Clothes, or a Coblar to mend your Shoes: Because if you may use him; so
may others as well as you, and so he will follow his Calling on the Lords day.
And yet I dare not say, if when you are to travel to Church, you find your
Shoes or Boots by breaking something, to make you incapable of going out, but
you may get them mended privately, where it may be done without this
inconvenience. And though Cooks and Bakers should not be unnecessarily used in
their trade, yet is it not always unlawful, but sometimes very well. Because
as one servant in the Kitchen may be used to dress meat for all the family, so
one Baker or Cook may serve many families, and save ten times as many persons
the labor which else they must be at; And perhaps with easier and quicker
dispatch than others. The trade of the Apothecary, Surgeon and Physician is
ordinarily used but for necessity.

IX. There is no sufficient avoidance of such abuses, but by careful foresight,
and prevention and preparation the week before; which therefore must be
conscionably done.

CHAP. XII.
Of what importance the due Observation of the Lords day is.
THese singular benefits of keeping the Lords day aright, should make all that
Love God, or holiness or the Church, or their own or other men's souls, take
heed how they grow into a neglect or abuse of it; much more that they plead not
for such negligence or abuse.

I. The due observation of the Lords day is needful to keep up the solemn
worship of God, and public owning and honoring him in the world: If all men
were left to themselves, what time they would bestow in the worshipping of God,
the greatest part would cast off all, and grow into Atheism or utter
profaneness; And the rest would grow into confusion. And if all Princes and
Rulers or Churches in the world were left to their own wills to appoint the
people on what days to meet, some Kingdoms and Churches would have one day, in
eight, or nine, or ten, or twenty, and some only now and then an hour, and some
one day, and some another, and some next to none at all. For there is no one
universal Monareh on Earth to make Laws for them all (whatever the Pope or his
nominal-General Councils may pretend to:) And they would never all come to any
reasonable agreement voluntarily among themselves. Therefore the Light of
Nature tells us, that as a day is meet and needful to be stated, so it is
meet that God himself the true Universal Monarch should determine of it; which
accordingly he has done. And this is the very hedge and defensative of Gods
public Worship. When he has made a Law that one whole day in seven shall be
spent in it, men are engaged to attend it.

O what a happy acknowledgement of God our Creator and Redeemer is it, and an
honoring of his blessed name, when all the Churches throughout all the World,
are at once praising the same God, with the same praises, and hearing and
learning the same Gospel, and professing the same faith, and thankfully
commemorating the same benefits! The Church is then indeed, like an Army with
Banners. And were it not for this days observation, alas, how different would
the case be? And what greater thing can man be bound to, than thus, to keep up
the solemn acknowledgement and worship of God and our Redeemer in the world?

II. The due Sanctification of the Lords day, does tend to make Religion
Universal, as to Countries and individual persons, which else would be of
narrower extent. When all the world are under a Divine obligation, to spend one
day every week in the exercises of Religion, (and superiors see to the
performance of their subjects obedience to this Law,) it will make men to be in
some sort Religious whether they will or not: Though they cannot be truly
Religious against their will, it will make them visibly religious. Yea Gods own
Law, if man's did nothing, would lay arrawe on the Consciences of most, who
believe that there is a God that made that Law. And the weekly Assemblies keep
up the knowledge and profession of the Christian faith, and keep God and Heaven
in the peoples remembrance, and keep sin under constant rebukes and disgrace:
And were it not for this, Heathenisme, Infidelity and profaneness would
quickly overspread the world. The Lords day keeps up the Christian Religion
in the World.

III. The lamentable Ignorance of the generality in the world, does require the
strict and diligent observation of the whole Lords day. Children and Servants,
and ordinary Country people, yea and too many of higher quality, are so
exceeding Ignorant of the things of God and their Salvation, that all the
constantest diligence that can be used with them, in Preaching, Exhorting,
Catechizing, etc. will not overcome it with the most. The most diligent Masters
of Families lament it, how Ignorant their Families are when they have done the
best they can. Let those that plead for dancing and sporting away much of the
day, but do like men that do not secretly scorn Christianity, nor despise their
servants souls, and let them but try what measure of knowledge the bare hearing
of Common Prayer, yea and a Sermon or two with it, will beget in their
servants, if the rest of the day be spent in sports; and let them judge
according to experience. If ever knowledge be propagated to such, and families
made fit to live like Christians, it is likest to be by the holy improvement of
this day, in the diligent teaching and Learning the substance of Religion, and
in the Sacred exercises thereof.

IV. The great Carnality, Wordliness and Carelessness of the most, and their
great averseness to the things of God, does require that they be called and
kept to a close and diligent improvement of the Lords day. Whatever
unexperienced or carnal persons may pretend, that such constant duty so long
together will make them worse and more averse, reason, experience and Scripture
are all against them. If there be some backwardness at the first, it is not
sports and idleness that will cure it, but resisting of the slothful humor,
and keeping to the work. For there is that in Religion that tends to overcome
men's averseness to Religion; And it must be overcome by Religion, and not by
playing or idleness, if ever it be overcome. It is want of knowledge and
experience of it, which makes them loath it or be weary of it: when they have
tried it more and know it better, they will (if ever) be reconciled to it. Six
days in a Week are a sufficient diversion. Apprentices, and Pupils and
School-boyes will hold on in learning, though they be averse; And you think not
all the six days too much to hold them to it. A Schoolboy must learn daily,
eight or nine hours in a day; and yet some wretched men (yea Teachers) would
persuade poor souls that must learn how to be saved or perish for ever, that
less than eight hours one day in seven, is too much to be spent in the
needfullest, excellentest and pleasantest matters in all the World.

If you say that the sublimity or difficulty makes it wearisome, I answer,
that Philosophers do much longer hold on in harder speculations.

If you say Divinity being unsuitable to carnal minds, their sick Stomachs must
take no more than they can digest, I answer, 1. Cannot a Carnal Preacher for
his gain, and honor, and fancy, hold on all the year in the study even of
Divinity, perhaps eight or ten hours every day in the week? And may not
ignorant people be brought one day to endure to be taught as long? 2. That
which you call Digesting, is but Understanding, and believing, and receiving
it: And one truth tends to introduce another; And he that cannot learn with
an hours labor may learn more in two. 3. And it is hearing and exercise that
must cure their want of appetite. Experience tells us, that when people take
the liberty of plays, and sports, and idleness for a recreation, they come
back with much more want of Love to holy exercises, than they that continue
longer at them. Gratifying sloth and sensuality, increases it, and increases
an averseness to all that is good; For who are more averse than they that are
most voluptuous? If ever people be made seriously holy, it is a due observation
of the whole Lords day, that is like to bring them to it (I mean observing it
in such Learning and seeking duties as they are capable of, till they can do
better) For when the mind long dwells on the truth, it will sink in and work;
And many strokes will drive the nail to the head.

Let the Adversaries of this day and diligence but observe, And if true
experience tell not the World that more souls are Converted on the Lords days
than on all other days besides, and that Religion best prospers both as to
the Number and the knowledge and serious Holiness of the professors of it,
where the Lords day is carefully sanctified, rather than where Idleness and
playing do make intermission, than I will confess that I am incapable of
knowing any thing of this nature by experiences. But if it be so, fight not
against the common light.

V. The Poverty, Servitude and worldly necessities of the most, do require a
strict observation of the whole Lords day. Tenants, and Laborers, Carters and
Carryers, and abundance of Tradesmen are so poor, that they can hardly spare
any other considerable proportion of time: much less all their Children and
Servants, whose subjection, with their Parents and Masters poverty, restrains
them. Alas, they are fain to rise early and hasten to their work, and scarce
have leisure to eat and sleep as nature requires: And they are so toiled and
wearied with hard labor, that if they have at night a quarter of an hour to
read a Chapter and Pray, they can scarce hold open their eyes from sleeping.
What time has the Minister then to come and teach them (if we had such
Ministers again as would be at the pains to do it?) And what time have they to
hear or learn? You must teach them on the Lords day, or scarcely at all. Almost
all that they must learn, must be then learnt.

I deny not but in those former years, when the Law forbad me not to Preach the
Gospel, the people came to me on the week day, house by house, and also that
they Learned much in their shops while they were working. But, 1. It came to
each Families turn but one hour, or little more in a whole Year (For about
fourteen families a week so Catechized and instructed, did no sooner bring
their course about.) 2. And our people were mostly Weavers, whose labor was
not like the Plowmans, Masons, Carpenters, Carryers, etc. to take up their
thoughts; but they could lay a Book before them and read, or meditate, or
Discourse to Edification whilst they were working. But this is not the case of
the Multitude.

And let any sober man but consider, whether with people so ignorant and averse
as the most are, should he be never so diligent on the Lords day, the six days
intermission be not a great cooling of affection, and a great delayer of their
growth in knowledge; when they are like by the weeks end to forget all that
they had learned on the Lords day. What then would these poor people come to,
if the Lords day it self must be alsoloitered or played away?

VI. The tyranny of many Masters makes the Lords day a great mercy to the
world: For if God had not made a Law for their Rest and Liberty, abundance of
worldly impious persons, would have allowed them little Rest for their bodies,
and less opportunity for the good of their souls. Therefore they have cause
with great thankfulness to improve the holy liberty which God has given them,
and not cast it away on play or idleness.

VII. The full improvement of the Lords days does tend to breed and keep up an
able faithful Ministry in the Churches (on which the preservation and glory of
Religion much depends.) When there is a necessity of full Ecclesiastical
performances imposed on Ministers, they are also necessitated to prepare
themselves with answerable abilities and fitness. But when no more is required
of them, but to read the Liturgy, or to say a short and dry Discourse, they
that know no more is necessary (to their ends) are so strongly tempted to get
ability and preparations for no more, that few will overcome the temptation.
And therefore the World knows that in Moscovy, Abassia, and for the most part
of the Greek and Armenian Churches, as nothing or little more than Reading is
required, so little more ability than to Read is labored after, And the
Ministers are ordinarily so ignorant and weak, as is the scorn and decay of the
Christian Religion.

VIII. Yea it will strongly incline Masters of Families to labor more for
abilities, to instruct and Catechize their Families, and pray with them, and
guide them in the fear of God, when they know that the whole day must be
improved to the spiritual good of their Families. And so knowledge, abilities,
and family-holiness will increase: Whereas those that think themselves under no
such obligations, what ignorant, profane and ungodly families have they?
because for the most part, they are such themselves.

IX. A multitude of gross sins will be prevented by the due observation of the
Lords day. Nothing more usual than for the sports, riots, idleness and
sensuality of that day, to be nurseries of Oaths, Curses, Ribaldry,
Fornication, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Frayes and Bloodshed. And is not Gods
Service better work than these?

X. Lastly, This holy order and prosperity of the Churches, and this knowledge
and piety in individual Subjects, will become the safety, beauty, order and
felicity, of Kingdoms, and all Civil societies of men. For when the people are
fit but duly to use and sanctify the Lords day, they are fit to use all things
in a sanctified manner, and to be an honor to their Country, and an ease, and
comfort to their Governors, and a common blessing to all about them.

CHAP. XIII.
What other Church Festivals or separated days are lawful.
I Shall conclude this Discourse with the brief answer of this Question.

I. No sober Christian doubts, but that some part of every day is to be spent
in Religious exercises; And that even our earthly business must be done with a
spiritual intent and mind. And that every day must be kept as like to the Lords
day, as our weakness, and our other duties, which God has laid upon us, will
allow.

II. Few make any question but the whole days of Humiliation and of
Thanksgiving may and must be kept upon great and extraordinary occasions, of
Judgments or of mercies. And that many Churches may agree in these. And I know
no just reason why the Magistrate may not (with Charity and Moderation to the
weak) impose them, and command such an agreement among his Subjects.

III. Few doubt but the Commemoration of great Mer^ies or Judgments may be
made anniversary, and of long continuance. As the Powder Plot day ( Nov. 5.) is
now made among us, to preserve the memorial of that deliverance. And why may it
not be continued, whilst the great sense of the benefit should be continued?
And so the second of Sept. is set apart for the Anniversary humbling
remembrance, of the Firing of London. And so in diverse other cases.

IV. The great blessing of an Apostolic Ministry, and of the stability of the
Martyrs in their sufferings for Christ, being so rare and notable a Mercy to
the Church, I confess I know no reason why the Churches of all succeeding ages
may not keep an Anniversary day of Thanksgiving to God for Peter or Paul, or
Stephen, as well as for the Powder plot-deliverance. I know not where God has
forbidden it, directly or indirectly. If his instituting the Lords day were a
virtual prohibition for man to separate any more, or if the prohibition of
adding to Gods Word were against it, they would be against other days of
Humiliation and Thanksgiving, especially Anniversarily; which we confess they
are not. If the reason be scandal, lest the Men should have the honor instead
of God, I Answer, 1. An honor is due to Apostles and Martyrs in their places,
in meet subordination to God. 2. Where the case of scandal is notorious, it may
become by that accident unlawful, and yet not be so in other times and places.

V. The Devil h^th here been a great Vndoer by Overdoing: When he knew not how
else to cast out the holy observation of the Lords day, with zealous people he
found out the trick of devising so many days called Holy days to set up by
it, that the people might perceive that the observation of them all as holy,
was never to be expected. And so the Lords day was jumbled in the heap of holy
days, and all turned into Ceremony, by the Papists and too many other Churches
in the World. Which became Calvin's temptation (as his own words make plain) to
think too meanly of the Lords day with the rest.

VI. In the lawful observation of days, it is most orderly to do as the
Churches do which we live among and are to join with.

VII. But if Church tyranny would overwhelm any place with over-numerous days
(or Ceremonies which are (singly considered) lawful, we should do nothing
needlessly to countenance and encourage such usurpation.

VIII. Yet is it lawful to hear a Sermon, which shall be Preached on a humane
Holy day, which is imposed by Usurpation. Seeing such a a Moral duty may be
done, and so great a benefit received, without any approbation of the
inconvenient season.

IX. And when we think it unlawful to join in the positive Celebration of
unlawful days (as the Mohammedan Sabbath,) yet it may become a duty for the
civil peace and our own safety, to obey the Magistrate in forbearing open
opposition or contempt, or working upon that day? And so Paul justifies
himself against the Jews accusations, that they found him not in the Temple
disputing with any man, nor raising up the people, nor in the Synagogues, nor
in the City, Act. 24. 12. unless it be when we have a special call, to reprove
the error which we forbear complying with.

X. It is long ago decided by the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. and 15. that we must
not be contentious, contemptuous, nor censorious against one another, about
things of no greater moment, than the Jewish days were, though some observed
them without just cause: Because the Kingdom of God consists not in Meats,
and Drinks, and Days, but in righteousness and peaceableness and joy in the
Holy Ghost. And he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God
(and received by him) and approved of (wise) men, and should be received to
Communion with them, Romans 14. 17, 18. and 15. 7. We must therefore follow after
the things that make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another,
Romans 14. 19.

XI. The Controversy, whether it be lawful to separate an Anniversary day for
the Commemoration of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision and such like things which
were equally existent in the Apostles days, and the reason for observing them
equal with following times, (and so the Apostles had the same reason to have
appointed such days had they thought it best, as we have) I acknowledge too
hard for me to determine* not being able to prove it lawful, I cannot own and
justify it; And not seeing a plain prohibition I will not condemn it, nor be
guilty of unpeaceable opposing Church Customs or Authority in it, but behave
my self as a peaceable doubter.

XII. But that no earthly power may appoint a weekly day, in commemoration of
any part of our Redemption, besides the Lords day, and so make another
separated weekly stated Holy day, I think plainly unlawful, Because it is a
doing the same thing for one day which God has done already by another; And so
seems to me, 1. An usurpation of a power not given, and 2. An accusation of
Christ and the Holy Ghost, as if he had not done his work sufficiently, but man
must come after and do it better.

But especially if such (or any day or Ceremony) be by an universal Law imposed
on the Universal Church, it is arrogant usurpation of the Divine Authority;
there being no Vicarious Head or Monarch under Christ of all the World or all
the Church, nor any Universal Governor who may exercise such Legislation,
whether personal or Collective.

The same I may say of any that would presume to abrogate the Lords day.

And so much shall suffice in great haste of this subject.

And to thee O most Glorious and Gracious Creator and Redeemer, I humbly
return my unfeigned thanks, for the unspeakable mercies which I have received
on thy day; And much more for so great a Mercy to all thy Churches and the
World: And craving the pardon (among the rest) of the sins which I have
committed on thy Day, I beseech thee to continue this exceeding mercy, to thy
Churches and to Me; and restore me and other of thy Servants, to the
privileges, and comforts of this Day; which we have forfeited and lost; And
let me serve thee in the Life, and Light, and Love of thy Spirit, in these thy
Holy Days on Earth, till I be prepared for, and received to, the Everlasting
Rest in Heavenly Glory, Amen.

October. 11. 1670.
FINIS.
AN APPENDIX For further Confirmation of Gods own Separation of the Lords day,
and Disproving the Continuation of the Jewish Seventh day Sabbath.

Written since the Treatise went to the Press, upon the Invitations of some
latter Objections.

Heb. 7. 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the Law.

2 Cor. 3. 7, 11. But if the Minist^ation of Death, in Letters Engraven in
Stones was glorious, etc. If that which was done away was glorious, much more
that which remains is glorious.

Act. 15. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no
greater Bu^den than these necessary things --

Col. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in Mat, or in Drink, or in respect of an Holy
day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath, which are a shadow of things to
come, but the Body is of Christ.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the three Crowns near Holborn Conduit.
1671.

CHAP. I.
An Answer to certain Objections against the Lords Day.
THough they are answered before, the Reader must pardon me, if upon the
particular urgencies of some Objectors, I again make answer to these that
follow.

Obj. Act. 20. 7. The first day (...) the Week; Gr. [one of the Sabbaths] That
(...) breaking of Bread there was common Eating, ^mpare the like greek phrase,
Act. 27. 35. and ^ 42. see Esa. 58. 7. However it was but an ^ample of
Preaching, and breaking Bread, upon a ^ecial occasion.

Answ. 1. That (...) signi^^^th on the first day of the week, the Generality
(...) the ancients both Greek and Latin agree, those testimony about the sense
of a word, is the ^st Dictionary and evidence that we can expect. and the same
phrase used of the Day of Christ's ^surrection by the Evangelists proves it.
though I am sorry to hear of one that denies ^at also, and asserteth that
Christ rose on the second day morning, because else he could not as Jonah, be
three days and nights buried. But I am not so proud as to think my self
capable of convincing that man in such a matter of fact, who will not believe
the historical witness of the whole Church of Christ, and expects to be
believed against them all, at ^uch a distance in the end of the World.

2. There is no doubt but that (...) breaking of Bread, was both a Common and a
Sacred action: And the phrase is to be interpreted by the context, to know when
it signifies the common, and when the Sacred. In Act. 27. 35. the context
teaches us to interpret i^ of common eating: But that it does not so, Act. 2.
42, 46. or Act. 20. is plain to him that considers, 1. That it was then usual
to communicate Sacramentally in all their Church Assemblies. 2. That these
mentioned were Church Assemblies; the Church being met purposely for Sacred
works. Yet it is to be remembered, that the Love feasts did usually concur in
the beginning with the Sacrament, and the name might be used with respect to
both.

3. That it was not a mere occasional meeting* is apparent to the unprejudiced,
1. Because they stayed at ^roas seven days, v. 6. and in all the seven make no
mention of this exercise, but on one only, which was the first, 2. Because as
is said it was not a family, or by-meeting, but a Church^meeting; [The
Disciples came or assembled together^ 3. Because it said that they assembled
for this very end, to b^^^k bread [(...)] 4. The great length of time which was
spent in the holy exercises: Besides the rest of the Worship, and breaking of
Bread, Paul Preaching till midnight: which intimates that such work took up
the day. 5. Because it is mentioned as a matter of their custom: They did not
assemble because Paul called them to hear him only, as being to depart on the
morrow; But Paul assembled with them at the time of their assembling to break
Bread; And it seems that he deferred his journey for that opportunity. 6.
Because other Texts as joined with this, and infallible Church History
following, do prove past all doubt that it was the constant custom of all the
Churches so to do.

Obj. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. The first day of the week, etc. gr. one of the Sabbaths.
It is an ordinance to lay aside for charitable uses; but not one word about
changing of the Sabbath.

Answ. The abolition of the Sabbath we prove not by this Text, but by others:
All that we bring this for, is but to show in conjunction with others, as part
of the Sacred History, that the first day was the Churches separated day. And I
pray mark the strength of the proof, that the Apostle did [ give order that all
the Churches of Galatia as well as the Corinthians, should deposite] their
Alms on one and the same day, viz. on the first day: Was it not enough to tie
them to the contribution, but he must tie them all to one set day to lay it by,
or deposite it? if it had not been because the Churches used to assemble on
this day, and not to appear before God empty (as Dr. Hammond notes on the
Text?) Whoever heard else that God or man tied several Countries to one set day
for the private depositing of their own moneys afterward to be distributed?
With such Sacrifices God is well pleased; And therefore it was ever accounted
by Christians a fit work for the sanctified day: But no other day was ever
appointed peculiarly for the set time of laying by men's gifts of Charity.

Obj. Rev. 1. 10. John was in the Spirit on the Lords day. Compare Exodus 20.
10, etc. Esa. 58. 13, etc. Luke 6. 5. Mark 2. 28. Mat. 12. 8, etc. And if the
Scriptures be the rule to judge, resolve whether that day be not the Lords day,
of which day, (and of which only as distinguished from the other days of the
week,) the Son of man is Lord.

Answ. We are not upon a Controversy of title or propriety, whether God be
Lord of other days: For so no doubt, he is Lord of all, and therefore no more
of one than another, because his propriety in each one is absolute; And it can
be no more in any. Thus also he is absolute Lord of all things, all places, all
persons, etc. And yet some things, some places, some persons have been
separated to his service by a peculiar Dedication and Relation; and thence have
been peculiarly called The Lords. And the Texts cited by you out of the old
Testament prove that such was the seventh day Sabbath then: But not that it is
so now; or was to be so for perpetuity.

And the words of the new Testament cited [ The Son of man is Lord also, or
even of the Sabbath day,] shows no more, then that it was in his power: He
gives it as a reason for his doing that which the Pharisees counted
Sabbath-breaking (By which he oftentimes offended them;) and not as a reason of
his astablishing it. And it seems plainly to mean, that being but a Positive
Law, and a Law of Moses, he had power to change it, and dispense with it, as
well as with other Positives and Mosaical Laws. As it is said, Ephesians. 1. 22,
23. he has made him Head over all things to the Church; not Head to all
things; so he is Lord over, or of all days; But all are not separated to his
Worship. As it is said, Joh. 17. 2. As thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him: so
it may be said, he has power over all days, that he may sanctify one to his
peculiar service, and use the rest in more common works.

But that which we bring this text for is but to know what day is notified to
the world by this title of The Lords day, and consequently was then accounted
his separated peculiar day. Now the signification of words is known but by use:
They are not Natural signs, but Arbitrary: You know not the sense of one word
of Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, but by the History of their use, by Dictionaries,
Authors or other Tradition. Now it is unquestionable to any man verst in
antiquity, that all the Churches, and Authors, Greek and Latin, Syriack,
Aethiopick, Persian, Arabic, that have been known among us, and speak of such
things, do unanimously call the first day of the week by the name of the Lords
day, as being so called from the beginning, even from the Apostles; And all old
expositors so interpret this present Text. And you may as well question what
day the word Sabbath signified in the Old Testament almost, as what day the
name of [ The Lords day] signified in the new; Or what sort of people they were
that were called Christians first at Antioch, when only one sort has ever
since been notified by that name; Even the Disciples of Christ. The Greek, with
the Syriack Translation, the Arabic, the vulgar Latin, have all [ The Lords
day;] and the Ethiopick as equipollent, has [ the first day] And Dr. Heylin
(who would find something against it if any thing were to be found) speaking of
some of late that otherwise expound it, is so ingenious as to say (Par. 2. cap.
1. p. 37.) Touching this we will not meddle; Let them that own it look to it:
The rather since St. John has generally been expounded in the other sense,
Aretas, and Andr. Caesariensis on the place, and by Bedae de rat. temp. c. 6.
and by the suffrage of the Church, the best expositor of the word of God;
wherein this day has constantly since the time of the Apostles been honored
with that name above other daies] And I know no one man (nor many) that at 1600
years distance almost, is so worthy to be believed for the bare sense of a
word, as the constant use and universal testimony of all ages from that time
till now.

As Christ is the Lord of all our Suppers, yet all are not named The Lords
Supper; so is it in this case.

I must needs conclude therefore, that if I should cast off the evidence of
this Text, upon no greater reason than you offer me, I think, I should resist
the holy Ghost, and use violence against Gods word which I should obey.

Obj. There is no Law in the Scripture to observe the first day, no promise
made to observers of it, no threatening against the breakers of it, etc. show
it. And if no Law, no transgression, Romans 4. 15. Sin is a transgression of the
Law.

Answ. I have showed you full proof of a Law for it before. Though it is not
Christ's way to enact his Laws in that Majestic Commanding forms as God did to
Moses on the Mount: But as he condescended into flesh, to be a Teacher and
Savior, in the form of a Servant, under the Law himself, to redeem those that
were under it, so he makes his Laws in a merciful Teaching style. All that is
revealed by him as his will appointing our duty is his Law. But that we observe
the Lords day is revealed by him as his will, making it our duty.

These are his Laws requiring us to Hear and obey his spirit in his Apostles,
Joh. 20. 21, 22. As the Father has sent me, so send I you: And when he had
said this, be breathed on them and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; etc. Luke
10. 16. He that hears you, hears me.

And this is his Law requiring his Apostles by that spirit to promulgate his
Laws, and make known his will. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go, disciple me all Nations,
Baptizing them, etc. Teaching them to observe all things whatever I have
commanded you, and lo I am with you always to the end of the world (or age)
with the other Texts forecited.

And that the Spirit in the Apostles has settled the Lords day, as the
separated day for holy assemblies and Worship, I have proved to you, both by
the Texts which you now sought in vain to make void, and by the unquestionable
practice and history of the universal Church, from that age until this. And
withal by other Texts which you omit: which (not alone, but) all set together
make up the proof, because it is historical evidence of a matter of fact, which
we have to seek after.

1. Christ's Resurrection laid the foundation, or gave the Cause; as Gods
ceasing from his works did of the Sabbath. 2. Christ's appearing to them
assembled on that day, began the actual separation. 3. The Holy Ghost coming
down on them, on that day, did more notably sanctify it. 4. The Holy Ghost as
an infallible spirit in them, did cause them to make a public settlement of
that day in all the Churches, which was the full and actual establishment. 5.
This settlement is fully proved de facto in Scripture and infallible history.
6. And that there are promises and threatenings, to the obeyers and rejecters,
of Christ's commands, (whom the Father commanded us to hear, and who is the
great Prophet of the Church,) I hope you believe. Rev. 20. 14. Happy are they
who do his commandments that they may have right to the tree of life, etc. Heb.
12. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks; For if they escaped not who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more, etc. Act. 3. 23. It shall come to
pass that every soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from
among the people: 1 John 4. 6. We are of God: He that knows God hears us:
he that is not of God, hears not us: Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and
the spirit of Error.

If besides all this you must have particular precepts, promises and
threatenings in the form which you imagine to be fittest, you may for want of
those deny many other Gospel Laws as well as this. Have you not much more for
the separation of the Lords day, than you have for Infants Baptism, for a
Christian Magistrate, for Christians wageing War, for prohibited degrees as to
Marriage, etc.

I am persuaded the sober study of these points would do much to convince the
contrary minded, 1. How much of Christ's work as to the settlement of
Church-Orders, was committed to the Apostles to be done, and how little he
publicly settled himself in person, before his Resurrection.

2. How much the Gospel administration excels that of the Law. And what
eminent Glory God designeth to himself by the work of man's Redemption, and how
much more now he calls man to Read, and Study and Know him in the face of
Jesus Christ, than in the Creation, And how largely the change of the Covenant
is proved in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

3. What a change is made herein as to man's duty, since the fall of man under
the wrath of the Creator, who is not now his Rest, but his terror and a
consuming fire, till Reconciled and Adopting us in Christ; And since the Earth
is cursed to us as a punishment for our sins.

4. How much of the certainty, and Glory of the Christian faith, and of all our
Rest and Consolation in it, is laid in the Gospel on the RESURRECTION of our
Lord, as beginning a new World, or Creation as it were, and as conquering and
triumphing over death and Satan, and sealing the promise and bringing Life and
Immortality to Light, and opening the Kingdom of Heaven to Believers.

5. How much of Christ's Legislation, and administration of his
Church-settlement and Government was to be done by the Holy Ghost! And how
glorious this office of the Holy Ghost is, and of what grand importance to be
understood: As he was the promised Paraclete or Advocate or Agent of our
glorified Lord, to do his Work on Earth in his bodily absence; To whom the
Infallibility of the Scriptures, the sealing operation of Miracles, the
Sanctification of Believers, and forming them for Glory in the Image of God, is
to be ascribed: Whom to Blaspheme is the unpardonable sin.

6. How dangerous a thing it is made by the Holy Ghost to seek to set up Moses
Law, (as the whole Epistle to the Gal. besides most of the other Epistles
testify) as intimating a denial of Christ, and a falling from Grace, and a
perverse setting up of that which Christ came to take down, as part of our own
redemption. And how large and plain Paul is upon this Subject; and how the
spirit in all the Apostles did determine it, Act. 15. And how the Cerinthians,
Nicolaitans, Ebionites, Nazaraeans, and many more of the condemned Heresies of
that age, which troubled the Churches, and whom the Apostles wrote against,
went all that way of mingling the Jewish Law with the Gospel.

7. How plainly and expressly Paul numbreth Sabbaths with the shaddows that
cease, Col. 2. 16. (to pass by other Texts) And what violence men's own wits
must use, in denying the evidence of so plain a Text. Their reason, that he
says not Sabbath but Sabbaths, is against themselves; the plural number being
most comprehensive, and other Sabbaths receiving their name from this; And the
word Sabbath always used in Scripture, for a Rest which was partly Ceremonial.
See what Dr. Young in his excellent Dies Domin says of this Text (Though I
know some say otherwise to the injury of their own cause,]

8. How many years together the Churches had been in possession, and
consequently in the undoubted knowledge, of the true established day of holy
Worship, before a word of the New Testament was Written. And therefore that it
was not written to be the first enacting of this day or change; but for other
uses.

9. And yet how much evidence of the fact there is in the Scripture it self,
that really such a day was used for the ordinary Church Assemblies, as a
peculiar separated day; even by the Common order of the Apostles in the
Churches, as 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. speaks.

10. And how impossible it is that all the Churches in the World should from
their beginning keep this as the separated day, even by the Apostles and from
their times, if it had not been so ordered by them indeed. And whether it be
possible that in no age near the original hereof, no Pastor, no Christian, no
Heretic, no Enemy would have detected the fraud or common Error, or once have
written, that this day was not separated or used by the Apostles or Apostolical
Churches; no nor any one (that I know of, that denied not the Resurrection)
ever to have scrupled or opposed the day.

11. Whether they that can reject such Historical evidence as this is, do not
unwittingly cast away the holy Scriptures, what zeal soever they pretend or
have for their honor and perfection.

12. Whether they that can reject all this evidence, and yet can find in the
second Commandment, the prohibition of all forms of Prayer, Sermons,
Catechismes, and all modal inventions of men, as Images, if not Idols, are
without partiality, or do not walk as men, by very different measures; and
partial conceptions.

I would on my knees entreat some most dear and worthy friends, on their knees
to ponder these twelve particulars.

But because by their preterition of the Text, Act. 2. 1, 2. I perceive they
observe not, that the Holy Ghost came down on the Lords day, Let them consider
that the Passover was on the Sabbath day that year, and therefore it must
needs be just fifty days to that Lords day, and it must be the day of
Pentecost.

And it is not a trifle, that the first Sermon to (...) people was Preached by
Peter on that day, and ^000 Converted by it and Baptized

Dr. Heyli^s own words are these, [Part. 2. p. 13. The first particular passage
which did occ^^^ in holy Scripture touching the first day of the week, is that
upon that day the Holy Ghost did first come down on the Apostles, and that on
the same day St. Peter Preached his first Sermon, to the Jews, and Baptized
such as believed, there being added to the Church that day 3000 souls] And to
prove the day he says, p. 14. [The rule being this, that on what day soever
the second of the Passover did fall, on that also fell the great Feast of
Pentecost ( as Scaliger de Emend. Temp. l. 2.) So that as often as the Passover
did fall on the Sabbath, as this year it did, then Pentecost fell on the
Sunday.]

The last part of our Objections are from History; and it is said,

Obj. [Qu. Whether the observation of the first day was not brought into this
Island by Antichrist, about 408 or 409 years ago? Roger Hoveden about an. 1202
(above 1200 years after Christ) mentions a Council held in Scotland for the
initiation or first bringing in that which he calls the Dominical day: see this
testimony mentioned by Binius in his Councils, and somewhat enlarged by Matthew.
Paris the old impression fol. 192, 193. and the last Edition fol. 200 and 201;
And how the King of England and the Nobility would not then receive this
alteration. -- I conceive that in the first Centuries the great Controversy
relating to this was about translating the keeping the Passover, which they now
call Easter, from the fourteenth day of the first Moon, etc. (under the color
of honoring Christ) to the first day of the Week as the Dominical day; which
the Popes first set themselves with great vehemence to introduce -- And as the
Pope obtained his purpose for one day in a year, so by degrees in some places,
came in one day in a week, the first day to be observed, and the seventh day by
one of the Popes turned from a Festival (...) Fast, whilst many of the Eastern
and some of the Western Churches did still retain withal the observation of
the seventh-day Sabbath together with the first day, and others of the Churches
in the East and West kept only to the seventh day as the Christian Sabbath, etc.

Answ. How much more desirable an Adversary is Heylin by his acquaintance with
History! 1. Were any of the Authors I before cited either Antichristian or 1200
years after Christ?

Ignatius, if genuine was about an. 102. If not, as Dalaeus thinks then he was
about 300. The Canons called the Apostles, and the Constitutions called the
Apostles, very ancient.

Justin Martyr wrote his Apol, an. 150. about 50 years after St. John's death;
where his testimony is as plain as can be spoken. To which Plinyes who wrote
about 107. some seven years after St. John's death, may be joined that he may be
understood of the day.

Clemens Alexand. about 94 years after St. John, an. 194.

Tertullian who is most express, and full, and frequent, about 198, that is, 98
years after St. John.

Origin about 206 began his Teaching.

Cyprian about an. 250.

Athanasius who wrote largely of it, about an. 330.

To what purpose should I mention again Eusebius, Greg. Nazianzen, Nyssen, and
all the rest. It was but about an. 309, that Constantine began his reign, who
made Laws for the Lords day, which other Christian Emperors enlarged. But how
much earlier were all those Synods which Eusebius mentioned, which in the
determination of Easter owned the Lords day? And that of Nice was but about an.
327. The Council of Laodicea but about an. 314 or 320.

The Council of Eliberis about an. 307. Can. 21. says, If any that live in the
Cities shall stay from Church three Lords days, let him be so long suspended
from the Sacrament, till he be sensible of his punishment.

After this how many Councils and how many Imperial Laws take care of the Lords
days? It is tedious to cite them.

To these may be added, 1. The common agreement that it is founded in the
Resurrection, and was from that time. 2. The early contest for keeping Easter
only on that day, which you note, as being a day by all Christians received. 3.
The common detestation of Fasting on that day. 4. And the universal custom of
not kneeling in adoration on that day: which all show that the day was
specially observed.

Athanasius says de sab. and Circ. Even as at the first it was commanded that
the Sabbath should be observed in memory of the finishing of the World, so do
we celebrate the Lords day as the commemoration of the beginning of a new
Creation. And Hom. de Sem. The Lord transferred the Sabbath to the Lords day.
Though Nannius question the Hom. de semente, so do few others* and none that I
know of, question that de Sab. and Circ.

Greg. Nyss. Orat. in s. Pasc. says, As God rested on the Sabbath from all his
works which he had done in the Creation, so did the only begotten Son of God
rest in truth from all his works, etc.

August. Epist. 119. The Lords day was declared to Christians by the Lords
Resurrection. From that time (or thence) it began to have its Festivity.

Maximus Taurinensis says, Hom. 3. de Pentec. The Lords day is therefore set
apart because on it our Savior as the rising Sun, discussing the infernal
darkness, did shine forth in his resurrection.

And for Fasting, Tertul. de Cor. Mil. c. 3. says, We account it unlawful to
fast on the Lords day. And though the Montanists fasted excessively, they
excepted the Lords day, Tertul. adv. Psych. c. 15.

Ignatius and the Apost. Constable. and Can. are forecited of this.

Austin says, Ep. 86. It is a great scandal to fast on the Lords day. (Which
the Manichees were accused of.)

The Council. Gangr. Can. 18. says. If any on pretense of abstinence fast on
the Lords day, let him be Anathema.

The Council. Caesar-august. c. 2. is against fasting on the Lords day either
for the sake of any time (as Lent) or persuasion, or superstition whatsoever.
So the Council. Agath. c. 12. Council. Aurel. 4. c. 2. And the Council. Carth. an.
398. Can. 64. Let him be taken for no Catholic who purposely fasteth on the
Lords day.

And the prohibition of kneeling in adoration, I have opened before, ex Council.
Nic. c. 20. Council. Trul^. Epiphan. etc. To which I add Collect. Can. Joh^n.
Antioch. sub titulo L. Tertul. de Cor. Mil. c. 3. (now cited) Hieronym. adv.
Lucifer. cap. 4. Die dominico and per omnem Pentecosten nec de geniculis
adorare, and jejunium solvere, multaque alia que non Script^ sunt, rationabilis
sibi observatio vindicavit. (yet Paul kneeled, Act. 20. in that time, vid.
Justell. ad Can. 20. Conc. Nic.) Question. ad Orthod. inter Justin. opera qu.
115. p. 283. Die Dominico genua non flectere symbolum est Resurrectionis, etc.
Germanus Constantinop. in Theoria Eccles. p. 149. Our not kneeling on the Lords
day, signifies our erection from our fall, by Christ's Resurrection, etc. see
also Basil de spir. Sanc. c. 27. To. 2. p. 112, 113. and Balsamon thereon p.
1032. and Zonari. in c. 20. Conc. Nic. p. 66. see Casp. Suicerus de bisce sacr.
observe. c. 6.

2. Your Historical observations are utterly mistaken. The observation of the
Lords day was in all the Churches past all Controversy from the beginning,
while the time of Easter was in Controversy, as I have proved. Why would you
not name those Churches in East and West (which I never read or heard of) yea
or that person, that was for the seventh day alone? I am confident because you
could not do it. Indeed all Churches called the seventh day alone by the old
name Sabbath, while they maintained the Sabbath to be ceased; But under the
name of the Lords day, the first was solemnly observed.

3. In Hoveden and Mat. Paris, there is not a word of what you say; so much do
you mis-cite History. There is indeed an. 1201. (which as I remember is
Hovedens last) the story that many Authors talk of, and Heylin mentions, of
one that sound a Letter pretended from Heaven upon the Altar, reproving the
crying sins of the times, and especially the profanation of the Lords day, and
requiring them to keep it strictly for the time to come: which was so far from
being the initiation of the Lords day, that it was about 1167 years after it.
And how could men pretend such a Divine reproof for such a sin, if the day not
been received before? I pray read Heylins History against us, which will set
you righter in the matter of fact. And there is no mention of any such Council
as you talk of, for the initiation of the Lords day, nor any resistance of the
Kings, or Scots: There is nothing of all this in Hoveden or Mat. Paris.

4. But what if England had been ignorant of the Lords day till then (which is
utterly untrue) it follows not that they kept the Sabbath on the seventh day.
Nor would a Barbarous remote corner of the World, prejudice the testimony of
all Christ's Churches in every age.

5. But that you may see how greatly you mistake the case of England; read but
our eldest English Historian, Beda Hist. Eccles. As l. 1. 26. he mentions an
old Church named St. Martins built in the Romans time, and cap. 33. a Church
built by the ancient faithful Romans; (And by the way, I think it most probable
that the Roman Soldiers first brought Christianity into Britain) so he often
describes the Worship as agreeable to other Churches: And l. 2. c. 2. he
begins his reproof of the Britains for not keeping Easter on the due Lords day,
but never reproves them for not keeping the Lords day it self. And though the
Britans and the Scots had so little regard of the English Bishops sent from
Rome, that they awhile refused so much as to eat with them, yea or to eat in
the same Inn ( cap. 4. li. 2.) yet about the Lords day there was no
Controversy. Lib. 3. c. 4. he tells you that the Scots difference about Easter
day continued till, an. 716. for want of intelligence from other Churches,
though Columbanus and his followers were very holy persons. And (that you may
see you error) he there tells you that they did not keep Easter day with the
Jews on the fourteenth day still, as some thought, but on the Lords day; but
not in the right week: For (says he) they knew (as being Christians) that the
Lords Resurrection which was on the first day of the week, was always to be
celebrated on the first day of the week; But being Barbarous and Rusticks, they
had not yet learned when that same first day of the week, which is now called
the Lords day, did come.

Here you see that it was past Controversy with them that the Lords day must
be Celebrated in memorial of Christ's Resurrection, and the Scots kept not
Easter on any other Week day; And that they had not been like Christians, if
they had not owned and kept the Lords day; only they had not skill enough in
Calculating the times, so as to know when the true Anniversary Lords day came
about, but kept Easter on a wrong Lords day.

The same he says again in the praise of F^nan lib. 3. cap. 17. that though he
kept not Easter at the due time, yet he did not, as some fals^y think, keep it
on any week day in the fourteenth Moon with the Jews; but he always kept it on
the Lords day, from the fourteenth Moon to the twentieth, because of the Belief
of the Lords Resurrection, which the Church truly believed was on the first day
of the week for the hope of our Resurrection, and which (they believed) will
fall out on the same first day, of the week, which is now called the Lords day.

So cap. 25. the King and the Queen kept Easter on several Lords days, and the
difference made the stir: And Wilfrid in his Speech there says the same, that
the Scots kept Ester only on the Lords day; (by whom the King at that time was
changed.)

And li. 3. c. 26. Beda says that Tuda, (another holy follower of the Scots)
being made Bishop,

On the Lords days the people flockt by crowds together either to the Church,
or to the Monasteries, not to refresh their bodies, but to learn the word of
God; and if any Priest hapt to come into a Village, presently the Inhabitants,
Congregati in unum, gathered together, took care to seek from him the word of
life.]

Cap. 2. li. 4. Theodorus his Consecration on the Lords day is mentioned.

Lib. 4. cap. 5. In the Synod at Herudford the first Canon is that all keep
Easter on the Lords day next after the fourteenth Moon of the first Month.

Lib. 5. cap. 22. Ceolfridus sends an Epistle to the King of the Picts, in
which are these words [Postquam vero Pas^ha nostrum immolatus est Christus,
Diemque nobis Dominicam, quae apud antiqu^t una (...) prima Sabbati sive
Sabbatorum vocatur, gaudio suae Resurrectionis fecit esse solennem; ita hanc
nunc Apostolica traditio festis Paschalibus inseruit.] that is, [But when
Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, and by the Joy of his Resurrection
made the Lords day, which by the Ancients was called one or the first of the
Sabbath or Sabbaths, to be a solemn day to us; so now Apostolical Tradition
has ingraffed it into the Paschal Festivals:] Where you see that the Lords day
settled as solemn by the Resurrection, he takes for uncontroverted, but the
graffing it into the Easter Festivals, he ascribes to Apostolical Tradition,
meaning St. Peter's.

And after in the same Epistle [ Qui tertia post immolationem suae passionis
die resurgens a mortuis, hanc dominicam vocari, and in ea nos annuatim
Paschalia ejusdem Resurrectionis voluit festa celebrare;] that is, [ Christ
rising from the dead, the third day after the Sacrifice of his passion, would
have this called the Lords day, and would have us on it to Celebrate the
Paschal Feast of his Resurrection.] The like is after again in that Epistle,
with this addition, that we hold that our own Resurrection will be on the Lords
day. By this Epistle the King of the Picts was brought to Conformity in that
day and made Laws for it: And Cap. 23. The Scots of Hy who stood out so long,
were brought to it by the persuasion of Eigbertus. Judge now of your Historical
note of England.

But that you may see more of this, you may Read Beda's mind that lived in
England in other of his Works. On Act 20. [ In una Sabbathi eum convenissemus
ad fraugendum p^nem; id est, Die Dominico qui est primus a Sabbate, cum ad
mysteria celebrandae Congreg^ti essemus;] that is, [ On the Lords day, which is
the first from the Sabbath, when we were Congregated to Celebrate the
Mysteries] -- And he thinks it called, The Lords day, because it is the
Remembrance of the Lords Resurrection or ours.

And on Luc. 6. fol. 78. he says [The observation of the Legal Sabbath, ought
of it self to cease, and the natural liberty of a Sabbath to be restored, which
till Moses time was like other days. That as it is not circumcision or the
Ceremonies of the Law that save the Church but the faith of Abraham working by
Love, by which being uncircumcised he was justified, so he calls the second
Sabbath after the first, no other but the spiritual Sabbath, in which as on
other days, it is lawful to do any profitable work, for distinction from the
Jewish Sabbath, in which it was not lawful to travel, to gather Wood, nor to do
other needful things] Pardon his Error about that word; I only cite it for the
historical use.

And on Luc. 24. 1. fol. 143. [One of the Sabbaths, or the first of the
Sabbaths, is the first day after the Sabbath, which the Christian custom has
called the Lords day, because of the Lords Resurrection.]

And ibid. fol. 143. [Whence Ecclesiastical custom has obtained, that either
in memory of Christ's Resurrection, or for the hope of ours, we Pray not with
bended knees, but only with faces declined toward the Earth, on every Lords
day, and all the quadragesimae.]

And in Act. 2. 1. [The Holy Ghost sent -- the example of the ancient sign
returning, did himself by his own coming most manifestly Consecrate the Lords
day.]

And on Col. 2. fol. 308. he shows that the Sabbath was a shadow, and Christ
that made it was Lord of it and ended it; and that to abstain from sin is now
our Sabbath. See him also on Rev. 1. 10. Heb. 4. fol. 308. 2 Cor. 3. fol. 176.
D.

And because he was a Scot, I will add Sedulius who lived 430. In Col. 2. fol
91. [The Sabbath being a shadow ceased when the Body came, because the Truth
being present, the Image is needless. And on Heb. 4 9. There remains a Rest,
that is, The Eternal Rest which the Jewish Sabbath signified.]

See Philastrius H^res. 8. Abundance more of this kind I might Cite, but for
making the Book tedious to those that need it not. And so much of the History,
to satisfy your Objections and Mistakes.

CHAP. II. An Answer to more Arguments for the seventh day Sabbath.
Reasons.
1. THat the Lord Jesus Christ is Jehovah, Zach. 11. 13. and 12, 4, -- 10. Genesis
19. 24. Act. 2. 25. compared with Psalm. 16. 8, etc. The Lord our Righteousness,
Jer. 23. 6.

Answers.
1. THis is no Controversy among us, meaning of Christ's Divine Nature; and his
person in respect thereof.

Reasons.
2. That the World was made by Jehovah Christ, Joh. 1. 3, 10. Heb. 1. 2, 3, 10.
Col. 1. 14, 15, 16, 17. Ephesians. 3. 9. Psalm. 102. 22, 24, 25. Heb. 3. 4. Romans 11.
36. 1 Cor. 8. 6. Genesis 2. 4, etc.

Answers.
2. Nor is this any Controversy, if meant of the second person in the eternal
Trinity, not yet Incarnate, nor in the flesh Anointed (Christ.)

Reasons.
3. The seventh day Sabbath was instituted by Jehovah Christ, and kept by him,
Genesis 2. 2, 3, 4. whilst man was in innocence, before the Fall, Genesis 3. 6. (and
before any Types.)

Answers.
3. Though this have long been doubted in the Church, some thinking it
mentioned but by Anticipation yet I deny it not, but believe that it was
Sanctified and kept from the beginning, because the Reason of the Consecration
was from the beginning. But, 1. The second Person is not called Christ before
the fall, nor without respect to his humane Nature. 2. It is uncertain whether
it was before the fall; because we know not whether man fell on the same day in
which he was Created, which is the commonest opinion, (though unproved)
Whereupon Mr. ^. Walker in his Treat. of the Sabbath maintains, that the fall
and promise went before the Sabbath, and so that Gods rest had respect to
Christ promised, as the perfection of his works, and that the Sabbath was first
founded on Christ and the promise. But because all this is unproved Opinion, I
incline to the Objectors, and the common sense.

Reasons.
4. The seventh day Sabbath was kept by Abraham, Genesis 26. 5. by the Israelites,
Exodus 5. 5. The Law for the seventh day was repeated Exodus 16. 22, 23.

Answers.
4. I am of the same opinion; but it is uncertain; so far as it is uncertain
whether it was instituted actually at first. But the rest, Ex. 5. 5. seems
plainly to referr to no Sabbath, but to the peoples neglect of their tasks,
while Moses kept them in hope of deliverance, and treated for them. And their
tasks, with their desire, to go into the Wilderness to Sacrifice, makes it
probable that Pharaoh never allowed them the Sabbaths rest.

Reasons.
5. The Decalogue was spoken by Jehovah Christ, Exodus 20. 1. ( see the
Assemblies lesser Catechism on the Preamble in the Commands:) Because the Lord
is our God, etc. Redeemer, etc. therefore we are bound to keep, etc. Exodus 19.
3. compared with Act. 7. 38. Esa. 63. 9. Ex. 19. 17. The Decalogue written by
his Finger, Ex. 31. 18. On Tables of Stone, Ex. 32. 15, 16, 19. and 34, 1, 28.
and kept by all the Prophets.

Answers.
5. All true, and uncontroverted, with these suppositions: 1. That the Father
as well as the Son gave the Decalogue: 2. That the second person was not (...)
Incarnate, (Christ.) 3. That the Law was given by the Ministration of Angels,
who its like are called the Voice and Finger of God. 4. That God our Redeemer
did variously Govern his Kingdom, by his Law and Covenant in various Editions:
of which more anon.

Reasons.
6. The Decalogue was confirmed by Jehovah, Christ, Man. 5. 17, 18, 19. Luke
16. 17. Mat. 28. 20. Joh. 14. 15. and 15. 14. Rom 3. 31. and 7. 12. Jam. 2. 8,
12. NewCovenant, Heb. 8. 10. 1 John 3. 22, 24. 1 John 5. 3. 2 Ep. Joh. 5. 6.
Rev. 12. 17. and 14. 12. and 22. 14, 18. compared with Mal. 4. 4.

Answers.
6. Here begins our fundamental difference: I shall first tell you what we
take for the truth, and then consider of what you allege against it.

1. We hold that every Law is the Law of some one; some Lawmakers or Sovereign
power: And therefore Christ being now the Head over all things to the Church,
Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. whatever Law is now in Being to the Church, must needs be the
Law of Christ.

2. We hold that Christ's Redeemed Kingdom has been Governed by him, with
variety of Administrations, by various Editions of his Law or Covenant: That
is, I. Universally to Mankind; viz. 1. Before his Incarnation: which was;
first, To Adam, and secondly to Noah, and to mankind in them both: 2. After his
Incarnation. II. Particularly, to the seed of Abraham even the Jews as a
particular Political society; chosen out of the World (not as the only people
or Church of God on Earth, but) for peculiar extraordinary mercies as a
peculiar people.

3. We believe that each of these Administrations was fittest for its proper
time and subject, according to the manifold Wisdom of God: But yet the
Alterations were many and great, and all tended toward perfection: so that the
last Edition of the Covenant by Christ Incarnate and his Holy Spirit, much
excelled all that went before, in the Kingdom of the Mediator. And all these
changes were made by God-Redeemer himself.

4. As it was the work of the Redeemer to be the Repairer of Nature, and
recoverer of man to God; so in all the several Administrations, the great Laws
of Nature containing man's duty to God, resulting from and manifested in our
Nature as related to God, and in the Natura rerum or the Works of God, was
still made the chief part of the Redeemers Law: so that this Law of Nature,
whose sum is the Love of God, and of his Image, is ever the Primitive
unchangeable Law; and the rest are secondary subservient Laws, either Positive,
or remedying, or both. And no tittle of this shall ever cease, if nature cease
not.

5. But yet there are temporary Laws of Nature, which are about Temporary
things; or where the Nature of the thing it self is mutable, from whence the
Natural duty does result. As it was a duty by the then Law of Nature it self;
for Adams Sons and Daughters to Marry [Increase and multiply] being made a
natural Benediction, and the means a natural Duty. And yet now, it is incest
against the Law of Nature, for Brother and Sister to Marry. So it was a Natural
duty for Adam and Eve before their Fall to love each other as innocent; but not
so when they ceased to be innocent: For cessanie materia cessat obligatio.

6. So also some Positive Commands made to Adam in Innocence ceased on the
fall, and sentence; (As to dress that Garden.) And some positives of the first
Administrations of Grace, did cease by the supervening of a more perfect
administration. As the two Symbolical or Sacramental Trees in the Garden, were
no longer such to man when he was turned out; so no positive Ordinance of
Grace, was any longer in force, when God himself repealed it, by the
introduction of a more perfect Administration.

7. Accordingly we hold, that a change is now made of the sanctified day. Where
note, 1. That we take not the seventh day, (no nor one day in seven, though
that be nothing to our Controversy) to be a Duty by the proper Law of Nature,
but by a Positive Law: 2. That the seventh day is never called a Sahbath till
Moses time, but only a Sanctified and blessed day; the word Sabbath being ever
taken in Scripture for a day of Ceremonial Rest, as well as of spiritual Rest
and Worship. 3. That Christ himself has continued a seventh day, but changed
the seventh day to the first; not as a Sabbath, that is, A day of Ceremonial
Rest, for he has ended all Sabbaths as shadows of things that were to come,
even of rest which remained for the people of God, Heb. 4. 9. Col. 2. 16. And
this is it which is incumbent upon us to prove, and I think I have fully proved
already. 4. That having proved the thing done (the positive Law of the seventh
day changed by the Holy Ghost to the first day) it concerns us not much to
give the reasons of Gods doings: But yet this reason may secondarily be
observed: That God having made the whole frame of Nature very good, did thereby
make it the glass in which he was to be seen by man, and the Book which he
would have man chiefly study, for the knowledge of his Maker and his Will. But
sin having introduced, disorder, confusion and a curse upon part of the
Creation for man's sake, God purposed at once, both to notify to man, what he
had done by sin, in bringing disorder and a curse upon the Creature, and
blotting the Book of Nature which he should have chiefly used, and also that it
was his good pleasure to set up a clearer Glass, even Christ Incarnate, in
which man might see his Makers face, in a representation suitable to our need;
not now as smileing upon an Innocent man, nor as frowning on a guilty man, but
as reconciled to Redeemed man; and to Write a Book in which his will should be
more plainly read, than in the blotted Book of Nature: Yea in which he that in
the Creature appeared most eminently in Power, might now appear most eminently
in LOVE, even redeeming, reconciling, adopting, justifying and saving Love. So
that, though God did not change the day, till the Person of the Incarnate
Mediator, with his perfect last edition of the Covenant, was exhibited, and set
up as this clearer Glass and Book, yet then as the seasonable time of
Reformation ( Heb. 9, 10, 11.) he did it. To teach man that though still he
must honor God as the Creator, and know him in the Glass and Book of the
Creature, yet that must be now but his secondary study; for he must primarily
study God in Christ; where he is revealed in Love, even most conspicuous,
wondrous Love.

And how suitable this is to man after sin and cur^e and wrath, may thus
evidently appear.

1. We were so Dead in sin, and utterly deprived of the spiritual Life, that
the Book of the Creatures, was not a sufficient means of our reviving: But as
we must have the QUICKENING SPIRIT of Jesus the Mediator, so we must have a
suitable means for that Spirit to work by: which that the cursed mortified
Creature is not, appears in the experience of the case of Heathens

2. We were so Dark in sin, that the Creature was not a sufficient means of our
Illumination: But as we must have the ILLUMINATING SPIRIT of Jesus, so we must
have a Glass and Book that was suited to that illuminating work.

3. We were so alienated from God, by Enmity and malignity, and loss of LOVE,
that as it must be the spirit of Jesus which must regenerate us unto LOVE, so
it must be a clearer demonstration of LOVE than the Creature makes in its
cursed state, which must be the fit means for the spirit to work by in the
restitution of our LOVE.

Where further note, 1. That LOVE is Holiness and Happiness it self: and the
operations of Divine Love are his Perfective operations, and so fit for the
last perfective act. 2. That man had many ways fallen from LOVE: As he had
actually and habitually turned away his own heart from God; and as he had
fallen under Gods wrath, and so lost those fullest emanations of Gods Love,
which should cherish his own Love to God; and as he had forfeited the
assistance of the spirit which should repair it; and as he was fallen in Love
with the accursed Creature, and lastly as he was under the Curse or threatening
himself, and the penalties begun; It being impossible to Humane Nature, to Love
a God who we think will damn us, and feel does punish us in order thereunto. So
that nothing could be more suitable to Lapsed man, or more perfective of the
Appearance and Operations of God, than this demonstration of Reconciling saving
Love, in our Incarnate Crucified, Raised, Glorified, Interceding Redeemer. All
which shows that Gods removal of the sanctified day from the seventh to the
first of the Week, and his preferring the Commemoration of Redemption, and our
use of the Glass and Book of an Incarnate Savior before that of the now
accursed Creature, is a work of the admirable wisdom of God, and exceeding
suitable to the nature of the things.

II. Now I come to consider of what you say against all this. You Cite the
numbers of many Chapters and Verses (contrary to your grand principles, these
divisions being Humane Inventions;) in all which there is nothing about the
Controversy in hand. The Texts speak not of the Decalogue only, but of the
Law, and of Gods Commandments, and Christ's Commandments. Now I must tell you
beforehand, that I will take no man's word for the Word of God, nor believe any
thing that you say, God speaks; without proof. Prove it, or it goes for
nothing with me. For as I know that adding to Gods Word is Cursed, Rev. 22. 18.
as well as taking away; so it I must once come to believe that God says this
or that without proof, I shall never know whom to believe: For twenty men may
tell me twenty several tales, and say that God says them all.

I expect your proof then of one of these two assertions (for which it is that
you hold, no man can gather by your own words, or citations.) 1. That all the
Law which was in being at Christ's Incarnation, was confirmed and continued by
him (which yet I do not Imagine you to hold* (...) all Paul's Epistles, and
especially the Ep. to the Heb. do so fully plead against it.) 2. Or else that
by the Law in all those Texts is meant all the Decalogue, and the Decalogue
alone.

The Texts cited by you prove no more than what we hold as confidently as you:
viz, 1. That all the Law of Nature, (where the Matter or Nature of the things
continue) is continued by Christ, and is his principal Law. 2. That the
Decalogue as to that matter of it, is continued as it is the Law of Nature
(which is almost all that is in it,) but not as the Jewish Law given by Moses
hands to the Political body. 3. That the Natural part of all the rest of Moses
Law is continued as well as the Decalogue. 4. That all Moses Law as well as the
Decalogue shall be fullfilled, and Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away than
one jot or tittle of it shall pass till it be fulfilled. 5. That the Elements,
Shadows, Predictions, Preparations, etc. are all fulfilled by the coming of
Christ, and by a more perfect Administration. For Christ fulfilled all
Righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. ((...) is sometimes put materially for (...),) 6.
That a change may be two ways made, 1. By destroying a thing. 2. By perfecting
it. And that by the Law in Matthew. 5. 17, etc. Christ means, the whole body of
Gods Law then in force to the Jews, considered as one frame, consisting of
Natural and Positive parts. Of which he says, that he came not (...), to
dissolve, pull in pieces or destroy the Law, as a licentious Teacher, that
would take off Gods obligations, and leave the Wills and Lusts of men to a
Lawless liberty (which was it that the Pharisees imputed to such as were against
the Law:) But that he came to bring in a greater strictness, a righteousness
not only exceeding that of his accusers, v. 20. but instead of destroying it,
to perfect the Law it self, that is, to bring in a perfecter Administration and
Edition of the Law. So that as Generation turns semen in suppositum, and so
does do away the seed, not by destroying it, but by changing it into a
perfecter being; and as Paul says, 1 Cor. 13. 16, 17, 18. When that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away; When I was a
child, I spoke as a child, I understood (or was affected) as a child, I thought
(or reasoned) as a child; but when I became a man I put away childish things,
etc. not that the child or his knowledge is destroyed, but perfected, and
changed into better; And yet many Acts of his childish reasonings may cease;
And as he that would repair the Temple to a greater glory, may take away the
brass, and put Gold instead of it, and so not change one pin of the Temple by a
destructive change but by a perfecting change, which (to the frame) is to
edify, and not to destroy; Even so Christ professes that he came not to
gratify the lusts of men, nor to destroy the Law in the smallest point, but 1.
Himself to fulfill it in the very letter, and 2. To accomplish the shadows,
Predictions and Types, by coming himself as the Truth and End, which when they
had attained they were fulfilled; And 3. By a more perfect Edition and
spiritual Administration, advancing the Law to a higher degree of excellency;
by which not the Law is said to be put away, or destroyed, but the
imperfections or weaknesses of it to be done away. Not but that all Gods Laws
are perfect is to the time and subject which they are fitted to; but not in
comparison of the future time, and degrees to be added. It is a Better
Testament that Christ brings in; Heb. 7. 22 and 8. 6. established on better
promises, and procured by better Sacrifice, and bringing a better hope, Heb. 8.
6. and 7. 19. and better things that are provided for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect, Heb. 11. 40. So that when Moses Law is considered
as such, in that Imperfect state, it is essentially or formally all done away;
but not materially, for it is done away but by changing it into a better
Testament and more perfect administration, which retains all that is natural
in it, and adds better positives suited to riper times.

So that the Law as denominated from the nobler Natural part, and as signifying
the whole Law or systeme of precepts, then in force, is not destroyed, but
perfected; But the Law as signifying that called Jewish delivered by Moses to
that Republic, as such, though part of the said systeme, yet is the Imperfect
part, and is taken down and is now no Law, though it be not destroyed, but
fulfilled, and turned into a more perfect Testament and Administration.

Now that by the Law and Commandments I am not to understand the Decalogue
only, in any of your cited Texts, I thus prove.

1. From the notation of the name. The word [ Law] in its usual proper sense,
does signify the whole, or other parts as well as that; and not that one part
only. Therefore I must so take it, till you prove that in any Text it has a
limited sense. Else I shall turn Gods universal or indefinite terms into
particular, and pervert his word, by limiting by my own invention where God
has not limited.

2. Because the common sense in which the Jews, (against whom Christ spoke)
did take the word [Law] Was not for the Decalogue only but for the Pentateuch,
or all Moses Law. And if Christ speak to them, he is to be supposed to speak
intelligibly, and therefore in their sense.

3. Because Christ in this very Chapter, Mat. 5. extends the sense further
than the Decalogue: As v. 17. he adjoynes the Prophets equally with the Law,
which he came not to destroy. And thus he speaks as the Jews, who distributed
the Old Testament into the Law and Prophets, when by the Law they meant the
Pentateuch. Now it is certain that all the Prophesies that say [ The Messiah is
not yet come, but shall come, and be incarnate, and that show the time and
manner,] etc. are not now true de futuro, as they then spoke; And yet they are
not destroyed but fulfilled, and so cease as prophecies of things yet future.
And so it is with the Positives of Moses Law. 2. V. 18. he says universaly,
Till all he fulfilled, and not the Decalogue only. 3. V. 19. he extends it to
the Least command. 4. V. 20. he extends it to all the Pharisees Righteousness,
which was Righteousness indeed. 5. V. 21. [ Whosoever shall kill, shall be in
danger of the Judgment,] has the political penalty in it, above the bare
sixth Commandment. 6. V. 31. Whosoever shall put away his Wife, let him give
her a writing of divorcement, is not the bare seventh Commandment, but fetched
from Deuteronomy. 24. 1. And this instance it self expounds, v. 17, 18. For when
Christ had protested against destroying an iota or tittle of the Law, yet he
changes this very Law now cited by himself, so far as it indulgeth putting
away; so that it is hence evident that be means not that he came not to make
a perfective change, but that he came not to indulge licentiousness, and Lust
by a destructive change. Luke 16. 18. 1 Cor. 7. 10. Mat. 19. 9. So 7. V. 33.
Thou shall not forswear thy self, etc. is fetched from, Lev. 19. 12, etc. 8. V.
38. An eye for an eye, etc. is fetched from Exodus 21. 24. Lev. 24. 20. Deuteronomy. 19.
21. and not from the Decalogue alone. 9. So V. 43. is from Lev. 19. 18. and
other places.

4. Because in all Paul's Epistles, and commonly in all the New Testament the
word Law is ordinarily, if not always, taken more extensively than the
Decalogue: Therefore to expound it for the Decalogue only, is to contradict the
constant use of the Scripture, under pretense of expounding the Scripture.

If then by the Law, be meant either the whole systeme of Gods Laws, Natural
and Positive, or all Moses Law, or the Pentateuch, then I may thus argue. It is
most certain that much of this Law of Moses is ceased or abrogate. Therefore it
is certain, that it was none of Christ's meaning that he would abrogate none of
that Law which he speaks of, or change it for a better.

That all and every word of the Decalogue is not of the dureable Law of Nature,
I shall prove anon.

That by the word [ Law] the Scripture means more than the mere Decalogue
these Texts among others prove, Exodus 13. 9. and 24. 12. Deuteronomy. 1. 5. and 4. 8.
and 17. 18, 19. and 28. 61. and 29. 29. and 31. 9. 2 King. 17. 37. and 23.
(...) 25. 2 Chronicles. 31. 21. and 33. 18. and 34. 19. (...) 7. 6. and 14. 26. and
10. 3 Neh. 8. 2, 7, 9, (...) and 10. 29 and 13. 3. Mal. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. (...)
11. 13. and 12. 5. and 26. 36, 40. (...) Luk 2. 22. 27. Joh. 1. 17, 45. and 7,
19. 23. ^1. and 8. 5. and 10. 34. and 12. 34. and ^5 25 Act. 6. 13. and 13. 15,
39. and 15. 5, 24. and 21. 20, 28. and 22. 3, 12. and 23. 3, 29 and (...). 23.
Romans 2. 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 20, 23. and 3. 19, 20, 21, 28, 31. and 4. 13, 14,
15, 16. and 5. 13. and 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 6, etc. And so to the end of the New
Testament; which I need not f^rther number.

7. That the seventh day Sabbath was kept by the Lord Jehovah Christ during his
life, Ma^k. 1. 21. and 6. 2. Luke 4 31. and 6. 6. 1. 5. and 13. 10. Mat. 12. 1,
9. and 13. 1, 2. and constantly, Luke 4. 16. 17. See Christ's counsel* which was
to come to pass about forty years after his death. Mat. 24. 20.

7. 1. So Christ was Circumcised, and joined in the Synagogue Worship, and held
Communion with the Jewish Church, and Priesthood, and observed all the Law of
Moses, never violating any part; For he was made under the Law to redeem them
that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. Do you think that all this is
established for us? 2. And his Counsel, Mat. 24. 20. had respect to the Jews
misery and not to their duty. He therefore foretells their destruction,
because they would reject him and his Law, in a perverse zeal for Moses Law;
And therefore intimates that even Moses should condemn them, and their misery
should be increased by their zeal for his Law; For their City was taken on the
Sabbath day, which increased their Calamity, who scrupled on that day to fight
or fly. And can you think Christ approved of that opinion, who had so often
before condemned the like, about their over rigid sabbatizing? Or as Dr.
Hammond thinks, it is liker to be spoken of a Sabbath year, when the War and
Famine would come together. However it be, it only supposes their adherence to
their Law and Sabbath, but justifies it not at all: Though yet the total and
full abrogation of the Jewish Law, was not fully declared, till, at that time
of the destruction of their City and Temple, their policy more fully ceased.

8. That after Jehovah had finished the work of Redemption, Joh. 19 30. his
body rested in the Grave, Mat. 27. 66. and himself in Heaven, Luke 23. 42, 43.
as he rested when he ended the work of Creation, Genesis 2. 2, 4.

8. You again add to the Word of God: It is not said that he had finished the
work of Redemption. But only [ It is finished] which seems to mean but that,
1. This was the last act of his life, in which he was actively to fulfill the
Law and offer himself a Sacrifice for man; 2. And in which all the Law and
Prophets were fulfilled which foretold this Sacrifice. For that it is not meant
of the whole work of Redemption as finished when he spoke those words, is
evident, 1. Because after those words he was to die; 2. Because his state in
death and his burial were part of his humiliation as is employed, 1 Cor. 15. 4.
Joh. 17 7. Romans 6. 4. Col. 2. 12. Isa. 53. 9. 1 Cor. 1^. 35. Act. 2. 24. 1 Cor.
15. 26. Phil. 3. 10. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Heb. 2. 14, 15. 3. Because his Resurrection
was his victorious act, and a part of the work of man's Redemption; 4. And so is
his Intercession. For Redemption is larger than Humiliation or Sacrifice for
sin. As Exodus 6 6. Luke 24. 21. Romans 3. 24. and 8. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ephesians. 1.
14. Luke 21. 28. It is the Resurrection by which we are made Righteous and
receive our hope of life, and victory over death and Satan, Romans 1. 4. Phil. 3.
10, 11. 1 Pet. 1. 3. and 3. 21. Romans 4. 25.

2. The clean contrary therefore to your Collection is true: viz. That God did
indeed end the Work of his Creation on the sixth day, and rested in it, as
finished on the seventh: But Christ was so far from ending his on the sixth,
and resting in it on the seventh, that on that day above all other he seemed
conquered by men and by him that had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14 and was
held as Captive by the Grave, so that his Disciples hopes did seem dead with
him, Luke 24. 21. This State of Death being not the least, if not the lowest
part of his Humiliation: Whence came the Churches Article that he descended
into Hades. 3. I did more probably before prove from Christ's own words compared
with his burial, a casting down of the seventh day Sabbath, thus. That day on
which the Disciples are to fast, is not to be kept as a Sabbath (For that is a
day of Thanksgiving) But on the day of Christ's Burial, the Disciples were to
fast, (that is, to walk heavily:) Which appears from Mark. 2. 20. When the
Bridegroom is taken from them, then they shall fast. Now though this meant not
to command any one day for fasting, much less the whole time of his bodily
absence, yet both the sense of the words themselves, and the interpretation of
the Event tell us, that as there was no day in which he was so sadly taken from
them as that Sabbath day, which almost broke their hearts and hopes, (for the
next day he was restored to them) So there was no day in which they were so
dejected, and unlike to the Celebraters of a Gospel day of Joy, or Sabbath. Do
you call the day of Satan's power, and triumph, and of the Discples greatest
fear and grief that ever befell them, the Celebration of a Sabbath rest? It had
indeed somewhat like an outward Rest, but so as seemed plainly to bury in his
Grave the seventh day Ceremonial Sabbath. And from the Reasons now pleaded it
was that the Western Churches kept the seventh day as a Fast.

9. Whilst the Lord Jehovah Christ rested, private believers rested according
to the Commandment, Luke 23. 55, 56. Mar. 15. 42. and 16. 1. compared.

9 A. They did indeed keep yet the Jewish Sabbath, till Christ's Resurrection,
and the coming down of the Holy Ghost: And so they did the rest of the Jewish
Law. For they yet knew not that it was abrogated; But must we do so too? You
may as well argue from their keeping the Sabbath before Christ's Death, as on
that day when he was dead. The change of the day was made by Degrees, by three
several acts or means. 1. The Resurrection of Christ, was the founding act,
which gave the Cause of changing it; Like Gods finishing his works of Creation
at first. 2. The Inspiration of the Holy Ghost in the Apostles does teach them,
and bring all things to their remembrance which Christ commanded, and was the
authorizing means of the change: And the Apostles actual settlement thereupon
was the Promulgation. 3. The gradual notification by the Preachers to the
Churches, and finally the destruction of the Jewish Policy, and Temple, and
Priesthood, were the fuller proclamation of it, and the way of bringing the
change that was made by Command into fuller Execution.

10. The seventh day Sabbath was observed by the Apostles after the
Resurrection and Ascension, Act. 13. 14, 15, 16, 42, 44. and 16. 13, 14. And
constantly, Act. 17. 2. (the same Greek phrase with that Luke 14. 16. for
Christ constant keeping the seventh day Sabbath as before) Act. 18. 1, 4. etc.

10 A. 1. But withal, in this time they stablished the Lords day, as soon as
(on that day) the Holy Ghost came down upon them.

2. So all that while they kept other parts of the Jewish Law: They scrupled,
yea refused a while Communion with the Gentiles as Act. 10. shows. They so
carried it to the Jews that Paul made it his defense, that he had not offended
any thing at all, either against the Law of the Jews or against the Temple,
Act. 25. 8. And when he Circumcised Tim^thy, purified himself, shaved his head,
for his Vow, etc. Do you think that all these are duties to Believers?

3. None of the Texts cited by you do prove that the Apostles kept the Sabbath
at all as a Sabbath, that is, a day on which it was their duty to Rest; But
only that they Preached on that day in the Synagogues, and to the people; For
when should they Preach to them but when they were Congregated, and capable of
hearing? They took it for no sin to Preach on the Sabbath no more than I would
do to Preach Christ on Friday, which is their Sabbath, to the Turks, if they
would hear me. But Sabbatizing according to the Law, was something else than
Preaching.

4. And it is most evident that for a long time the Christian Jews did still
keep the Law of Moses: And that all that the Apostles did against it then, was,
but 1. To declare that Christ was the end of the Law, and so to declare the
keeping of it to be unnecessary to Salvation, but not unlawful, laying by the
opinion of necessity. 2. That the Gentile Christians should not be brought to
use it, because it was unnecessary. For the Apostles Act. 15. do not forbid it
to the Jews, but only to the Gentiles, (who were never under it.) Therefore the
Apostles who lived among the Jews no doubt did so far comply with them to win
them, as to keep the Law externally, though not as a necessary thing, that is,
not as a Law in force obliging them, but as a thing yet lawful to further the
Gospel. And therefore no wonder if Peter went so far as to withdraw from the
Gentiles when the Jews were present, when even Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles
who speaks so much more than all the rest against the Law, does yet as
aforesaid Circumcise Timothy, shave his head, purify himself, etc. and as he
became all things to all men, so to the Jews he became a Jew. But when the Jews
Policy and Temple ceased, the change was executively yet further made, and the
Jewish Christians themselves were weaned from their Law. In the mean time Paul
and John, Rev. 2. and 3. do openly rebuke the Judaizing Heretics, the
Ebionites and Cerinthians, and Nicolaitans, and show the perniciousness of
their conceits.

11. The Holy Spirit calls the seventh day (and no other day) the Sabbath,
throughout the Scriptures, before and after the Death, Resurrection and
Ascension of the Lord Jehovah Christ, Genesis 2. 2, 3, 4. Exodus 20. 10, etc. Act.
13. 14, 15, 16, 42, 44. and 16. 13, 14. and 17. 2. and 18. 1, 4.

11. A. Though it be not true that the seventh is called the Sabbath, Genesis 2.
and though others deny the sufficiency of your enumeration, yet I grant your
assertion as true. And therefore am satisfied that it is the seventh day which
is put down, when Sabbatizing was put down; and that it could be none but the
seventh day which Paul meant, Col. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in mea^s, etc.
and Sabbaths which were Shadows of things to come. For the first day is never
called a Sabbath as you truly say; therefore it was not put down with the
Sabbath. See Dr. Youngs Dies Dom. on Col. 2. 16.

12. The seventh day Sabbath was profaned by the Church heretofore and
reformed: Neh. 10. 28, 29, 31. and 13. 15, 17, 18, 22. See Belg. Annot. on Dan.
7. 25, etc. as prophesied who would change it.

12. This is all granted. Sacrificing also was then Profaned and Reformed, and
polluted and destroyed by Antiochus; And yet we are not still under the
obligation of Sacrificing. We are not under the Law, but under Grace.

CHAP. III.
Whether the seventh day Sabbath be part of the Law of Nature; or only a
Positive Law?
IT is but few that I have any Controversy with on this point: But yet one
there is, who objecteth and argues as follows.

God has put this into nature, Ex. 20. 10. Thy Stranger. Deuteronomy. 5. 14. The
three first Chapters of Romans. Particularly Chap. 2. 14, 15, 26, 27. and 3. 9.
21. 1 Cor. 11. 14. Nature has its teachings. The humane Nature in the first
Adam was made and framed to the perfection of the ten words; some Notions
whereof are still retained, even in the corrupt state of fallen man. Genesis 1.
26, 27. Eccl. 7. 29. Ephesians. 4. 20. Col. 3. 10. The Law of the seventh day Sabbath
was given before the ten words were proclaimed at Sinai, Exodus 16. 23. Even
from the Creation. Genesis 2. 2, 3. Given to Adam in respect of his humane nature,
and in him to all the world of humane creatures, Genesis 1. 14. Psalm 104. 19 Lev.
10. 23. Numb. 28. 2, 9, 10. It Is the (...) word in the Original. Se^ times of
Divine appointment f^r solemn asse^^^ing, and for Gods instituted service are
directed to and pointed at, by those great Lights which the Creator has set up
in the Heavens, Psalm. 19. with Romans 10. 4, 5, 6, 7. 8, 18, 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 30.
10, 15. John 1. 9. Every man has a Light and Law of Nature which he carries
about him, and is born and bred together with him: These seeds of truth and
light, though they will not justify in the sight of God, and bring a soul
thoroughly and safely h^me to glory, Romans 1. 20. Yet there are even since Adams
fall, those relics and dark Letters of this holy Law of the ten words, to
preserve the memory of our first created dignity, and for some other ends,
though these seeds are utterly corrupted now, Titus 1. 15. Natural reason will
tell men, that seeing all men in all Nations, do measure their Time by Weeks,
and their Weeks by seven days, they should (besides what of their time they
offer up as due to God every day) give one whole day of every Week to their
Maker, who has allowed them so liberal a portion of time, wherein to provide
for themselves and their families. There being no other proportion of time that
can so well provide for the necessities of families, as six days of every
Week, and that is so well fitted to all Functions, Callings and Employments.
And the light of Nature (when cleared up) will tell men, that all labor and
motion being in order to rest, and rest being the perfection and end of labor,
into which labor work and motion does pass, that therefore the seventh day
which is the last day in every Week is the fittest and properest day for a
religious rest unto the Creator, for his Worship, Genesis 2. 1, etc. Exodus 20. 9.
Deuteronomy. 5. 13, 14. Heb. 4. 1. 11. Exodus 31. 17. Romans 14. 13. Exodus 23. 12. and
34. 21.

Answ. How far a day is of Natural due, I have showed before: In all the words
of this reason (which I set down as I received them) there is much which is no
matter of Controversy between us; As that there is a Light and Law of Nature
(which few men doubt of, who are worthy to be called men) And that by this Law
of Nature God should be solemnly worshipped, and that at a set or separated
time. I hope the Reader will not expect that I weary him with examining the
Texts which prove this before it is denied. But the thing denied by us is, that
the seventh day Sabbath as the seventh, is of Natural Obligation. The proofs
which are brought for this I must examine: For indeed this is the very hindge
of all our Controversy: For if this be once proved, we shall easily confess
that it is not abrogate: For Christ came not to abrogate any of the Law of
Nature (though as I have said, such particles of it may cease, whose Matter
cease, by a change in Nature it self.)

The first proof is Exodus 20. 10. The stranger. To which I answer, Our question
is not whether the Sabbath was to be rested on^ by Strangers that are among the
Jews, but, Whether it was part of the Law of Nature? If it be intended that [
whatever such strangers were bound to, was of the Law of Nature: But strangers
were bound to keep the Sabbath -- Ergo -- ] I deny the Major, which they offer
not to prove: And I do more than deny it: I disprove it by the Instances of
Ex^d. 12. 19. Was eating leavened bread forbidden by the Law of Nature? V. 48.
49. One Law shall be to him that is home-born, and to the stranger that
sojourneth among you: Circumcision was not of the Law of Nature. Lev. 16. 29.
Resting from all work on the tenth day of the seventh Month, was not of the
Law of Nature, though made also the strangers duty. So eating blood, and that
which dies, or was torn, Lev. 17. 12, 15. So Lev. 25. 6. Numb. 15. 14, 15, 16,
26. 29. and 19. 10. and 35. 15. Deuteronomy. 31. 12. Jos. 8. 33, 34, 35. and 20. 9,
etc.

The next pretended proof is, Romans 2. 14, etc. where there is not one syllable
mentioning the Decalogue as such, but only in general, The Law, so far as it
was written in the Gentiles hearts. But where is it proved, that the Law or the
Decalogue are words of the same signification, or extent; any more, than the
whole and a part are? Or where is it proved, that none of the rest of the Law
is written in Nature, but the Decalogue only? Or else that every word in the
Decalogue it self is part of the Law of Nature, (which is the question.) I
shall prove the contrary anon: In the mean time, the bare numbering of Chapters
and Verses is no proof.

3. It is next said, that [ Adam was made and framed to the perfection of the
ten words.] Answ. Adam was made in the Image of God, before the ten words were
given in stone: But so much of them as is of the Law of Nature, and had matter
existent in Adams days, no doubt, was a Law to him as well as it is to us. But
that is nothing to the question, Whether all things in the ten words are of
Natural Obligation?

4. It is said, that the Law of the seventh day Sabbath was given before the
ten words were preclaimed in Sinai. Answ. So was Circumcision; and so was
sacrificing: yea, so was the Law about the dressing of the Garden of Eden, and
about the eating or not eating of the fruit thereof, even in innocence; which
yet were no parts of Natures Laws, but Positives which now cease.

5. It is said, that it was given to Adam in respect of his humane nature, and
in him to all the world of humane creatures. Answ. So was the Covenant of
Works, or Innocence, which yet is at an end. But what respect is it (to his
humane nature) that you mean. If you suppose this Proposition, [ Whatever Law
is given with respect to humane nature, and to all men, is of natural and
perpetual Obligation] I deny it. The Law of S^crinces and Oblations was given
with respect to humane nature, that is, in order to its reparation, and it was
given to mankind, and yet not of natural perpetual obligation. The Law of
distinguishing clean Beasts from unclean, and the Law against eating blood,
were given to Noah and to all mankind, with respect to humane nature. Genesis 8.
20. and 9. 4. and yet not wholly of natural or perpetual obligation. All common
Laws have some respect to humane nature. But if your meaning be, that this Law
was given in and with the Nature of Man himself, or that it is founded in, and
provable by the very essentials of man's nature, or any thing permanent, either
in the nature of man, or the nature of the world, I still deny it, and call for
your proof. Positives may have respect to humane Nature as obliged by them; and
yet not be written in humane nature, nor provable by any mere natural evidence.

6. It is said [ Set times of Divine appointment for solemn assembling, etc.
are directed to by the great Lights, etc. Psalm. 19. Romans 10, etc.] Ans. But the
question is not of set times in general (that some there be) But of this set
time, the seventh day in particular. It will be long before you can f^tch any
cogent evidence from the Lights of Heaven for it. Nor do any of the Texts cited
mention any such thing, or any thing that can tempt a man into such an opinion.
It must be the Divine appointment and institution (which you mention,) that
must prove our obligation to a particular day, and not any nature within us or
without us.

7. The only appearance of a proof is at the end, that time being measured by
Weeks, and the end of the Weeks being fittest for Rest, therefore nature points
us to the last day.

Answ. But 1. You do not at all prove, that nature teaches all men to measure
their time by Weeks. 2. Nor is your Philosophy true, that all motion is in
order to rest. Indeed all Labor is, that is, all the Motion of any Creature
which is out of its proper place, and moves toward it. But if you will call
the Action of Active natures, such as our souls are, by the name of spiritual
motion, or Metaphysical motion, as many do, then no doubt but cessation is as
contrary to their nature, as corporal motion is to the nature of a stone: And
the Rest, that is, the perfection, pleasure and felicity of Spirits, consists
in their greatest activity in good; They rest not saying, Holy, Holy, etc. 3.
You transfer the case from a day of Worship to a day of Rest. And so make your
cause worse: Because nature says much for one stated day of Worship; but not
for one stated day of Rest from labor, further than the Worship it self must
have a vacancy from other things. For reason can prove no necessity to humane
nature of Resting a whole day, any more than for a due proportioning of Rest
unto Labor every day. The Rest of one hour in seven, is as much as the Rest of
one Day in seven. Or if some more additional conveniences may be found for
Days than Hours, there being no convenience without its inconvenience, this
will but show us, that the Law is well made when it is made, but not prove a
priore that there is or must be such an universal Law. As you can never prove,
that Nature teaches men the distribution of Time by Weeks (1. It being a thing
of Tradition, Custom and Consent. 2. And no man naturally knows it, till
others tell him of it. 3. And many Nations do not so measure their time. 4. And
no man can bring a Natural Reason to prove that it must be so, which they might
do if it were a Law of Natural Reason) so also that every Family, or Country
at least, should not have leave to vary their days of Rest, according to
diversity of Riches and Poverty, Health and Sickness, Youth and Age, Peace and
War, and other such cases, you cannot prove necessary by Nature alone, though
you may prove it well done when it is done. 4 You cannot prove the last day
more necessary for Rest, than the first, or any other. For there are few
Countries, where Wars, or some other necessities, have not constrained them
sometimes to violate the Sabbaths Rest: which when they have done, it is as
many days from the third day to the third, as from the seventh to the seventh.
5. If Time were naturally measured by Weeks, yet it follows not, that Rest
must be so: some Countries are strong and can labor longer, and others tender
and weak, and can labor less. 6. And seeing that the Reason of a day for
worshipping Assemblies, is greater and more noble, than the Reason of a day for
Bodily Rest, Nature will rather tell us, that God should have the first day,
than the last; A Jove principium: As God was to have the first born, the first
fruits, etc. 7. If we might frame Laws for Divine Worship by such conceits of
convenience, as this is of the last day in seven as fittest for Rest, and call
them all the Laws of Nature, what a multitude of additions would be made, and
of how great diversity? whilst every man's conceit went for Reason, and Reason
for Nature, and so we should have as many Laws of Nature, as there are
diversities of conceits. And yet that there is such a thing as a Law of Nature
in which all Reason should agree, we doubt not. But having in vain expected
your proof, that the seventh day Sabbath is the Law of Nature, or of universal
natural obligation, I shall briefly prove the Negative (that it is not)

1. That which is of natural obligation may be proved by Natural Reason (that
is, by Reason arguing from the nature of the thing) to be a duty. But that the
seventh day must be kept holy as a Sabbath, cannot be proved from the nature of
the thing. Therefore it is not of Natural obligation. He that will deny the
Minor, let him instance in his natural proof.

2. That is not an universal Law of Nature, which Learned, Godly men, and the
greatest number of these, yea, almost all the world, know no such thing by, and
confess they cannot prove by Nature. But such is the seventh day Sabbath --
etc. It is not I alone that know nothing of any such Law, nor am able by any
Natural Evidence to prove it, but also all the Divines and other Christians
that I am or ever was acquainted with: Nay, I never knew one man that could
say, that he either had such a Law in his own nature (unless some one did take
his conceit for a Law) nor that he could show such 3 Law in natura rerum. And
it is a strange Law of Nature, which is to be found in no ones Nature, but
perhaps twenty men's or very few in a whole age; nor is discerned by all the
rest of the world. If you say, that few understand nature or improve their
reason: I answer 1. If it be such a Law of Nature as is obliterated in almost
all mankind, it is a very great argument that nature being changed, the Law is
changed. How can that oblige which cannot be known? 2. Are not we men as well
as you? Have not several Ages had as great improvers of nature as you? If grace
must be the improver, are there, or have there been none as gracious? If
Learning must be the improver, have there been none as learned? If diligence or
impartiality must be the improvers of nature, have there not been many as
diligent, studious and impartial as your selves? Let all rational men judge
which of these is the better argument, [ I and twenty men more in the world do
discern in Nature an universal obligation on mankind to keep the seventh day
Sabbath: Therefore it is the Law of Nature.] Or [The world of mankind, godly
and ungodly, learned and unlearned, discern no such natural obligation, except
you and the few of your mind: Therefore it is no Law of Nature.]

3. That is not like to be an Universal Law of Nature, which no one man since
the Creation can be proved to have known and received as such by mere natural
reasons without tradition. But no one man since the Creation can be proved to
have known and received the seventh day Sabbath by mere natural reason without
tradition: Therefore it is not like to be an Universal Law of Nature. If you
know any man, name him and prove it; For I never read or heard of such a man.

4. If the Text mention it only as a Positive Institution, then it is not to be
accounted a Law of nature. But the Text mentions it only as a Positive
institution -- As is plain, Genesis 2. 3. God blessed the seventh day and
sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his work, etc. If it
had been a Law of nature, it had been made in Nature, and the making of Nature
would have been the making of the Law. But here are two arguments against that
in the Text.

1. Blessing and sanctifying are positive acts of supernatural institution,
superadded to the works of nature: They are not Divine Creating acts, but
Divine instituting acts.

2. That which is blessed and sanctified, Because God rested in it from all his
works, is not blessed and sanctified merely by those works or that Rest: And if
neither the works of Nature, nor the Rest of God from those works did sanctify
it, then it is not of natural sanctification, and so not of natural obligation.

5. If the very Reason of the day be not of natural, but of supernatural
Revelation, then the sanctification of the day is not of natural, but
supernatural revelation and obligation. But the former is certain. For no man
breathing ever did or can prove by Nature, without supernatural Revelation,
that God made and finished his works in six days, and rested the seventh.
Aristotle had been like to have escaped his Opinion of the worlds eternity, if
he could have found out this by nature.

6. The distinction of Weeks is not known by nature, to be any necessary
measure of our time; Therefore much less, that the seventh day of the Week must
be a Sabbath. The Antecedent is sufficiently proved, in that no man can give a
cogent reason for the necessity of such a measure. And because it has been
unknown to a great part of the world. The Peruvians, Mexicans, and many such
others knew not the measure of Weeks. And Heylin notes out of Jos. Scaliger de
Emend. Temp. li. 3. and 4. and Rossinus Antiq. and Dion, that neither the
Chaldees, the Persians, Greeks, nor Romans did of old observe Weeks; and that
the Romans measured their times by eights, as the Jews did by sevens. Hist.
Sab. P. 1. Chapter 4. p. 83, 84. And p. 78. he cites Dr. Bounds own words, p. 65.
Ed. 2. confessing the like, citing Beroaldus for it as to the Roman custom.
Yea, he asserteth that till near the time of Dionys. Exig. an. 500. they
divided not their time into Weeks as now. In which he must needs except the
Christians and consequently the ruling powers since Constantine. And if they
were so unsettled through the world in their measure by Months, as Bishop Usher
at large opens in his Dissert. de Macedonum and Asianorum Anno solari, (see
especially his Ephemeris in the end, where all the days of each Month are
named without Weeks) the other will be no won-wonder.

I conclude therefore 1. That one day in seven, rather than in six or eight,
may be Reason be discerned to be convenient when God has so Instituted it: But
cannot by Nature be known to be of natural universal obligation.

2. That this one day should be the seventh, no Light of Nature does discover:
Therefore Dr. Bound, Dr. Ames, and the generality of the Defenders of one day
in seven against the Anti-sabbatarians, do unanimously assert it to be of
Positive supernatural institution, and not any part of the Law of Nature:
Though stated days at a convenient distance is of the Law of Nature.

CHAP. IV.
Whether every word in the Decalogue be of the Law of Nature? and of perpetual
obligation? And whether all that was of the Law of Nature was in the Decalogue?
BUt the great argument to prove it the Law of Nature is, because it was part
of the ten words written in stone. To which I say, that the Decalogue is an
excellent summary of the Generals of the Law of Nature, as to the ends to which
it was given; but that,

I. It has more in it than the Law of Nature.

II. It has less in it than the Law of Nature: And therefore was never
intended for a mere or perfect transcript of the Law of Nature: but for a
perfect general summary of so much of that Law as God thought meet to give the
Jews by supernatural revelation, containing the chief heads of Natures Law
(lest they should not be clear enough in Nature it self) with the addition of
something more.

I. That the Decalogue written in stone has more than the Law of Nature, is
proved 1. By these instances; 1. That God brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, and out the house of servants, and that he is to be worshipped in that
relation, is none of the Law of Nature, universally so called.

2. That God is merciful (and therefore reconciled) to thousand Generations of
them that Love him, notwithstanding man's natural state of sin and misery, and
all men's actual sin, this is of supernatural Grace, and not the Law of mere
Nature.

3. The great difference between the ways of Justice and mercy, expressed by
the third and fourth Generation, compared to Thousands, is more than the mere
Law of Nature.

4. Those Divines who take all Gods positive Institutions of Worship, to be
contained in the Affirmative part of the second Commandment, must needs think
that it contains more than the Law of nature (Though I say not as they; but
only that as a General Law, it obliges us to perform them, when another Law
has instituted them.)

5. To rest one day in seven is more than the Law of Nature.

6. To rest the seventh day rather than the sixth or first is more than the Law
of Nature.

7. The strictness of the Rest, to do no manner of Work, is more than a Law of
Nature.

8. That there be Man servants, and Maid servants, besides natural inferiors,
is not of the primitive or universal Law of Nature.

9. The distinction of the Israelites from strangers within their Gates, was
not by the Law of Nature.

10. That Cattle should do no manner of work (as for a Dog to turn the spit in
a wheel, or such like) is more than a Law of Nature.

11. That God made Heaven, and Earth in six days and rested the seventh, is
not of Natural Revelation.

12. That this was the reason wherefore God blessed the Sabbath day and
hallowed it, is not of Natural Revelation.

13. Some will say that more Relations than Natural being meant in the fifth
Commandment, makes it more than a Law of Nature.

14. That the Land of Canaan is made their reward, is a positive respecting the
Israelites only.

15. That length of days in that Land should be given by Promise, is an act of
Grace, and not of Nature only.

16. That this promise of length of days in that Land, is made more to the
Honoring of Superiors, than to the other commanded duties, is more than
Natural.

2. I prove it also by the Abrogation of the Law written in stone, which I
proved before; If the Decalogue had been the Only and Perfect Law of Nature, it
would not have been so far done away, as the Apostle says it is (of which
before.)

II. All the Law of Nature was not in the Tables of Stone. Here I premise these
suppositions.

1. That a General Law alone, obliges not to all particulars, without a
Particular Law. E. g. If the second Command say, Thou shall perform all Gods
instituted Worship: Or, Thou shall Worship me, as I appoint thee? This binds
no man to Baptism, the Lords Supper, etc. till another Law appoint them.
Therefore there is not so much in the general Law alone, as is in that and the
particular also.

2. All that is presupposed in a particular Law, is not part of that Law.

3. It is not so much to infer a duty indirectly and by far fetched
Consequences, as to command it directly.

Now I prove the assertion by instances. All these following are Natural
duties, and commanded also in other parts of Scripture, and yet are not in the
Law of Moses as Written in Stone.

1. To believe that the soul is Immortal. 2. To believe that there is a Heaven
where we shall be perfectly blessed in the Knowledge, Love and Fruition of God.
3. To believe that there is a Hell, or life of future punishment for all the
impenitent. 4. To Love ourselves, with a just and necessary Love, as such. 5.
To take greatest care to save our souls, above our bodies. 6. To tame and
mortify all our fleshly lusts in order to our own Salvation. 7. To deny all
bodily pleasure, profit, honor, liberty and life, for the securing of our
salvation. 8. To forbear all outward acts of Gluttony, Drunkenness, Sloth, etc.
as they tend to our own damnation. 9. To rejoice in persecution because of our
great reward in Heaven. 10. To pray constantly, and servently for Heaven, as
the means of our obtaining it.

Let none say that many of these same things are commanded in order to God, and
our neighbor. For I grant that the same material acts be so; as they are
expressions of Love to God and Man: But to do them in Love to our selves and
for our own Salvation, is another principle and end, not contrary to, but
necessarily conjunct with the former two: And indeed all the duties of
self-love as such are past by (as supposed) in Moses Decalogue; because they
are deeply written in man's Nature, and because the Law was Written as
Political, for another use.

Obj. But these are all supposed in the first Command of Loving God, and in the
second Table, Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self.

Answ. 1. These last are not the words of the Decalogue: but a part of the
summary of all the Law. 2. Both Tables indeed suppose the Love of our selves,
but that which is supposed, is not a part of them.

Obj. But it is the Socinians that say the Old Testament speaks of no reward
or punishment but in this life.

Answ. True: But Camero (de tripl. faed.) and others that rightly understand
the matter affirm, that, 1. The Law of Nature contains future rewards and
punishments in another life, 2. And so does the Covenant of Grace made with
Adam and all mankind in him, and renewed to Noah, Abraham and the Israelites,
which by Paul is called The Promise as distinct from the Law. 3. But the Law of
Moses in its own proper Nature as such, was only Political, and spoke but of
Temporal Rewards and Punishments. 4. Though yet all the faithful were bound to
take the Law and Promise together, and so to have respect both to Temporal and
Eternal things. For the Law it self connoted and supposed things Eternal as our
great concernment.

III. There is more of the Law of Nature in other parts of Moses Law, conjunct
with the Decalogue, than is in the Decalogue alone.

I will stay no longer in the proof of this, than to cite the places as you do.
Exodus 23. 13, 32. and 22. 18, 20. Lev. 20. 1, 4, 6. Deuteronomy. 13. and 17. Exodus 23.
24. Deuteronomy. 12. and 23. Lev. 24. and 23. 3. Exodus 12. 16. Deuteronomy. 23. 18. Exodus 22.
28. and 23. 20. and 21. 15, 17. Lev. 19. 32. Deuteronomy. 21. and 1. and 16. and 6.
and 11. Exodus 21. 12, 13, 18, 20, 22, etc. and 22. 2, 3. Lev. 13. 14. and 17.
Deuteronomy. 21. Exodus 22. 19. Lev. 18. and 19. 29. and 20. Deuteronomy. 22. Exodus 21. 16,
21, 32, 35. and 22. 1. 4. to 17. Lev. 19. 30, 35. Deuteronomy. 24. and 29. 14. and 21.
and 25. Exodus 23. 1. to 9. Deuteronomy. 23. and 24. Lev. 19. 11, 15. Exodus 22. 21, 22.
and 25. and 26. and 23. 4. Lev. 19. 14, 16, 18, etc.

By all this I show you why, 1. I allow not of your making the word Law in the
New Testament to signify the Decalogue only, or taking them for equipollent
terms. 2. Why I take not the Decalogue and the Law of Nature, for equipollent
terms, or their matter to be of the same extent: And consequently why I take
it for no proof that all things in the Decalogue are perpetual, because all
things in the Law of Nature are so.

CHAP. V.
Whether the truest Antiquity be for the seventh day Sabbath as kept by the
Churches of Christ?
IT is here further objected that the seventh day Sabbath has the truest
testimonies of Antiquity: that it is controvertible when and how the Lords day
came in; but the Antiquity of the seventh day Sabbath is past Controversy:
that the Eastern Christians long observed it, and Antichrist in the West did
turn it into a Fast: that the Empire of Abassia keeps it to this day.

Answ. There is enough said of this before, were it not that some Objectors
causlesly look for more. I answer therefore, 1. That it is true that the
Sabbath is more ancient than the Lords day; And so is Moses more ancient than
Christ Incarnate, and his Law than the Gospel as delivered by Christ and his
Apostles, and Circumcision than Baptism, and the Passover than the Lords
Supper; And so every man's Conception, Nativity, Infancy and Ignorance was
before his Maturity and Knowledge. And what can you gather from all this? Thus
the Papists say that their way of Religion was in England before ours, and that
the relics of it in our Monuments [ Orate pro animabus, etc.] is their
standing witness, which we cannot totally deface: And its true, if by our way
they mean the Reformation of theirs as such: For the Cure is ever after the
disease: Though its false if they speak of our Religion it self; which was here
before their errors, as Health is before sickness. But they should consider,
that by this prerogative the Heathens excel us both: And that they may say,
you have yet many Monuments of our more ancient Religion, which you have not
been able to obliterate: You still call your Week days by our ancient names,
Sunday, Monday, etc. Your adoration toward the East was fetched from us, and so
were abundance of your Customs: Which we hope may recover the reputation of
our Religion.

2. I have showed you already how and why the Eastern Christians kept the
Sabbath: 1. They kept it not as a Sabbath, but only met on that day as they did
on the fourth and the sixth days, ( Wednesdayes and Fridayes) as it is used in
England to this day. And for the most part they Celebrated not the Lords Supper
on that day. And they abhorred the keeping it as a day of Rest.

2. They met on that day for all these Reasons. 1. Because having been used in
the beginning to meet every day in the Week (when they had all things common,
and were to show the power of the Evangelical Doctrine to the height, Act. 2.
44, 45, 46. and 4. 33, 34, 35.) as they found cause to retrive their community,
so did they to meet seldomer, and yet not so seldom as once a Week: And
therefore as we now keep other meetings for Lectures and Prayers, besides the
Lords day, so did they then on Wednesdayes, Fridayes, and Saturdayes. 2.
Because the Conversion of the Jews was a great part of their work and hope: And
therefore to win them, they would with Paul become Jews, that is, not affect an
unnecessary distance, but come as near them as Lawfully they could. 3. Because
Converted Jews were no small part of the Eastern Churches: who could not easily
be quite brought off from Jewish Customs; And the rest were unwilling to
offend them, being taught not to despise the weak that observed meats and days,
Romans 14. and 15. Gal. 2. 4. Because the Assemblies on the seventh day were
taken as fit preparatories to the sanctifying of the Lords day, on which
account the Church of England now appoints them. These things one that is
acquainted with Church History needs no proof of.

And they are sufficiently proved before. Ignatius words before cited are full.
And those of the Council of Laodicea, Can. 29. are more full, who do at once
appoint meetings on the seventh day, and yet Anathematize them that Judaize
thereon, by bodily rest; and would have men labor on it, and prefer the Lords
day before it.

Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho, does largely show that Circumcision
and the Sabbath are ceased by the coming of Christ, and his Institutions, and
are not now to be used by Christians. And what writer have we of full
reputation and credibility more ancient than Justin, from whom any testimony in
this case might be sought?

Tertullian (one of the next) li. 2. against Marcion says, that the Sabbath
was for that Time, and present occasion, or use, and not for perpetuity.

Athanasius was one that was for meeting on the Sabbath: And yet writes his
Book de Sab. and Circum. purposely to prove that the Sabbath is ceased with
Circumcision as a Shadow, and that now the Lords day is the sanctified day. And
the like he has most expressly in Homil. de Semente, as is cited before, saying
that, The Master being come, the Usher was out of use; and the Sun being risen
the Lamps are darkened.

Basil Ep. 74. Writes against Apollinaris for holding that after the
Resurrection, we should keep Sabbaths, and Judaize^; As if that were the
perfection to which Christ would restore men.

See Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 43. And Chrysoft. Hom. 19. in Mat. 12. against the
use of the Sabbath. Cyril. Hieros. cat. 4. and Epiphan. against the Nazaraei,
condemn them for keeping the Sabbath and Circumcision, though withal they kept
the Lords day. The same does Epiphanius li. 1. Haer. 30. n^ 2. and before him
Eusebius Hist. li. 3. say of the Ebionites. Augustine often tells us, that the
observation or keeping of the seventh day Sabbath is ceased, and not to be done
by Christians. Qu. ex. N. Test. 69. Ad Bonif. l. 3. Contr. Faust. Manich. li.
6. c. 4. De Genes. ad lit. l. 4. c. 13. de spir. and lit. c. 14. de util. Cred.
c. 3.

3. And as for the Abassians keeping the Sabbath, Its true, they keep that day
in some sort: But it is as true, that they use Circumcision, and many other
Jewish Ceremonies; besides often Baptizings; And that they profess not to use
these as the Jews do, but only as ancient Customs, and as Paul did while he
complied with them, using the outward action for other ends than Judaizers do.
And the rather because they think their Emperors descended from Solomon. But
the Lords day they keep on the same account as other Christians. And if this
instance make any thing for Sabbatizing, it will make as much for Circumcising,
and other Jewish rites, but nothing against the Sanctifying of the Lords day.

4. And as for the matter of Fasting on the Sabbath, the Churches greatly
varyed in their Customs. The Eastern Churches, and Millan in the West, were
against Fasting on the Sabbath on two accounts, 1. Because, as is said, they
would not offend the Jews. Even as many peaceable Non-Conformists, who are
against many Holy days now established, do yet forbear laboring and opening
their Shops on those days, because they will not give offense; Yea and go to
hear the Sermons on those days, though they keep them not Holy as such days.
2. Because there were many sorts of Heretics in those times, who held that the
World was made by an evil God, and thence came evil, and so they Fasted on the
seventh day on that reason: Which made the Christians avoid it lest they should
Symbolize with those Heretics. And therefore the (real or pretended) Ignatius
speaks so severely against Fasting on the Sabbath, as well as on the Lords
day. And so do the Constitutions called the Apostles; yea and the Canons called
theirs, Can. 65.

But in the Western Churches, (as is aforesaid) both Jews and Heretics were
more distant, or less considerable for numbers; and therefore they fasted on
the seventh day, and that the rather lest they should seem by Sabbatizing to
Judaize. Which was before Antichrists appearing, unless you think all the holy
Doctors before cited, and all the Western Churches to be Antichristian.

Having gone thus far I here add two more Scripture Arguments to prove the
abolition of the Jewish Sabbath. The first is because it is frequently made (as
Circumcision is) a sign of the particular Covenant between God, and that Nation
as they were a political body, and peculiar people. Therefore if their Policy
cease, and Gods relation to them as a Political body, and peculiar people, and
so that Political Covenant with them, then also the sign of the Covenant and
Relation cease. And though the word [ for ever] is sometime added, it is no
other than is often added also to the Jewish Law and Ceremonies.

2. From Act. 15. Where the case is determined by a Council of Apostles, Elders
and Brethren, yea by the Holy Ghost. V. 28. It appears by V. 24. that the
thing asserted by the false Teachers was, [that the Gentiles must be
Circumcised and keep the Law; that is, of Moses] V. 1. Now the seventh day
Sabbath was part of that Law (As Sacrificing was, though it was a Law before.)
But the Holy Ghost determines the case, [ to lay on them no greater burden
than these necessary things,] after named; where the Sabbath is none of them,
and therefore hereby shut out. The precepts given to Noah are named (of which
the Sabbath was not one.)

Obj. By this Exposition you may say that the rest of the Decalogue is
excluded: For Idolatry, Murder, etc. are not here forbidden by name. Answ. I
have fully proved that the Decalogue as written in Stone, and part of the Law
or Covenant of Moses is not at all in force, especially to the Gentiles, nor
yet as part of the Covenant (or promise) of Works, made with Adam in Innocence:
For the form of the Promissory Covenant of Works ceased upon man's sin, and the
promise of a Savior; And the form of the Mosaical Law or Covenant never
reached to the Gentile Nations and is ceased to the Jews: Therefore the Matter
must cease as it constituted the same Covenant, when the form ceased: And Paul
says expressly that this Law Written in Stone is done away: But, 1. The Law of
Nature as a mere Law never ceased: 2. And Christ has taken it into his
Covenant, as part of the Matter of it: So that it is wholly in force, though
not as part of the Covenant of Works, either Adamical or Mosaical. But the
Sabbath as to the seventh day, was no part of the Law of Nature, as is proved:
And Paul expressly says that it was a shadow of things to come, and is
therefore vanished away, Col. 2. 16. Had it been part of the Law of Nature, it
had bound us as such and as Christ's Law: or had it been one of the Enumerated
particulars, Act. 15. it had bound the Neighbor Gentiles, pro tempore at
least. But being neither, that Council discharges Christians from the
observation of it, as far as I can understand the Text.

FINIS.
Postscript.
IT is long since the foregoing Treatise was promised to a Person of Honorable
Rank, who was inclined to the Jewish Sabbath; but before it was finished, or
well begun, I had a sight of a Treatise on the same subject, by the late
Reverend Worthy Servant of Christ Mr. Hughes of Plymouth, which inclined me to
take my promised work as unnecessary. But yet some reasons moved me to reassume
it. Near two Months after it went from me to the Press, the said Treatise of
Mr. Hughes first, and after another on the same subject by Dr. I. Owen came
abroad. Yet do I not reverse mine, because many Witnesses in an Age of Enmity
and Neglect, can be no injury to a truth so serviceable to the Cause of
Christianity, and the prosperity of the Church, and the good of souls. Though
if I were one that took the Churches prosperity to consist in the Riches,
Grandeur, Ease and Domination of Empire of Papal Pastors, rather than in the
humble, holy, heavenly, self-denying imitation of a Crucified Christ, I would
have forborne a subject which is all for our preparation for a Heavenly
Sabbatism, and carries men above the sensual Rest of Fleshly men, and
therefore is so much disrelished by them, Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. But supposing it my
duty to do what I have done, I think meet to advertise the Reader, that when
several men treat of the same subject, though they speak the same things in the
main, yet usually each of them brings some considerable light, which is
omitted by the rest: And as the same Spirit sets them all on work, so all
together give suller evidence to the truth, than any one of them alone. And I
hope the Concourse of these three Tractates does prognosticate, that (though
the Devil has so contrived the business for the Profane, that like Papists,
they will hear and read none, but those that are not like to change them; yet)
God will awaken the sober and serious believers of this Age, to a more holy and
fruitful improvement of his day; which will greatly tend to the increase of
real Godliness, and consequently to the recovery of the dying hopes of this
apostatizing and divided Age.

But that which moves me to write this Postscript, is to acquaint thee, for
the prevention of scandal by any seeming differences in our Writings, 1. That
it cannot be expected, that all who plead the same Cause, should say just the
same things for it, for matter and manner of argumentation.

2. That if I own the Name Sabbath less than some others, and adhere more to
the name of the Lords Day, I do not thereby oppose the use of the name of
Sabbath absolutely; nor is that in it self a Controversy about the Matter, but
the Name, which though not contemptible, yet is of far less moment than the
Thing.

3. That if I make not use of so many Old Testament Texts as some others, I do
not thereby deny the usefulness of them, nor call you off from the
consideration of any argumentation or evidence thence offered you.

4. That if I seem to be more for the cessation of Moses Law than some others,
even of that part which was written in Stone, yet no part of the Law of Nature
is thereby denied by me any more than by any of them; And they that are angry
with me, for writing so much against the Antinomians, should not also be angry
with me for going no further from them, than the force of Truth constrains me.

5. That you must pardon me for my purposely avoiding the name of the [ Moral
Law] Mr. Cawdry and Mr. Palmer who have written most largely of the Sabbath,
have told you the reason. I love not such names, as are not fitted to the
nature of things, but are fitted to signify almost what the Speaker pleases.

I know no Law which is not formally Moral, as being Regula actionum Moralium.
And men may if they will, as well confine the signification of the word [ Law]
it self, as of a [ Moral Law] Nor does use it self sufficiently notify the
distinguishing signification of it: For one means by that name, all the Law
of Nature as such. Another means only so much of the Law of Nature as is
common to all mankind. Another means all Positive Laws of supernatural
Revelation, which are perpetual and universal, as well as the Law of Nature.
Therefore without finding fault with others, it suffices me to distinguish
Laws by such names as plainly signify the intended difference. And though by
the Law of Nature, I mean not formally the same thing that some others do, I
have sufficiently opened my sense and the reasons of it, in my Reasons of the
Christian Religion.

6. That they who say, that the Old Covenant, or the Covenant of Works made by
Moses with the Jews is abrogate or ceased, and the Decalogue as a part of, or
belonging to that Covenant, do say the same thing that I do, when I maintain
that the Decalogue and whole Law as Mosaical is ceased, but that all the
Natural part is by Christ assumed into his Law or Covenant of Grace. For it is
the same thing which is denominated the Law (of Moses, or of Christ) from the
preceptive part, and and a Covenant from the terms, or sanction, especially the
Promissory part. Nor is there any part of the Law of Moses, which was not a
part of the Mosaical Covenant. And if the Form cease which denominateth, the
Being and denomination ceaseeth, and all the parts as parts of that which
cease. So that if the Covenant of Works made with the Jews cease (which
Camero calls a third or middle Covenant, and several men do variously
denominate, but the Scripture calls the old, or former Covenant, or
Testament, or Disposition) then all the Law as part of that Covenant cease:
And that is as much as to say also that it cease as merely Mosaical, or
Political to the Jews. And then the Argument is vain, This or that word was
written in the Tables of Stone: Therefore it is of perpetual obligation. For as
it was written in Stone, it was Mosaical, and is done away; and under the New
Covenant all that is Natural and Continued, shall by the Spirit be written upon
the Heart; whence sin at first did obliterate it.

7. That as the Rest of God in the Creation is described by a Cessation from
his work, with a complacency in the goodness of it: but Christ's Rest is
described more by Vital Activity and Operation, than by Cessation from work,
even his Triumphant Resurrection as the Conquest of Death, and beginning of a
New Life: so I think the Old Sabbath is more described by such Corporeal Rest,
or Cessation from work, which was partly Ceremonial, or a signifying shadow,
and that the word Sabbath is never used in the Scripture, but for such a day of
Ceremonial Rest (though including holy Worship). But that the Lords day and its
due observation is more described by spiritual Activity and Operation, in the
spiritual Resurrection of the soul, and its new Life to God; And that the
Bodily Rest is no longer Ceremonial or shadowy, but fitted to the promoting and
subserving of the spiritual Activity and Complacency in God and holy exercises
of the mind, as the body it self is to the service of the soul.

8. That I am not ignorant that many of the English Divines long ago expound
Matthew. 24. 20. of the Christian Sabbath, and Col. 2. 16. as exclusive of the
Jewish Weekly Sabbath: But so do not most Expositors, for which I think they
give very good reasons, which I will not stand here to repeat.

9. That I intended not a full and elaborate Treatise of the Lords Day, but a
brief Explication of that Method of proof which I conceive most easy and
convincing, and fittest for the use of doubting Christians; who are many of
them lost in doubts in the multitude and obscurity of arguments from the Old
Testament: when I think that the speedy and satisfactory dispatch of the
Controversy is best made by a plain proof of the Institution of Christ by the
Holy Ghost in the Apostles; which I thought to have showed in two or three
Sheets, but that the necessity of producing some evidence of the fact, and
answering other men's Objections, drew it out to greater length. And my method
required me to say more of the practice of Antiquity, than some other men's. But
again, I must give notice that Dr. T. Ysoungs Dies Dominica is the Book which I
agree with in the Method and Middle way of determining this Controversy, and
which I take to be the strongest written of it: And that I omit most which he
has, as taking mine but as an Appendix to his, and desire him that will write
against mine, to answer both together, or else I shall suppose his work to be
undone.

ERRATA.
PAge 19 Line 23 and 24 for there put the^. p 21 l 20 Blo^t out (of the
Conclusion) p 30 l 10 for Pentecost r Passov^^. p 35 l. 4 r (Canon. Council.
Trul.) p 181 l 13 r George Walker. And in my Defense of the Principles of Love
the Errata being not gathered, the Reader is desired Part: 2. page 92 line 3
for the Verb to read the Word.

FINIS.

