Full and Easy SATISFACTION WHICH IS THE TRUE AND SAFE RELIGION. In a
CONFERENCE Between D. A DOUBTER, P. A PAPIST, and R. A REFORMED CATHOLIC
CHRISTIAN.
In Four Parts: I. The true stating of our Difference, and opening what each
Religion is. II. The true easy and full Justification of the Reformed or
Protestant Religion. III. The Protestants Reasons and Charges against Popery,
enumerated. IV. The first Charge, viz. Against Transubstantiation made good: In
which Popery is proved to be the SHAME OF HUMANE NATURE, notoriously contrary
to SENSE, REASON, SCRIPTURE and TRADITION, or the Judgment of the Ancient and
the Present Church; devised by Satan to expose Christianity to the Scorn of
Infidels.


By Richard Baxter.

London, Printed, for Nev. Simmons, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1674.

(...) and still continues so to do. And while I can say, that I know of no
Nobleman living who has read more of my Writings than You have done, all that
know the End of Writing, will consent, that there is no Noble Name which I
should prefer. And as I long ago read in the Learned Spanhemius's Dedication of
his Dubia Evangelica p. 3. to You (well joined with the famous Usher) the
predication of Your Judicium supra aetatem maturum, rerum omnium cognitione
subactum pectus, and that as attested by the Illustrious Duke of Rohane, the
Most Sagacious Arbiter of ingenies; And years and experience have been long
adding to Your knowledge: Being not a stranger to the Truth of this my self, I
have great reason to be Ambitious to stand right in Your esteem: (For who
reverenceth the Judgment of ignorant Readers? Or does not reverence the
Judgment of the Wise?) And therefore to give You an account of my self and of
this writing;

Since I overgrew that Religion which is taken up most on humane trust, by
increasing knowledge I increased men's displeasure; and my judgment not falling
just into the mold of any Sect among Church-dividers, there is scarce any Sect
which does not, according to their various interests, signify their
displeasure. Some only by Magisterial Censures; more credibly acquainting the
world, what they are themselves, than what I am, or what is my judgment. But
from others I take a mere slander for Clemency, and as Philostratus says, de
Dicto Phavorini) Et dum Socratis cicutam non bibam, aerea privari statua non
laedit. Simple Christianity is my Religion: I determine to know nothing but
Christ Crucified (and Glorified.) And I am past all doubt, that till simple
Christianity become the terms of Church-Unity and Concord, the Church will
never see Unity or Concord, which shall prove universal or durable. So certain
am I, that the Wits of the Learned, much less of the Community of vulgar
Christians, will never arrive at the stature, of Concord, in numerous and
difficult points: Nor the mavelous diversity of Educations, occasions,
temperatures and capacities, be ever united in any thing but what is plain and
simple. And as Certain am I, that the Universal Conscience of true believers
will never unite, in any thing which is not evidently divine. And yet as
certain am I, that the forsaking of the determination of the Holy Ghost and the
Apostles, Acts 15.28. and of Paul's Decision, Romans 14. and 15. has been the
Engine of Church-Divisions and many calamitous distractions to this day: And
that that blessed Prince who must have the honor and comfort of beginning the
true healing and Concord of the Churches, must pare off all their
superfluities, and leave them at best among their things indifferent, and unite
them on the terms of simple Christianity.

And as to Popery I have certainly found, that the Cross Interests and Passions
of Disputers have made us (though really too distant) to seem commonly about
many Doctrinals more distant than indeed we are: And that it had been better
with us, if such men as judicious Ludov. le Blank, had had the stating of our
Controversies at the first, that differing words and methods might not have
passed with either side for damnable errors in the faith. I mean in the points
of foreknowledge, predestination, providence, predetermination, concurse,
original sin, free will, universal Redemption, sufficient Grace, effectual
Grace, the nature of Faith, Justification, Sanctification, Merit, Good Works,
Certainty of Justification, and of Salvation, Perseverance, etc. For my knowing
this to be true, I am censured by those on one extreme, as too favorable to
the Papists (being indeed an Enemy to injury, calumny, uncharitableness or
cruelty to any in the world.) But I am much more displeasing to the Roman
party; Because I know, that One man is naturally incapable of being the Monarch
of all the world: That the King of Rome (as the Geographia Nubiensis calls him)
was never by Christ made King of Kings and Lord of Lords: That he never was,
nor can be a Pastor at the Antipodes, and over all the Earth, or as far as
Drake and Candish did Navigate: That it 's a sorry Argument, [ Monarchy is the
best Government: Ergo, An universal Monarchy is best:] That the Government
settled in Nature and Scripture, is for Princes to rule Churchmen and all, by
the Sword, and the Pastors of all particular Churches, to rule their
Congregations by the Church-Keys, that is, by the Word, using Synods for due
concord and correspondency: And this much will do better than all the stir that
the Clergies Ambition has made in the world.

I know that the Pope stands on no better a foundation than the other four
Patriarchs: And that he was but the chief Prelate or Patriarch in one Empire,
as the Archbishop of Canterbury is in England; And that the Greek Church never
took his Primacy in that one Empire to be of Divine Right: For if they had,
they had never set up the Patriarch of Constantinople against him, who never
claimed his Primacy as jure Divino. I know that the great Council of Chalcedon
decreed, Act. 16. Bin. 734. [We following always the definitions of the holy
Fathers and the Canon, have our selves also defined the same things, concerning
the Privileges of the same Most Holy Church of Constantinople, New Rome; For
to the Seat of Old Rome because of the Empire of that City, the Fathers
consequently gave the Privileges: And the one hundred and fifty Bishops most
beloved of God, being moved with the same intention, have given equal
Privileges to the Most Holy Seat of New Rome: Reasonably Judging that the City
adorned with the Empire and Senate, shall enjoy equal Privileges with Old
Regal Rome.]

I know that their late Bishop of Chalcedon says (against Bishop Bramhall,
Survey, page 69.) [ To us it suffices, that the Bishop of Rome is St. Peter's
Successor; and this all Fathers testify. But whether he be so jure Divino vel
humano is no point of faith. Vid. Bellarm. 1.2. de Pont. l. 12. And Holden
Analys. fid. l. 1. c. 9. p. 161. Multa sunt quae traditione universa firmiter
innituntur (puta S. Petrum fuisse Romae) quae revelata non sunt; ideoque ab
articulorum fidei Catholicae numero excluduntur.

I know that there never was such a thing as a true Universal Council in the
world (unless Christ and his Apostles were such); nor ever must, or will, or
can be.

I know that they were called Universal but as to one Empire: and that
Emperors called them together, who had nothing to do without that Empire; and
that (unless accidentally any inconsiderable number) no Churches out of the
Empire were summoned, or sent their Bishops thither: Which needs no other proof
than the knowledge of the limits of the Roman Empire, and the Notitiae
Episcopatuum, and the Names subscribed to each Council in Binnius and the rest.

I know that long ago their Raynerius said ( Cont. Waldens. Catal. in Biblioth.
Patrum Tom. 4. p. 773.) [ The Churches of the Armenians, and Ethiopians, and
Indians, and the rest which the Apostles converted, are not under the Church of
Rome.] And that Godignus and others make no doubt but the Abassines had the
faith from the days of St. Matthew and the Eunuch.

I know that Theodoret. Histor. Sanct. Patr. c. 1. says, [James the Bishop of
Nisibis came to the Synod of Nice; for Nisibis then obeyed the Roman Empire.]
Nothing can be more plain.

I know that Jacob. de Vitriaco (and others) say ( Hist. Orient. c. 77.) that [
the Churches of the Easterly parts of Asia alone exceeded in number the
Christians either of the Greek or Latin Churches]: And that Brochardus that
lived at Jerusalem says, that [ those called Schismatics by us are far better
men than those of the Roman Church.]

And to persuade the Kings of other Kingdoms, that the necessary way of
Church-Union, is to unite all their Subject-Churches under the Patriarchs of
another Empire, is no wiser than to tell all the world that they must be under
the Bishop of Canterbury.

I know that it was long ere Our ancient Britains, and especially Your Scots,
would so much as eat with the Roman Clergy, (as Beda shows.)

And I know that their Melch. Canus says, ( Loc. Com. cap. 7. fol. 201.) [That
not only the Greeks, but almost all the rest of the Bishops of the whole world,
have fought to destroy the privileges of the Church of Rome; And indeed they
had on their side both the Arms of Emperors and the greater number of
Churches: And yet they could never prevail to abrogate the power of the One
Pope of Rome.] Was this Pope then (or the Roman Church) Universal? Besides
that, to this day, they are but about the third or fourth part of the Christian
world.

And I know that General Councils are their Religion: and what the General
approved Council at Lateran sub Innoc. 3. has Decreed against Temporal Lords
and their Dominions, and absolving of their Subjects from their Oaths of
Fidelity: Besides what Greg. 7. has said in his Council. Romans of his power to
take down and set up Emperors.

The knowing of these things, makes me taken for their enemy. And their Image
of Worship in an unknown Tongue, with their Bread-Worship and multitude of
ludicrous deceitful toys, are things which my soul can never be reconciled to:
Much less to that renunciation of humanity which hereafter I detect, in the
following Treatise.

And having given You this Account of my self, I add as to this Treatise, 1. It
grieved me to hear that so many refused the Parliaments Declaration against
Transubstantiation: And I desired to show them what it is.

2. Instead of joining with those who talk much of the danger of Popery in the
Land (to keep it out,) I thought it better to publish the Reasons which
satisfy me against it, and leave the success of all to God.

3. And having occasion to re-print the First Part of my Key for Catholics,
with Corrections, instead of the Name before prefixed, (of one whose face I
never saw, nor ever had a word from, but ignorantly endeavored to have
provoked him to do good) I thought Your Name fittest to be gratefully
substituted, who were the first then that checked my imprudent temerity.

Though I was not so vain, as to expect of late in your multitude of greater
business, that You should read over my more tedious Writings, I despair not but
You may find leisure in perusing this, to see that I have prefixed Your Name to
nothing, but what Sense and Reason and Religion do avow. And so Craving Your
Pardon for the boldness and tediousness of this Address, I rest,

Your Graces humble much obliged Servant, Richard Baxter.
August 27. 1673.
TO THE READER.
THis Dialogue comes not to you, from an apprehension of any extraordinary
excellency of it, as if it did much more than is already done: but as extorted
by men's necessity; 1. Because so many ignorantly turn Papists of late; 2. And
some are pleased to Say (I dare not say, To Think) that it is long of men in my
condition; 3. And it is the Art of the Papists (which our vanity encourages)
to seek to bring the old Books into oblivion (which are unanswerable) and to
call still for new.

The intended Use of this is, 1. To tell those that will dispute with a Papist,
on what terms and in what order to proceed, lest they be cheated into a snare.

2. To teach the Ignorant Doubters truly to understand, wherein the difference
between us and the Papists does indeed consist; that the talk of Sectaries
Calling that which displeases them, Popery, nor the scandal of our real or
seeming divisions, may not delude them, nor Papists puzzle them by putting them
to prove every word in our thirty nine Articles or other Writings.

3. To Resolve all that will be Resolved, by Senses, Reason, Scripture, or the
Judgment and Tradition of the Church.

Of the multitude of Reasons against Popery enumerated, I have here made good
but one, by a special disputation; because I would not make the Book too big.
The rest I shall easily prove in another Volume, if greater work and shortness
of life do not hinder it; (which I fully expect.) And lest I have no more
opportunity to answer their Charges against us on the other side, I have
reprinted and added (Corrected) the first part of my Key for Catholics, where
it is long ago done, and never answered. There is extant one Piece of theirs
against me, unanswered, called, Mr. Johnson's Rejoinder about the Visibility of
the Church: which I seriously profess I have left unanswered, as utterly
unworthy of my precious Time, till I have no greater matter to do, which I hope
will never be. And he that will well study his opening of the terms in the
latter end, will see to how pitiful a case they are reduced. I conclude with
this solemn Profession, That I am satisfied of the truth of what I write, and
must dye ere long in the faith which I here profess, and lay my hopes of
endless happiness on no other way: And that I would joyfully receive any Saving
Truth, from Papists or any other, who will bring it me, with such evidence as
may make it indeed my own. The Lord Unite us by Truth, Love and Humility. Amen.

September. 1. 1673. Richard Baxter.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
WHat is the Protestants Religion, and what the Papists? page 1. Chap. 1. The
occasion of the Conference: with an humbling consideration to staggerers. ibid.
Chap. 2. The Conditions of the Conference. p. 6. Chap. 3. What is the Religion
of the Protestants. Of the name Protestant: The Augustane and other
Confessions: The thirty nine Articles: The Essentials of Christianity to be
distinguished from the Integrals and Accidentals. p. 9. Chap. 4. What is the
Papists Religion: out of Veron, Davenport, etc. p. 25.
PART II.
Fourteen Principles in which the Papists and Protestants seem agreed; by which
the Protestant Religion is by the Papists confessed and maintained to be all
true. p. 40.
PART III.
Twenty five Charges against Popery enumerated, to be all in order proved; as
Reasons why no one that has Religion, or Sense and Reason, should turn Papist.
p. 61.
PART IV.
The first Charge made good, viz. against Transubstantiation: In which Popery
is fully proved to be the shame of Humane Nature; contrary to SENSE, REASON,
SCRIPTVRE and TRADITION, or the Judgment of the ancient and the present
Church; devised by Satan to expose Christianity to the Scorn of Infidels. p.
75. Chap. 1. The first Reason to prove that there is Bread after the
Consecration, from the certainty of the Intellects Perception by the means of
sense. ibid. Twenty Reasons against the denying of common senses. p. 77. Chap.
2. The Papists Answers to all this confuted. p. 88. Chap. 3. The second
Argument against Transubstantiation from the contradictions of it. p. 96. Chap.
4. The third Argument from the certain falsehood of their multitudes of feigned
Miracles in Transubstantiation. Thirty one Miracles in it enumerated; with
Twenty aggravations of those Miracles. p. 99. Chap. 5. The Minor proved, viz.
That these Miracles are false or feigned. p. 110. Chap. 6. Arg. 4.
Transubstantiation contrary to the express Word of God. p. 117. Chap. 7. Arg.
5. All these Miracles are proofless: yea, the Scripture abundantly directs us
otherwise to expound, This is my Body. p. 123. Chap. 8. Arg. 6.
Transubstantiation nullifieth the Sacrament. p. 128. Chap. 9. The Novelty of
Transubstantiation, as contrary to the faith of the ancient Christians: And the
singularity, contrary to the Judgment and Tradition of most of the Christian
world. p. 132. Chap. 10. The second part of the Controversy: That it is not
Christ's very flesh and blood into which the Bread and Wine is turned. p. 146.
Chap. 11. The Conclusion: The Scandal of our difference removed. Whether the
falsehood of one Article prove the Papists foundation false? Whether it do so by
the Protestants? Whether Papists have any more Infallibility than others? The
necessity of discerning the Essentials of Christianity. The distinction of
Explicit and Implicit faith considered. How come so many Princes, Nobles,
Learned men, and whole Nations to be Papists? All Christians besides Papists,
are of one Church, though of many opinions. How come so many among us at home
of late inclinable to Popery? What hope of Concord with the Papists? How to
help them off their Councils? Snares in the point of Transubstantiation. Of
their denying the Cup to the Laity. p. 152.
Reader,
I Hope the Printers Errata are not many, and I am discouraged from gathering
them, because I see men had rather err themselves, and calumniate the Author,
than take notice of them: So has Mr. Danvers done by me in a Book against
Infant Baptism, where as an Introduction to abundance of mistakes in History,
he abuses his Reader by several scraps of a Book of mine, so curtailed as to
be insufficient to signify the sense; And among them feigneth me to write (
Chr. Direct. p. 3. page 885. l. 13. [ to Institute Sacraments] as that which
man may do, instead of [ Nor to Institute Sacraments]; and so makes his
credulous flock to believe that I assert that very thing which I write against:
Though the place was marked with a Star in the Errata, and the Reader desired
specially to Correct it. But such dealing is now grown so common with such men,
that we must bear it as the effect of their disease.

PART. I. What is the Protestants Religion, and what the Papists.
CHAP. I. The occasion of the Conference.
D. SIR, I am come to crave your help in a matter of great importance to me: I
was bred a Protestant; but the Discourses of some Roman Catholics, have
brought me into great doubts, whether I have not been all this while deceived:
And though I cannot dispute the case my self with you, I desire you to dispute
it in my hearing with a Catholic Priest whom I shall bring to you.


R. With all my heart: But let me first ask you a few Questions.

Quest. 1. Did you ever understand what the Protestants Religion is?


D. I take it to be the 39 Articles, Liturgy and Government of the Church of
England.


R. No wonder if you be easily drawn to doubt of that Religion which you no
better understand. Can you hold it, and not know what it is?

Quest. 2. Do you know what it is to be a Christian?


D. It is to believe in Christ, and to Love and obey Him. Our Baptism is our
Christening.


R. Very true: And in your Baptism you are Dedicated and Vowed to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, renouncing the Lusts of the Flesh, the World and
the Devil.

Quest. 3. And have you been a true Christian, and lived according to this Vow?
Have you obeyed God more than the desires of your flesh? Have you preferred the
Kingdom of Heaven before all the pleasures, honors and riches of this world?
Have you sincerely submitted to the healing saving Doctrine, Law and example of
Christ, and to the sanctifying motions of his Holy Spirit? And have you lived
soberly, righteously, and Godlily in the world, and made it your care and
business to deny your self, and mortify all fleshly inordinate desires, as it
is the care of sensual men to gratify them?


D. I have had my faults as all men have; but I hope none can say but I have
lived honestly toward all; And if I have been faulty in drinking, sports or
gaming, it has been to no ones injury but my own.


R. I ask you not whether you are a sinner; For so are all men. But whether you
are a truly Penitent, John's. Nov. Repr. p. 426. Protestants formally such, have
not enough to be brought to the unfeigned Love of God above all things, and
special Love to his servants, and unfeigned willingness to obey him: I deny you
have any certain knowledge or feeling that you love God or his servants, or
willingness to obey, etc.
Converted sinner; and whether yet you are true to your Baptismal Vow and
Covenant? Can your Conscience say, that you Love, and Trust and obey God, and
your Redeemer, before all the world; and that you love not Pleasure, Riches and
Honor, more than God and Holiness and Heaven? and that it is more of the care
and business of your life, to Know and Love and serve God better, and to make
sure of your salvation, than to please your flesh, or prosper in the world? In
a word; Do you heartily and in your practice, take God for your God, even for
your All, and Christ, for your Teacher, King and Savior, and the Holy Ghost
for your Sanctifier, turning in heart and life, from the Devil, the world, and
the sinful pleasures of the flesh? This is the question which I desire you to
answer.

But I will prevent your answer lest you mistake my purpose, and think I make
my self your Confessor, and I will tell you why I ask the question.

Either you have thus Kept your Baptismal Vow, by a Godly life, or else you
have broken it by worldliness and sensuality, etc. If you have kept it, and are
a truly Godly person, you have resolved your own doubt, and absolutely confuted
Popery already. For no honest man and true Christian can possibly turn Papist
without gross contradiction.


D. How prove you that.


R. Most easily: I pray you do but mark: 1. It is their principal Doctrine that
the Pope is the Head of the Universal Church on earth; and that the Church
subjected to him, is the Universal Church; and that out of that Church there is
no salvation; and that no one is a true member of Christ and his Church, who is
not a subject of the Pope.

2. And they all confess that every one shall be saved that is a true
Christian, and keeps his Baptismal Covenant, and that Loves God above all.
So that they must needs hold that none in the world but Papists, do truly Love
God, and keep that Covenant, and are true Christians.

Now if you can know that you have the true Love of God, and are true to your
Baptism, you must needs confess that Popery is false, which says that none
Love God above all but Papists.


D. But what if I have not Loved God, and obeyed him, above my flesh?


R. I Will tell you what follows. 1. It is no wonder if you forsake the
Protestants Religion, who never truly entertained it. If your Heart and Life
were not devoted unfeignedly to God, you were no true Christian, nor indeed had
any true Religion at all: And he that has no Religion, turns from none which
he truly had. If you were never a true Christian, you were never a true
Protestant: And then what wonder if you turn Papist? For you have no
experimental Knowledge of that Religion which you seem to forsake.

2. And how could you expect better, but that God should penally forsake you,
and give you over to believe deceits, if you have dealt so falsely and
deceitfully with him, as to live to the world and flesh which you renounced,
and neglect that God and Savior and sanctifier to whom you were so solemnly
devoted? And if you have been so treacherous and unwise, as to prefer a
brutish transitory pleasure, before Gods Love and the Joys of Heaven?

3. And what honor is it to the Church of Rome, that none but Infidels and
false-hearted hypocrites, and perfidious breakers of their Covenant with God,
did ever turn to them? If you turn Papist, you confess that you were a wicked
hypocrite before.

4. But the chief thing which I would tell you is, that turn up and down as often
as you will, to this Church or that Church, to this side or that side, you will
never be saved, unless you become a holy, serious, mortified Christian: As long
as you love pleasures, wealth and honor more than God and Holiness and Heaven,
you shall never be saved, whether you be Papist, or a professed Protestant. It
would make the heart of a Christian ache, to see so many thousands cheated by
the Devil, to take this opinion or that opinion, called the true faith, and
this side or that side, called the true Church, to be to them instead of a holy
heavenly heart and life. And how many thousands, especially Papists, that are
truly of no Religion, do dispute, and plot and disquiet the world, as for
Religion. To hear a profane man swear that his Religion is right; or that man
to think to be saved for being of the true Church and faith, whose heart was
never set on Heaven, but lives in drunkenness, lying, idleness, fornication,
and thinks that the Priests absolution sets all right again. Without true
Holiness no man shall be saved, what Church soever he join with; and with it no
man shall be damned. For God cannot hate them that have his nature, and Image.


D. Well sir: I came not to dispute with you, but to desire you to meet a Roman
Catholic Priest, that I may hear you both together.


R. I have the greater hopes of you, because you have so much regard of your
soul, as to be willing to hear what can be said. For most that turn to them,
never come to an impartial trial, but rashly follow the deceiver, or stay till
they are secretly hardened by false insinuations, and then take on them to
desire to hear both, when they are first resolved to be gone.

But you must tell me what is the question that you desire should be disputed.


D. I would know whether the Papists or the Protestants be the True, and safe
Religion?


R. I undertake to give you that plain undeniable evidence for your resolution,
which should fully satisfy any reasonable man, at least that professes
himself a Christian: so be it you will perform these reasonable conditions: 1.
That you will be impartially willing to know the truth. 2. That you will
honestly resolve to Live according to it when you know it, and to be True to
the True Religion. 3. That you will bring such a man to confer with me, who
will yield to the Reasonable Conditions of a disputant, such as your Doubt and
the nature of the matter does notoriously require, and not a Knave, and studied
Deceiver, who will set himself purposely to hide the truth.


D. These conditions are so reasonable that I must not deny them.


CHAP. II. The Conditions of the Conference; between a P. and R. and D.
R. SIR, I am desired by this person, who is brought by some of you to doubt of
our Religion, to debate this Case with you in order to his satisfaction,
Whether the Papists or the Protestants be the True and Safe Religion?


P. That is too large a Question: We cannot dispute of all our Religion at
once: I will begin with you, about some one of the Articles of the Church of
England, or the Visibility of your Church in all Ages, or the Resolution of
your faith, etc. And this I will do only on these conditions, 1. That you bring
some express Text of Scripture, which without your Interpretation, Reasonings
or Consequences, does assert that Article of yours which I shall accuse, or
contradict any Article of our faith, which shall be questioned. 2. Or if you
will go from the express words to Reasoning, that we keep to the strictest
Rules of Logic, and that you use nothing but Syllogism, and that all be done
in writing, and not by word of mouth.


R. Neighbor D. you promised me to bring another kind of Disputant: You hear
his conditions: you shall hear my answer.

1. The Case which you told me you were in doubt of, and desired satisfaction
in, was Which is the True and Safe Religion? This he refuses to Dispute.
Pretending that we cannot dispute of our whole Religion at once. But did you
never hear him give any Reasons against our Religion? If he have, Why can he
not do it now? I expect not all in a word, but let him give them one by one,
and say his worst. I am sure I can give you many against theirs: And we will
after debate them particularly as largely as you please.

2. If Writing be it that you desire for your satisfaction, I ask you, whether
you have read all, or the fourth part, of what is written against Popery
already. Have you read Dr. Challoner of the Catholic Church? Dr. White, Dr.
Field, Dr. Downame of Antichrist, Chillingworth, Dr. Abbot, Dr. Willet, Bishop
Usher, Bishop Morton, Dr. Stillingfleet, and an hundred more? Why should I
expect that you should read what I shall write, if you will not read what is
written already?

3. Can you stay so long unresolved without injury to your soul, till he and I
have done writing? You cannot but know, that from Sheets we must proceed to the
writing of Volumes, in answering each other, as others have done. And this is
like to be many years work, for men that have other business: And how know you
that we shall all Live so long?

4. Are you able when it comes to tedious Volumes to examine them, and find
who is in the right? Or will you not rather take him to conquer, who has the
last word? And it is like that will be the longest liver?

5. And as to a strict syllogistical form, do you understand that best? I avoid
it not, but shall consent to use it as far as you understand it. Do you know
all the Logical forms of arguing, all Moods and Figures, and all the fallacies?
Or do you not perceive, that you have broken your promise with me, and brought
a friend of darkness, who comes purposely to hide the truth?


D. I must needs profess, that the Question which I would have debated, is,
Which is the True and Safe Religion? And that it is not tedious writings, nor
long delays, but present conference which must satisfy me. And that it is
plain Scripture and Reason that must satisfy me, who understand not Logic. I
pray let me hear your own Conditions which you think more just.


R. The Conditions which the nature of the Cause directs us to, are these.

I. That we first truly state the question to be disputed: For we cannot
dispute till we are agreed of what: That is, 1. That we agree what we mean by
our [ Religion]; and 2. That I tell you, what is the Religion of Protestants,
which I undertake to defend: And that he tell us what is the Religion of the
Romanists, which must be compared with it.

II. That our Conference consist of these several parts.

1. That premising the principles in which we are agreed, I tell you the
Reasons why you should not be a Papist.

2. That he tell you the Reasons why you should turn Papist, or what he has
against Our Religion.

3. That then we come to dispute these Reasons distinctly: where I will prove
my charges against them, and he shall prove his charges against us one by one.

III. And that in all our disputes, we shall consent, 1. Not to interrupt each
other in speech; but if the length seem to overmatch the hearers memory, we
will take brief Notes to help our memories, as we go, and crave the recitation
of what shall be forgotten: For the strength of Truth lies so much in the
connection of its parts, that when it is mangled into scraps by uncivil
interruptions, it is deformed and debilitated and cannot be well understood.

2. That we bind our selves by solemn promise, to speak nothing which we
unfeignedly judge not to be truth, nor any thing designedly to hide or resist
the truth which we discern.

These terms are so just and necessary, that I will avoid him as a fraudulent
wrangler who will deny them. For I come not to scold, nor to try who has the
strongest Lungs, the nimblest Tongue, or the lowdest voice, or the greatest
confidence, or fiercest passion; but to try who has the truth, and which is
the true way to Heaven. For the servant of the Lord must not strive; especially
about words and barren notions; for that does but tend to increase ungodliness.


D. Your Method is so reasonable, and so suited to my own necessity, that I
must profess no other can so much tend to my satisfaction: And therefore I hope
it will not be refused.

(Here after long opposition, the P. at last agrees to these terms).


CHAP. III. What is the Religion of the Protestants.
R. I. THe word [ Religion] is sometimes taken Objectively; And so I mean by
it* [ The objects of Religious Belief, Love and Practice,] which are, 1. The
Things themselves; which are the principal objects (called by Logicians, The
Incomplex terms.) 2. The organical object; or the Revelation of these Things;
containing 1. The Words or other. Signs: 2. The sense or notions signified.

For instance, Matthew. 17.5. [ This is my Beloved son in whom I am well
pleased.] Here 1. The Real Incomplex object is Christ Himself, the beloved Son
of God, and God the Fathers well-pleasedness in him. 2. The signal part of the
organical object, or Revelation, is the Words themselves, as spoken then, and
written now. 3. The signified notions are the Meaning of the words, and are the
chief part of the organical object, that is the Divine Revelation.

The word [ Religion] is of larger extent in its sense than [ Faith]; For it
contains all that Revelation which God has made Necessary to salvation;
which is twofold, 1. That which is to inform the understanding with necessary
knowledge and faith. 2. That which is necessary to a Holy Will and a Holy Life,
to the Love of God and man, and to well doing; which are Precepts, Promises and
Threatenings.

II. The word [ Religion] is often taken also subjectively (as they speak); For
the Acts and habits of Love and Obedience.

Now I suppose we are agreed that it is not Religion in this last sense that we
are to dispute of (which is as diverse as persons are:) But it is that which we
call Objective Religion, even the Organical part directly. And if by all this
D. understands us not, in plainer words, our Question is, Of the True Divine
Revelation, viz. Which is the True Rule of Faith, Will and Practice; that which
is held to be such by the Protestants: or that which is held to be such by the
Papists?


P. I grant you, that this is the state of the Question.


R. I here declare to you then, What is the Religion of the Protestants. IT IS
THE LIGHT and LAW OF GOD CONCERNING HOLY KNOWLEDGE and BELIEF, HOLY WILL and
PRACTICE, CONTAINED IN NATURE and THE TRUE CANONICAL SCRIPTURES.

Here note 1. That our Religion has its Essential parts; And its Integral
parts and Accidentals. I. The Essentials of our Religion, are contained in the
Baptismal Covenant; which is expounded in the CREED, the LORDS PRAYER, and the
DECALOGUE (as delivered and expounded by Christ, and the Law of Nature.)

II. Our Entire Religion, in the Essentials, Integrals and needful Accidentals
is contained wholly in the Law of Nature and the Canonical Scriptures.

The Essentials are delivered down to us two ways: 1. In Scripture with the
rest; 2. By the sure tradition of the Universality of Christians, in actual
Baptizings, and the daily profession of Christianity. This is all the
Protestants Religion. If you fasten any other on us, we deny it; we own no
other. And none know What is my Religion, that is, What I take for the Rule of
my holy Faith, Love and Life, so well as my self.


P. This is mere craft: you will make that only which is past controversy
among us, to be Your Religion, that so your Religion may be past controversy
too.


R. It is such Craft as contains that naked truth, which we trust all our own
salvation on. I say that I have no other Religion; And if you know better than
I, disprove me.


P. I disprove you three ways. I. Because the Name Protestant signifies no
such Religion, but somewhat else lately taken up. II. Because the Angustane
Confession, the thirty nine Articles and such like, are by your selves called
The Articles of your Religion. III. Because all your Writings declare, that
besides these, you hold all those controverted points, which are contrary to
that which you call Popery.


R. I pray you mark D. that he would persuade you that he knows my Religion
better than I do my self? What if I should pretend the like as to his Religion?
Were I to be believed?


P. No: but if you have an odd Religion of your own, that proves it not to be
the Protestant Religion.


R. Remember D. that I come not hither to persuade you to any other Religion,
than this which I have mentioned. Let him talk as long as he will what is other
men's opinions, I persuade you to nothing but this, to take Gods Law of Nature
and the Scripture for your Religion. Either this is Right or Wrong. If Right,
fix here and I have done. If Wrong, let that be disputed.

But yet I open to you all his three deceits.

I. The name Protestant does not signify our Religion, but our Protesting
against the Papists corruptions and additions. I have no Religion but
Christianity: Knot against Chillingworth Chapter 2. p. 122. [ In no one doctrine
Protestants would seem more unanimously to agree, than in this, That all things
necessary to salvation are contained evidently in Scripture -- which they hold
as the only foundation of the whole structure of their Faith and Religion.]
Note this Confession.
I am a Christian, and that signifies all my Religion. I am a Catholic
Christian, that is, of the Common Christian Faith and Church, and not of any
heretical dividing Sect: And I am a Reformed Protestant Christian, because I
renounce Popery. Therefore I rather say [ The Protestants] than the [
Protestant] Religion. As if I were among Lepers; If I say, I am no Leper, that
signifies not my Essence: But if I say, [ I am a Man, and I am not a Leper,] I
speak my Nature, and my freedom from that disease. So if I say I am a Christian
Protestant, I mean only that I am a Christian, and no Papist, or renouncing
Popery; as by the word [ Catholick] I renounce all Sects and Schisms. I tell
you, This is my meaning, when I say, I am a Protestant: and can you tell my
meaning better than my self?

II. And as to what he says of the thirty nine Articles and other Church
Confessions, I answer, None of these are our Religion, in the sense now in
question; that is, They are not taken by us to be [ the Divine Revealed-Rule of
our Faith, Love and Life] which is our Religion now disputed of. And that this
is so, I prove to you past all question.

For 1. Else should we have as many Religions as we have Church Confessions,
and should alter our Religion as often as we alter our Confessions; and our
Religion should be as New as those Confessions: All which the Protestants abhor.

2. All those very Confessions themselves do assert that Gods Word is our only
Religion, and all men's Writings and Decrees are liable to mistakes: To pass by
all the rest, these are the words of our sixth Article, [Holy Scripture
contains all things Necessary to salvation: so that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it
should be believed as an Article of faith, or be thought Requisite or necessary
to salvation]. What would you have more plain and full?

And in the Book of Ordination, it is asked [Are you persuaded that the Holy
Scriptures contain sufficiently all doctrine required of necessity for eternal
salvation? through faith in Jesus Christ? And are you determined out of the
said Scriptures to instruct the people committed to your charge? and to teach
Nothing (as required of necessity to eternal salvation) but that which you
shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the Scripture?] Is not this
plain?


P. Why then do you call the thirty nine Articles the Articles of your
Religion? And what is their use? And why are all required to subscribe them?


R. 1. Their Use is to signify how the Conjunct Pastors who use them do
understand the Holy Scriptures in those points: And that partly for the
satisfaction of all foreign Churches, who may hear us accused of Heresy or
Error; and partly to be a hedge to the Doctrine of young Preachers, to keep
them from vending mistakes in the Churches, and also to try the soundness of
their understandings.

2. The Confessions, and Articles, and Catechisms are our Religion, as the
Writings of Perron, Bellarmine, Suarez, etc. or many of these agreeing, are the
Roman Religion: They are not the Divine Revelation and Rule of faith and
practice to us: But they are the expression of our own conceptions of the sense
of several chief matters in that Rule or Revelation. So that they are the
Expression of our faith or Religion taken subjectively (for acts and habits)
and not our objective Rule it self. Our Sermons and Prayers are our Religion in
this sense: that is, The Expression of our own Religious Conceptions: And so
are your Sermons and your Writings also to you. But if this were our Rule of
Faith and Life, and so our Divine Objective Religion, then we should be of as
many Religions, as we are several persons: For every one has his several
Expressions: And every new Sermon, or Book, or Prayer, would be a new part of
Religion. And so with you also. So that this doubt is past all doubt: Our
Confessions are but the expressions of our personal belief, and not our Rule of
Faith.

III. And as to your third pretense (that we have other Articles as opposite to
Popery) I answer, Our Religion as a Rule of Faith and Worship is one thing* And
our Rejecting all Corruptions and Additions is another. E. g. My Religion is,
that our God is only the true God. If now I say also, that Hercules is not God,
and Bacchus is not God, and Venus, Mars, Mercury, Pallas, Neptune, Pluto,
Ceres, etc. are not Gods; is this a new Religion, or an addition to the former?
If the Baptismal Covenant be the Essentials of my Religion, and the Creed,
Lords Prayer and Decalogue the Explication of it; and if the Scripture be my
Entire Religion, and if the Papists will come and add a multitude of new
Articles and Corruptions, my rejecting of those additions, is no more an
alteration of my Religion, than the sweeping of my house, or the washing of my
hands is an alteration of them. So that notwithstanding all that you have said,
my Religion is nothing but the Law of Nature and Scripture, and my rejecting of
Popery, is no otherwise my Religion, than my freedom from the Leprosy, etc. is
my humanity.


P. Observe, I pray you, that It is no part of your Religion to be against
Popery.


R. Observe I pray you, that Popery is against my Religion, that is, against
much of the Christian Religion; and therefore my Religion is against Popery.
But I will not quarrel with you about words: When God has Revealed to us his
Will, and the Papists add their corrupting inventions, Gods Revealed Will is my
Religion: your Corrupting additions are contrary to it: Call my rejecting such
Corruptions and additions, by the name of my Religion Reductively (as Nihil is
objectum Intellectus, and Malum Voluntatis; and as non-agere is part of
obedience); or Call it no part of my Religion in the primary notion, but a
Rejecting of its contraries; so we understand each other I care not.

The truth is, the Rejecting of some of your errors, directly contradicting the
Scripture it self, may be called part of our Religion, as the Negation of the
Contrary is included in the sense of an Affirmative: But your remoter
additions, are contrary to our Religion, but not so directly. For instance:
when the Scripture says, There is bread after Consecration, and you say There
is no bread: My Religion contains the Assertion, that There is bread: And so
includes a contradiction to your Negative, that says [ There is none]. Now to
say, that it is none of my Religion to deny your Negative, who say There is no
bread, would import that It is none of my Religion which affirms that there
is bread. Contradictions cannot both be true: Properly that word that says
There is bread is my Religion: But this word contradicts you that say There
is none.

But in another instance; my Religion says, that The Righteous shall go into
life everlasting, and the rest to everlasting punishment; and tells us of a
Heaven and Hell only hereafter: And you tell us of Limbus Patrum and Infantum,
and of Purgatory: The Scripture enableth us by consequence to confute this: but
if it did not, it were enough for me to say, It is none of my Religion, because
not Revealed by God in Nature or Scripture; And as it is your Addition, so to
deny it, is not directly and properly my Religion it self, but the Defense and
Use of my Religion. God tells us in Scripture, that He created Heaven and
Earth. If one should assert as from God, that God created ten thousand Heavens
and ten thousand Earths, this is a faith of his own invention or addition, and
it is enough for me to say, I have no such faith; because God reveals no such
thing. So tha^ still the Scripture is the Protestants Religion as your Polydor
Virgil truly describes them, and others confess.


P. All this is mere delusion: For It is not the words, but the sense that is
your Religion; as you will confess. And if your Articles or Confessions contain
a false sense, or your Books or Sermons show that you falsely expound the
Scripture, your Religion is then false.


R. Such Confusion may cheat a heedless hearer: But any one that will take
heed, may quickly perceive, that you here fraudulently play with the ambiguity
of the word [ Religion] and quite turn to another question. For you now speak
of subjective Religion, that is, of the Acts and habits of the person: whereas
we are disputing only of objective Religion, which is Gods Revelation and our
Rule. If I understand any Texts of Scripture amiss, my faith is so far
defective in my selfs* But Gods Word, which is my Rule, is never the more
imperfect.

I pray you consider how justly you have spoken. 1. Is a man's Act of faith,
Gods Word or Revelation? 2. What need you dispute of the Protestants Religion,
if we have as many Religions as persons? For it is as certain that we have as
many degrees of our understanding many Texts of Scripture? 3. Would not this
prove also as many Religions as persons among your selves? Is it not most
certain that no two Papists in the world, have just the same sense or
conceptions of the Scriptures and Councils in each particular. The Law of God
is my only Religion, objectively, as how disputed of: If I mistake any
essential part of it, so as to deny it, I am personally a Heretic: If I
mistake any Integral part, I so far err from the Rule of my Religion or faith.
But I still profess, that I take Gods Word or Law only for my sure unchangeable
Rule or objective Religion, and I am daily learning to understand it better,
and as soon as I see my error I will reform it, and blame my self and not my
Rule. And I think you will say the same of your Rule and of your personal
errors.


P. This shall not serve your turn: For every Law must have its promulgation:
And if it be not manifested to you that Scripture is Gods Law, and sufficient,
it cannot be your Rule: I ask you therefore,

Qu. 1. Is it the Scripture in the Original, or in the Translations, which you
say is your Religion, Law or Rule?


R. I told you our Divine Rule consists of Words and Meaning. It is only the
Originals which are our Rule or Religion as to the very words; that is, Only
the Original words, were of that Divine Inspiration. But every Translation is
so far Gods Word, in sense, as it expresses truly the sense of the original
words.


P. Qu. 2. I pray you what then is the Religion of all the unlearned
Protestants, who know not a word of the Originals? They may see now that you
have stripped them of all Divine Religion.


R. Their Religion is the same objectively with that of the most learned, as
delivered from God; but it is not equally learned and understood by them; Gods
Word in the Original Tongues is given them as the Rule of Faith and Worship;
and Teachers are appointed to help them to understand it. When these Teachers
have Translated it to them, they have the same sense, though not the same
words, for their Religion. And to know the Words is not so necessary to
salvation, as to know the sense (or sentence) though by other words: For the
words are but means to know the Sense; and the sense but a means to know the
Things, (viz. God, Christ, Grace, Glory, etc.) And as they have the same God,
Christ, Spirit, Grace, Glory, etc. to be the real objects of their Religion, so
have they the same DoDoctrine and Law in sense which is in the Originals.


P. Q. 3. And I pray you, How shall the unlearned be sure that the Translations
are true as to the sense? when you have no Divine Infallible Translators?


R. I also ask you. 1. How was all the Greek Church for many hundred years sure
of the soundness of the Translation called the Septuagint? or that of Aquila,
Theodot. Symmachus, etc. when it is certain that in many things they were all
unsound?

2. How was the Latin Church sure of the soundness of their Translation before
Hierome amended it? And how have you been sure since then, when Pope Sixtus,
and Pope Clement have made so many hundred alterations or differences? Had you
then Infallible Translators? And why then do your Translators (as Montanus and
others) still differ from that Vulgar Latin?

3. And how do all your unlearned persons know that you give them not only the
true sense of the Scriptures, but of all your Councils or Traditions?

But I will answer you directly. We still distinguish the Essentials of our
Religion, from the Integrals and Accidentals. 1. The unlearned may be certain
that the Essentials are truly delivered them in sense: Because they have them
not only in the Scripture, but by Universal certain Tradition, in the constant
Use of Christian Baptism, and in the use of the Creed, Lords Prayer and
Decalogue in all the Church Assemblies: And they may easily know that men's
tempers, Countries, Interests, opinions in other points, and sidings are so
various, that it is not a thing possible without a miracle, that all these
should conspire both in a false Translation, and Universal assertion and
Tradition of all these Essentials. For the effects must be contrary to a
torrent of Causes: The Papists, Protestants, Arians, Greeks, Socinians,
Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, Separatists, etc. have so much animosity
against each other, that undoubtedly if any party of them did falsify
Scripture even in the Essentials which are easily discerned, multitudes would
quickly detect it and contradict them. And this the unlearned may surely and
easily discern.

But as for all other less necessary texts of Scripture, neither you nor we,
learned or unlearned, are certain that they are perfectly translated, nor are
they by any one perfectly understood, nor are they sure (by reason of the
various readings) which copy of the original is absolutely faultless.

2. But suppose that an unlearned weak Believer were not absolutely certain (as
he may be) that the very essentials of Christianity are truly opened to him, he
may yet grow up to better understanding, and he may be saved with some
doubtings of Christianity it self, so be it his Faith be more prevalent than
those doubtings, upon his Heart and Life.


P. Is it a safe Religion which you your self describe? When no man can be sure
that he rightly understands all the Scriptures? and when your believer is
uncertain, even of Christianity it self? Let D. Judge whether this be a sure
Religion.


R. The word of God is absolutely certain in it self; but that so much
uncertainty may be in believers, I will make you to your shame confess your
self, and recant these insinuations.

Q. 1. Dare you say that all your Church, or any one man, even the Pope
himself, does understand all the Scripture? or can perfectly and infallibly
translate each word? You dare not say it. Else why did he never once pretend to
give us either an unerring Commentary or Translation? And why have you such
great diversity of both?

Q. 2. How much less dare you say that any of you perfectly understand all the
Councils, which are the rest of your Religion? No nor that you have certainty
which are the true Copies of them all? else why do Caranza, Crab; Surius,
Binnius, Nicolinus, etc. give give us such various Copies? And yet you confess
the Scriptures to be Gods word, and with the Councils to contain your Religion.

Q. 3. If God have promised salvation, to all that truly hold and practice the
Essentials (the Baptismal Covenant) does the difficulty of other points (in
Genealogy, Chronology, History, by matters) either make our salvation ever
the less certain, or any way impeach the word of God? What disgrace is it to a
man that besides Head and Heart, he has fingers, and toes, and nails and hair?
No more is it to the Scripture, that as our entire Religion, it contains even
Integrals and Accidentals.

Q. 4. And as to a Doubting Believer, I ask, Dare you say that all those were
Infidels or in a state of damnation, who said, See the Roman Catech. where this
is confessed, Cap. 1. q. 1. page 9. Lord increase our faith? or Lord we believe;
help our unbelief? or to whom Christ said, Why are ye afraid O ye of little
faith? or that said, Luke 24. We trusted that this had been he that should have
delivered Israel? Or if a man should doubt even of the Life to come, and yet
his Faith be so much more powerful than his doubts, as that he resolves to
prefer his hopes of Heaven before all this world, and to seek it on the most
self-denying terms, even to the laying down of life it self, are you sure that
this man shall be damned? But this is the Course of pievish wranglers. To
maintain their own opinions and put a face of certainty on their own
conclusions, they stick not to damn almost all the world. For it will be no
less, if all doubting believers must be damned.

5. It is a gross delusion to pretend that there is a necessity, that All Gods
Infallible word, See Dr. Holden Analys. fidei Li. 1. c. 3. Let. 1.
must needs be taught us by as Infallible Inspired Prophets or other persons,
as those that first delivered it. Translation is but the first part of
exposition. And must we have none but Infallible or Prophetical Expositors?

6. Is it All the Scriptures, or but some part, that your Pope or Councils can
Infallibly both translate and expound? If but some, we need not their
Infallibility or Inspiration, for the most plain and necessary parts: It is and
can be done without them. If it be All, how impious and cruel are they that
would never do it to this day?

7. And why use all your Expositors the common helps of Grammars, Lexicons,
Teachers, long studies, and yet differ de side (even of the sense of many a
text of Scripture) when all is done, if your Pope have the gift of Infallible
Translating and expounding all?


P. Remember that your selves derive your Essentials from Tradition.


R. Yes, and our Integrals to: What objective presence to the senses, (eyes and
ears) of those that heard Christ and his Apostles, and saw their miracles was
to the first Converts in those times, that partly Tradition is to us, or the
necessary medium. He that would know what stress we lay on Tradition as the
Medium may see it fully in my Reasons of Christ. Relig. And Dr. Holden is more
for us than for the Papists, Cap. 3.
The words could not come down to us, without some to deliver them. We have the
Bible by Tradition, and we have practical Tradition of Baptism and the Creed by
it self, and that in many languages; where we are sure we have all the
necessary sense. But do you remember that this is Universal Tradition, and not
mere Roman Tradition; such as is certain by moral Evidence, even the consent of
all that are yet of cross opinions and Interests, (as to matter of fact);
Historical Evidence; and not the pretended certainty of a Pope and his
favorites, phanatically claiming a spirit of Infallibility.

But I am not now disputing with you, I am only telling you that the Protestant
Religion is nothing but Christianity and the Scriptures. And all our
Confessions are our Religion (besides Consent) but as our Sermons and Treatises
are, which vary as they are various expressions of men's various subjective
faith; while Gods word varyeth not.


P. If the Bible be your Religion, then the Ceremonial Law of Moses is your
Religion: For that is part of the Bible.


R. You study what to say against another, and never think how it concerns
your selves. 1. Is not the Bible at least Part of your Religion? You dare not
deny it. And is the Ceremonial Law of Moses therefore your Religion?

2. I told you that as a perfect man has hair and nails, which are but
Accidents, so the Bible has more than the Integrals of our Religion.

3. The Ceremonies of Moses in that sense as now they are delivered to us in
the Bible, are parts or appurtenances of our Religion: That is, the historical
narrative of those Abrogated Laws, which now bind us not as Laws, but tell us
(as the Prophesies) what was heretofore, and how Christ was fore-typified, and
what intimations of Gods will we may gather from the history. And the abrogated
Laws are no otherwise delivered to us, and so we must use them.


P. If the ten Commandments be your Religion, you must keep the Jewish seventh
day Sabbath: so that neither there can you fix.


R. The same answer will serve. 1. The ten Commandments are no otherwise part
of our Religion th^n they are of yours. 2. They are a Law to us, as delivered
and expounded by Christ, and in Nature: and the seventh day is an abrogated
part of Moses Law.


P. If the Creed be your Religion, you must take the Article of Christ's descent
into Hell to be necessary to salvation.


R. 1. Is the Creed no part of your Religion? As you answer, so may we. 2. I
did not tell you that the Creed had no more than the Essentials. I told you
that all the Essence of Christianity is in the Baptismal Covenant: And he that
understands that, understands it all. And that the Creed, the Lords Prayer,
and the Christian Decalogue are the exposition of it. But the Exposition may
have somewhat more than the Essentials. 3. The Creed was not written first in
English, nor Latin; And Christ's descent to Hades is more needful to be
believed, than his descent to Hell, as the word is commonly taken in English.

But, to conclude, remember, 1. That I profess here to own and plead for no
other Religion (as we explained the word) but Gods Law of Nature and Scripture.
2. That I profess to persuade D. to no other: And you cannot make me a Religion
against my will.


CHAP. IV. What is the Papists Religion.
R. I Have plainly told you what my own, and the Protestants Religion is, viz.
[ Nothing but Christianity; contained Integrally in the holy Scriptures; And
the Essentials being the Baptismal Covenant, explained in the Creed, Lords
prayer and Christian Decalogue, are delivered to us both in the said
Scriptures, and by distinct Tradition; which also has brought down to us the
Scripture it self: Not a Tradition depending on the pretended Authority of the
Roman Pope or party, or on any other that shall pretend the like; But that
Historical Evidence of matter of fact, which is surelier given us by all sorts
of Christians, taking in the Concord of many Heretics, Infidels and Enemies;
which evidence depends not on the credit of supernatural Revelation, but on
the natural credibility yea and certainty of such universal Circumstantiated
Concordant testimony; and is necessarily antecedent to the Belief of
supernatural Revelations in the particulars, as sight and hearing were in the
auditors of Christ and the Apostles; seeing these two Acts of Knowledge,
[Whatever God says is True; and This God saith] must necessarily go before our
Belief or Trust that [This is True, because God says it.] And so we run not in
a circle, and need not a supernatural faith, for the founding of our first
supernatural faith; that is, A first before the first.]

Without fraud or obscurity this is our faith and Religion.

Now do you as honestly and plainly tell me What is Yours, which D. must be
persuaded to: For I confess that I take it to be an unintelligible thing, and
despair that ever you give any man a certain notice, what it is, which may be
truly called the Religion of your Roman-Catholick-Church.


P. I shall make you understand it if you are willing: But 1. Note that [
Religion] being a larger word than [ faith] includes also [ Practice] or [
Manners], we must give you a distinct account of each: For they have not the
same Causes: Our Faith is Divine; But our Manners or Practice must follow the
Laws of the Church, as well as the Immediate Laws of God: These must not be
confounded.


R. Man has three faculties, Intellective, Volitive and Vitally- Executive, or
Active: Our Religion subjectively must be in all, viz. The Sanctity of all, by
Holy Life, Light and Love: And therefore the Rule which is our objective
Religion does extend to all, (to Intellect, Will and Practice). And surely for
All, there is a Rule directly Divine, given by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost or
Christ's own words, and subordinate Rules by Christ's Ministers, which are
directly Humane, and no otherwise Divine than as God has in General authorized
them thereto. Even as the Sovereign has the only Universal Legislative power,
and Magistrates by Him are authorized to subordinate mandates and acts of
Government. And so we have a Divine Faith and Revelation, and a subordinate
Humane faith and Ministerial Revelation or Preaching: We have Divine
Persuasions, and subordinate Persuasions of men: We have Divine Laws, yea and
executions; and we have Humane subordinate Laws and executions. If you resolve
to call the Humane, Divine so far as they are indeed Authorized by God, I will
not quarrel about words: But remember, 1. That so you must do also on the same
reasons, by the Laws of Kings and the Commands of Parents, who are as much
authorized by God to their proper Government. 2. And I hope you mean not to
Confound these Humane Laws, with Gods own Universal Laws, nor humane faith with
Divine faith. And be it known to you, It is the Divine Revelations and Laws as
distinct from the Humane, which we are now calling our Religion, and disputing
of; though this Religion teach us to obey Parents, Pastors and Princes, and
that obedience may be consequentially and reductively called Religious if you
please. But if really your Religion be not Divine, but Humane, let us know it.
For by the word [ Religion] we essentially mean that which is [ Divine.]


P. Men were the speakers and writers of the Scriptures, and so far they are
humane, as well as the Decrees of the present Church.


R. The Decalogue was witten by God, and delivered by the Ministry of Angels:
Christ was owned by a Voice from Heaven. And himself spoke and did most recited
by the four Evangelists: And the Prophets and Apostles spoke by the immediate
Infallible Inspiration of the Holy Ghost: So that the Holy Ghost is the Author
of the Scriptures. But the present Pastors of the Church instead of that
Immediate Revelation from God by the Spirits Inspiration, have but the ordinary
help of the Spirit, to understand those same Revelations, and that proportioned
to the measure of their diligence, natural parts and helps of Art, as the
knowledge of Theology is attained by other Students; who are none of them
perfect or free from error.


P. I will tell you what our Religion is, It is Gods Word concerning things to
be Believed and Done delivered partly in the Canonical Scriptures, and partly
by Oral Tradition, and received by the Church, and by it delivered to us. The
Trent. Catech. Prefac. q. 12. says, Q. Was it from the Church that the first
Church received it? Or was it not the same Divine Religion which the first
Church (whether Council or Practicers) received without the Tradition of
Council or Practicers? If so, this cannot be essential to Religion. If the
Apostles words were to be believed, their proved Writings are to be believed.
And their Writings were proved theirs before a General Council or Universal
Practice witnessed it: Even by each Church and person that received any Epistle
from any one of them.
Omnis doctrinae ratio, quae fidelibus tradenda sit, verbo Dei continetur, quod
in Scripturam, Traditionesque distributum est. The Reason of every doctrine
which is to be delivered to the faithful, is contained in the Word of God,
which is distributed into the Scripture and Traditions.

Vide Council. Senonens. in Bin. Decr. 5. p. 671. and Council. Tridentini Sess.
4. p. 802. -- Perspiciensque hanc Veritatem and disciplinam contineri in libris
sacris, and sine scripto Traditionibus, quae ex ipsius Christi ore ab Apostolis
acceptae, and ab ipsi, Apostolis Spiritu sancto dictante quasi per manus
traditae, ad nos usque pervenerunt, orthodoxorum patrum sententiam sequuta,
omnes libros tam Veteris quam Novi Testamenti, nec non Traditiones ipsas, tum
ad fidem, tum ad mores pertinentes, tanquam vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a
Spiritu sancto dicta^as, and continua successione in Ecclesia Catholica
conservatas, pari pietatis affectu and reverentia suscipit ac veneratur.

Bellarmin. de Verbo Dei, lib. 4. c. 2, 3. shows the diverse sorts of
unwritten Traditions which are part of Gods Word: some de side, as the
perpetual Virginity of Mary, that there are but four Gospels, etc. and some of
Manners; as Crossing, Fast-dayes, etc. Easter, Whitsontide, and other Festivals.

Veron de Reg. fid. cap. 2. says,

[The total and only Rule of the Catholic faith, to which all are obliged
under pain of Heresy and Excommunication, is Divine Revelation delivered to
the Prophets and Apostles, proposed by the Catholic Church in her General
Councils, or by her Universal practice, to be believed as an Article of
Catholic faith.]

[All that is of this nature is an Article or doctrine of faith. And no other
doctrine can be of faith, if either the first Condition fail, viz. Divine
Revelation, or the second, which is a Proposal by the Universal Church.] p. 5.
No doctrine grounded on Scripture diversely interpreted, either by the ancient
Fathers or our Modern Doctors, is an Article of faith. For such a doctrine,
though it may be revealed, yet the revelation is not ascertained to us, nor
proposed by the Church: -- Nor any Proposition which can be proved only by
consequence drawn from Scripture, So that if the Doctors will but differ in
their Expositions, the Scripture is no more the sure Word of God, or to be
believed by Catholic faith.
though the consequences were certain and evident, and deduced from two
propositions of Scripture -- Yet these doctrines are Certain, when the premises
are so. -- Gratians decrees -- the Papal decrees contained in the body of the
Canon Law, none of them do constitute an Article of says -- Nor that which is
defined in Provincial Councils, though the Pope preside in person -- for the
second condition is always wanting in this case, and very often the first --
p. 11. I did not say that such definitions were not of faith -- but they are
not of Catholic faith, Of the Pope without a General Council.
or which all as Catholics are bound to hold as of faith, and the contrary to
which is heretical, and removes from the bosom of the Church. Mark then, that
it may be de fide divina, though not of Catholic necessity without the
proposal of Council or universal practice.
-- p. 12, 13. The Practice even of the Universal Church is no sufficient
ground for an Article of Catholic faith, by reason the object of faith is
Truth: and often times the Church proceeds in matter of practice, upon probable
Opinions, and this probability is sufficient to justify the practice, which
the Church on just cause may change: As e. g. as Vasquez teaches, the Church
did anciently pray in the Mass for Infidels alive, and Catechumens dead, and
the Sacrifice of the Mass was offered for them, and yet he -- rather inclines
to the contrary, that the Sacrifice of the Mass ought not to be offered, but
for the faithful living and dead, by which Opinion the Church seems guided at
present. But Vasquez answers, that the Church following a probable opinion did
practice that which she did not declare to be of faith. -- p. 15. So General
Councils when they mention any thing in this manner (by way of simple
assertion) and do not properly define: For as Bellarmine affirms, it is
necessary that General Councils properly define the thing in question, as a
Decree which ought to be held as of Catholic faith. Hence Bellarmine adds,
they are not properly Heretics, who hold the Pope not to be above all
Councils, though he say the last Laterane Council under Leo the tenth Ses. 11.
expressly and professedly teaches that the Pope is above all Councils, and
rejects the contrary Decree of the Council of Basil: because it is doubtful
whether the Laterane Council defined that doctrine properly as a Decree to be
believed with Catholic faith. The same Bellarm. (de Council. l. 2. c. 19.) also
requires that the definition be made Conciliarly: Pope Martin the fifth said,
he only confirmed those Decrees of faith which were made in the Council of
Constance, Conciliariter: that is, after the manner of other Councils, the
question being first diligently examined: But its clear (says he) that this
Decree, that a General Council has immediate authority from Christ, which all,
even the Pope, are bound to obey, was made without any examining -- p. 17. The
object defined must be truly and properly an object of faith; and a Decree
ought to be on a thing universally proposed to the whole Church -- Vasquez
holds: It is not at all erroneous to affirm that a General Council may err in
Precepts, and in particular Judgments -- and ( p. 19.) in framing Laws not
necessary to salvation; or making superfluous Laws -- Without all doubt a
General Council may err in a question of fact: (which depends on testimony and
information of men:) So the sixth General Council condemned Honorius of Heresy
by false Information, and misunderstanding his Epistles. -- p. 20. The Pope
(says Suarez) to a particular action belonging to humane Prudence, has no
infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost -- As that such or such an
excommunication is valid, or that such or such a Kingdom is disposable by the
Pope for such and such causes.]

So far Veron, who is most favorable to you, in narrowing our faith.


R. Thus far you have resolved me: but I must crave somewhat more. Qu. I. Are
there no Essential Constitutive parts of your Religion, more necessary than the
Integrals and Accidentals? Have you no description for it, but that It is
Divine Revelation proposed by the Church? The Doctrine of Sacrificing was a
Divine Revelation to Adam, and the difference of clean and unclean Beasts to
Noah, and the Jewish Law was Gods Revelation to Moses and them: And yet I
suppose Christianity is somewhat different from all these. Is not Christianity
your Religion? Has Christianity no Constitutive special Essence, but only the
Genus of Divine Revelation which is common to that with all other Divine
Revelations? And what if you add [ to a Prophet or Apostle]? Was Agabus
Prophecy of Paul, or Paul's of the event of the shipwreck, etc. essential to
Christianity? Has Christianity no Essence? Or is all Divine Revelation
essential to it?


P. You take advantage of the disagreement of our Doctors. You know that some
few acknowledge distinct fundamentals; John's. Nov. Rep. p. 19. of the
explication of Terms: Know you not, that Divines are divided, what are the
points necessary to be believed explicitly necessitate medii: Some, and those
the more ancient hold, that the explicit belief of God, of the whole Trinity,
of Christ, his Passion, Resurrection, etc. are necessary necessitate medii:
Others among the recentiors, that no more than the belief of the Deity, and
that he is the rewarder of our works, is absesolutely necessary with that
necessary, to be explicitly believed.
and some deny the distinction in your sense: And most of us say, that no man
can enumerate the things necessary to all, but that it depends upon men's
various capacities, educations, and means of knowing. And in sum, that no more
is necessary to all to be explicitly believed, but that Gods Revelations are
true; and that All are Gods Revelations which the Church proposes as such.

You may take our judgment much from him that comes nearest to you, whom I
have heard you much praise, as most moderate and judicious, viz. Dr. H. Holden
Anal. fid. l. 1. c, 5. Lect. 2. p. 53.

[Divines disputing of the necessity of points to be believed, do commonly tend
this way, to denote the Articles of things revealed, the explicit and express
belief whereof, is (as they opine) altogether necessary to all Christians. The
resolution of which question is among them so doubtful and uncertain, as that
they are in this (as they are in all things else) distracted and divided into
various Opinions: which they that care for them, may seek: To me they are as
Nothing, while the Authors of them profess, that they have nothing of
Certainty. Yea, to one that meditateth the matter it self, laying by all
preoccupation, it is most clearly manifest, that the Resolution of this
question is not only unprofitable, that I say not pernicious, (as it is handled
by Divines); but also vain and impossible. It is unprofitable, because no good
accrueth by it to souls. It is pernicious, while Divines for the most part
assert, that only One or Two Articles, yea, (as some say) no singular Article
at all, is necessary to be believed of all by an explicit faith. For hence
(however the truth of the matter be) the colder Christians taking occasion, do
little care to obtain that degree of Knowledge in the Mysteries of faith, which
they might commodiously and easily attain. It is Impossible, seeing it is
Manifest, that no particular Rule or Points to be believed, or Number of
Articles can in this Matter be given or assigned, which shall be wholly common
and necessary to all Christians: For this depends on every individual man's
natural capacity, means of instruction, and all the other circumstances of each
man's life and disposition, which are to each man so special, that we can
determine of nothing at all that is common to all.

But I handle the Necessity of points to be Believed in a far other sense: For
the Articles of the Christian faith, which I now call necessary, I do not at
all understand to be such as all and every one must distinctly know, or hold by
explicit assent; But I mean only such, the belief of which is accounted
universally by the whole Catholic Church, so substantial and essential, as
that he that will deservedly be esteemed, and truly be a member of it, must
needs adhere to them all at least Implicitly and Indirectly: He does better
interpret the distinction of Explicit and Implicit on another occasion, in
another sense.
that is, by believing whatsoever the holy and Universal Church does
Catholickly believe and teach as a Revealed Doctrine and Article of divine
faith. And therefore he is for that cause to be removed from its Communion and
Society, who shall pertinaciously and obstinately deny the least of them, much
more if he maintain the contrary, while he knows and sees that it is the
Universal sentence of that Church, that we must adhere to that as an Article of
faith. And in this sense I will henceforth use the word Necessity.


R. This might have been said in fewer and plainer words, viz. That your
Divines herein do commonly err, and that perniciously, and yet that indeed he
is of the same mind; viz. that It is impossible to name the Articles necessary
to be believed explicitly of all, because each man's diverse capacity, means and
circumstances diversifie them to each: But that only this one thing is
explicitly to be believed, [That whatsoever the Holy and Universal Church does
Catholickly believe and teach as a Revealed Doctrine and Article of faith, is
true.] And therefore that no man must pertinaciously deny any thing which he
knows the Church so holds. So that nothing is necessarily to be believed
actually and indeed, but Gods and the Churches Veracity.


P. Another of ours that comes as near you as most, opens this more fully,
Davenport alias Fr. a Sancta Clara, De. Not. Great. p. 111, etc.

[As to the Ignorance of those things that are of necessity of Means, or End,
there is difference among the Doctors: For Soto 4. d. 5. q. 5. and l. de Not.
and Great. c. 12. and Vega l. 6. c. 20. sup. Trid. hold that now in the Law of
Grace there is no more explicit faith required, than in the Law of Nature.
Yea, Vega ib. and Gabriel 2. d. 21. q. 2. ar. 3. and 3. d. 21. q. 2. think that
in the Law of Nature, and in Cases in the Law of Grace, some may be saved with
only natural knowledge, and that the habit of faith, is not required. Whom
Horantius terms men of great name, and will not accuse of heresy. I would this
great man's modesty were more frequent with modern Doctors. Yea, Alvarez de aux.
disp. 56. with others, seems to hold, that to justification there is not at
all required the knowledge of a supernatural object (or the supernatural
knowledge of the object.) Others hold, That both to Grace and Glory is required
an explicit belief of Christ. Bonav. 3. d. 25, etc. Others, that at least to
salvation is an explicit belief of the Gospel or of Christ, though not to
Grace or Justification. And this is common in the Schools, as Ferera shows that
follows it: And for this Opinion Scotus is cited --

But I think he holds, that explicit belief of Christ or the Gospel, is not
of necessity of means as to Grace or Glory, as 4. d. 3. q. 4. What is plainer
than that now -- men may be saved without the explicit belief of Christ -- And
I plainly think its Scotus's and the common opinion, which Vega follows, and
Faber 4. d. 3. and Petigianis very well, and of the Thomists Bannes 2.2. q. 2.
a. 8. Canus and others: Yea, the Trent Council seems to favor it, Sess. 6.
c. 4. -- p. 114. So Corduba, Medina, Bradwardine. -- And such (as have no
explicit faith in Christ) are not formally without the Church. This way go
Victoria in 4. Relect. 4. tit. Richard de Villa med. 3.25. a. 3. q. 1, etc.

Well says Petigianis 2. d. 35. q. 1. a. 9. that if there were a simple old
woman to whom some false Opinion were preached by a false Prophet ( e. g. that
the substance of Bread remains with the body of Christ in the Sacrament) and
she believe it: Does she sin by this? No. -- p. 119. Yea, if she so err through
piety, thinking that the Church so believes, perhaps she should merit. -- p.
120. For my part I think that the Vulgar committing themselves to the
instruction of the Pastors, trusting of their knowledge and goodness, if they
be deceived, it will be taken for invincible ignorance, or at least probable,
(as Herera) which excuses from faultiness. -- Yea, some Doctors give so much
to the Instruction of Pastors, that have the care of the Sheep, that if they
should teach, that hic and nunc God would be hated, the rude Parishioner were
bound to believe him: which yet I think false -- p. 123. It seems at this day
to be the common judgment of the Schools and Divines, that the Laity erring
with their Doctors or Pastors are altogether excused from all fault; Yea, often
times so materially erring do merit for the act of Christian obedience which
they owe their Pastors: as you may see in Valent. To. 3. disp. 1. q. 2. p. 5.
and others. So Angles 2. d. 22. q. 2. dub. 7. Vasqu. p. 2. disp. 121. In case
they never doubted of the Veracity of their Prelates --

Much more says Sancta Clara there, to prove that the ignorant Protestants
here may be saved; citing further to his end, Zanchez in Decal. l. 2. c. 1. n.
8. Alph. a Castro, Simanca, Argon, Tanner, Faber, Eman^sa, Rozell. And out of
Argon tells us when Faith is sufficiently proposed, viz. [When faith is so
confirmed by Reasons, holiness of life, the confutation of the contrary errors,
and by some signs, as that Reason it self begins prudently to prescribe,
that the matters of faith heard are to be believed, and the contrary Sect is
false.] p. 125.

And probl. 16. p. 127. Whether men may be blamelesly ignorant of the Law of
Nature and the Decalogue? The common opinion is that they may; not of the first
principles, but 1. Of the easy conclusions for some time, and of the remoter
conclusions for a longer time: Such are the Commandments of the Decalogue as to
the substance of the act; as in some lying, theft, fornication, manslaughter
(in Will at least) etc.


R. Qu. II. But do you think that men may not as invincibly and inculpably be
unacquainted with the Authority of the Pope and Roman Councils or Church, as
you say they may be ignorant of Christ, Holden. l. 1. c. 9. p. 169. Queret an
teneatur quispiam a^ internum Divinae fidei actum, quem nec semper fortasse in
eius potestate situm novimus? Quamdiu sane arbitretur quispiam hujusmodi fidei
actum lumini naturali and rationi oppositum and contrarium esse, nequaquam
poterit ad illum eliciendum astringi.
and the Law of Nature? I instance in the millions of the Abassme Christians,
who for above a thousand years never heard from the Pope or his emissaries.


P. That cannot be denied: For they have not the necessary means.


R. How then do you make your Churches proposal to be the necessary point to be
Explicitly believed of all?


P. We do not mean it of all that Will be saved: For you hear that some may be
saved without any explicit belief of Christ. But we mean it of all that will
be in the Church, and be saved there.


R. But do you not hold and say, that out of the Church there is no salvation?


P. Some say so: and some say that It is rare out of the Church.


R. But are the Ethiopian Christians out of the Church?


P. They are out of the true Church, being Schismatics.


R. Why said your Author before, that Infidels were not formally out of the
Church who are invincibly ignorant?


P. But other Doctors are of another opinion.


R. But Christ is the Savior of his body: Are not those of the Church who are
saved, or in a state of salvation? What hold you of that?


P. Some say, They are all of the Church: and others that Christ saves more
than his Church: And some say, that They are of the Church Regenerate, but not
of the Church Congregate. But few own this, because it is your distinction: as
of a visible and invisible Church.


R. Qu. III. But above all, I would know of you, what you mean by the Catholic
Church, whose proposal is necessary to the being of faith?


P. We mean the Roman Catholic Church: that is, the Pope and his Subjects.


R. Do you mean the Pope without a General Council, or a General Council
without the Pope? or only both agreeing and conjunct?


R. You take advantage of our differences: but those do but show, that this is
no point of faith. Some hold that the Pope alone may serve: and some, that the
Pope in a Provincial Council: and some that a General Council without him: But
you heard Veron takes in the Council, and it is no true Council without the
Pope: And therefore the surest opinion says, that it must be both in Concord.


R. But what is the Universal Church whose Practice is made sufficient instead
of, or without a General Council?


P. It is the whole Roman Church real, distinct from the Representative.


R. Is it the Clergy only, or the Laity only; or must it be both?


P. Both, but not equally; but in their several places.


R. Must it be All the Church, without any excepted? Or only the greater part?


P. These are points not agreed of, and therefore not of faith. Some say that
it must be so many as that the dissenters be not considerable. But how many are
considerable or inconsiderable is undetermined. Others say, It may be the minor
part that practice, so be it the rest do not contradict it, or do contrarily.


R. I will trouble you with no more such questions, (though I have a multitude
which should be here resolved) for I perceive that we must expect nothing but a
Maze of uncertainties and confusion.

We are next in order to Agree upon our common principles which must be
supposed in our following Dispute: For they that Agree in nothing, are
incapable of disputing of any thing; seeing all conclusions of which we doubt,
must be drawn from more evident truths, of which we are less doubtful, and
resolved into a conceded Principle.


PART II. The Principles which Papists and Protestants are agreed in: And
therein the full ^ustification of all the Protestants Religion.
THe first common Principle: That we are Men, having Reason, and Free Will, and
Sense; whose Natural way of knowing things sensible, is by the perception of
our senses, having no way of greater Certainty.

R. I take it for a common principle, that we are Men, having Reason, and
Free Will, and Sense: whose natural way of Knowing things sensible, is by the
perception of our senses* And therefore that our rightly constituted or sound
senses, with their due media, about their proper objects are to be trusted;
being either certain, or we have no certainty.


P. I know what you intend: I grant it as you express it.


R. It must then be granted us, that there is true Bread and Wine in substance
remaining after the words of the Mass-Priests consecration.


P. Yes: When you can prove, that the consecrated Bread and Wine are the proper
objects of sense: which we deny; they being not now Bread and Wine.


R. Is it by the Perception of sense that you deny it? or by other means?


P. No: It is by Faith and Reason which are above Sense.


R. Now you come to deny the Principle which you granted: Sense is the
perceiver of its own objects: No Faith, no Reason can perceive them, but by
sense: And if due sensation perceive them, and Faith deny them, then Faith
denies sense to be the proper natural perceiver of its objects, and our
judgment of things sensible to be such as must follow that perception. But we
must dispute of this anon, and will not now anticipate it. Only remember, that
if you deny sense which is the first Principle, no mortal man is capable of
disputing with you, there being no lower principle to which we can have
recourse, and resolve our differences.


The second Principle: That there is One only God, Infinite in Being, Power,
Wisdom and Goodness; Our Owner, Ruler and Chief Good; Most Holy, Just and True,
and therefore cannot lie; but is absolutely to be believed, and trusted, and
loved.

R. I need not repeat it: Do you not Agree with us in this?


P. Yes: Heathens (that are sober) and Christians are agreed in it.


R. You grant then, that this may be known by them that are no subjects of the
Pope. Remember anon that we are not to be blamed for Believing God.


The third Principle: That the whole frame of Nature within us and without us
(within our reach) is the signal Revelation of God and his Will to man; called
(Objectively) The Light and Law of Nature.

R. I suppose that this also may pass for a common granted Principle.


P. Yes, as you express it: If we agree not of the Light and Law of Nature, we
come short of Infidels, and mere Natural men.


R. Observe then, that we are Justified by your principles, for Believing and
Trusting Gods Natural Revelation. The very first part of which is made to our
senses: By Natural Evidence God shows us that Bread is Bread.


P. Yes: when sense is sound, and objects and media just, and God does not
contradict sense by supernatural Revelation.


The fourth Principle: That Natural Revelation is before supernatural, and
sense before faith, and we are Men (in order of Nature at least) before we are
Christians, and the former is still presupposed to the later.

R. This also I suppose is a granted Principle.


P. It is so: But see that you raise no false consequents from it.


R. I conclude from it, that He that denies the perception of sense to be the
certain way of Judging of things sensible, denies all the Certainty of faith,
and subverteth the very foundations of it: And that we are justified for our
Assenting first to Gods Natural Revelations. It is God that made my senses and
understanding, and God that made the object and media, as Bread and Wine, and
therefore God deceives me, if I be deceived in taking it for Bread and Wine
after Consecration. But God is to be believed, in his first Revelations.


P. You vainly call Sensation, and Intellection or Knowledge of things sensible
by the name of Believing.


R. We will not vainly contend about the Name, if we agree of the Thing: But
this leads me to another Principle.


The fifth Principle: That the Knowledge of things fully sensible has more
quieting, satisfying Evidence, than our Belief of supernatural Revelations
alone, as made to us by a Prophet or Apostle: And that where all the sound
senses of all men living do agree about their near and proper sensible object,
there is the most satisfying Evidence of all.

R. I suppose that we are all agreed also in this principle.


P. As you word it we are: For our Divines distinguish of Evidence and
Certainty: and are so far from saying that Faith has more Evidence than Sense
and Knowledge, that it is ordinary with them to say, that this is the
difference between Faith and Knowledge, and that faith has not Evidence: but
yet it has no less certainty.


R. Some men use words first to sport themselves out of their understandings,
and then to use others to the same game. Evidence is nothing but the
Perceptibility or Cognoscibility of a thing: by which we call it Knowable;
which is the Immediate necessary qualification of an Object of Knowledge.
Certainty is either Objective, which is nothing but this same Cognoscibility or
Evidence as in a satisfying degree: Or it is Subjective or Active, which is
nothing but the Infallible or True, and quieting satisfactory knowledge of a
Truth. Where the Certainty of Object and Act concur: For no man can be certain
of a lie or untruth: For to be Certain, is to be certain that it is True: Those
therefore would befool the world, who would persuade men, that a clear and
confident perception of an untruth, or confident error, is Certainty. There may
be Objective Truth and Certainty of the Matter, where there is not in us an
Active or Subjective Certain Knowledge of it: But there can be no Active
Certainty of an Objective Uncertainty, or certain Knowledge of a lie. Now if
you mean that faith has Objective Certainty without Evidence of Certainty, or
Ascertaining Evidence, that is, but to say and unsay: It has Certainty and no
Certainty: For this Certainty and Evidence is all one. But if you mean that
Faith has an Active Subjective Certainty without an Objective Certainty in the
Matter, you speak an impossibility and contradiction: as if you said, [ I
clearly see a thing invisible or without light.]


P. Do you think that our Divines knew not what they said, when they say that
to believe without Evidence makes faith meritorious?


R. The old asserters of this meant the same that Christ meant, when he says
to Thomas [Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.] There
is a sensible Evidence, and an Intelligible Evidence. Faith has not an
Immediate sensible Evidence; that is, we believe things unseen, and above
sense: And this is their meaning: We see not God, Christ, Heaven, Angels, etc.
But faith has always Intelligible Evidence of Verity; and (as our Mr. R.
Hooker says) can go no further than it has such Evidence.

However, I appeal to any that have not been disputed out of their wits,
whether, If God would give us as full a sight of Heaven and Hell, and Angels
and Blessed souls, as we have of the Bread and Wine before us, and as full a
Hearing of all that they say, in justification of Holiness, or Lamentation of
sin, and as full sensible acquaintance with the world we go to, and our title
to it, as we have with this world, I say, whether this would not be more
ascertaining and satisfactory to us, and banish all doubts, more than our
present faith does? I love not to hear men lie as for God, and talk and boast
against their experience, as if the interest of faith required it. Things
revealed to faith Are Certain and Infallible. But that is because we have
certain evidence 1. That God cannot lie; 2. And that God revealed them; and so
that they are True. But if we did see, feel, taste, etc. we should be more
certain. Else why is it said, that we now know but enigmatically and as in a
glass; and as children; but hereafter shall see as face to face, and know as we
are known, when faith is done away, as being more Imperfect than Intuition. We
have evidence to prove, that the Revelation made to David, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Peter, Paul, etc. were of God, and that their words are by us to be believed,
etc. But to see, hear, taste, feel, etc. would be a more quieting Assurance.

Therefore when all the sound senses of all men living, perceive after
consecration, that there is Bread and Wine, this Certainty is, 1. in order
antecedent to that of faith, and 2. by Evidence, more satisfying and assuring
than that of mere faith, as to a prophets Revelation; And therefore to reject
it on pretense of faith, is a subversion of all natural methods of assurance;
and is but pretended, I think, by your selves.


The sixth Principle. That except those Immediate Inspirations which none but
the Inspired do Immediately and clearly perceive, we have no Revelations from
God, but by signs; which are created beings; and have their several Natures,
and so may be called Physical, though signifying Moral things. And thus far our
natural and supernatural Revelations agree.

R. Every being is either Uncreated (which is God only) or Created (in a large
sense, that is Caused:) What God Revealed to Christ, Peter, Paul, etc. we have
knowledge of, but by signs: In Scripture these signs are Words: These words
signify partly the mind of God, and the speakers or writers, and partly the
matter spoken or written. When it is said, that It is impossible for God to
lie, it can mean nothing to us, but that it is impossible that God should make
us a deceitful sign of his will. The voice of an Angel, Prophet, Apostle, a
thousand Miracles, etc. are but signs of the matter and of Gods will: And if
God can ordinarily make false natural signs, we are left unassured that he
cannot make false signs by an Angel, or a Prophet, or a Miracle. And so all
faith is left uncertain.


P. Then you will make God a liar or deceiver whenever any man is deceived by
natural signs.


R. Not so: For men may deceive themselves by taking those for signs of a
thing which are none, and so by misunderstanding them. And the Devil and bad
men may promote this deceit. But whenever God gives man so plain a sign of the
Matter and his Will, as that no error of an unsound sense, an unqualified
object, a culpable or diseased fantasy or Intellect, interveneth, then if we
are deceived it can be none but God that does deceive us; which cannot be,
because he cannot lie. And as it is an unresistible argument against the
Dominican doctrine of Physical Predetermination as absolutely necessary to all
acts of natural or free agents, that If God physically predetermine every liar
to ivery lie, that is mentally conceived or uttered, then we have no certainty
but he might do so by the Prophets and Apostles; so is it as good an argument
against Papists, that* if he ordinarily deceive the senses of all sound men by
a false appearance of things seeming sensible, he may do so also by the audible
or legible words of a prophet.


The seventh Principle. That he that will confute sense, and prove that we
should not Judge according to its perceptions, must prove it by some more
certain evidence that contradicts it.

R. I suppose you will not question this.


P. No: The word or Revelation of God is a more certain evidence.


R. How know you that there is any word of God, but by your senses?


P. But yet by sense I may get a certainty which is above that of things
sensible. As I know by the world that there is a God, by a certainty above that
of sense.


R. 1. If that were so, yet if things sensible be your media, you destroy your
Conclusion by denying them, and undermine your own foundation.

2. But it is not true: The knowledge of the Conclusion can be no stronger than
that of the principles, even of the weaker of them. If you are in any
uncertainty whether there be Sun, Moon, Heaven, Earth, Man, Beast, Heat, Cold
or any Created sensible being, you must needs be in as much doubt whether there
be a God that made them.


The eighth Principle. That Believing or Assenting is Intellection of the Truth
of something revealed, and therefore must have Intelligible Evidence of Truth
in the thing believed.

R. I know that Assiance or Trust as it is the act of the Will, reposing it
self quietly on the Believed fidelity of God, is not Intellection. But the
Assenting act is an Intellection or an Act of Knowledge of a Verity; not as
Science is narrowly confined to principles, but as Knowledge is taken in genere
for notitia. So to believe is no other than to know that this is true, because
God says it. Joh. 6.69. We believe and are sure that thou art that Christ,
etc. Joh. 3.2. We know that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no man could
do such works, etc. Joh. 21.24. We know that his testimony is true -- See Romans
7.14. and 8.28. 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if this earthly house, etc. 1 Timothy
1.8. 1 John 3.2. Joh. 8.28, 32. 1 Cor. 15.58. We know that our Labor is not in
vain, etc. Therefore your denying the certainty where the evidence is most
notorious, and telling men of Meriting if they will but believe your Church,
without any Evidence of certainty, is a mere cheat.


The ninth Principle* That Jesus Christ is the Son of God and the Savior of
the World, and that Christianity is the true Religion, and Gods appointed
sufficient way to Heaven, including Godliness, which is its final part.

R. By Christianity I mean both our Believing, Loving and obeying Christ as the
way to the Father, and our Believing, Loving and Obeying God our Father, as the
end of Christ's Mediation: The Knowledge of God and the Mediator being Eternal
Life, Joh. 17.3. And as Taking a man for my Physicion, is taking him, by his
medicines to help me to my health, and so Health is finally included* so taking
Christ for my Savior, is to take him by faith to be the means of bringing me
to the Love of God and to Glory: And so I include Godliness in Christianity,
and the Law of Nature in the Law of Grace.


P. We are agreed on the truth of this: but not of the medium by which it must
be made known to us.


R. At the present I ask no more than that we agree in Christianity as the true
and sufficient Religion and way to life.


The tenth Principle. That Baptizing is our Christening: And that all that are
truly Baptized are Christians, and members of the visible Church, until they
Apostatize or are justly excommunicate (at least.)

P. I grant you all this as a common Principle with Christians.


R. Then you grant us, 1. That our Religion is the True Religion; of Gods
appointment, sufficient to salvation: For it is Christianity, which you
confessed to be such. 2. You grant that we are baptized into the true Catholic
Church, which is the body of Christ.


The eleventh Principle. That all that are truly Baptized have the pardon of
all their sins, and have present right to salvation if they so die.

R. I mean, that they that are Internally true Consenters to the baptismal
Covenant, and are baptized, have all these benefits of Baptism: And that
Infants have them as rightly dedicated to God and baptized: Do not you Consent
to this?


P. Yes, you know we do.


R. Then you fully grant, that all among the Protestants who in Infancy or at
age are truly baptized are in a state of salvation: Why then would you make
people believe that there is no salvation in our Churches, when you grant the
right to all that are Baptized.


P. But you are not Baptized by lawful Ministers.


R. Take heed what you say: Your party holds that even Schismatics and
Heretics Baptism is valid, if they have all that is essential to Baptizing in
the doing of it: Yea that a lay man's, or woman's baptizing is valid. If you deny
it, I will shame you, by producing the common consent of your Doctors; and your
censure of Cyprian, and making the contrary doctrine to be a Heresy.


P. But you have not all that is essential to Baptism, because you are not
intentionally Baptized, into the true Catholic Roman Church: For while you are
not subject to the Pope, you are not baptized into the Church: and therefore
Bellarmine shows that indirectly we are obliged to the Pope by baptism; which
you intend not.


R. Come, come, strive not against your knowledge. 1. If our Baptism have not
all that is essential, why do you never rebaptize Protestants when they turn to
you? Do you not find that you condemn your selves? 2. Why do not you your
selves put the name of the Pope into your words of baptism? 3. Does your
Tradition tell you that the ancient Churches did baptize men into a subjection
to the Pope? 4. Did any of the Primitive Christians baptize men into the name
or subjection of Peter or any Apostle? 5. Does not Paul expressly renounce it as
to himself and Peter, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. Every one of you says, I am of
Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: Is Christ divided? Was
Paul Crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul, etc. 6. Did
not Christ himself tell us all that was Essential to baptism in his
institution, Matthew. 28 without making any mention of Peter or the Pope?


P. I cannot deny but our doctrine infers that all that are baptized among
you have a true Sacrament, but not the Benefit of it, and so are not in a state
of pardon and salvation: Or at least when you come to age, by refusing the
Pope, you turn Heretics and lose it.


R. I know some of your divided writers say that we have Sacramentum, but not
Rem Sacramenti: But 1. You say that a Character is imprinted by Baptism, and
all sin done away, and the person in a state of life, unless he come feignedly;
which you will not charge on Infants, nor can you prove it by those of the
Anabaptists themselves that are baptized at age. And says Aquinas when the
fiction cease, the fruits of baptism are obtained. 2. And it will be long ere
you will prove that to be baptized into the name of the Trinity is uneffectual,
if we leave out the Pope. 3. And you will hardly make a man understand what you
mean by the validity of the Baptism of Heretics and Schismatics, if it
neither take the Baptized into the true Visible Church, nor the invisible (or a
state of saving grace).

And as to Infants losing it as you say at age by Heresy. 1. Will you save all
the Anabaptists, that are baptized at age? If their baptism put them into a
state of salvation, and they continue just of the same faith and mind that they
were baptized in, sure that faith which put them in a state of salvation, will
keep them in it; or not be damning through defectiveness to morrow, which made
them heirs of Heaven to day. But you cannot make your doctrines hang together.
2. And they that are Baptized in Infancy are baptized into the same faith which
they continue in at age. The Minister intends no other: The Parents,
Sponsors, etc. intend no other: And will that prove defective even to Salvation
after, which was saving then? 3. If Baptism make us Christians; and if
Christianity be the true Religion, sufficient in suo genere to salvation, then
we that continue in the Christianity which we were baptized into, by your
confession continue in the true saving Religion; And this is all our Religion.


P. It is not every one that owneth Christianity that shall be saved: Heretics
own it in general, and yet contradict it by their Heresies.


R. It is every one that truly owneth Christianity in mind and will that shall
be saved: else Christianity were not a saving sufficient Religion: The question
is not whether objective Christianity or faith be sufficient to save him that
believes not, or is not subjectively a Christian; nor whether the doctrine of
faith be sufficient in omni genere: But whether it be a sufficient doctrine, or
ob^ective faith, in suo genere? If a Heretic deny any essential part of it, he
believes not that which he (really, understandingly and prevalently) denies.
It is but the Name of Christianity, and not the Thing, which he owneth, who
disowneth any of the essence. Our question is now whether our professed
objective Faith be true and sufficient? When you come to prove us heretical
denyers of any of its essence, we will give you a sufficient answer.


The twelfth Principle. That the Essence of our Religion or Christianity as
Active and Saving, is Faith that works by Love: Or such a Belief in God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as is accompanied with a true devoting of our
selves to him, by Love and willingness to obey his Laws, so far as we know
them; in opposition to the temptations of the world, the flesh and the Devil:
And he that is truly such shall be saved.

P. I grant that he that truly Loves God, shall be saved: But a Protestant
cannot truly love God, because he has not true faith.


R. Do you not agree and confess then, that If any Protestants do truly Love
God, and are sincerely willing to obey his will, and to know it that they may
obey it, such are of the true Religion and shall be saved, and that popery
which denies their salvation is false?


P. If your false supposition were true, these false consequents would be true:
But you are all deceived when you think that you sincerely Love God, and are
willing to know and do his will.


R. 1. Let all Protestants note this first, that you grant that none but
falshearted Hypocrites, that are not what they profess to be, and Love not God,
nor would obey him, should turn Papists.

2. And if a man cannot know his own Mind and Will, what he Loves and what he
is willing of, no not about his End and greatest concernments, how can he know
when he Believes aright? Why do you trouble the world thus with your noise
about Believing the Proposals of your Church, if a man cannot know whether he
believe or not? And he that cannot know what he Wills, Chooses or Loves,
can no more know what he believes. For the Acts of the Will are more plenary
and easily perceived. And do all Papists know their own Hearts or Minds, but no
Protestants? What would you expect but indignation and derision by such arguing
as this, if you will go about the world and tell men, [ You none of you know
your own Minds and wills, but we know them; You think you Love God, and are
willing to obey him; but you are all mistaken, it is not so with you: but you
must believe our Pope and his Council, and then you may know your own minds and
hearts.] They that believe you on these rates, deserve the deceit of believing
you; and punish themselves.


The thirteenth Principle. That when Christ described all the Essence of
Christianity, by our Believing in and being baptized into, the name of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, the Apostles and first Pastors of the
Churches, instructed people to understand the meaning of these three Articles;
And the ancient Creed called the Apostles, is the exposition of them, as to
Belief: And that this Creed was of old the symbol of the true faith, by which
men were supposed sufficiently qualified for baptism, and distinguished from
Heretics: which after was enlarged by occasion of heresies to the Nicene and
Constantinopolitane Creed; To which that called Athanasius's was added as a
fuller explication of the doctrine of the Trinity: And he that believed all
these, was taken for one of the true Christian Religion, which was sufficient
in suo genere to salvation.

P. All that was then Necessary to be explicitly believed, necessitate medii,
was expressed in the Creeds (if not more): But not all that is now necessary
when the Church has proposed more.


R. 1. Some of you say, no more is necessary ut medium, but to believe that God
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him: Others say that
the chief articles of the Creed also are commonly necessary: And in your
discord we lay no great weight on your Opinions. 2. But is not Christianity the
same Thing now as it was at the beginning? Is Baptism altered? Has not a
Christian now the same definition as then? Are not Christ's promises and the
Conditions the same? Shall not he that was a Christian then, be saved if he
were now alive? May not we be Christians, and saved by the same Constitutive
Causes which made men Christians, and saved them in the primitive Churches?
Subvert not Christianity, and confound not the Church, and cheat not poor
souls, by laboring to hide the essence of Christianity, and such plain
important truths. You cannot deny our faith to be true, without condemning the
ancient Church and Christianity it self: While we aloud profess that the
Christian faith explained in all the ancient Creeds, is the faith which we own,
in its Essentials explicated.


The fourteenth Principle. That the Books which the Protestants commonly
receive as Canonical Scriptures, are in the agreeing Original Copies, as to the
very words, and in true Translations as to the sense, the most true Infallible
word of God.

R. I grant that where the Copies disagree by various Readings, we are no more
sure that any of them is the word of God, than we are sure, that such a Copy is
righter than all that differ from it. But as long as the essence of
Christianity on which our Salvation is laid, is in the Covenant of Grace,
explained in Credondis in the Creed, and in Petendis, in the Lords Prayer, and
in Agendis in the Decalogue as explained by Christ. And no one Duty or material
doctrine of our Religion depends on the various Lections, but those texts
that Agree are sufficient to establish them all; yea, as Franc. a Sancta Clara
system. fid. professes, the ordinary Translations so agree, as that no
material point of Religion does depend on any of their differences; It is as
much as we assert, that the Agreeing Original Copies, and the
sound-Translations, so far as they are such, are the True Infallible word of
God; the former both as to words and sense, and the later as to sense alone. Do
you not grant this?


P. We grant the Scripture as you say to be Gods Infallible word; But 1. You
cannot know it to be so, because you take it not on the Roman Churches
Authoritative Proposal; 2. And you leave out part of it.


R. 1. Whether we can know it, shall be tried in due place. 2. And whether we
have All of it, or enough, is another question, to be debated when you will.
You grant us expressly that which we now desire; which is the Infallible Truth
of our Canonical Scripture. And this is All our Religion, containing not only
the Essentials, but all the Integrals, and Accidentals needful to be recorded.
So that All the Protestants Religion is confessed to be Infallibly True.

And from hence further note, that in all our disputes, you are obliged to be
the defendants, as to Truth: For we deny the Truth of much of your Religion,
but you deny not the Truth of one word of ours: but only the Plenitude or
Sufficiency.


P. The name of a Protestant was never known till Luthers time: And the
occasion of it was a particular Protestation of the German Princes, and not
directly a Protesting against Popery.


R. It is not Names but Religion which we dispute of. And it is that which each
party Professes to be their Religion. Therefore you must take our Profession
or you change the subject of the dispute. And we profess, that the Law of
Nature (which no sober man questioneth) and the Scriptures, are All our
Religion. Therefore if you please you shall suppose that the name Protestant
were not now in the world: It does not signify our Religion. But we now use it
to signify our Protesting against Popery, or that we agree in substance, and
in rejecting Popery, with those that made that particular Protestation
mentioned by you.

Names are often given from accidents; as Africanus, Germanicus, Britannicus,
etc. to several Roman Captains; when yet their Humanity was the same before
they were so named.


P. Turks, Socinians, Quakers, etc. Protest against Popery: It seems then they
are Protestants too; and your companions.


R. 1. Thus some men study to deceive, by turning from the question to another.
Our question I tell you is Whether the Religion of the Protestants be
Infallible? and not, Whence is their name? 2. But by a Protestant we mean only
one that takes the Scripture for the Rule, and Christianity for the Essence of
his Religion: Which no one does that denies any essential part of it. If we do
so, prove it, and you shall have our answer. How do you judge of any man among
your selves that takes Gods word proposed by your Church for his Religion, and
yet mistaketh the Church in any point: As Durandus that thought the matter of
Bread continues, whom Bellarmine yet denies to be an Heretic. So is it with
any among us that mistake the sense of Scripture in some such point.

When a Name is put upon any person or party from a common accident, you may if
you will call all by that name which that accident agrees to: And so Papists
are called by some Non-conformists now in England, because they Conform not:
But the world knows well enough that it is Protestants which are commonly
meant by that name, and not Papists, Quakers, Seekers, etc. though these
conform not. And so you may say if it please your self that Turks, Jews,
Heathens, Socinians, Quakers, Ran^ers, are Protestants, because they Protest
against, or reject Popery: But the world knows who is meant by the Name, Even
Christians rejecting proper Popery.

And for my part, I deal openly with you, I care not if the name Protestant
were utterly cast aside; If any man be so deceived by it as 1. Either to think
that it signifies the Essence of our Religion (unless you mean as we Protest
for Christianity.) 2. Or that we take those called Protestants for the whole
Catholic Church, they make it an occasion of their own deceit: Names of
distinction are used, because men know not else readily how to speak
intelligibly of one another without circumlocutions: And then comes the
Sectarian, and takes his Party, for all the Church (at least which he may
lawfully Communicate with), and the name of his party to notify his Religion.
And then comes the crafty Papist, and pretends from hence that such a named
Religion is new; and asks you, where was there any (e. g.) Protestants before
Luther?

My Religion is naked Christianity, the same as is where the name of a
Protestant is not known, and as was before it was known; and as if the name of
the Pope had never been known. But now the Pope and his Monarchical Usurpation
over all the world, are risen and known, I am one of those that protest against
them, as being against Christianity which is my Religion; But so as to addict
my self to the opinions of no man or party that opposes them, wholly and
absolutely and beyond evidence of truth: I take the Reformed Churches, to be
the soundest in the world: But I take their Confessions to be all the Imperfect
expressions of men; and the Writings of Protestant Divines to be some more
clear and sound, and some more dark, empty, and less sound, and in many things
I differ from many of them. Choose now whether you will call me a Protestant or
not; I tell you my Religion, which is simple Christianity: Names are at your
own Will. I could almost wish that there were no name known besides that of
CHRISTIAN as notifying our faith and Religion, in the Christian world (Though
as notifying Heresy and sin, there must be proper names, as in Rev. the name
Nicolaitans is used). Even the word Catholic had long a narrower sense in the
Empire with many than I now own it in. Though as it signifies One that is of
the Church Universal, loves Universally all true Christians, and has
Communion with them in Faith, Love, and Hope, so I like it, and am A CATHOLIC
CHRISTIAN. I dispute for nothing else; I persuade this person here in Doubt, to
nothing else; but 1. To hold fast to true and mere Christianity; 2. To Reject
all in Popery or any other Sect that is Evidently against it; 3. To suspend his
belief of all that's doubtful, and to receive nothing as a part of Divine faith
or Religion, till he be sure that indeed it is of God.

And now these Principles being supposed, let us proceed, and try whether
Popery be of God or not.


PART III. The Protestants Reasons against Popery.
D. I Have heard what you have said in stating the Protestants Religion: I now
expect to hear what Reasons you have against that which you call Popery: And
afterward that you prove all that you charge upon it. But I adjure you first
that you say nothing but what you believe in your conscience to be the truth,
as one that looks to be judged for it.


R. With many Papists confident and vehement protestations go instead of
Arguments, and we often hear them say, [ If this be not true, I am content to be
torn in a thousand pieces: We will seal it with our blood: We will lay our
salvation on it: And do you think we have not souls to save? etc.] Which is
much like as if they would end all Controversies by laying Wagers that they are
in the right, or by protesting that they are honester and credibler men than
their adversaries: And it is no more than a Quaker or other such Sectary will
say: the most proud and ignorant being usually the most confident: But yet
though I expect not that you should receive any thing from me, upon
Protestations, but upon Proofs, I will here promise you that I will charge
nothing on the Papists, but what in my Conscience I am verily persuaded to be
true.


The Reasons which resolve me against Popery are these and such like.

I. Reason, Their Doctrine of Transubstantiation is so notoriously false and
inhumane, even contrary to the fullest ascertaining evidence that mankind can
expect on earth, ( viz. for all men on pain of damnation to believe, that there
is no Bread, and no Wine, when all the soundest senses of any men in the world,
do perceive Bread and Wine, by seeing it, tasting it, feeling it, smelling it,
and by the notorious effects; and all this built upon no Revelation of God, no
Reason at all, nor any true consent of the Primitive Church, but clean contrary
to them all;) that I solemnly profess, that I find it an utter Impossibility to
believe it: And it often puts me to a doubt, Whether it be possible for any
mortal man unfeignedly and fully to believe it, and Whether there be really any
such Papist in the world: or Whether most do not for carnal respects take on
them to believe it, when they do not; or rather the Vulgar understand their
words, as not really excluding the true being of Bread and Wine; and the rest
only somewhat overawing their own reason with a reverence of their Church, so
far as not to contradict, or so far as notionally to own it, when they do not
from the heart believe the thing.

So many contradictions, absurdities, and impieties are to be by them believed
with it, that I am sure no man that understands them, can possibly believe
them all.

And all this must be done by Miracles, stupendous miracles, daily or common
miracles, which every Priest can do at his pleasure, and never fail, sober or
drunken, greater than raising a man from the dead; so that every beastly,
sordid, ignorant Priest, shall do more miracles by far, than ever Jesus Christ
did in all his life on earth, as far as we know by the holy Records, (if he
live as long). He that can believe all this, may next believe, that there is
neither Earth under his feet, nor the Firmament over his head, nor Water, nor
Air, nor any other Creature, and that he has no being himself.

II. Reason: The Faith or Religion of the Papists, as described by themselves,
is so far from Infallibility, as that it is utterly uncertain, unintelligible,
and mere contradiction and confusion; and a changeable thing; so that no man
knows whether he have it or not, and whether he have it all; But whoever has
it, he has certainly a hodge-podge of truth and falsehood.

III. Reason. Their Papacy, which essentiateth their Church, is a horrid
Usurpation of Christ's own Prerogative, and of an Office to do that which is
incompaparably above the Natural Power or Capacity of any mortal man; even to
be the Apostle and Governor of the whole world (of Christians at least); To
take Charge of all the souls on earth; to teach and call those that are
uncalled, and to Rule those that are baptized: even at the Antipodes, and in
all those unknown or inaccessible parts of the world, which he has no
knowledge of: A far more arrogant undertaking, than to be the Civil Monarch of
all the earth; and utterly impossible for him to perform, and which never was
performed by him.

IV. Reason. The said Papacy is an arrogant Usurpation of the Power of all the
Christian Princes and Pastors upon earth, or of a Power over them, never given
by Christ: It sets up a Kingdom in a Kingdom, and takes from Pastors the
power which Christ gave them, over their particular flocks.

V. Reason. The said Papacy is a mere humane Institution: They confess
themselves, that it is not of Divine faith that the Bishop of Rome is St.
Peter's Successor by Divine Right: It is no article of their own faith: But
History fully assures us, that it was but in the Roman Empire, that the Roman
Bishop was made Supreme: as the Archbishop of Canterbury is in England: And
that he stands on the same humane foundation as the other four Patriarchs of
the Empire did. And that their General Councils were called by the Emperors,
and were called General only with respect to that Empire. And there never was
such a thing as a General Council of all the Christian world, nor ever can be:
And that there never was such, is most notorious yet by the Names subscribed to
all the Councils. But they abuse the world, and claim that power over all the
Christians on earth, which one Prince gave his subject-Prelates in his Empire:
As if the General Assembly of Scotland or France should pretend to be a General
Council of the world, and the Archbishop of Canterbury should call himself
Archbishop of all the Church on earth, and claim the government of it.

VI. Reason: The said Papacy hold their claim of Supreme Government as by Gods
appointment (though they confess as before said, that it is not de fide, that
the Pope succeeds Peter by Divine right) and this notoriously Contrary to the
Judgment and Tradition of the far greatest part of the Churches in the world:
General Councils (such as they had) and the sense of the greatest part of
Christians have determined against the Papal claim. And Tradition condemns
them to this day, while they plead Tradition.

VII. Reason: It is Treason against Christ for the Papists who are but a Sect,
and not the third part of the Christians in the world, to call themselves the
whole Church, and unchurch all the rest, and seek to rob Christ of the far
greatest part of his Kingdom, by denying them to be such: As if they would deny
two third parts of this Kingdom to be the Kings. They are Sectaries and
Schismatics by this arrogant dividing from all the rest, and appropriating the
name and privileges of the Church to themselves alone.

VIII. Reason: By making an unlawful and Impossible Condition and Center of
Church Union, they are the greatest Schismatics in all the world: The greatest
Dividers of the Church upon pretense of Unity: As he would be a divider of this
Kingdom, who would set up a Vice-King without the Kings authority, and say that
none that subject not themselves to him, shall be taken for subjects of the
King.

IX. Reason: They studiously brand themselves with Satan's mark of malice, or
uncharitableness and cruelty to men's souls: while they sentence to damnation
two third parts of the Christian world, because they will not be the subjects
of their Pope: And they think their way to Heaven is safest, because they are
bolder than us in damning other Christians: Whereas Love is the mark by which
Christ's Disciples must be known to all.

X. Reason: They are inhumanely cruel to men's bodies: And this is their very
Religion: For the Council at the Laterane under Innocent the third decreed,
that those that believe not, or deny Transubstantiation are Heretics, and all
Temporal Lords shall exterminate them from their Dominions: That is, no man
shall be suffered to live under any Christian Lord, that will not renounce all
his senses, and profess that he believes that they are all deceived by God
himself; which is not only to renounce their Humanity, but their Animality or
sense it self. So that no men indeed, are to be suffered to live, but only such
as deny themselves to be men: What Heathens, what Turks, did ever exercise such
Inhumane fury? Besides their burning and tormenting men as Heretics that will
not do all this and more, and will not say as they require them.

XI. Reason: Their Church indeed is invisible, while they deny it, and an
unknown thing: For, 1. Men are forced into it by such bloody Laws, as that they
cannot rationally be known to be Consenters: 2. And they have no certain faith
to constitute a Churchmember: For they hold that his obligation to believe, is
according to his inward and outward means, of which no man can possibly judge:
And so no man can know whether himself or another have that faith which is
required as necessary to salvation. And many of them say, That they that
believe not in Christ, have saving faith, and are in the Church, if they had
not sufficient means.

XII. Reason: The Papacy does intolerably tyrannize over Kings, and teach such
Doctrines of Perjury and Rebellion, as their very Religion, as is not in the
practice of it to be endured in any Kingdom; nor dare they fully practice it:
The Crowns and Lives of Princes being at the mercy of the Pope; As the said
Laterane Council shows.

XIII. Reason: Their Church is often Essentially unholy, heretical and wicked,
because the Pope is often so, who is an Essential part of it: And therefore it
is not the holy Catholic Church. General Councils have upon examination judged
their Popes to be Heretics, Schismatics, Adulterers, Murderers, Simonists,
yea, guilty of Blasphemy or Infidelity it self. And the Church cannot be Holy,
whose Essential part is so unholy.

XIV. Reason: Their Churches succession is so notoriously interrupted, and
their Papacy so often altered in its causes, as that it is become a confounded
and a mere uncertain thing. So many notorious or judged Heretics, Simonists,
Murderers, Sodomites, Adulterers have possessed the Seat, who were therefore
incapable, that the line of succession must needs be interrupted by them. And
so many ways have they been made or elected, sometimes by the people,
sometimes by the City-Presbyters, sometimes by Emperors, sometimes by
Cardinals, sometimes by Councils, that if any one way of Election be necessary,
they have lost their Papacy long ago. If no one way be necessary, then the Turk
may make a Pope.

XV. Reason: Their Church called One, is really two in specie; one Headed by a
Pope, and another by a General Council: For while the Head or Supreme Ruler is
an Essential part, and one part of the people own one Head and another part own
another Head, (as they do) the Churches thus constituted cannot be One.

And also de individuo there have been long two or three Popes at once, and
consequently two or three Churches: And to this day none knows which was the
right.

XVI. Reason: They plead for a Church which never had a being in the world;
that is, All Christians Headed by one Pope; When all the Christian world did
never take him for their Head, nor were governed by him to this day.

XVII. Reason: They dreadfully injure the holy Scriptures, as if Jesus Christ,
and all the Prophets and Apostles in all those Sacred Records, had not had
skill or will to speak intelligibly, and plainly to deliver us the doctrines
necessary to salvation: But they make their Voluminous Councils more
intelligible and sufficient; as if they had done better than Christ and his
Apostles: And when men must only Discern Gods Laws, and Judge Causes by the
Law, they make themselves Judges of the Law it self, that is, of God the Judge
of all, and of the Law by which they must be judged.

XVIII. Reason: There is no other Sect of Christians under Heaven which has so
many differences among themselves, or have written so many Books against one
another as the Papists: And though many of them are of great importance, yea,
some are about the very Essence or Constitutive Head of their Church, yet have
they no handsomer way to palliate all by, than by saying that these are but
Opinions, and no Articles of faith, and the Infallible Judge dare not decide
them: No though it be diversity of Expositions of Gods own Word, yet
Commentators still differ without any hope of a decision, as if Gods Word were
not to be believed, but were only the matter of uncertain Opinion, till the
Pope and Council have expounded it, and no more Scripture is de fide than they
expound.

XIX. Reason: Perjury is made the very Character of their Church, or the brand
by which it is stigmatized; As is visible 1. In the Trent Oath imposed on their
Clergy, which whoever takes he is immediately perjured: and 2. By their
disobliging men from Oaths and Vows; even the Subjects of Princes from their
Oaths of Allegiance, whenever the Pope shall excommunicate them, and give their
Dominions to others, as is decreed Council. Later. sub Innoc. 3. Can. 3.

XX. Reason: They are guilty of Idolatry in their ordinary Worship by the Mass:
while they worship Bread as their Lord God: Nor will it justify them to say,
that if they thought it to be Bread, they would not worship it: Any more than
it would justify Julian to say, that he would not worship the Sun, if he
thought not that it was God: And they confess, that if it prove to be still
Bread, their Worship will prove Idolatry: and we desire no other proof.

And I am not able to justify their sending God his Worship by a Cross,
Crucifix, or other Image, as a medium cultum, from being a gross Violation of
the second Commandment: (which they leave out).

XXI. Reason: Their Religion greatly tends to Mortify Christianity, and turn
it into a dead Image, by destroying much of its life and power: 1. By
befriending Ignorance, and hiding the holy Scripture, forbidding all the people
to read them in a known tongue without a special license: blaspheming Gods
Word, as if so read, it had more tendency or likelihood to hurt men than to
profit them, to damn them than to save them; when they will say otherwise of
all their own Vulgar postils and such like writings.

2. And by teaching the people a blind devotion, viz. to pray in an unknown
tongue, and to worship God by words not understood.

3. And by making up a Religion much, if not far most, of external formalities,
and a multitude of ceremonies, and the opus operatum of their various
Sacraments; As if God delighted in such actions as befit not the acceptance of
a grave and sober man; or as if Guilt and Sin would be wiped off, and charmed
away into virtue and holiness, by such corporeal motions, shows and words.

XXII. Reason: Their Religion, though it thus tend to gratify the ungodly by
deceitful remedies and hopes, yet is very uncomfortable to the godly. For, 1.
By it no man can know that he is a true believer, and not a child of Hell,
(much less that he shall be saved:) For they teach that no Divine can tell them
what Articles are necessary to be believed to salvation: But they must be so
many as are suited to every ones capacity, and means, during his life. And no
man living can know that he understands and believes as much as his capacity
and means were in their kind sufficient to: Nay, there is no man that has not
been culpably ignorant of somewhat which he might have known.

2. Men's Sacramental receptions and comforts depend on the Intention of the
Priest, which no man knows.

3. Almost all Godly men must expect the fire of Purgatory: and consequently
none of them can be rationally willing to dye: Because this life is better than
Purgatory; and no man will desire to go from hence into the fire: And so by
making all men unwilling to dye, it destroys a heavenly mind, and kills
faith, and hope, and love, and holy joy, and tempts men to be worldlings, and
to love this life better than the next. Yea, it tempts men to be afraid of
Martyrdom, lest (dying in Venial sins, as all do) they go to a Purgatory fire,
more terrible than Martyrdom.

XXIII. Reason: Their Doctrine is not only contrary to many express Texts of
Holy Scripture, but also contrary to it self: One Pope and one Council having
decreed one thing, and another the clean contrary.

XXIV. Reason: All this evil is made more pernicious, by that professed
Impenitence which is included in the conceit of their Churches Infallibility:
For they that hold themselves Infallible, do profess never to Repent, of any
thing in which they suppose themselves to be so. And as Repentance is the great
evidence of the pardon of sin; so Impenitency is that mortal sign of an
unpardoned soul, without which no sin does qualify the sinner to be
Excommunicated by man, or damned by God: And a sin materially less, is more
Mortal unrepented of, than a greater truly lamented and forsaken.

XXV. Reason: Every honest godly Protestant may be as sure that Popery is
false, as he is that he is himself sincere, and Loves God, and is truly
willing to obey him. And no man can turn Papist, without self-contradiction,
who is a true Christian, and an honest man: For by turning Papist he confesses
himself to be before a false-hearted hypocrite, who neither Loved God, nor
sincerely desired to obey him, nor was true to his Baptismal Covenant. For it
is a part of Popery to believe that none are in a state of salvation, but the
Subjects of the Pope, or members of the Papal Church; And consequently that no
others have true Faith, Repentance or Love to God: Or else that God is false in
promising salvation, to all that have true Faith, Repentance and Love to God.
All therefore that know their own hearts to be truly devoted to God, are safe
from Popery; And seeing it is agreed on both sides, that none can or ought to
turn Papists but ungodly hypocrites (or Knaves) no wonder if such are deluded
by the most palpable deceits, and forsaken of God whom they perfidiously
forsook.

I will name you no more: If I make these, or any one of these good (as I
undertake to prove them all), you will see that I refuse not my self to be a
Papist without sufficient cause.

And yet by this charge you will see that I am none of their extreme
adversaries: I pass by abundance of Doctrinal differences, wherein by many they
are most deeply charged: Not as Justifying them against all or most so charged
on them, but 1. As giving you those Reasons which most move my self, and which
I am most able to make good, and leaving every one to his proper work: 2. And
as one that have certainly found out, that in many doctrinals seeming to be the
matter of our widest difference, we are thought by many to differ much more
than we do; 1. The difference lying most in Words, and Logical Notions, and
various ways of men's expressing their conceptions: 2. And the animosity of men
engaged in Parties and Interests against each other, causing most to take all
in the worst sense, and to make each other seem far more erroneous than they
are, and to turn differing names into damnable heresies: And 3. Few men having
Will and Skill to state controversies aright, and cut off mistaken seeming
differences: 4. And few having honesty and self-denial enough to incurr the
censure of the ignorant Zealots of their own party, by seeming but impartial
and just to their adversaries.

I mean in such points, as 1. The Nature of Divine faith, Whether it be a
persuasion that I am pardoned, etc. 2. Of Certainty of salvation, 3. And
Certainty of perseverance, 4. Of Sanctification, 5. Of Justification, 6. Of
Good works, 7. Of Merit, 8. Of Predestination, 9. Of Providence and the Cause
of Sin: 10. Of Free Will, 11. Of Grace, 12. Of Imputation of Righteousness, 13.
Of Universal Redemption, 14. Of Original Sin, and diverse others: In all which I
cannot justify them, but am sure that the difference is made commonly to seem
to be that which indeed it is not: In the true impartial stating whereof Lud.
Le Blanck has begun to do the Christian Churches most excellent service,
worthy our great thanks, and his bearing all the Censures of the ignorant.

PART IV. The First Charge made good against Transubstantiation: In which
Popery is proved to be the Shame of Humane Nature, Contrary to SENSE, REASON,
SCRIPTURE and TRADITION, or the judgment of the Ancient and Present Church;
devised by Satan to expose Christianity to the Scorn of Infidels.
CHAP. I. The First Reason to prove Transubstantiation false.
R. THe Papists Belief of Transubstantiation is, that There is a change made of
the whole substance of the Bread into the body of Christ, and of the whole
substance of Wine into his blood. Their opinion (called their faith) has two
parts: The first is, that There is no more true Proper Bread and Wine after the
words of Consecration, Hoc est Corpus meum. The second is, that There is the
true proper Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, under the species (as they call
them) of Bread and Wine.

It is the first that I shall now prove false: And you must not forget the
state of the Question, Aquin. p. 3. q. 75. a. 5. ad 3. Fides non est contra
sensum, sed est d^ eo ad quod sensus non attingit. But does not sense say, Here
is Bread and Wine?
which is not, Whether Christ's Body and Blood be present? But Whether there
remain any Bread and Wine?

Arg. I. If there remain no Bread and Wine after the Consecration, then all the
senses of all the sound men in the world are deceived, or all men's perception
of these sensible things deceived, though there be due magnitude, site,
distance of the object, a due abode, and a due medium and no depravation of the
sense or intellect. But this Consequent is notoriously false, (as shall be
proved) Therefore Popery is false.

1. That all men's senses perceive Bread and Wine, or all men's Intellects by
their senses, will not be denied. Not only Protestants, but Greeks, Mahometans,
Heathens, Papists, all persons perception by sense is here the same: Therefore
it is sound senses or else there are none sound in the world.

2. It is not one sense, but all. The eye sees Bread and Wine: The hand and
mouth feel it; The palate tastes it; The smelling sense smells the Wine;
yea, and the ear hears it poured out.

3. It is in due quantity, and not an undiscernable Atome.

4. It is near the sense, and neither by too much distance or nearness made
insensible.

5. It has a due abode, and is not made insensible by hasty passing by.

6. The air, and light, and all necessary media of perception are present. So
that there is nothing wanting to the sensibility of the object.


P. And how do you prove all or any of these? For ought you know, the media may
be undue, the magnitude, site, distance, abode, may not be what they seem to
be; and so you prove not what you say.


R. All that I am now saying, is, that All men of sound sense, in the world
have these immediate clear perceptions: The Intellect by sense perceives the
object as quantitative, as near, etc. This you dare not deny: So that if this
perception be false, and here be no Bread and Wine, then Sense or the Intellect
discerning by the means of sense, is deceived.


P. I say that the Senses or Intellects perception are deceived.


R. I prove that they are not deceived; or at least, that this kind of
perception is the most certain that man on earth is capable of, and is to be
trusted to by all men, and disbelieved or contradicted by none.

Reason I. Because that humane nature is so formed, that the Intellect has no
other way of perceiving things sensible, but as they are first perceived by the
sense, and by it transmitted to the Intellect (or made its objects): And if
about Spirits it hold not, that There is nothing in the Intellect, which was
not first in the sense: yet about things sensible, it does undenyably hold: And
also that the Intellect of it self is not free to perceive things sensible
otherwise than as they are sensed, or not to perceive them; but is naturally
necessitated to perceive them. So that it is a contradiction for a man to be a
man, consisting of a reasonable soul, with sensitive faculties and a body, and
yet not to be formed to judge of things sensible as sense perceives them.


P. Then mad men cease to be men, if they judge otherwise.


R. Mad men are your fittest presidents: But, 1. I told you how man's nature is
made by God to judge of things: I told you not that this nature may not be
vitiated, and hindered from right action. Did I ever say, that the eye may not
be blinded, or the understanding distracted? Blind men and mad men judge not
according to the tendency of Nature, and therefore misjudge. The Connection of
the Intellect to the sense is essential to man as man; but so is not the
soundness or right exercise of his faculties.

Reason II. Hence I argue, that sensation and the understandings perception
thereby, is the first perception of man's soul, and all that follow are but the
rational improvements of it, and therefore ever presuppose it: The natural
order of the souls apprehensions is this, beyond all controversy. First Sense
perceives things sensible, and the Imagination the Images of them. Next the
Understanding by a simple perception conceives of them as it finds them in
the imagination. Thirdly, then by this Thinking or Knowing, we perceive also
our own Act, that we do so Think or Know. And then Fourthly, We compound our
conceptions, and form organical notions, and spin out conclusions from what we
first perceive. Now if the first perceptions be uncertain or false, it must
needs follow, that all those following thoughts, and reasonings which do but
improve them, are at least as uncertain and false, if not more. So that there
can be no more certainty in any of the Conclusions as such, than there is in
the premises and principles. Therefore if man's first and most natural necessary
perceptions are false, all the following actions or reasonings of his mind must
be no better. All being finally resolved into these perceptions by sense, there
is no Truth or Certainty in man's mind at all, if there be none in these.

Reason III. Else you would infer, that God is not at all to be Believed, and
that there is no such thing as Divine Faith and Religion in Certainty in the
world: And so you would bring in, by unavoidable consequence, far worse
Impiety, and Irreligiousness than Mahomet or Julian, or any Idolaters that I
hear of on the earth. For you directly will overthrow the Divine Veracity, or
Truth of Gods Revelations, which is the Formal Object of Faith, without which,
it is no Faith.


P. A heavy charge, if you can make it good.


R. To make it good, do but first observe, 1. That Gods Essential Will or mind
is not in it self immediately seen by man; but known only by some Revelation.

2. That this Revelation is nothing but some SIGNS: For there is nothing in
the Universe of Beings, but GOD and CREATURES and the ACTS or Works of
Creatures. Now it is not Gods own Essence which is the Revelation in question.
Therefore it must be either A Creature (or work of God), or an Act or Work of a
Creature. As the voice on Mount Sinai, and that of Christ at his baptism and
transfiguration, and the written Tables of Stone, etc. were either the works of
God immediately, and so created Signs of his mind; or else the Acts of Angels,
and so Imperate Signs of his mind. Nor it is not the ordinariness or
extraordinariness of the way of making these signs, which makes them current
and true, or credible: For if God can make a Natural false sign, he can make a
supernatural false one, for ought any mortal man can prove. Only all the
question is, Whether it be indeed a sign of the mind and will of God or not?
Now the works of Nature are Gods Natural Signs, and his Natural objective Light
and Law; as the perception of them is the Subjective or Active Light and Law of
Nature: Something of God, these Natural signs do signify or reveal plainly,
and some things darkly: And so it is with supernatural signs; As the written
Tables, the voice of an Angel, the words of an inspired Prophet or Apostle,
etc. Now there is no other way for God to speak or reveal falsely, could he do
it, but 1. Either to make a false sign, naturally or supernaturally, or 2. To
determine man's sense or mind to a false perception. And if God can do this
naturally, why not supernaturally?

Nay, a fortiore mark how you teach the Infidel to infer? 1. Gods Natural
Revelations are Common, and his supernatural rare. 2. Gods Natural Revelations
are most certainly his own Acts: But how far a Voice or Book from a Spirit, may
be the Act of that Spirit or Angel as a free Agent, and how far that Agent is
fallible or defectible, we could not tell, if we had not farther Evidence of
Gods owning it. Therefore if you make Gods own ordinary Natural Revelations or
significations to be false, how will you be able to disprove the Infidel about
the rest? 3. And then note, that our Case is yet lower and plainer than all
this: For if the very Being of the Creatures, which is the Matter of these
Signs be uncertain to us, and all our senses and minds deceived about it, then
we have no place for enquiry, Whether this Creature be any sign of the mind of
God. As if the hearing of all men was deceived, that thought they heard that
voice, [ This is my Beloved Son] or Paul's, that thought he heard Christ speak
to him [ Saul, Saul, etc.] or if their Eyes and Intellects were deceived, that
thought they saw Christ and his miracles; or that think now that they read the
Bible, and indeed there be no such thing as a Bible, no such words, etc. then
there is no room to enquire what they signify: For nothing has no
signification. Truth and Goodness are affections or modes of Being: And if we
cannot by all our sound senses know the Being of things, we can much less know
that they are True or Good. Therefore all knowledge, and all faith, and all
Religion is overthrown by your denial of the truth of our Senses and Intellects
perception of things sensible.

Reason IV. And by this means you are not capable of being disputed with, nor
any Controversy between you and any others in the world, of being decided,
while you deny sense. For then you agree not with mankind in any one common
principle. And they that agree in nothing, can dispute of nothing. For this is
the first principle: Est vel non est is first to be agreed on, before we can
dispute any farther of a substance. What will you do to confute an adversary,
but drive him to deny a certain principle? And can you drive him to deny a
lower fundamental Principle, than the Being of a substance perceived by sense,
yea, by all the sound senses of all men in the world?

Reason V. Yea, it is specially to be noted, that our difference is not only
about the species of a sensible substance, but about the very substance it self
in genere, Whether all our senses perceive any substance at all, or not.
Suppose the question were, Whether it be water or not, which all men's senses
see in Rivers? If a Papist would deny it to be water, doubtless he denied the
agreeing judgment of all men's Intellect by sense. But if he should also say,
It is no substance, which we call water or earth, This were to deny the first
Principle, and most fundamental perception in nature.

Now that this is your case, is undeniable. For, 1. You profess, that Christ's
Body and Blood are not sensible there; That it is not the quantity, shape,
number, color, smell, weight, etc. of Christ's Body and Blood which we
perceive, and that these Accidents are not the Accidents of Christ. 2. And you
believe that the Bread and Wine is gone, that is, changed into the body and
blood of Christ; so that no part of their substance, matter or form is left.
And you put no third substance under these Accidents in the stead. So that you
maintain, that it is the quantity of nothing, the figure of nothing, the
color, the weight, the situation, the smell, the number, etc. of nothing,
which all men's Intellects by sense perceive. So that the Controversy is,
Whether it be any substance at all which by those accidents we perceive? And
when we see, handle, taste, smell it, you believe (or say you believe) that it
is none; neither Bread or Wine, or any other: Now if by sense we cannot be sure
of the very Being of a substance, we can be sure of nothing in the world.

Reason VI. Yea, it is to be noted, that though Brutes have no Intellects, yet
their Sense and Imagination herein wholly agrees with the common perception of
man: A Dog or a Mouse will eat the bread as common bread, and a Swine will
drink the Wine as common Wine: and therefore have the same perception of it as
of common bread and wine; And so their senses must be all deceived as well as
man's. And Brutes have as accurate perfect senses as men have, and some much
more. And mere natural operations are more certain and constant (as we see by
the worlds experience) than mere Reason and Argumentation. Birds and Beasts are
constant in their perceptions and course of action, being not left to the power
of Mutable free will.

Reason VII. You hereby quite overthrow your own foundation, which is fetched
from the Concord of all your party, which you call all the Church: You think
that a General Council could not agree to any thing a^ an Article of faith if
it were not such; (when it is bu^ the Major Vote that agree); You say that
Tradition is Infallible, because All the Church agrees in i^ (when it is
perhaps but your Sect, which is a Mino^ part). But do you not overthrow all
this, when yo^ profess, that All the senses of all the sound men in the world,
and all the simple perceptions of their Intellect^ by sense, do agree, that
there is substance, yea, d^ specie Bread and Wine after the Consecration? No
on^ man's perception by sense disagreed in this, from the institution of the
Sacrament to this day, that can be proved, or the least probability of it
given. And i^ this Concord be no proof, much less is yours: For* 1. The
Intellect in Reasoning is more fallible than i^ its Immediate perception of
things sensed (or perceived by sense). 2. Yours is but the Consent of some men;
but ours is the Consent of all mankind. Yours among your selves has often in
Councils a Minor part of dissenters, who must be overvoted by the rest: But our
Case has never one dissenting sense or perception.

Reason VIII. By this denial of sense, you overthrow the foundations of Humane
Converse: How can men make any sure Contracts, or perform any duty on a sure
ground, if the Concordant senses of all the world be false? Parents cannot be
sure which are their own Children; nor Children which are their own Parents:
Husbands cannot certainly know their own Wives from their neighbors. No
Subjects can certainly know their own Prince. No man can be sure, whether he
buy or sell, receive money or pay it, etc. No man can be sure that there is a
Pope, or Priest, or man in the world.

Reason IX. You seem to me to Blaspheme God, and to make him the greatest
Deceiver of mankind, even in his holy Worship: Whereas God cannot lie; It is
impossible: And the Devil is the Father of lies: And you make God to tell all
the world (as plainly as if words told them) even by demonstration to their
sight, smell, feeling, taste, that, here is Bread and Wine, when there is none;
yea, that it is at least some substance which they perceive, when it is none at
all.

Reason X. You thus fain God to be Cruel to Mankind, and that under pretense of
Grace; Even to put such hard Conditions of salvation on man, which seem to us
impossible, to any but mad men, or those who by faction have cast their minds
into a dream. If these be Gods Conditions, that no man shall be saved, that
does not believe that all his senses, and all the senses of all the world, are
deceived when they perceive Bread and Wine, or substance, many may take on them
to believe it, but few will believe it, and be saved indeed.

Reason XI. Hereby you make the Gospel or New Covenant to be far harder and
more rigorous than either the Law of Moses, or the Law of Innocence: For
neither of these did damn men for believing the agreeing senses of all mankind:
Perfect Obedience, to a perfect nature, was fit to be a delight. The burdensome
Ceremonies had no such Impossibilities in them. None of them obliged men to
renounce all their senses, and to come to Heaven by so hard a way.

Reason XII. You seem to me to Contradict Gods Law and terms of life, and to
forge the clean contrary as his: He says, He that comes to God must Believe
that God is, etc. and He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes
not shall be damned: But you seem to me to say in plain effect, [ He that
Believes Gods Natural Revelations to all men's senses shall be damned, and that
believes that the said Revelations are false, may be saved, caeteris paribus.]

Reas. XIII. And what a thing by this do you mak^ Gods Grace to be? Whereas
true Grace is the Repaire^ and perfecter of Nature, you make it to be the
destroye^ and deceiver of Nature. The use of Grace according to your faith is
to cause men to believe that Gods natural Revelations are false, and that all
the senses of the world in this matter are deceived: Whereas a mad man can
believe this without Grace.

Reas. XIV. By this doctrine you abominably corrupt the Church with hypocrisy,
while all that will have Communion with you, must be forced to profess tha^ all
men's senses are thus deceived: And can you thin^ that really they can all
believe it? or rather you^ Church must be mostly made up of gross hypocrites
who falsely take on them to believe it when they do not.

Reas. XV. And by this means you make the Unity of the Church to become a mere
Impossibility: For you^ condition of union is, that men all believe this among
other Articles of your faith: And that man has lost o^ vitiated his humanity
who can believe and expect, tha^ all Christians in the world should ever
believe that al^ the senses of all the world are thus deceived. You might as
well say, The Church shall never have Unity till all Christians do believe that
David or Christ was a Worm and no man, a door, a Vine, a thief, a Rock, in
proper sense; or we shall have no unity till we renounce both our humanity and
animality and the light and Law of God in Nature. And after this to cry up
Unity, and cry down Schism, what abominable hypocrisy is it?

Reas. XVI. And by this doctrine what bloody inhumanity is become the brand or
Character of your Church? When you decree Council. Later. sub. Innoc. 3. Can. 3.
that all that will not thus renounce their senses, and give the lie to Gods
natural revelations, shall be excommunicated and utterly undone in this World,
even banished from all that they have, and from the Land of their Nativity; Yea
your Inquisition must torture and burn them, and your Writ de hereticis
comburendis must be issued out against them, to fry them to death in flames, if
they will not renounce the common senses of mankind.

Reas. XVII. And it even amazeth me to think what horrid Tyrants you would thus
make all Christian Princes! When the said Canon determines that they shall be
first Excommunicate and then cast out of their Dominions, which shall be given
to others, and their subjects absolved from their allegiance and fidelity,
except they will exterminate all these as heretics from their Dominions, who
will not give the lie to all men's senses and to Gods natural Revelations. The
plain English is, He shall not be the Lord of his own Dominions who will have
men to be his subjects, or such as will not renounce both their humanity and
animality or sense. For to perceive substances in genere and in specie by
sense, and to believe or trust the Common senses of all the World about things
sensible, as being the surest way that we have of perception, is as necessary
to a Man as Ratiocination is. Choose then O ye Princes of the Earth, whether
you will be Papists, and whether you will have no men to be your Subjects, even
none that believe the senses of themselves and all the world.

Reas. XVIII. Thus also your Idolatry exceeds in absurdity the Idolatry of
all the Heathens else in the World: Even Canibals and the most barbarous
Nations upon Earth. For if they call men to Worship an Image, the Sun, the
Moon, an Ox or an Onion (of which the Egyptians are accused) they do but say
that some spiritual or celestial numen affixeth his operative presence to this
Creature: But they never make men swear that there is no Image, or Sun or Moon
or Ox or Onion left, but that the whole substance of it is turned into God, or
somewhat else. Your Absurdities tend to make the grossest Idolatry seem
comparatively to yours, a very fair and tolerable error.

Reas. XIX. By these means you expose Christianity to the scorn of humane
nature, and all the world. You teach Heathens, Mahometans and other Infidels to
deride Christ as we do Mahomet; and to say that a Christian Makes and Eats
his God, and his faith is a Believing that Gods supernatural Revelations are a
lie, and that God is like the Devil the great Deceiver of the world. Woe be to
the world because of offenses, and woe be to him by whom offense comes.

Reas. XX. Lastly by this means you are the grand pernicious hinderers of the
Conversion of the Heathen and Infidel world: For you do as it were proclaim to
them; [ Never turn Christians till you will believe that Gods Natural
Revelations are false, and that all men's senses in the world are deceived, in
judging that there is Bread, Wine, or sensible substance after the words of
Consecration.]

These are the mischievous Consequents of your doctrine. But one benefit I
confess does come by occasion of it; that it is easier hereby to believe that
there are Devils, when we see how they can deceive men: and to believe the evil
of sin, when we see how it makes men mad; and to believe that there is a Hell,
when we see such a Hell already on Earth, as Learned Pompous Clergy men, that
have studied to attain this malignant madness to decree to fry men in the
flames and damn them to Hell, and give them no peace or quietness in the World,
unless they will say, that Gods Natural Revelations are false, and that all
men's senses are herein deceived, by God as the great deceiver of the World.


CHAP. II. The Papists Answers to all this confuted.
P. IT is easy to make any cause seem odious, till the accusations are
answered, which I shall confidently do in the present case.

I. All this is but argument from sense: And sense must vail to faith: Gods
word must be believed before our senses.


R. It is easy to cheat fools and children into a dream, with a sound of empty
words: To talk of senses vailing to faith and such like Canting, and
insignificant words, may serve turn with that sort of men. But sober men will
tell you that sense is in exercise in order of Nature at least before Reason or
faith, and that we are Men and Animals before we are Christians: And that the
truth and certainty of faith, presupposes the Truth and Certainty of sense.
Tell me else, if sense be false, how you know that there is a Man, or Pope, or
Priest in the World? that there is a Book or Voice, or any being? And what
possibility then have you of Believing?


P. Gods Revelation is surer than our senses?


R. This is the old song over and over. Revelation without sense (to you and
ordinary Christians at least) is a contradiction. How know you that God has
any revelations? If by preachers words, How know you that there is a preacher,
or a word but by sense? If by books, How know you that there is a book, but by
sense?


P. II. We may trust sense in all other things, where God does not contradict
it: But not in this One Case, because God forbids us.


R. Say so of your Church too, your Pope, Council or Traditions; that we may
trust them in all cases save one or two, in which it is certain that they do
lie! And will not any man conclude, that he that can lie in one case, can lie
in more? If one Text of Gods word were false, and you would say, You may
believe all the rest save that, how will you ever prove it? For the formal
object of faith is gone, which is the Divine Veracity; He that can lie once,
can lie twice. So if all our senses be false in this instance, how shall we
know that they are ever true?


P. You may know it because God says it.


R. 1. Where does God say it? 2. How shall I be sure that he says it? If you
say, that it is written in Scripture; besides that there is no such word; How
shall I know that all men's senses are not deceived in thinking that there is a
Scripture, or such a word in it? If you say that the Council says it, How
shall I know that there is a man or ever was a Council, or a Book in the world?
The certainty of Conclusions presupposes the certainty of premises and
principles: And the certainty of faith and Reasoning, presupposes the
certainty of sense: And if you deny this, you deny all, and in vain plead for
the rest.


P. I must believe my senses, where I have no reason to disbelieve them. But
when God contradicts them, I have reason to disbelieve them.


R. 1. You vainly suppose without proof that God contradicts them. So you may
say, I may or must believe the Scripture or an Apostle, Prophet or Miracle,
except God contradict them. But if God contradict them, he contradicts his
own word or revelation: For we have no other from him, but by man: And if he
contradict himself, or his own word, how can I believe him, or know which of
his words it is that's true, when one is false? so here: His Natural Revelation
is his first, nearest, and most satisfactory revelation: And if that be said to
be false by his supernatural revelation, which shall I believe, and why?


P. III. You cannot deny but God can deceive our senses. And therefore if he
can, will you conclude against all faith if once he do it?


R. 1. This is not once; but as often as God is worshipped in your Mass and our
Sacrament.

2. God can deceive us without a Lie, but not by a Lie. Christ deceived the two
Disciples, Luke 24. by carrying it as if he would have gone further; but not by
saying that he would go further. God can do that from which he knows that man
will take occasion of deceit. God can blind a man's eyes, or destroy or corrupt
his other senses; he can present an object defectively, with unmeet mediums,
distance, site, etc. In this case he does not give us a FALSE SIGN; nor does he
by the Nature of the Revelation oblige any man to believe it: Yea Nature says,
that a man is not to Judge by a vitiated sense, or an unmeet medium, or a too
distant object, or where the due qualification of the sense or object are
wanting: Nature there tells us that we are there to suppose or suspect that we
are incapable of certainty: But Nature obliges us to believe sound senses
about duly qualified objects; and to take sense for sound when all the senses
of all the men in the world agree; and the object to be a duly qualified object
of sense, when all men's senses in the world so perceive it. For we have no way
but by sense to know what is an object of sense.

3. The question is not what God can do by his power, if he will; but what God
will do, and can will to do, in consistency with his perfection, and just and
merciful Government of the World. And God in making us men whose Intellects are
naturally to perceive things sensible by the means of the perception of sense,
does naturally oblige man and necessitate him also, to trust his senses in such
perception. And in Nature man has no surer way of apprehension: Therefore if
you could prove that sense is ordinarily fallible, and Gods revelations to it
false, yet man were not only allowed but necessitated to use and trust it, as
having no better surer way of apprehension: As among many knaves or liars, I
must most trust the honestest and most trusty, when I have no better to trust.
If I am not sure that it is a Sun or Light that I see, yet I am sure that I
must take my perception of it as a Sun or Light as it is; For God has given me
no better. If I am not sure that my sight, feeling, taste, etc. are infallible;
yet I am sure that I am made of God to use them; and that I have no better
senses, nor a better way to be certain of their proper objects: so that I must
take and trust them as they are, or cease to be a man.


P. IV. Christ's Body and Blood are not sensible objects; and therefore sense is
no proper judge whether they be present.


R. This is one of your gross kind of cheats, to change the question. We are
not yet come to the question, Whether Christ's Body and blood be here? And I
grant you that sense is no judge of that, any more than whether an Angel be
here. But the question is now only, Whether Bread or Wine or sensible substance
be here? And of this we have no natural way but by sense to judge.


P. V. If God should say to you [ Your senses are in this deceived; Here is no
bread or wine or sensible substance] Would you not believe him?


R. 1. Again I tell you, it is a supposition not to be put: As if you should
say, [ If God should say, that part of the Gospel or word of God is false,
would you not believe him?] 2. If I know that God tells me that some disease
or false medium, etc. deceive me or another in particular, I will believe him:
But here it is supposed, 1. That I have assurance that it is God that tells me
so; 2. And that I have no assurance that common sense says the contrary. But
if the sense of all the world about a well situate object of sense agree, I
will not take that to be Gods word which contradicts it, till I have some
evidence which is better and stronger than the agreeing senses of all the world
to prove it to be so. And what evidence must that be? I assure you somewhat
greater than the authority of a beastly ignorant murdering Pope, and his
factious Council.


P. VI. Cartesius gives you an instance of deception of sight: We think a
square Tower of a Steeple to b^ round till we come near it: And the water
seems to us to move when it is the boat.


R. Cartesius and you do seem to be Confederate, to put out the eye of nature,
and tempt the world to Infidelity, if not to Atheism. 1. Nature tells us that a
distan^ Steeple or other object, is not perfectly discernible and therefore
Nature forbids us to judge till w^ come nearer. We speak only of objects
duly situate an^ qualified. 2. The failing of the sight there is but Negative:
It discerns not the corners: but here yo^ feign it to be positive. 3. As the
error is corrigibl^ by nearer approach, so also by the use of other sense^* If
a man feel the Tower that is square, he will infallibly perceive it. But if you
could prove that this squar^ Tower is no Tower, no Stone, no Substance at all,
thoug^ all the world should judge otherwise that see it at the meetest
distance, and feel it with their hands, then you did something to the purpose.

So as to the moving water or banks, 1. Motion is not so evident as substance.
2. Though one sense, through the weakness of the brain be insufficient, the
Intellect by the same sense about other objects, and by other senses can
infallibly discern what that one perceives not. 3. And if one man's eyes
deceive him who is in the boat, ten thousand men's eyes that stand on the firm
land, perceive the truth: But in our case it is all the senses of all the
world, in all ages, about the nearest object, that agree.


P. VII. Substance is not the proper object of sense, but only Accidents: We
see, feel, taste, smell the accidents, but not the substances.


R. 1. If you can name some notional speculator or Word-maker that has said
so, you think you have authority to renounce humanity by it. Call it proper or
not-proper, substance is the certain object of sense as clothed with its
accidents. Quantity and the res quanta are not two things, but one: And he that
feels or sees quantity, feels or sees the rem quantam. He that sees or
feels shape or figure, sees or feels the thing figured. He that smells
odor, smel^eth rem odoratam; He that sees Color, sees the rem coloratam.
When to feel the superficies, you feel ^he substance.

2. By this we see how by words you will unman mankind. Have you any way of
perception of corporal substances but by sense? Do you know that there is any
Earth or Water, or any corporal substance in the world, or not? If you do, tell
us how you know it but by the ^erception of sense presenting it to the
Intellect? You know that you must thus know it, or not at all.

3. And thus still you would bring men with Skepticism to Infidelity. You would
teach men, that they that saw Christ were not sure that they saw him or any
substance at all, but only the accidents, called Quantity, Shape, Color, etc.
They that saw Apostles, Miracles, Bibles, Councils, were not sure that they saw
any more than accidents, etc.


P. VIII. They that saw Angels appearing to them like men, or the Holy Ghost
descending on Christ in the shape of a Dove, thought they saw Men and a Dove:
So Moses Rod did seem a Serpent. But their senses did deceive them.


R. Their senses were not at all deceived: And if by rash judging they would go
beyond sense, and wilfully deceive themselves, it was their fault. Their sense
saw the shape or likeness of a man and dove. The text says, not that the Holy
Ghost was a dove, but that it descended in the likeness of a Dove: and their
senses perceived no more. And this was true. A man consists of a soul and a
body of flesh and blood: Did sense perceive any of this in the Angels? either,
soul, flesh or blood? or any such thing in the appearance of a dove? If I see
your picture or statue, is my sense deceived if I take it not for a living man?
It I see it moved, is my sense deceived if I take it not for any other than a
moving Image? Nature does not bind me to take every simile to be idem; a corpse
for a man; an Image for the person. It will be foolishness so to take it. But
if this Angel, or Dove, had come near to the senses, all the senses, of all
sorts of men, and they had seen, and felt, and tasted, and smelt, all that are
the objects of these senses, and yet there had been indeed no visible,
tactible, sensible substance at all, this had been a deception of the senses
remediless. Christ I am sure appealed to sense, to prove that he had flesh and
blood and was not a mere spirit. The same I say of Moses Rod: either it was
really a Serpent or not; If it was, then it was no deception to judge it such:
If not, sense was not at all deceived: For it perceived nothing but the
similitude and motion, and those (with the substance) were certainly there. But
if all men's senses, seeing, feeling, tasting, etc. had been deceived, and there
had been indeed no shape of a Serpent, nor any sensible substance at all but
Accidents real without any substance, this had been indeed a deception of the
senses. And if God so subvert man's nature, he will not bind him to do the
things which belong to the nature of man to do.

But by all this we may perceive, that there is no end of Controversies with
you to be hoped for: For how is it possible to bring any thing to a more
satisfying issue, than when the senses of all the world do as clearly perceive
it, as any sensible thing can be perceived? If our difference were whether this
be Paper, and these be Letters; or whether this be a Pen, a Table, yea or a
substance, and I should appeal to the sense of all the World, and yet this will
not serve to decide the Controversy; what end, or hope of ending can there be:
I will sooner look for concord with a mad man, than with men that deny the
senses of all the World.


CHAP. III. The second Argument against Transubstantiation: The Contradictions
of it.
R. Arg. 2. GOd owneth not Contradictions (nor can do). The Papists doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or nullification of the whole substance of Bread and Wine,
is contradictious: Therefore it is not owned by God.

The Major I know no man that denies.

The Contradictions are these.

I. You feign many Accidents of no substance; which is a gross contradiction.
For to be an Accident is essentially Relative to a subject or substance: And
ejus esse est inesse. To be a Father without a Son, or a Son without a Father,
a Husband without a Wife, or a Wife without a Husband, etc. are contradictions:
And so it is to be an Accident of nothing, or without a subject.

Particularly, 1. The quantity of nothing is a contradiction: We can measure
the Bread, and Wine: To be an inch in longitude, latitude or profundity, and
yet to be no substance is a contradiction. To be (as the Wine is) a quart, a
gallon of Nothing is a contradiction.

2. So for number; we can number the wafers or pieces of Bread, and the Cups of
Wine: And to be twenty, forty, an hundred nothings, is a contradiction.

3. So for the Weight, To be an ounce, a pound, or ten pound, of nothing, is a
contradiction.

4. So for the figure or shape: It is a contradiction to be a round nothing, a
square nothing, etc.

5. So is it to be a sweet nothing, a sharp nothing, an austere nothing, etc.
as the Wine is fancied by you.

6. Or to be an odoriferous nothing: A rough or a smooth nothing, etc.

7. Or to be a white nothing, or a red nothing, or any colored nothing. The
same I may say of site, and of a multitude of Relations, etc.

II. It is a contradiction, for Nothing to have all those Real notable effects,
which it is certain that the consecrated Bread and Wine have.

As, 1. That when a man or a beast, is really nourished by the Bread and Wine,
and flesh and blood, and spirits are made of it, (as they may live by it many
months,) that these should be the effects of nothing, or made out of no
substance by way of Nutrition, without a proper Creation.

2. When the Consecrated Bread and Wine do partly turn to Excrements, Urine,
Dung and Spittle, that all the Excrements are nothings or made of nothing
without a new Creation, is a contradiction.

3. When the Wine shall (as it may do) make a man or a swine drunk, that he is
made drunk by nothing or no substance, when as that drunkenness is essentially
the operation of the spirits of the Wine upon the spirits of him that drinks
it, this also is a contradiction. And God makes not contradictions true.


P. It is the plea of an Infidel to say that God cannot do this or that. Will
you limit the power of the Almighty? Will you say that God cannot make
Quantity, quality, site, etc. without substance, because we cannot? It is
blasphemy to say God cannot.


R. God can do All things that are works of Power: God can do nothing which is
a work of Impotency, defectiveness, naughtiness, or folly, or which are
contradictions in themselves. And when we say God cannot, we do but say either
that God is Perfect and Almighty, or that the thing is Nothing, but a false
name, and not capable of being any ones work. God cannot lie, because he is
perfect and Almighty, and not because he wants power. God cannot make you to
be a man and no man, a substance and no substance, in the same sense, at the
same time: because it is a contradiction.

But if this Argument did not hold, and it were no contradiction, for God to
overturn his settled course of Nature, I shall show you next that we have other
reasons enough to judge that he does it not. If he Can make darkness to give
Light, and a clod to be to the World instead of the Sun, without changing it,
or a stone to understand and speak without changing it, yet that God does none
of this, both reason and experience prove.


CHAP. IV. The Third Argument against Transubstantiation: from the certain
falsehood of their assertion of multitudes of Miracles in it.
R. THat doctrine which asserteth a multitude of false or feigned Miracles is
false and not of God: But such is the doctrine of Transubstantiation -- Ergo --


I will 1. Show you what Miracles it asserteth; and 2. Prove that they are
feigned or false.

I. It is a Miracle for Bread and Wine to be turned into no Bread and Wine,
yea, into nothing; and this by the speaking of four words.

II. It is a Miracle (or Contradiction) for the Bread and Wine to be turned
into Christ's Body and Blood, and yet neither the matter nor form of it to
become any of the matter of Christ's body and blood.

III. It is a Miracle, (or a contradiction rather as aforesaid) for the
Accidents to be the Accidents of Nothing, or no substance; to be the quantity
of Nothing, the shape, the number of nothing, the color, savor, smell of
nothing, and so of all the rest.

IV. It is a Miracle to have all the sound senses of all sorts of men in the
world so deceived herein, as to perceive bread, wine and substance, if there be
none.

V. It is a Miracle to have the senses of Mice and Rats, and Dogs and other
Brutes also deceived when they eat and drink it.

VI. It is a Miracle (or contradiction) to have nothing without a Creation, to
become excrements: or else those excrements to be nothing also: And the
Accidents of all those excrements to be the Accidents of Nothing.

VII. It is a Miracle to be nourished by Nothing: (For you say, that it is not
Christ's body and blood that nourishes the flesh.) To have flesh and blood made
of nothing, is a creation.

VIII. It is a Miracle to be drunk with nothing, when the Wine is annihilated
or gone, and seems to be it that causes the effect: Yea, for Beast or man to
be so drunk.

IX. It is a Miracle (or contradiction) for Christ to eat his own body (as the
Papists hold he did); and yet it was his Whole Body which did eat his body, and
yet he had but one body.

X. It was a Miracle (or contradiction) for Christ's entire body to be nourished
by that eaten body, and that the eaten body turned into the substance of his
eating body: And yet all was but one.

XI. It was a Miracle that Christ's Eaten body being not dead but living with a
humane soul, should be broken and eaten by him and his disciples, and yet feel
no pain by it.

XII. It was a Miracle that his whole body was on the Cross; and yet part of it
in the disciples bellies at that time; or at least before that eaten by them.

XIII. It was a Miracle (or contradiction) that Christ's eaten body now
nourishes not the flesh of any man; and yet did nourish the flesh of the
disciples before his death. Or if it did not nourish them, it was a Miracle
that what they eat and drank then did not nourish them, (or Christ what he eat
and drank).

XIV. It was a Miracle that the whole body of Christ should arise and live, and
ascend to Heaven, when the disciples had eaten it.

XV. It is a Miracle that every Receiver eats the whole body of Christ, and
not a part, and yet that he has but one body; or that they eat each a part
without dividing him.

XVI. It is a Miracle that as soon as the species of Bread and Wine perish or
cease in the Eater, Christ's body and blood cease to be in him, and this
without his detriment.

XVII. It is a Miracle that there is such a local distance between the
consecrated bread and wine all over the world; and yet no such distance between
the parts of Christ's body, and yet that bread to be his body.

XVIII. It is a Miracle that bread and wine is Annihilated or cease every Mass,
and yet that the quantity of corporeal matter in the whole world is no whit
diminished: or else that those four words can so annihilate and diminish the
matter of the world.

XIX. It is a Miracle that Christ's body and blood increase not, when so many
millions of parcells of bread and wine are turned into it.

XX. It is a Miracle that Christ's body and blood is not diminished, when by the
Corruption of the species of bread and wine, it vanishes away.

XXI. It is a Miracle that Christ's body and blood should be so received into
the bowels of a wicked man, and yet not be any way defiled by his sin, nor by
his bodily uncleanness.

XXII. It is a Miracle that a Baker dispositively, and a Priest effectually can
make his own God, and eat him when they have done.

XXIII. It is a Miracle that when Worms are bred of that which was bread and
wine, these worms are really generated of nothing, or created; (or if as some
say, the bread and wine do substantially return again, and breed them, that is
another, a double miracle.)

XXIV. And it is a Miracle that the Corporeal matter of the world should by
these Worms be daily increased, out of nothing, or out of mere accidents that
have no substance.

XXV. It is a Miracle that men may be poisoned by the Sacramental Elements as
ingredients in the mixture, and yet that they are no substance.

XXVI. It is a Miracle or Contradiction, that when flesh and blood (formally
such) enter not into the Kingdom of God, but Glorified bodies are all spiritual
bodies (though not Spirits), and therefore not flesh and blood: Yet Christ's
body in the Sacrament should be truly and properly flesh and blood, and yet the
same with his glorified body (which is not flesh and blood:) which is the
Papists doctrine; and the bread turned into such flesh.

XXVII. It is a Miracle that the same Body which in Heaven is brighter in Glory
than the Sun, and exalted above Angels, should yet show no signs of Glory on
the Altar, in the Cup, in the hand, mouth or belly of him that takes it; but
all its Glory be so hid.

XXVIII. It is a Miracle (or Contradiction) that Christ's Humiliation should be
past, and his whole Body Glorified, and yet that to be torn with the teeth of a
wicked man, to be eaten by Mice, Rats or Dogs, to go into the filthy guts, to
be trodden in the dirt, should be neither painful, nor any diminution of the
Glory of that same body. Indeed his body on the Cross might be broken, and his
blood spilt and trodden on, because he was a sacrifice for sin; and it was the
time of his Voluntary Humiliation: But now for the suffering of death he is
crowned with Glory and Honor, Heb. 2.9, 7.

XXIX. It is a Miracle that the Living Body of our Glorified Redeemer should
give no evidence or sign of life; neither stir, nor speak, nor have breath,
pulse, warmth, or other property of life appearing.

XXX. It is a Miracle, at least, that flesh should have none of the common
notes or properties of flesh, not to be made of food, of blood and chyme, not
to consist of the fibrae which flesh consists of; not to have the color,
taste, odor or other such accidents of flesh: And that Blood should have none
of these notifying accidents of blood.

XXXI. It is a Miracle or Contradiction, that Christ's Flesh was Broken before
it was broken, sacrificed before it was sacrificed, I mean really broken and
sacrificed at his Supper, when yet he was whole and not really sacrificed till
he was nailed to the Cross. And so that his blood was really and properly shed
in his Supper, and yet no skin broken, nor his blood really shed till his side
was pierced on the Cross. And that he that was but once offered and sacrificed,
should yet be offered and sacrificed once on one day, and another time on
another day.

Here are one and thirty Miracles or Contradictions: Let us hear some of the
Aggravations of them, as worthy to be considered.

I. It is a Miracle of these Miracles, that there should be as many Miracle
workers as Priests in the world: How many thousand are they in France alone?
And so in many other Countries. Whereas in Christ's own time, they were
comparatively but few.

II. That the Pope or any Prelate can make a Miracle worker when he please,
yea, a thousand; as if the Holy Ghost were at his will.

III. It is a Miracle of these Miracles that a Simonist who buyeth the
Priesthood with money, does buy the Holy Ghost to work Miracles for that money,
which Simon Magus was condemned for thinking possible. For the Papists hold,
that the Consecration of a Simoniacal Priest transubstantiateth.

IV. It is a Miracle that all this power of Miracles should be given to
flagitious wicked men; Adulterers, Murderers, Drunkards, etc.

V. It is a Miracle that all these men can work Miracles at their own will and
pleasure, at any hour: whereas the Apostles had not the Spirit at command, and
could not do it when they would.

VI. It is a Miracle that Miracles should be as common as Masses, or the
Eucharistical worshipping of God; not only on every Lords Day in all
Church Assemblies, but any day or hour else in the Week. And so Miracles be as
ordinary almost as to eat and drink.

VII. It is a Miracle that every wicked Priest should do so many Miracles in
one, and so many more in number than Christ himself did, in the same proportion
of time, as far as the History of the Gospel tells us: Christ is quite
exceeded by them all.

VIII. It is a Miracle that every wicked Priest can work all these Miracles so
easily, as with the careless saying over four words: When the Apostles could
not cast out some Devils, or work some Miracles, and some could not be done but
by fasting and prayer.

IX. It is a Miracle that every Priest can work all these Miracles upon an
unbeliever or a wicked man: For to such they say, it is the real flesh and
blood of Christ, and no bread or wine; And the senses of all these wicked men
are deceived. Whereas Christ himself could not do any great miraculous work
among some where he came, because of their unbelief.

X. It is a Miracle that God and the Priest should do these foresaid Miracles
on Mice and Rats and other Beasts, by deceiving their senses, which we find not
that Christ ever did: or that God should feed them with the miraculous
accidents aforesaid.

XI. It is a Miracle of these Miracles that the Priest can thus easily work
Miracles not only on other creatures, but on the glorified body of Christ
himself, (by the foresaid changes, etc.)

XII. It is a Miracle, that when Christ wrought his Miracles usually before a
far smaller number, these Priests work Miracles thus before or on the senses of
all the men in the world that will be present at the Mass; for all their senses
are deceived.

XIII. It is a Miracle that the Abassines, Armenians, Greeks, Protestants, yea,
any that they call Schismatics, and Heretics, Vid. Aquin. 3. q. 82. a. 7. c.
who do not intend to work any Miracle, nor believe Transubstantiation, do yet
work Miracles in each Sacramental administration of the Eucharist, not only
without their knowledge, but contrary to their belief, and against their wills:
For they say, that even such men's consecration is effectual.

XIV. Either their Priests consecration works all these Miracles, when they
intend it not, Vid. Aquin. 3. q. 69. a. 9.
(as if they speak the words in jest or scorn, or in Infidelity,) or only when
they intend it. If the first be said, it is a Miracle of Miracles, that any
Priest can work so many and great Miracles by a jest or scorn -- If not, then
all the business is come to nothing, and no one but the Priest knows whether
there be any such Miracle at all, and whether ever he eat the flesh of Christ:
And so it will be in the power of the Priest to deceive and damn all the
people, according to the Papists exposition of Christ's words, Joh. 6. Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you have no life in you.

XV. Either a malicious intention to a wrong end will be effectual in
Consecration, or not. If not, none but the Priest knows that there is any
body and blood of Christ, or that ever he received any: Because none knows
though the Priest intend Consecration, whether he intend it to a right end. But
if a wicked end will serve (as I think most of them hold) the Miracle may be
great and sad. For any Roguish drunken malicious Priest may undo a Baker or
Vintner at his pleasure, and by four words deprive him of all his Bread and
Wine: Yea, he might nullify all the Bread and Wine in the City, and so either
make a famine at his pleasure, or else make whole Families and Cities live
still and be nourished without any substance by bare Accidents, which would be
a Miracle indeed.

If the Priest can by consecration change only a convenient quantity of bread
and wine, then all that is overmuch is bread and wine after consecration. If
otherwise, why may he not change all the bread and wine in the Shop or Cellar
where he comes, intending consecration to an ill end?

If he can do it only on the Altar, then want of an Altar would frustrate the
effect (which they hold not). But if he can do it without an Altar he may do it
in the Shop and Cellar.

If he can do it only on the bread and wine present, how near must it be? Then
the words will work at so many yards distance, and not at so many. Or if he
cannot do it out of sight, a blind Priest cannot do it. But if he can do it on
that which is absent, we may fear lest in an anger he may take away all the
bread and wine in the Land; at least in a frolic to try his power.

XVI. And it is some aggravaion of these manifold Miracles that a Degraded
Priest can do them: Vid. Aquin. 3. q. 82. a. 8.
Because they follow the indelible Character: And so he that has once made a
Miracle-worker, cannot take away his power again, nor his sin lose his power.
Is not this a mavelous power of Miracles, which becomes like a nature to
them, as the power of speaking is?

XVII. Yet is this Miracle-working-power more miraculous, in that a man's own
unwillingness, or Repentance of his Calling cannot hinder the Miracle if he do
but speak four words. Consent it self is not necessary to it: Let a man Repent
that ever he was a Priest, and profess that he continues in that Calling
against his will, yea, let him write as I now do against Transubstantiation,
yet all this will not hinder his next Consecration from working all the
foresaid Miracles.

XVIII. It is miraculous that if you keep a consecrated Wafer never so long, if
you use it never so coursly, if you (as he did who occasioned the conversion of
Mr. Anthony Egan a late Irish Priest) pawn it at an Alehouse for thirty
shillings; if you lay it down for a stake at Cards or Dice, etc. it will not
cease to be Christ's flesh (and so by his blood,) nor ever becomes bread, or any
other substance till it corrupt: And yet in a man's stomach it cease to be
Christ's body, as natural heat corrupts it by concoction: And yet it is not
Christ's flesh that is concocted.

XIX. It is a Miracle of this Miracle which Aquinas and others assert, that the
Bread and Wine are not Annihilated, but wholly turned into Christ's body and
blood; and yet, as Vasquez says, It is not that the matter of bread begins to
be under the form of Christ's body (as Durandus held.) Says Veron Reg. fid.
cap. 5. This Transubstantiation is neither a change nor a production of any
thing; but it is a Relation of order between the substance that does desist to
be, and that into which it does desist. And yet says the Council. Trident.
There is a change made of the whole substance into, etc.

XX. Lastly, It is a Miracle that all these Miracles should be done so as not
to appear to the senses of any man living, either to Convert Unbelievers or
Confirm the faithful: So that millions of these Miracles are seen and not seen;
the Priest, and Action, and Accidents are seen, but no Miracle seen by any. So
that Aquinas concludes 3. q. 76. a. 7, [Though Christ be existent in this
Sacrament per modum substantiae, yet neither bodily eyes, nor our Intellects
can see him, but by faith: no nor the Intellect of an Angel can see him
secundum sua naturalia; nor do Devils see him but by faith; nor the blessed,
but in the Divine Essence.]

All these make these Miracles far more miraculous than the raising of Lazarus
from the dead.

WHether all these are Miracles, or most or many of them Contradictions, and
therefore Impossibilities, I make no great matter of at this time. I think it
utterly needless to add any more to what is said in answer to such sayings as
Aquinas's (3. q. 75. and 76.) and other Schoolmen, that [ The senses are not
deceived, because there are the Accidents, and the Intellect is by faith
preserved from deception: that the remaining accidents are in quantitate
dimensiva quasi in subjecto: that these Accidents can change an extrinsick
body, can be corrupted, can generate Worms, can nourish, can be broken, etc.]
For all this at least confesses, that its all done by Miracle: (Though I will
say, 1. That they could scarce have chosen a more unhappy pro-subject of
Accidents than Quantity, nor have given more unhappy reasons for it than
Aquinas does q. 77. a. 2. c. 1. Because the sense perceives that it is Aliquid
quantum, that is colored. 2. Because Quantity is the first disposition of
matter, etc. For this includes matter: and Aliquid quantum is a word that
gives away his Cause: And no Accident is more the same with its subject than
Quantity, or moles extensiva. 2. And he will be long before he will make or
prove man's nature to be such, as that his Intellect can judge of substances by
Believing, as incomplex objects, before it have perceived them by sense and
imagination. When we see, taste, smell, feel, hear them, the Intellect will
suddenly and necessarily have some species or perception of the Thing, before
it come Logically to dispute from extrinsick media of Testimony, What this
thing is in a second notion. And our question is, Whether the Intellect in this
first Perception be deceived, or not? If you discharge the Intellect from
perceiving substances presently, before it know them by second notions or
Argument, you will make man quite another thing, than every hour and action
tells us he is: But what will not a man say, when he sets himself only to study
what to say for the making good of his undertaken Cause?

But my next work is to prove the Falsehood of these pretended Miracles.

CHAP. V. The Minor proved, viz. That these Miracles are false.
THat these are all but feigned Miracles, I thus prove. I. Because the holy
Scriptures do plainly deny such an ordinariness or commonness of the gift of
Miracles. 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10, 11. [ To one is given by the spirit the word of
Wisdom, to another the word of Knowledge by the same spirit, to another faith
by the same spirit, to another the gifts of healing by the same spirit, to
another the working of miracles, etc. But all these works that one and the
self same spirit; dividing to every man severally as he will. 28, 29. And God
has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, Governments,
diversities of tongues: Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers?
are all workers of Miracles.]

Here it is most expressly told us, that working Miracles is a peculiar gift of
some, and even in those times not common to all that were Priests. But the
Papists make it common to every Priest, though a common Adulterer, Drunkard,
Murderer or Heretic; no one Priest in the world is without it.

II. Though some few that were workers of iniquity might have some such gifts,
Matthew. 7. Yet that was so rare, that Nature it self taught men to judge
Miracles to be signs of divine approbation: so that Nicodemus thence argues,
Joh. 3.2. No man could do these Miracles that thou do except God be with him.
And the man Joh. 9.31. God hears not sinners, but if any man be a Worshipper
of God and does his will, him he hears. And the people, verse. 16. How can a
man that is a sinner do such Miracles? And it was Christ's own proof that he was
of God, and his Gospel true; and therefore to Blaspheam his Miracles, by
ascribing them to the Devil, was the unpardonable Blasphemy of the Holy Ghost:
And to deny Miracles to be a sign of Gods attestation is to subvert all
Christianity. Act. 2.22. Jesus of Nazareth a man approved of God among you by
miracles, wonders and signs which God did by him in the midst of you -- Joh.
5.36. The same works that I do bear witness of me that the Father has sent me.
Joh. 10.25, 37, 38. The works that I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness
of me -- If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not: But if I do,
though ye believe not me, believe the works, that ye may know and believe that
the Father is in me, and I in him.

Joh. 14.11. Believe me for the very works sake.

Joh. 15.24. If I had not done among them the works that no other man did, they
had not had sin.

This also was Paul's proof of his Apostleship, yea and of the truth of all the
Apostles doctrine: Heb. 2.3, 4. 2 Cor. 12.12. Romans 15.19. Act. 14.3. and 15.12.
God also bearing them witness both with signs and wonders, and diverse
Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will.

Therefore that Doctrine is unlike to be true, Matthew. 21.15.
which tells us that every wicked Priest in the world, though a Simonist, or an
enemy of Christ and Godliness, and drowned in all Vice, is such a constant
miracle-worker: When God hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.5.

III. But though this Reason be but probable, this following is demonstrative
to a believer.

That doctrine which makes every Ignorant wicked or Heretical Priest in the
world, far to excel the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, in the
Greatness, Number and facility of Miracles, is false: But such is this doctrine
of Transubstantiation --

I know that Christ tells his Apostles [ Greater works than these shall ye
do.] But 1. There are Greater works (such as the converting of greater numbers
in the world) which are not Greater Miracles: 2. And what was promised ^o the
Apostles, as to Miracles, was not promised to every Priest in the world.

I appeal to the Consciences of sober Christians, whether it sound not as an
arrogant if not blaspheamous speech, to say that Christ and his Apostles did
fewer and smaller miracles (proportionable to their time) than every Priest.

And as to the Minor, it is soon proved in its parts.

1. As to the Greatness of the Miracles; those of Christ were exceeding Great:
especially his Raising Lazarus, and his own Resurrection, his turning water
into Wine, and his feeding thousands with a little food -- But he that will
examine Transubstantiation as afore-described, shall find it to have more that
is contrary to nature, than all these, by far. The substance of the dead body
of Christ or Lazarus did not vanish, but remained to be the organized Recipient
matter of the re-entring soul. There were no Accidents without substances, or
other such things as are mentioned before. The multiplying of food, could at
the most be but a new Creation; But it was real food, and none of the
contradictions or absurdities before recited. The turning of Water into Wine
was likest this in the Papists opinion; but indeed little like it. For the
matter of the water there remained, with the form of Wine, and so became the
Matter of Wine, and did not vanish: And here was real Wine, and real substance,
and not Accidents without substances, deceiving all the senses or Intellectual
perceptions. The same may be said of the miracles of the Apostles, compared
with Transubstantiation.

2. And as to the Number, though Christ's and his Apostles Miracles were very
many, yet there is no Scripture-evidence that they were for number comparable
(for so much time) to every Priests. Christ's miracles are set down in the
sacred history in such order, and the Evangelists so much agree in reciting the
same miracles, that (though St. John say) the world could not contain the Books
that should be written -- yet we find no probability that they were near so
common as Masses are: when in several places where Christ came, they that
looked after Miracles and Signs were denied them, and had none, but were put
off to the sign of the Prophet Jonah, etc. Yea Herod and Pilate were in this
denied their desired satisfaction; and they that call to him for a miracle on
the Cross. And so of the Apostles. But every Priest does his miracles as often as
there is a Mass, though every day.

3. And as to the Facility I said before, that [in his own Country, among his
own kindred, he could do no mighty work save that he laid his hands on a few
sick folk and healed them, and he marvelled at their unbelief] Mark 6.4, 5, 6.
And he some time groaned in spirit, and wept, (as for Lazarus). And the
Disciples could not cast out a Devil, Mar. 9.18, 28. Luke 9.40. It was not to
be done but by fasting and prayer. Its like Paul would have cured Trophimus if
he could, when he left him sick. And as holy men spoke, not when, nor as they
pleased, but when and as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost: so did they work
miracles, not arbitrarily, but at such times and in such manner as the spirit
moved them.

But any the most wicked Priest can do it at his pleasure, any hour of the day:
and that but by reciting Hoc est corpus meum. Many other disparities appear in
what is said before.

IV. The End of the Gift of Miracles confuteth the feigned Miracles of
Transubstantiation. The End of Christ's gift was to prove him to be of God (as
is aforeshewed) and to prove his Apostles to be of God, and to confirm the
Gospel which they Preached, Mar. 16.17, 18, 19, 20. Heb. 2.4. As the gift of
Tongues so other wonders, were to convince unbelievers, 1 Cor. 14. Act. 2. and
4.30. and 5.12. and 7.36. and 8.13. and 14.3. 2 Cor. 12.12.

But the miracles of Transubstantiation are known to no unbeliever; nor to any
one in the world by any sense; and have no such End, but a contrary effect.

The Apostles who were to convert the world, and next Christ, to do the
greatest good, were therefore to do the greatest miracles: And it was their
argument for Christ, Joh. 7.31. When Christ comes will he do more miracles
than these which this man has done? Yet now every ignorant Priest pretends
to far more, who does but tempt Infidels to deride Christianity by the
pretense; as we do Mahometanism, for Mahomets sport pretended with the Moon,
and other such delirations.

V. God is not to be said to work Miracles and cross the established course of
nature without proof. But these pretended Miracles have no proof -- No man
living perceives them by sense. And that God tells us of no such things by
supernatural Revelation, shall be further showed anon: In the mean time, it may
satisfy us, that they bring us no proof, but their own affirmation, which they
require us to believe.

VI. The Matter of these pretended Miracles is expressly contradicted by the
Word of God, as shall be proved in the next Chapter.

VII. Ad hominem; Do not the Papists forget themselves here, and contradict
their other suppositions? So they do by forbidding to eat Flesh in Lent: And
yet say they eat Christ's flesh in Lent: When Irenaeus cited by Occumenius Com.
in 1 Pe^. c. 3. brings in Blandina proving to the Heathens that Christians
did not eat flesh and drink blood in the Eucharist, because that they use even
to abstain for exercise sake, from Lawful flesh.


1. They make Miracles to be one evidence of sanctity, and therefore Canonize
men, when they think that they have proof that they wrought Miracles: And yet
maintain that a Whoremonger, Drunkard or Heretic may do many more.

2. They make Miracles a proof that they are the true Church, and say that
among us there are no Miracles; and yet they confess that every Priest, among
us and all others, whom they account Schismatics and Heretics, do more
Miracles than Christ did; if they consecrate frequently.

3. They burn men to ashes for working miracles, even for making God; if so be,
they do it not in the Roman fashion.

4. They confess that the other Sacraments are not thus made up of Miracles; no
not Baptism, which is our Christening, and washes us from our sins: And yet
this Sacrament alone, must by a multitude of Miracles differ from the rest.

4. Whether the Doctrine of their St. Thomas and his followers and others, that
the formal words of this Sacrament have a created effective virtue by which
they instrumentally make the change (3. q. 78. a. 4. c.) be not an absurdity
rather than a proper miracle. For words Physically move but the air first, and
the terminus of the aires motion (e.g. the ear) next: and next that, if it be
an intellectual, or other animal recipient, the sense, and fantasy next, and
so on: But the Bread and Wine have no sense nor fantasy nor Intellect: And to
say that the moved air is the means of turning them into the body and blood of
Christ, is still to multiply miracles.

5. Do they not too much magnify the common work (and consequently the office)
of a Priest, above the work of a Pope or Prelate, who seldom consecrate? when
the Priest works so many Miracles more than they?

6. They conclude that a sinner that has Voluntatem peccandi receives Baptism
in vain, as to its ends of pardoning him, and therefore should not receive it (
Council. Romans Epist. Gregor. 7. Aquin. 3. q. 68. a. 4. c. etc.) And yet, be the
sinner never such an hypocrite or Infidel, he eats Christ's real flesh
nevertheless, yea against his will, if he do but the outward act.

7. Is it not strange that an Infidel receives as verily the real flesh and
blood of Christ as a Saint, and yet not the benefits or effects? As if Christ's
flesh and blood could be in a man's body without his benefit: When he has
promised that he that eats him, shall live by him. Yet see the measures of
their faith and Church: Says Aquinas (3. q. 80. a. 3. ad 2.) [ Unless perhaps
an Infidel intend to Receive that which the Church gives, though he have not
true faith about other Articles or about this Sacrament] then he may receive
sacramentally.

CHAP. VI. The fourth Argument. This Miraculous Transubstantiation is expressly
contrary to the Word of God, in Scripture.
Arg. 4. THe Papists say that there is no bread after the words of
Consecration: Gods word says, There is Bread after the Consecration: Therefore
the Papists speak contrary to the Word of God.

I. In 1 Cor. 11. It is called expressly BREAD after consecration no less than
three times in three verses together, 26, 27, 28. [For as often as ye eat this
Bread and Drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore
whosoever shall eat this Bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily shall
be guilty of the Body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup]: Here they that call for
express words of Scripture for our doctrine, without our consequences, may see
their own faith expressly contradicted, and our opposition justified: The Holy
Ghost here expressly calls it Bread: And yet no expresness nor evidence will
satisfy them.

P. By Bread is meant that which was Bread before, or else that which
nourishes the soul as Bread does the body: And so it is metonymically only
called Bread, as Christ's Flesh is called Bread in Joh. 6.


R. Why then do you call for express texts of Scripture as our proof, when that
expresness signifies nothing with you; but you can say, It is a metonymie or a
metaphor at your pleasure. But you say so against notorious Evidence: The
Apostle calls it Bread so often over and over, as if he had foreseen your
inhumane heresy: He calls it The Bread which is to be Eaten, joined with
Drinking the Cup; never once calling either of them the Flesh or Blood of
Christ, but as he recites Christ's words which he expounds. Yea he tells us
that eating this bread, and drinking this cup, is to show the Lords death till
he come; where he calls us to look back at Christ's death as past, in our
Commemoration, and to look forward to his personal coming as future; but never
tells us that we must kill Christ and eat him our selves (when we have made
him), nor that his body is there present under the accidents of Bread and Wine.

But the rest of the Scriptures as expressly justify our doctrine. 1 Cor.
10.15. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion (or
Communication) of the blood of Christ: And the Bread which we break, is it not
the communion (or participation) of the body of Christ?] Here it is the Cup and
the Bread after Consecration, if the Holy Ghost may be believed.

And in the next words the Apostle repeateth it in his reason [ For we being
Many are One Bread, and One Body* For we all partake of one Bread (or Loaf).]
Is not here express proof?

So Act. 20.7. When we came together to break Bread -- And v. 11. He ascending,
and breaking bread, and eating etc. Here it is twice more called Bread after
the Consecration (which ever went before the Breaking).

So Act. 2.42, 46. It is twice more called Breaking of Bread.

And what else can the recitation of Christ's institution mean, 1 Cor. 11.23,
24. Panem accepisse, fregisse; to have taken Bread, and having given thanks, to
have broken? What is it that he brake? Its nonsense if it have no accusative
case that it respects? And plain Grammatical construction tells us then, that
it must be that before mentioned, What he Took he blessed, and brake and gave:
But he took Bread and the Cup --. The same is in Mat. 26, 26, 27. and the other
Evangelists.

II. The Scriptures expressly ( Act. 2, etc.) make the Killing of Christ, and
drawing his blood, to be the heinous sin of the Jews, for which some Repented
and others were cast off: Therefore it is not to be believed that Christ did
first kill or tear himself, and shed his own blood; or that his disciples did
kill him, or tear his flesh and shed his blood, before the Jews did it. And if
they tore his flesh and drank his blood, and yet killed him not, the event
altered not the fact: The Jews did but break his flesh and shed his blood. If
you fly to a good intention, Paul will come in for some further excuse for his
persecution.

III. 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils:
Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table and of the table of Devils. -- Here
note 1. That the same phrase is used of the Participation of the Lords
mysteries and the Devils. But it was not the flesh and blood or the substance
of Devils which the Idolaters ever intended to partake of: but only their
sacrifices.

2. It is here called only the Table and the Cup, and not the flesh and the
blood.

3. It is said that They could not partake of both: whereas according to the
Papists doctrine, if a man should partake of the Idols sacrifice in the
morning, and of the Lords Table in the evening (without repentance,) he should
really partake of Christ's own flesh and blood; which the Text says cannot be
done.


P. It means only, You cannot Lawfully, or you ought not to partake of both,
but not that it is impossible or never done.


R. No doubt but it means that They ought not, or cannot Lawfully; but that's
not all: The text plainly means, You cannot have communion with both: You may
take the bread and wine at your peril; but you cannot partake of it as a
sacramental feast which God prepares you, and so partake of Christ therein.

And the same is said (expounding this) 2 Cor. 6.15. What concord has Christ
with Belial -- and what agreement has the temple of God with Idols?]
Intimating that Communion with God and Idols, Christ and Belial, are (so far)
inconsistent: But by the Papists doctrine an Idolater and Son of Belial may
partake of the very substance of Christ's body and blood, into his body, as
verily as he partaketh of his meat and drink.

IV. The Scripture teaches us expressly to judge of sensible things by sense.
Luke 24.39. [ Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self: handle me, and
see; for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. And when he had
thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet.] And v. 43, [ he did eat
before them] to confirm their faith. But they could have no more sensible
evidence of any of this, than we have of the being of Bread and Wine, or some
sensible substance after Consecration. Joh. 2.9. they tasted the water turned
into Wine, and were convinced.


P. But the Body of Christ here is not a sensible thing.


R. But Bread and Wine are sensible things.


P. But They are not There; and so are no objects of sense.


R. But all our senses say that They are there; and by them we must judge.


P. Your senses perceive nothing but Accidents: and your understanding must
believe God, and so (as you noted out of Aquinas before) there is no deceit
either of sense or Intellect.


R. Though this be answered fully before, I will again tell you, That these two
notorious falsehoods are all that you have to say against Humanity in this case,
that's worth the noting. I. It is false that you say that sense perceives not
substance: When I take up a staff or stone in my hand, I do not only feel
Roughness or Smoothness, etc. but a substance: It is a quantitative, and
qualitative substance, which I feel, taste, smell, see and hear: And this I
perceive by sensation it self, as the medium to the Intellect. It is not the
sense indeed, but the Intellect that gives it the Logical notion or definition
of a substance; but it is the sense it self that by sensation perceives it;
and to deny this is to deny all sense.

And if it were not so, How could any such substance be known? when it cannot
come into the Intellect but by the sense?

II. Your great cheat (or error) is by confounding the first and
natural-necessary perception of a sensibile sensatum or incomplex object, by
the Intellect, with the second conception of the Names of things, or of
Organical second notions, and the third conception of them Artificially by the
use of these names and Organical notions, and the fourth perception of
Consequents from those conceptions. To know by Believing is but the third or
fourth sort of knowledge, and presupposes the two first. If a man had never
heard a name or word in his life; yet by sensation as soon as he saw, smelt,
tasted, heard, handled things, his Intellect would have had a perception of the
Thing it self as it was sensate; And this is the Intellects first perception:
And this is it which falls under our question, Whether the Intellect in this
first perception of a substance or Thing as sensate, be deceived or not, when
the Thing has the Conditions of an object before mentioned. 2. Next this we
learn or invent Names and organical notions for things: And whether these be
true or false, and whether they be apt or inept is all one. This is but an
arbitrary work of art. 3. Next this we conceive of things by the Means of these
Names and second notions, and examine the Congruence: and so we define them:
And this is but a work of Artificial Reasoning, and presupposes the first
Natural necessary perception. Now Faith belongs partly to this, and partly to
the fourth, which is The raising of Conclusions, and the weaving of methods;
and presupposes the first, yea and the second: It is but an assent given by
the means of an Extrinsick Testimony of God, that this particular Word is True,
etc. Now if the Intellect in its first Perception (natural and necessary) of
the Thing it self, as sensate, be deceived, if faith should be contrary to it,
1. It must be such a Faith which is the immediate contrary perception of a
sensate object; which is no faith, nor is any such possible, (properly called
faith): 2. And if faith can come after and undeceive the Intellect, by saying
that God says otherwise, yet this would be no prevention of its deception, but
a cure, presupposing the said deception as the disease to be cured. So that to
say as Aquinas that faith preventeth the deceit of the Intellect, is a falsehood
contrary to the nature of man, and his natural way of acting, as he is composed
of soul and body.

I have said this over again, lest error get advantage by the brevity and
unobservedness of that which I said before.


CHAP. VII. Argum. 5. All these miracles have not the least proof; yea, the
Scriptures fully direct us to a cross interpretation of the Papists pretended
proofs; which also are renounced by themselves.
I Know of no Scripture proof in the World that the Papists pretend to, but the
words, This is my Body, and This is my Blood, and such like. And that these are
no proof I shall fully prove to any impartial man.

I. The very nature of the Sacrament instituted by Christ with his expressed
End, command our Reason to expound the word [is] of signification,
representation or exhibition, and the word [Body] and [Blood] of a new Relative
form only, that is, of a body and blood Representative, (which is all one in
effect): As a piece of Gold, Silver, or Brass, is by the law and stamp turned
really into the Kings Current Coin; and so has a new Relative form: so that
you may truly say that there is a change made of the Gold, or Silver into the
Kings Coin: and it is no more to be called mere Gold or Silver (though it be
Gold and Silver still), because the form denominateth, and the new form is now
that in question which must denominate. Or as a Prince that is married in
effigy or by a Representative to a woman, is not there personally; and yet it
is aptly said, This is the Prince which is betrothed or married to thee. Or as
we say of Pictures, This is Peter, or Paul, or John. Or as when we deliver a
man possession of a House by a Key, or of Land by a twig and a turf, or of a
Church by the belrope, etc. and say, Take, this is such a House, or such a
piece of Land, or Church, etc. As this is ordinary intelligible speech among
all men, so Christ tells them that he would be so understood.

1. In that his Real natural body spoke this, of the Bread and Wine which was
not his natural body: His real natural body was present, visible, entire,
unwounded, his blood unspilt, and did eat and drink (the other, as the Papists
hold, as being the same): And can any living man imagine that the Disciples who
understood not his Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. yet understood by these
four words, when they saw Christ's body alive and present, that this Bread and
Wine was that same Body and Blood, without any more questioning?

2. In that he bids them, Do this in Remembrance of him; which plainly speaks
a commemorating sign: Who will say at his last farewell when he is parting with
his friends, I will stay among you, or keep me among you, in Remembrance of me?
So for Christ to say, Eat me in remembrance of me, were strange.

II. It may put all out of Controversy to find, that Christ's words of one half
of the Sacrament are (as they confess) figurative; therefore the other must be
so judged also. Luke 22.20. This Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is
shed for you: 1 Cor. 11.25. [ This Cup is the new Testament in my blood.] And
here no man denies a double Trope at least: no man expounds it, that the Cup
or the Wine was the New Testament it self. And yet it is as expressly said, as
it is that the Bread is the Body it self. How then will they prove that one is
spoken properly, and the other figuratively?

III. There is no more found in these words to assert the Bread to be Christ's
Body, than is found in a multitude of such phrases in Scripture asserting
things which all men expound otherwise. As in Joh. 15.1. I am the Vine and my
Father is the husbandman: Joh. 10.7, 9. I am the door -- Joh. 10.14. I am the
good Shepherd and know my Sheep: Psalm. 22.6. I am a worm and no man (which
being a prophecy of Christ, a Heretic imitating you, might deny Christ's
humanity:) 1 Cor. 10.4. That Rock was Christ -- 1 Cor. 12.27. Ye are the body
of Christ -- Mat. 5.13, 14. Ye are the Salt of the earth: Ye are the lights of
the World -- Joh. 6.63. The words that I speak unto you they are spirit and
they are Life. Abundance such are in the Scripture, as All flesh is grass:
Christ is the Lamb of God: the Lion of the Tribe of Juda; the bright Morning
Star; the head Corner Stone, etc.

And it is yet more fully satisfactory, that the Hebrew constantly puts [
is] for [ signifieth] as you may find in all the old Testament; having no other
word so fit to express [ signifying] by: And as Christ spoke after that manner,
so the New Testament ordinarily imitateth; As Daniel and the Revelation agree
in saying, of the Visions, This is such or such a thing, instead of this
signifies it. So Christ, Matthew. 13.21, 22, 23, 37, 38, 39. He that sows is
the Son of man: the field is the world: the good seed are the Children of the
Kingdom; the tares are the children of the wicked one: the enemy is the Devil,
the Harvest is the end. The reapers are the Angels -- And thus ordinarily.

IV. Yea, the same kind of phrase used before in the Passover, teaches us how
to expound this: Exodus 12.11. Ye shall eat it in haste, It is the Lords
Passover -- verse. 27. It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover.

V. Yea the ordinary way and phrase of Christ's teaching may yet farther put us
out of doubt. For he usually taught by Parables, and expresses his sense by
such assertions: As Matthew. 13.3. Behold a sower went out to sow, etc. Luke
15.11, 12. A certain man had two sons, and the younger said, etc. Luke 12.16.
The ground of a certain Rich man, etc. Luke 16.19. There was a certain Rich
man, etc. Mat. 21.28. A certain man had two sons, etc. Verse. 33. There was a
certain householder which planted a Vineyard, etc. The Gospel abounds with
such instances, which teach us how to interpret these words of Christ.

VI. But most certainly all those forementioned texts teach it us, which
expressly call it Bread after the Consecration. If we will not believe the Holy
Ghost himself, who so frequently calls it bread, it is in vain to allege any
text of Scripture in the Controversy.

Now to feign a course of ordinary Miracles, Greater and more than Christ's, and
this to every Priest, how ignorant and impious soever; to pretend that every
Pope and Bishop can for money sell the Holy Ghost or the Gift of Miracles, in
Ordination; and all this when no eye sees the Miracles, when it is confessed
that Angels cannot naturally see it, yea when all men's senses perceive the
contrary; and all this because, that Christ said This is my Body, while
abundance such sayings in Scripture, yea the words about the Cup it self, are
confessed to be tropical, and when the Scripture expressly tells us that there
is Bread. Judge whether it be possible for Satan to have put a greater scorn
upon the Christian faith, or a greater scandal before the enemies of it, or a
greater hinderance to the Worlds Conversion, than to tell them, you must
renounce not only your Humanity but all common sense, if you will be
Christians, and be saved, or suffered to enjoy your estates and lives.

VII. Lastly, It is ordinary with their subtilest Schoolmen to confess that
this their doctrine of Transubstantiation cannot be proved from Scripture, and
that they believe it only because their Church says it, which must be
believed, and because that by the same spirit which wrote the Scripture, the
Church is taught thus to expound it. So that all their faith of this is by them
resolved into a phanatick pretense of Inspiration; As I have elsewhere showed
out of Durandus, Paludanus, Scotus, Ockam, Quodl. 6. li. 5. q. 31. Rada vol. 4.
Cont. 7. a. 1. page 164, 165.

And no General Council ever determined it till that at Rome under Innoc. 3.
Where says Matthew. Paris, many decrees were proposed or brought in by the Pope
which some liked and some disliked. And this was 1215 years after Christ's
birth. And Stephanus Aeduensis is the first in whom the name of
Transubstantiation is found, about the year 1100.

CHAP. VIII. Arg. 6. From the Nature of a Sacrament.
Arg. 6. THat Doctrine which by consequence denies the Lords Supper to be a
true Sacrament, is false.

The Papists doctrine of Transubstantiation by consequence denies the Lords
Supper to be a true Sacrament: Therefore the Papists doctrine of
Transubstantiation is false.

The Major I know no man that will deny that we have now to deal with.

The Minor needs no other proof, than the common definition of a Sacrament,
and Christ's own description of this Sacrament in the Scripture.

I. Aquinas concludes 3. q. 60. a. 1. that a Sacrament is a sign; and a. 2.
that it is a sign of a thing sacred as it sanctifies men; and a. 3. that it is
a Rememorative sign of Christ's passion, a demonstrative sign of Gods Grace, and
a prognosticating sign of future Glory: And a. 4. that it must be Res
sensibilis a sensible thing, it being natural to man to come to the knowledge
of things intelligible by things sensible, and the Sacrament signifies to man
spiritual and intelligible Goods: and a. 5. that they must be things of Divine
determination, etc.

But, 1. If the Bread and Wine be gone, there is nothing left to be a sign, a
Real sensible sign, to lead us to the knowledge of spiritual and intelligible
things. If they say that the species of Bread and Wine is the sensible sign,
what mean they by that cheating word [ species?] Not the specifying form or
matter, but only the outward appearance. And is it a true or a false
appearance? If True, then there is Bread and Wine: If false, it is a false
sign: And what is that false appearance which God makes a Sacrament of? It is
plainly nothing but the Accidents of Bread and Wine without the substance. But,
1. When they take the Cup from the Laity, and deny them half the Sacrament,
sure there are then no Accidents of Wine. Is there either Quantity, Color,
Smell, Taste, etc. of Wine? They will not say it. So that here is no sensible
sign as to one half.

2. And herein they deal far more inhumanely with us than the Infidels
themselves: For when they plead against Christ and Scripture, they grant that
the common principles and Notitiae, which all mankind acknowledge, are the
certain unquestionable light of Nature. See my More Reasons for the Christian
Religion, and the Lord Herbert de Veritate.
But the Papists deny not only the Notitias communes, but common sense. It is
nothing with them to damn all the world, that will not believe contradictions.
They say that the Quantity of Nothing endued with the Qualities, the Actions,
the Passion, the Relations, the quando, ubi, situs of nothing, is the
Sacramental sign. Inhumane contradiction! 1. Gassendus and others say truly,
that an Accident is not properly Res, but Modus Rei, (vel Qualitas, as he
calls it.) 2. Quantity does not Really differ a re quanta: and to say, [ The
Length, Breadth, Profundity of Nothing] is a notorious contradiction. And so it
is of the other Accidents. There is no Real sensible sign, and therefore no
Sacrament, where there is nothing, but the quantity, color, taste, smell, etc.
of Nothing.

3. And they cannot, they dare not say, that Christ's Real Flesh and Blood, is
the Sacramental sign: For, 1. It is not sensible; 2. It should be then the sign
of it self: The sign and the thing signified cannot be the same.

II. The very substantiality or corporeity of the Bread and Wine as such, is
part of the sign: As Christ says, Behold and handle me, a spirit has not
flesh and blood, as ye see me have: So he takes Corporeal bread and wine in
their sight, and breaks it, and pours it out, and gives it them to see, to
feel, to taste, to eat, that they may know it is true bread and wine, the signs
of his True Body and Blood. So that to deny the Corporeity is to deny Christ's
Corporeity in its signs; and tends to the old Heresy of them that held that
Christ had but a fantastical body, or was not indeed Crucified, but seemed so
to be: They teach Heretics to argue, The sign was no Real substance: Therefore
neither the thing signified.

III. The nutritive use of the bread and wine was another part of the sign, as
all confess: As bread and wine are the Nutriment of the body and life of man,
so is Christ crucified meritoriously, and Christ glorified efficiently, the
life of the soul. And he that denies the Nutritive sign, denies the
Sacrament: But it is not the false appearance, or phantasm, or accidents of
bread and wine, that are the natural nourishers of man: Therefore he that
denies the nourishing substance, denies the Real sensible Sacramental sign.

Says Bellarmin de Euchar. l. 3. c. 23. [ In the Eucharist we receive not
corporal food that the flesh may be thence nourished and made fat: but only to
signify inward refection.] So that he acknowledged this to be part of the
Sacramental sign. So Gregor. Valent. says that [ The chief and essential
signification of this Sacrament is that which by external nourishment is
signified, the internal spiritual refection of the soul by the body of Christ.]
So that denying the nourishing sign is destroying the essence of the Sacrament.

IV. The breaking of the Bread and pouring out the Wine is confessedly another
part of the Sacramental sensible sign. But, 1. When there is no Wine, there is
no pouring it out: 2. And if there be no Bread neither, there is no breaking
it: Can that be broken which is not? They that deny (as the Papists do) that
the Bread is broken (saying that only the Quantity of Nothing is broken) deny
the sensible Sacramental sign.

And here I may note, that we do not well to contend with them for denying the
Cup only to the Laity, and granting them only the Bread, when indeed they grant
neither, but deny them both: There is (say they) no more Bread than Wine, but
only a false appearance of it.

V. Lastly, The Apostle 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. shows that one Sacramental use of
the Bread was to signify the Unity of Christians, who are one Bread, and one
Body, as one Loaf is made of many Corns. But that cannot be One, which is
Nothing: Ens, Vnum and Verum convertuntur. To say with Greg. Valent. and
Bellarmine, that because it was Once bread, and one bread, therefore the
accidents of it remaining now signify that we are one bread; is but to say,
that There was once a fit sign, but then there wanted the form: Now after
Consecration, there is no Sacramental sign, but yet there is a Sacramental
form: And in what Matter is that form? Doubtless it can be no where but in the
Brain or Mind of man: That is, man can Remember that once he saw Bread: This is
the species of bread in his Intellect: This species is the sign: And so we have
found out another sense of the species of bread, than many think on; viz. It is
that which is called The species intentionalis, or the Idea or conception of
bread in a man's fantasy and mind: And so indeed the Sacrament is with them an
invisible thing: for it is only in men's minds: There is no Sacrament on the
Altar, but in the thoughts: And so who has a Sacrament, and who not, we know
not: And a man may by thinking make a Sacrament when he will.

CHAP. IX. Of the Novelty of Transubstantiation.
R. I Once thought to have next proved out of the Current of Antiquity, the
Novelty of this inhumane doctrine of the Papists, and that the Ancients
commonly confessed, that there was true Bread and Wine remaining in the
Sacrament after Consecration: But, 1. I should but tempt and weary ordinary
Readers, who neither need any such arguments (having Sense and Scripture to
give them satisfaction) nor are able to try them: For it is an indirect kind of
dealing, to expect that the unlearned, or those that are strangers to the
Writings of the Ancients, should believe this or that to be their mind and
sayings, merely because I tell them so. And if they read the plainest words,
they know not whether I rightly recite them, but by believing me. And it is as
unreasonable on the other side, that the Papists should expect, either by their
Citations or their general Affirmations, that the Readers should believe them,
that the Ancients were for Transubstantiation. Till men can both read the
Authors themselves, and try the Copies, they can have no sure historical notice
what the Fathers held, except by the common consent of credible Reporters or
Historians: Not while one side says, they say this, and the other side says
they say the contrary, and yet their Books are to be seen by all. We may bid
them believe us, and the Papists may bid them believe them, and a Priest may
cheat them by saying, that his word is the Churches: But though this will
produce a humane belief in the Hearers or Readers, as by advantages it is most
taking with them, yet that fallible belief is all the Certainty that it can
afford them. Therefore I think it most ingenuous and reasonable to give men
such arguments as they are capable of understanding and improving to certain
satisfaction.

2. Because they that can study such Authors as have gathered the sentences of
the Ancients in this Controversy, may find it so fully done by Edmund.
Albertinus in his second Book, that they can need no more.


P. You know that Albertinus is answered.


R. And I know that he is again Defended: And who doubts but you can answer
me copiously, if I did maintain that the Sun gives light: What is it that a
man cannot talk for? especially they that can hope to persuade all the
Christian world, that they must be damned, unless they will believe that all
men's senses are deceived, and that God is the great Deceiver of the world.


P. But how can you think to please God and be saved, if you be not of the same
faith as the Church has always been of? All the ancient Fathers and Catholic
Church were for Transubstantiation; and are you wiser and in a safer way than
they?


R. You have lost your credit with me so far, as that your word is no oracle to
me: If I must not believe my own nor other men's senses, I am not bound to
believe you: at least when I know you speak falsely. But I pray tell me, How
know you that the Church and Fathers did so believe?


P. Because the present Church says so; which cannot err.


R. Do not your own Writers say, that a General Council and Pope may err in
matter of fact? and that they did so in Condemning Pope Honorius and in other
Cases?


P. Yes: but this is a matter of faith.


R. Is it not a matter of fact, what this or that man said, and what doctrine
the Church at such a time did teach and hold?

But how know you that the present Church does say so, that this was the faith
of the ancient Church?


P. By their testimony in a General Council.


R. Did you hear the Council say so?


P. No: but the Church tells me that the Council said so.


R. Who is it that you now call the Church which tells you so?


P. My Superiors, who have it from the Pope, and their Fathers.


R. Are your Superiors that told you so, the Church? Or is the Pope the
Church? If so, What need you say a Council is the Church? And how know you that
the Pope and your Superiors err not in a matter of fact?


P. I know it by the Decrees of the Council yet extant.


R. 1. But if sense be deceitful, how know you that you ever read such Decrees?
2. How know you that they are not forgeries, or since corrupted?


P. The Church is a safe keeper of its, own Records.


R. Still what mean you by the Church? The Vulgar neither keep nor understand
your Councils. The Council of Trent is long ceased: No other General Council
has been since, to tell you what are the true Decrees of that Council. The
Pope is not the Church: And he may err in a matter of fact: What then is the
Church that tells you certainly what the Council of Trent decreed? Tell me if
you can.


P. We have such common historical Evidence and Tradition, as you have for your
Acts of Parliament when the Parliament is ended. The present Governors
preserve them.


R. Very good: It is the Office of the Governors to take that Care, but
therein they are not indefectible and infallible; but they and the published
Laws, and the notice of the whole Land, and the Judicial proceedings by them in
the Courts of Judicature make up a Certain Historical Evidence. And so it may
be in your Case: And when you have talked your utmost, you can show no more. And
have not we the same Writings of Fathers and Councils as you have? You dare not
deny it. Why then may not we know what is in them as well as you? And I pray
you tell me, Whether your Antiquaries, such as Albaspinaeus, Sixtus Senensis,
Petavius, Sirmondus, etc. do prove what Cyprian, Optatus, Augustine, etc. held,
by the judgment of the Pope or Councils, or by citing the words of the Authors
themselves? And do Crab, Binnius, Surius, Caranza, etc. prove what one Council
said by the authority of another, or by the Records themselves, yet visible to
all?


P. Those Records themselves, even the visible Writings of the Fathers and
Councils are for Transubstantiation.


R. Till you have persuaded me out of my senses, I will not believe you. I pray
you tell me if you can of any Author or Council that ever used the name
[Transubstantiation] before Stephanus Aeduensis after the year 1100, de Sacram.
Altar. c. 13.


P. Though the name be new, the Doctrine is not.


R. Tell me next, what General Council did ever determine it, before the
Council of Laterane under Innoc. 3. an. 1215.


P. Not expressly: for General Councils need not mention it, till the Albigenses
Heretics gave them occasion by denying it.


R. Was it an Article of faith before? If it were, either the Councils are not
the measure of your faith, or it is very mutable.


P. Among all your questionings answer me this question if you can. If that
General Council decreed Transubstantiation, what could move them so to do, if
it were not the faith of the Church before? Were they not all of the same mind
the day before they did it? and so the day before that, and the day before
that, etc. Or do you think that they were against Transubstantiation the night
before, and awaked all of another mind the next morning? What could make all
the Pastors of the Church think that this was the true faith, if they did not
think it was the ancient faith? And what could make them think it the ancient
faith, if it were not so? Did not they know what their Fathers held? And did
not their Fathers know what their Fathers held? The same I say of the Council
of Trent also.


R. Thus men that must not believe the common sense of mankind, can believe the
dreaming conjectures of their brains, and sit in a corner, and thence tell the
world what can and what cannot be done by public assemblies, at many hundred
years and miles distance. Who would not laugh at a Friar, that in his Cell
would tell by moral conjectures, all the thoughts and motions of an Army or
Navy, that never saw them, and contrary to the experience of those that were on
the ground and interessed in their Councils and actions. Observe how many false
suppositions go to make up your cheats.

1. You suppose this a true General Council, which is a pack of factious
Prelates subject to the Pope, and assembled at Rome in his own Palace, under
the awe of his presence and power. And as if the small number after at Trent
had spoke the minds of all the Churches.

2. You suppose all the members of a Council to be of one mind: when as they
determine by the Major Vote. And often times the difference is not above two or
three, and its possible one Voice may turn the scales: And perhaps one, or two,
or ten may be absent one day, and present another, and so the Cry of [ the
Judgment of all the Bishops in the world] may signify no more, but that two
or three of the other side staid a little too long at dinner that day, while
the other party carried it by their absence. And I pray you where has God
promised, that the faith of an hundred and one shall not fail, when the faith
of ninety nine of the same company may fail (supposing the Council to be two
hundred): Or why are the one hundred and one the Bishops of all the world, and
not the ninety nine?

3. Do you think we never read the History of the Council of Trent? and before
them, of the Councils of Ariminum, Ephesians. 2, yea, Calcedon, etc.? And yet must
we suppose, that men come thither all of one mind? when they have such shameful
Contentions? Such cunning contrivances to get the majority of Votes? Such awe
and terror from the power of the Chief? and such carnal dependances and
respects to their several worldly interests? Yea, sometimes fighting it out
unto blood (as Dioscorus and Flavianus case does shamefully evince?)

4. And must we suppose men's minds to be changed in their sleep, when the awe
or the oratory of other men change them? Do we not know the Course of the
Parliaments of England of later times? How much a few men of more than ordinary
parts and interest, can do with the rest? And how often the major Vote has gone
against the sense of the far greater number of the House?

5. And do we not know, that ordinarily he that is sent to the Council from a
Province, is chosen as it pleases the Pope, the King, or the Archbishop, or
some in greatest power; and rarely according to the free will and sense of the
greater part of the Clergy. If five hundred to one of the Clergy of a Kingdom
be of one mind, and the Prince, or chief men, or powerfullest Prelates be of
another, they will send a Bishop thither of their own mind.

6. Do you think we know not that all the Papists are not past the third or
fourth part of the Christian world? Why then should their sense be called the
sense of all the Christian world?

7. Do you think we know not how little reason you have to say, that the
Council at Laterane spoke the sense of all the Church? When the Decrees were
but proposed by Pope Innocent, and recited there without any due Synodical
deliberation, and some liked them, and some disliked them? as you may find in
Math. Paris in K. John, Nauclerus Gener. 41. ad an. 1215. Godefridus ad an.
1215. Platina in Vita Innoc. 3. And this one of your late false Scriblers in a
Book for Toleration also says; Though the Disputers against Dr. Gunning and
Dr. Pierson copiously and confidently justify that Council: and indeed with
you it passes for an Approved one.

8. And were not your arguing as strong for the Council of Ephesians. 2. and that
at Arim. and Sirmium, and diverse at Constantinople disallowed, and those at
Constance and Basil, (where were many times the number of the Council at
Trent)? Did these Councils all go to bed of one mind, and rise of another? Or
did they not know what their Fathers faith was? Why then do you reprobate them,
and deny that which they decreed as of faith? Is it not a shame, to talk of [
the Bishops of all the world] and [ Tradition from their Fathers] when your
meaning is but that All these may err, and do often err, unless one man, the Pope
approve them? But where sense is renounced, we must not expect modesty.


P. But the ancient Councils and Fathers are against you, as is to be seen.


R. It is utterly false: I will not abuse the Reader so as to carry him into a
Wood, and lose him among a multitude of old Books, when he has more
satisfactory evidence enough at hand.

But, I. As to all your Citations from true antiquity (for your forged Authors
and corrupted Testimonies we regard not) they are answered by this one true
observation, that when old Writers sometimes say, that after consecration it is
[ No more bread and wine, but the body and blood of Christ], their whole
Context plainly shows, that they mean that it is no more MERE or Common Bread
and Wine; and usually they so speak. Because forma denominat, and it is the
ultimate form that denominateth, all antecedent forms being but the dispositio
materiae. As if the question be, Whether a Shilling be Silver or Money? Before
the Coining, it was but Silver; but after, it is no more Common Silver, but
Money: Silver is but the matter, and not the denominating form. Is your Garment
to be called Cloth, or a Cloak? Before the making it was but Cloth, but now it
is not mere Cloth, but a Cloak. The same I may say of the Kings Crown and
Scepter, or of any Relative, Representative or Personating form that is added
to any matter or man. This is the plain meaning of the Ancients.

II. And as to what they say against you, I will now only give you a few brief
instances.

1. Justin Martyr. in Dial. cum Tryph. says, [ The offering of Flower
delivered to be offered for them that were cleansed of the Leprosy, was a Type
of the BREAD of the Eucharist which our Lord Jesus Christ commanded us to make
in remembrance of his passion, etc.]

And more plainly Apolog. 2. (indeed the first) [ When the President has given
thanks, and all the people acclaimed, those that with us are called Deacons,
distribute to every one present BREAD and WINE and Water, and bring them to
those that are absent.]

2. Irenaeus says lib. 4. c. 34. [ For as the Bread which is of the Earth
receiving the divine invocation, is not now Common Bread, but the Eucharist,
consisting of two things, the Terrene and the Celestial, etc.]

See more out of him in Albertinus, at large.

3. Tertullian cont. Marcion l. 3. c. 19. [ Calling Bread his Body, that hence
you may understand that he gave to Bread the Figure of his body.]

And before l. 1. [ He reprobated not -- Bread, by which he Represents his
very Body.]

And lib. 4. cap. 40. [ The Bread which he took and distributed to his
Disciples he made his body, saying, This is my Body; that is, The figure of my
body. -- And what he would have Bread then signify, he sufficiently declared,
calling Bread his Body.]

And it is a notable passage of Tertullians against the Academicks that
questioned sense, lib. de anim. c. 17. [ What do thou, O procacious
Academick? Thou overthrowest the whole state of life: Thou disturbest the whole
order of nature; Thou blindest the providence of God himself; as if he had made
men's lying and deceitful senses to be the Lords, in understanding, honoring,
dispensing and enjoying all his works* Is not the whole Condition (of man)
subadministred by these.] And after [ We may not call those senses into
question, lest Christ himself must deliberate of their certainty (or must
distrust them). Lest it may be said, that he falsely saw Satan cast down from
Heaven, or falsely heard the voice of his Father testifying of him; or was
deceived when he touched Peter's Wives Mother -- or perceived not a true taste
of the Wine which he Consecrated in the memorial of his blood.] Many such
places are in Tertullian.

4. Origin is large and plain to the same purpose in Matthew. 25. calling it [
Bread and a Typical and Symbolical Body, which profits none but the worthy
receivers, and that according to the proportion of their faith, and which no
wicked man does eat, etc.] Many more such places Albertinus vindicateth.

5. Cyprians Epistle to Magnus is too large this way to be recited. As [ Even
the Sacrifices of the Lord declare the Christian Unanimity, connexed by firm
and inseparable love: For when the Lord calls Bread his body (or his body
bread) made up of many united grains, etc. And when he calls the Wine his
Blood, etc.] So Epist. ad Caecil.

6. Eusebius Caesar. demonstr. Evang. l. 1. c. 10. [ Celebrating daily the
memorial of the body and blood of Christ] -- [Seeing then we receive the
memorial of this Sacrifice to be perfected on the Table, by the symbols of his
body and most precious blood -- ] And l. 8. [ He delivered to us to use, Bread
as the symbol of his own body.]

7. Athanasius's words are recited by Albertinus l. 2. p. 400, 401, etc.

8. Basil. de Spir. Sanct. says, [ Which of the Saints has left us in Writing
the words of invocation, when the Bread of the Eucharist, and the Cup of
blessing are showed?]

9. Ephrem (in Biblioth. Photii p. 415. Edit. August.) says, [ The body of
Christ, which believers receive, loses not his sensible substance, and is not
separated from the intelligible grace.]

And ad eos qui filii Dei, etc. [ Take notice diligently how taking Bread in
his hands, he blessed it, and brake it, for a figure of his immaculate body,
and he blessed the Cup and gave it to his Disciples as a figure of his precious
blood.]

10. Cyrillus (vel. Johan.) Hierosol. Catech. Mystag. calls the bread indeed
Christ's body, but fully expounds himself de Chrysmate, Cat. 3. page 235. [ For
as the Bread of the Eucharist, after the invocation of the Holy Ghost, is no
more Common Bread, but is the Body of Christ: So also this Holy Ointment is no
more mere Ointment, nor (if any one had rather so speak) common, now it is
consecrated; but it is a Gift (or Grace) which causes the presence of Christ
and the Holy Ghost; that is, of his Divinity.] As the Ointment is Grace, or the
Holy Ghost, just so the Bread is the body of Christ, as he says after Cat. 4.
It is not only what we see (Bread and Wine) but more.

11. Hierom cont. Jovinian. l. 2. The Lord as a type (or figure) of his blood,
offered not water but wine.

12. Ambrose de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4. [ This therefore we assert, How that which
is Bread, can yet be the body of Christ.] -- And [ If Christ's speech had so
much force, that it made that begin to be which was not, how much more is it
operative, that the things that were, both Be, and be changed into something
else.] And [ As thou have drunk the similitude of death, so thou drinkest the
similitude of precious blood.]

13. Theodoret in Dialog. Immutab. deals with an Eutychian Heretic, who
defended his Error by pleading that the bread in the Eucharist was changed into
the body of Christ: To whom says Theodoret, [The Lord who has called that
meat and bread which is naturally his Body, and who again called himself a
Vine, did honor the visible signs with the appellation of his body and blood;
not having changed their Nature, but added Grace to Nature.]

And in Dialog. 2. In confus. he says, [ The divine Mysteries are signs of the
true body.] And again, answering the Eutychians pretense of a change he says,
[ By the net which thou have made, art thou taken. For even after the
Consecration, the Mystical signs change not their nature: For they remain in
all their first SVBSTANCE, figure and form, and are Visible, and to be Handled
as before. But they are understood to be the things which they were made, and
are believed and venerated as made that which they are believed to be.] Would
you have plainer words?

14. Gelasius cont. Nest. and Eutych. says, [ Verily the Sacraments of the
body and blood of Christ which we take, is a Divine thing, for which and by
which we are made partakers of the divine nature. And yet it cease not to be
the Substance and Nature of Bread and Wine. And certainly the Image and
similitude of the body and blood of Christ are celebrated in the action of the
Mysteries.] What can be plainer?

15. Cyril. Alexandr. in John 4. cap. 14. says, [ He gave to his believing
disciples fragments of Bread, saying, Take, Eat, This is my body.]

16. Facundus lib. 9. cap. 5. page 404. (as cited by P. Molin. de Novitate
Papismi) [We call that the body and blood of Christ which is the Sacrament of
his body, in the consecrated Bread and Cup. Not that the Bread is properly his
body, and the Cup his blood; but because they contain the Mystery of his body
and blood.]

But I am so weary of these needless Transcriptions, that I will trouble my
self and the Reader with no more. Albertinus will give him enough more who
desires them: And no doubt but with a wet finger they can blot out all these,
and teach us to deny the sense of words, as well as our senses.


D. But you said also, that the Present Church and its Tradition is against
Transubstantiation, as well as the Ancient: How prove you that?


R. Just as I prove that the Protestants are against it.

By the present Church, I mean the far greater part of all the Christians in
the world. The Greeks with the Muscovites, the Armenians, the Syrians, the
Copties, the Abassines, and the Protestants, and all the rest who make up about
twice or thrice as many as the Papists.

That they hold that there is true Bread and Wine after Consecration, all
impartial Historians testify, both Papists and Protestants, and their own
several Countrymen; and also Travelers who have been among them. And their
Liturgies, even those that are in the Bibliotheca Patrum put out by themselves,
do testify for those Countries where they are used (Though as Bishop Usher
has detected) by one words addition they have shamelesly endeavored to
corrupt the Ethiopick Liturgy about the Real presence.) But I need no more
proof of that which no faithful History does deny.

And then I need not prove, that Transubstantiation is against the most General
or Common Tradition, For all these Christians, the Greeks, Armenians,
Abassines, etc. profess to follow the Religion which they have received from
their Ancestors, as well as the Papists do: And if the Papists be to be
believed in saying that this is the Religion which they received from their
forefathers, Why are not the other to be believed in the same case? And if the
Popish Tradition seem regardable to them, Why should not the Tradition of twice
or thrice as many Christians be more regardable? And if in Councils, the Major
Vote must carry it; Why not in the Judgment and Tradition of the Real body of
Christ's Church? As for their trick of excepting against them as Schismatics
and Heretics, to invalidate their Votes and Judgment, we despise it, as
knowing that so any Usurper that would make himself the sole Judge, may say by
all the rest of the world: But as they judge of others, they are justly judged
by others themselves.


CHAP. X. The second part of the Controversy, Whether it be Christ's very Flesh
and Blood into which the Bread and Wine are Transubstantiated.
R. OUr first Question was, Whether there be any Bread and Wine left after
Consecration; Our second is, Whether Christ's Real Flesh and Blood be there, as
that into which the Bread and Wine are changed?


And herein 1. I do freely grant, that the change of Christ's Body by
Glorification is so great, as that it may be called, though not a Spirit, yet a
spiritual body, as Paul, 1 Cor. 15. says Ours when Glorified shall be; that
is, A body very like in purity, simplicity, and activity to a Spirit: And the
general difference between a spirit and body was not held by many of the Greek
Fathers as it is by us: And if the second Council of Nice was Infallible, no
Angel or other Creature is Incorporeal: Or as Damasus says, [They are
Corporeal in respect to God, but Incorporeal in respect to gross bodies.] The
perfect knowledge of the difference between Corpus and Spiritus, except by the
formal Virtues, is unknown to mortal men.

2. I grant therefore, that our senses are no Competent Judges, Whether Christ's
true body be in the Sacrament? no more than Whether an Angel be in this room?
There are bodies which are Invisible.

3. I grant that it is unknown to us, how far Christ's Glorified body may
extend? Whether the same may be both in Heaven and on earth? I am not able nor
willing to confute them that say, Light is a Body; nor them that say, It is a
spirit: nor them that say, It is quid medium as a nexus of both: I mean Ether
or Ignis, visible in its Light. And it is an incomprehensible wonder, if Lumen
be a real radiant or Emanant part of the Sun, that it should indivisibly fill
all the space thence to this earth, and how much further little do we know. So
for the extensions of Christ's body, let those that understand it dispute for me.

4. And I will grant that it is very probable that as in Heaven we shall have
both a Soul and Body, so the Body is not like to have so near an Intuition and
fruition of God as the soul. And whether the Glorified Body of Christ will not
be there a medium of Gods Communication of Glory to our bodies, yea and his
glorified soul to our souls, as the Sun is now to our eyes, I do not well
understand: only I know that it is his prayer and will, that we be with him
where he is to behold his Glory; and that God and the Lamb will be the Light of
the Heavenly Jerusalem.

5. And I am fully satisfied that it is not the signs only; but the Real Body
and Blood of Christ, which are given us in the Sacraments (both Baptism and the
Eucharist): But how given us? Relatively, de jure; as a man is Given to a Woman
in Marriage; or as a house and land are delivered to me, to be mine for my use;
though I touch them not. Thus 1. A right to Christ is given us: 2. And the
fruits or benefits of his Crucified body and shed blood, are actually given us,
that is, Pardon and the Spirit, merited for us thereby.

6. And among the Benefits given us, besides the Relative, there are some such
as we call Real or Physical terminatively, and hyperphysical originally ut a
Causa, which are the spirit of Holiness, or the Quickening, Illuminating and
Sanctifying influence of the spirit of Christ upon our souls. And the Sacrament
is appointed as a special means of communicating this.

7. I have met with some of late who say, that Indeed Christ's Body and Blood in
his humbled state, were not really eaten and drunk by the disciples, at his
last supper: For the flesh profits not to such a use: But that his Glorified
Body is spiritual, and is extensively communicated, and invisibly present under
the form of Bread in the Sacrament; and that as we have a Body, a sensitive
life, and an Intellectual soul, so Christ is the life of all these
respectively; viz. His Body is made the spiritual nourishment of our Bodies;
his sensitive soul (for which the word Blood is put, because it is in the blood
in animals) is the food or life of our sensitive souls; and his Intellectual
soul, of ours: And to these uses they assert the Real presence and oral
participation of Christ's Glorified body.

To all which I say, 1. Whether or how far an invisible spiritual Body is
present, sense is no judge; nor can we know any further than Gods word tells
us. 2. That Christ in his Glorified soul and Body is our Intercessour with God,
through whom we have all things, we must not doubt. 3. That Christ in his
Humane and Divine Nature now in Heaven, is that Teacher who has left us a
certain word, and that King who has left us a perfect Law of Life, whom we
must obey, and a promise which we must trust, we must not question. 4. That the
Holy Ghost who is our spiritual Life, is given us by, from and for Christ our
Mediator, we must take for certain truth.

But, though in all these respects, Faith apprehends and lives upon Christ,
yet that moreover his Glorified Body in substance, either feeds or by contact
purifieth our Bodies, and his sensitive soul, our sensitive souls, and his
Intellectual soul, our Intellectual souls, as if in themselves, and not in
their effects only they were thus communicated to us, I understand not, either
by any just conception of the thing it self, or any proof of it from the word
of God. But if any can help me to see it, I shall not refuse instruction.

Nor can I see why the soul of Christ should be said to be given in the Wine
only, and not in the Bread; Nor why by this kind of Communication he may not as
truly be said to be given us in other Ordinances as in the Eucharist: Nor know
I what they mean by the Forms of bread and wine, under which they say that
Christ's Body and blood is given: But I am past doubt that Bread and Wine are
still really in substance there.

And whereas the same men say that It is Christ's humbled flesh and blood as
sacrificed on the Cross that is Commemorated, but his Glorified Body and soul
only which are Communicated and Received, I must say, 1. That Christ plainly
tells us of his Giving us his Sacrificed Body or flesh it self to eat, as he is
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World: And he says, Take,
Eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, etc. so that the same body is
Commemorated and Communicated: But how Communicated? In the effects of his
sacrifice: His Body was given a sacrifice to God for us, and the fruits of that
sacrifice given to us. And thus he was given a sacrifice for the life of the
world; And thus we do receive him: By our bodily taking and eating the Bread,
we profess that our souls take him to be our Savior and Cause of our Life,
both as Purchasing and Meriting it on Earth, and Interceding and Communicating
it in and from Heaven.

2. And this Doctrine will not serve the Papists turn, who tell us that Bread
and Wine are ceased, and that Christ's very flesh and blood is there, into which
all the substance of the bread and wine are turned; and that his natural Body
before his death, was in the same sort given under the forms of Bread and Wine
as now; and will not be beholden to this subterfuge.

And indeed it is strange if the Sacrament at the first Institution should be
One thing, and ever after another thing; and that the Bread should ever since
be turned into Christ's body, upon the Priests Consecration, and not be turned
into it, (because not yet glorified) upon his own words [ This is my Body.]
Therefore we must let this go, and speak of what they own and hold indeed. And
as for any other Bodily presence, influence or communication of Christ's Body or
Soul, besides that which they call Transubstantiation, we have nothing to do
with it in this Controversy.

That the substance of the Bread and Wine is not turned into the substance of
the flesh and blood of Christ, is proved.

I. Because the Glorified Body of Christ is not formally and properly Flesh and
Blood: Though it be the some Body which was Flesh and Blood. The Apostle Paul
says, 1 Cor. 15.50, 51. [ Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, nor does corruption inherit incorruption;
Behold, I show you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed.] It is not only Dr. Hammond, but other of the best expositors who show
that by Flesh and blood and corruption here is not meant sin, but flesh and
blood formally considered; which is ever corruptible: And the Papists commonly
confess this. If therefore it be flesh and blood which the bread and wine are
turned into, then either Christ has two bodies, or two parts of one, which are
utterly heterogeneal, one flesh and blood, and the other not; one corruptible
and the other incorruptible.

II. And this feigneth Christ to be often Incarnate, even thousands and
millions of times; And to lay down that Incarnate body again as often as it
corrupts, and to take up a new one as often as the Priest please; and yet all
but one. Whereas the Church and Scripture have ever told us but of one
Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

III. And it is expressly contrary to his promise Joh. 6.51. I am the living
bread which came down from heaven: If any man eat of this bread, he shall live
for ever: And the bread which I give is my flesh which I will give for the life
of the world -- v. 34. Who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood has
eternal life -- He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me
and I in him. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so
he that Eats me, even he shall live by me -- He that eats of this bread
shall live for ever --.] These are the express promises of Christ. But the
Papists say that wicked men and unbelievers eat the flesh of Christ, who shall
not live for ever, nor have eternal life, nor dwell in Christ, but are more
miserable by their hypocrisy.

I pass by abundance of other arguments, because commonly used, and these are
as many as my ends require; and I would make the Reader no more work than needs.

CHAP. XI. The Conclusion of the first Book: The Causes of Popery.
R. I Have now made plain to you, 1. What the Protestants Religion is, (or at
least my own, and all that I persuade you or any other to embrace.) 2. And also
that it is granted to be all true by the generality of the Papists (as is
explained and proved.) 3. And I have told you, by an enumeration of some
particulars, why I am not a Papist, and why I do dissuade you from it. 4. And I
have made good my first charge, in the point of Transubstantiation, if any
thing in the world can be proved. The second I shall leave till another time,
viz. To show you how far their Religion (as Popish) is from Infallible
Certainty; and what horrid confusion is among them; and how they have done much
to promote Infidelity in the world, by building Religion upon some notorious
untruths, and upon a multitude of utter uncertainties. Though I doubt not but
among them there are many true Christians, who practically resolve their faith
into the surer evidences of Divine Revelation, yet I shall clearly prove to
you, that all those whose practical faith is no surer or better, than the
notional opinions of their Divines will allow, have no certain faith or
Religion at all: And what impudency is it to make men believe, that there is no
certainty of Religion to be had, but in their way, who build their Religion
upon such a multitude of uncertainties and certain falsehoods, as will amaze you
when I come to open them to you, viz. that ever so many Learned men, and
persons of all ranks, can be induced so to jest in the matters of their
salvation.

And if I be not by death or other greater work prevented, I hope in order to
make good all the rest of the Charges before mentioned, which are our Reasons
against the Popish way of Religion. In the mean time tell me what you think of
that which is already said.


D. I know not how to confute what you have said: And yet when I hear them on
the other side, me thinks their tale seems fair, and I cannot answer them
neither: so that between you both, we that are unlearned are in a sad case, who
must thus be tossed up and down by the disputations of disagreeing Priests, so
that we know not what a man may say is certain.


R. To this I have several things to say; 1. Ordination does not make men wise,
holy, humble and self-denying; but sets such men apart for the sacred office,
who seek it, and have tolerable gifts of utterance: And it is too ordinary for
worldly minded men, to make a worldly trade of the Priesthood, merely for ease,
and wealth, and honor. In which case, do you not think that the Papists who
have multitudes of rich benefices, prelacies, preferments, and Church Power,
and worldly honor, are liker to be drawn by worldly interest, than such as I
that am exceeding glad and thankful, if I might but preach for nothing?

2. Do you lay your faith and salvation upon plausible discourses? and will you
be of that man's faith, whom you cannot confute? Then you must be of every man's
faith: or indeed of no man's. There are none of all these sects, so hardly
confuted, as a Porphyry, a Julian or such like Infidels who dispute against
Christ, and the truth of the Scriptures? or such Sadducees as dispute against
the Immortality of the soul. Alas, the tattle of Papists, Pelagians,
Antinomians, Separatists, Quakers, and all such, supposing the truth of the
souls Immortality and the Scriptures, is easily resisted and confuted, in
comparison of their assaults who deny these our foundations. And will you turn
Sadducee* Atheist or Infidel because you cannot confute their Sophistry? I tell
you, if you knew how much harder it is, to deal with one of these than with a
Papist or any other Sectary, you would shake the head, to hear one man dispute
for an universal Monarch, and another dispute against a form of prayer, and
another whether it be lawful to Communicate with dissenters, etc. while so few
of them all can defend their foundations, even the souls Immortality and the
Scriptures, nor confute a subtle Infidel or Sadducee.

3. What if we all agreed to say that there is no Bread in the Sacrament after
Consecration? Were it ever the truer for that? Will you be deceived as often as
men can but agree to deceive you? There is a far greater party Agreed against
Jesus Christ (even five parts of the World) than that which is agreed for him:
Will you therefore be against Christ too? There are more Agreed for Mahomet (a
gross upstart deceiver) than are agreed for Christ: And does that make it
certain that they are in the right?

4. Will you deny all your senses, and the senses of all the World, as often as
you cannot answer him that denies them? Upon these terms, what end will there
be of any Controversy, or what evidence shall ever satisfy man? Have Papists
any surer and more satisfying evidence for you, than sense?

I pray you tell me; Did you ever meet with any of them that doubt of another
life, or of the Immortality of the soul?


D. Yes, many a one: I would we were all more certain than we are.


R. And what is it that such men would have to put them out of doubt?


D. They say that our talk of Prophets and supernatural revelation are all
uncertainties; and if they could see, they would believe. Could they see such
Miracles as they read of: Had they seen Lazarus raised, or Christ risen from
the dead, etc. Had they seen Angels or Devils or Spirits appearing: Had they
seen Heaven or Hell, they would believe.


R. And are not you more obstinate than they, if you will not believe that
there is any Bread and Wine, when you see, feel, smell, and taste it, and all
men that have senses are of the same mind? What is left to satisfy you, if you
give so little credit to the common sense of all the world?


D. But I often think that the faith of all the Church is much surer than my
sense, or my private faith: At least it is safest to venture in the common
road, and to speed as the Church speedeth, which Christ died for, and is his
Spouse.


R. 1. But do you think that the opinion of the Papal faction who are not the
third part of the Universal Church, that is, the Christian world, is the faith
of all the Church? Why call you Opinion faith? and a sect and faction, All the
Church?

2. Indeed if all the Church did set their senses against mine, I would rather
believe them than my senses: For I should think, that I were in that point
distracted, or my senses by some disease perverted, which I did not perceive: I
mean if it were in a case where they had the affirmative: As if all England
should witness that they saw it Light at Midnight, I would think my eyes had
some impediment which I knew not of, if I saw none. But this is not your case;
The Papists themselves do not set all their senses against yours: much less the
senses of all mankind: They do not say, that [ We and all men, except the
Protestants, do see, and feel, and taste that There is no Bread and Wine.] But
contrarily, You have the senses of all the world, and the says of two or three
parts of the Christian world, against the Opinion of one Sect, which
Schismatically call themselves All the Church.


D. But suppose that they err in this one point, they may for all that be in
the right in all the rest: Who is it that has no error? I must not for this
one forsake them.


R. 1. I will stand to their own judgments in this, Whether all their
foundation and faith be not uncertain, if any one Article of their faith prove
false? They are all (that ever I knew) agreed of the affirmative: And will give
you no thanks for such a defense.

2. And if we come to that work, I shall prove all the rest of their opinions
before mentioned to be also false.


D. What then if I find but one point false in the Protestants Religion? Must I
therefore forsake it all as false?


R. 1. Still remember to distinguish between our Objective and our Subjective
faith: or if you understand not those words, between Gods Revelation and Man's
Belief of it: or the Divine Rule and Matter of our faith, and our faith it
self. And about our own Belief you must distinguish between a man's Profession
of Belief, and the Reality of his belief.

All true Protestants profess to take Gods word alone, or his Revelation in
Nature and Scripture, for the whole Matter of their Divine Belief and Religion*
But who it is that sincerely believes little do I know: nor how much of this
word any singular person understands, and believes, I can give you no
account of. If personal faith were that which we dispute of, I would be
accountable for no man's but mine own. In this sense, There are as many Faiths
and Religions as men: For every man has his Own Faith and Religion: And if you
know that a man erreth in one point, it follows not that he erreth in
another. They that believed that the Resurrection was past, believed a
falsehood: and yet truly believed that Christ was the Messiah: They erred that
thought it lawful to eat things offered to Idols; and yet they erred not in
believing in Christ. No two men in the world, its like, have the same degree of
personal faith and knowledge; as I often said before. But if our professed object
of faith, that is, Gods word, were false in one thing, we could not be sure
that it were true in any thing.

Yet here I told you before, 1. That a man may be much surer that one part of
Scripture is Gods word, than another; because some Copies are doubtful in the
diverse Readings of some particular words or sentences; and which of them that
so differ is Gods word, we often know not: But so much as we are sure is the word
of God, we are sure is true: So if the Authority of some few books was once
doubted of, (as 2 Pet. Jam. Jud. Heb. etc.) and yet be by any, it follows not
that they doubt of the truth of any, which they know to be the word of God. 2.
Or if any do hold that the Penmen might be left to their natural fallibility in
some by historical circumstances or words, it would not follow, that one
Article of the Gospel or Christian faith is doubtful, which is plainly as the
Kernel of it, delivered in all the Scripture, and also by infallible Universal
Tradition, by it self, in the Sacrament, Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalogue.

And our case also much differs from the Papists in this: For We profess that
our objective faith, (Gods word) is Infallible, and we are Infallible so far as
we believe it: But we confess that we are liable to misunderstand some parts of
it; and so far are fallible, as being imperfect: But the Papists say, that
their Pope and Councils and Universal- Practicers are personally Infallible, so
as not to be liable to any misunderstanding of any Article of faith (say some)
or Article of Catholic faith (say others): And so they make their own Act of
Believing to be Commensurate and equally certain with Gods word of faith; and
therefore they allow you to question them in all, if they err in one, as
pretending to a gift of never erring in any.


D. But is it not a great reason to incline us to them rather than to you, when
They only pretend to Infallibility, and You confess that you are all fallible
in your Belief?


R. This is to be the subject of our next Conference, and therefore not now to
be anticipated; only I shall tell you, that It is a mere noise of ambiguous
words to deceive the heedless that cannot search out the meaning of them. 1. We
not only Pretend, but Profess and prove that our Christian Religion is
altogether Infallible. For which end I have written diverse Treatises my self.
2. And we profess that all the mystical Church of Christ (that is all sincere
Christians) do truly and Infallibly believe all that is Essential to
Christianity, and as much of the Integrals as they can know. 3. And we profess
that the Catholic Church-Visible (that is, All professors of Christianity in
the world) do profess all these Essentials of Christianity, and are Infallible
in this profession.

But we hold withal, that there is no particular Church, or Bishop, no Synod
or Council, that is so Infallible, but that, 1. They that hold to the
Essentials may misunderstand and err about some Integrals: 2. And those persons
have no Certainty that they shall not err by Heresy or Apostasy from the
Essentials themselves: So that the Church is Infallible, because it is
essentiated by believing an Infallible Word; which who ever believes not,
cease to be of the Church: not Gods Word infallible, because the Church or
any number of men believe it, or say Its true: For Truth is before Knowledge
and Faith: As Aristotle was a Philosopher, because he understood and taught the
doctrine of real Philosophy; and not that doctrine called Physics or
Philosophy, because that Aristotle knew or taught it.

But, alas, What work shall I show you when I come to open their bewildring
uncertainties?


D. But to deal freely with you, methinks their way of measuring out the
Necessaries in Faith and Religion according to men's various parts and
opportunities, seems to me more satisfactory than yours, who fix upon certain
points (as the Baptismal Covenant) as Essentials. For there is great diversity
of men's Capacities.


R. This comes from confounding several Questions as if they were all one.

1. It is one Question, What is the Christian Religion?

2. It is another Question, Whether the Christian Religion be absolutely
necessary to the salvation of all those to whom it was never competently
revealed?

3. And it is another Question, Whether more than the Essentials of Christian
Religion be not necessary to the salvation of many who have opportunity to know
more? Alas, what work does Confusion make in the world!

To the first, It is evident that as Mahometanism is a thing which may be
defined, so much more may Christianity: Who that writes of the several
Religions of the world, Ethnic, Jewish, Mohammedan, and Christian, do not take
them to be distinguishable and discernable? Especially when Christ has summed
up Christianity into a Covenant, and given it us in express words, and affixed
a flat promise of salvation to the true Covenanters, and the Church has ever
called our Baptism, our Christening? Is Christianity Nothing? If Something, Why
may it not be defined, and differenced from all false Religions? And if so, It
has its Essential Constitutive parts. All this is plain to Children that will
see.

2. And then as to the second question, it concerns not our Controversy at
all. It is but Whether any Infidels may be saved? Or any that are no
Christians? And if it could be proved, that any are saved that are no
Christians, do you thereby prove that they are Christians, or members of the
Christian Church? or that Christianity is not a Religion which may be defined?

3. And as to the third question, We are on all sides agreed in it, That they
that have more than the naked Essentials of Christianity revealed to them
aptly, are bound to believe more: Yea, it is hardly conceiveable that any one
should know and believe the Essentials only, and no more: It is not Essential
to the Christian Covenant or Christianity to know that the Name of Christ's
Mother was Mary; or that Pontius Pilate was the man that condemned him; And if
an Ignorant man thought that his continuance in the Grave was four days, I do
not think that this would damn his soul to Hell: (Much less the not believing
that Mary dyed a Virgin.) And yet it is not like that any man should come to
the Essentials of Christianity by any such way, as should acquaint him with no
one of these, or any point besides the said Essentials.

And yet it is certain for all this, that he that truly receives the
Essentials, and is true to the Baptismal Covenant, shall be saved, whatsoever
else he want: But it is as true, that he that Receives the Essentials, will
(from the same principles and obligations) receive more, when it is aptly
notified to him: And he that truly Covenanteth, will honestly keep the Covenant
he makes; which binds him still to learn of Christ. But if any man be saved
without the Essentials, he must be saved without Christianity.


D. But you know that they distinguish of faith Explicit and Implicit: He may
be Implicitly a Christian that believes not the Essentials Explicitly; as
long as he believes that which would infer them; if they were made known to
him to be indeed the Word of God.


R. Thus do Words abuse and cheat the ignorant: Could you but read their own
Dr. Holden before cited in his Analys. fid. you would find this distinction
justly rendered by him shameful and ridiculous, according to their common sense
and use of it; and the truer sense delivered and vindicated. An Implicit faith
or Knowledge we confess to be true, as it is opposed to 1. A distinct, or 2. To
a well-expressed faith or Knowledge. For it is Implicit, 1. As to the Object,
when a man knows the whole matter, but not by distinct parts: As a man may
know a Cup of water, and not know how many drops or drams it is; or he may know
a sentence, and not know how many letters are in it. 2. Or it is Implicit as
to the Act, when it is yet but a crude imperfect conception, Apply this to Mr.
Johnsons Rejoinder on this Point, and you will see his Vanity.
and the thing is really known, but not the Logical notions, or Grammatical
names, either the verba oris or mentis by which it should be expressed: So that
the man cannot notify his knowledge to another. These two are called
Implicit; the first signifies Confused and General Knowledge, and the other
Imperfect and undigested.

But to call that Implicit faith or knowledge, which extends only to some
Principles, and not to the Conclusions themselves, is 1. To Call No-knowledge
and faith, by the name of knowledge and faith. 2. And by their application to
confound the World and the Church, and to make all the Infidels and Heathens to
be Christians, and every Fool a Philosopher.

For, 1. All men of Reason know these two Principles (who own a God), 1. That
God is not a liar, but all his Word is True. 2. That all the Truths in the
world are God's, some way or other revealed by him. Therefore, if they knew
that the Gospel were Gods word, they would believe it: or if they knew it to be
one of those Truths that are in the world, they would take it to be of God. And
thus all Infidels, and Turks, and Pagans may (by such abuse) be called
Implicit Christians.

But why then do the Papists burn the Protestants when if their Religion were
true, we are all Implicitly Papists. For we believe, 1. That all Divine
Revelations are True; 2. And that all those are Infallible whom God has
promised to make Infallible; 3. And that all those must be believed and obeyed
whom God has commanded us to believe and obey; 4. And that we must not forsake
that Church which God has commanded us to adhere to; 5. And that all our
Lawful Pastors must be reverenced and submitted to; 6. And all their lawful
Precepts obeyed. 7. And all Gods Sacraments holily used; 8. And all Traditions
from the Apostles to the Churches received; with many more such: Only we know
not that the Pope is our Pastor, or that his Councils are the Church, or have a
promise of Infallibility; and so of the rest. And yet we must burn for it, if
they can procure it. And yet he is a true believer Implicitly who believes
not the Essentials of Christianity.

But the Design which is predominant here is too visible, when this Implicit
faith comes to be described: For it is not a Belief in God, or in Christ only
that will serve the turn, but it must be a belief in the Church, and their
Church, and their Pope too, or else it will not do. The Implicit faith is the
explicit belief of these three Articles: 1. All Gods Word is true: 2. All that
is Gods Word, which the Church tells us is Gods Word. 3. The Pope and his
Council and Subjects are this Church. And yet this man must be supposed if he
know no more, per impossible, not to know that there is a Christ, or who he is
as to his Person or Office, or what he has done, or will do for us: And yet
that he has a Vicar and a Church. Or else they may know Christ and
Christianity before they know that there is any Pope or Church, and then the
Pope has lost the Game.


D. But if Popery be so senseless a thing as you make it, how come so great a
number of persons of all ranks and qualities, Kings, Nobles, Learned men, and
Religiously-disposed persons to embrace it? Have not they souls to save or lose
as well as you? and do they not lay all their hopes of Heaven upon it? and can
such persons, and so many, be so mad and senseless?


R. Do we need thus to ramble round about, as if we would doubt of the thing
till we know the Causes of it? when we see and they all confess that they deny
all our senses? Will you not believe that there is a Sun, till you know what it
is made of? Or whether the Sea ebb and flow, till you know the Causes of it? I
pray you tell me,

Q. 1. Do you think that the Mahometan's is not a very foolish Religion, and
their foundation (the pretended Mission of their Prophet) without any show of
truth; and his Alcoran (if ever you read it) a heap of Nonsense and Confusion?


D. Yes: I think it deserves no better thoughts.


R. And do you not know that (though it arose not till about six hundred years
after Christ) much more of the world is Mohammedan than Christian? And are there
not far Greater Emperors and Princes Mahometans than any that are Christians?
And have not all these souls to save or lose? And do they not all venture their
souls upon that Religion? Why then is not your argument here as good for
Mahometanism as for Popery?


D. Though the Emperors of Constantinople, the Great Mogul, the Persian,
Tartarian Mahometans, etc. be all Great as to their vast Dominions, yet they
are barbarous and unlearned in comparison of the Papists.


R. 1. It is not because they have not as much wit as we: but because they
think that our laborious wordy kind of learning, is an abuse of wit, and
against true Policy, ludicrously or contentiously diverting men's minds and time
from those employments which they think more manly and profitable to the
Commonwealth; Though no doubt but they do err more unmanly on that extreme. But
I further ask you,

Q. 2. Do you not think that the Common Religion of the Heathens is very
unworthy for any wise man to venture his soul upon? If you have but read how it
is described by the Ancient Christians, Justin, Athenagoras, Origin, Arnobius,
Minutius Foelix, Tertullian, Lactantius, Eusebius, Augustine, etc. you will say
that they thought it a ridiculous unmanly Religion.


D. I think no better of it than they did.


R. And 1. Do you not know that almost all the world was then Heathen and
Idolaters? Alas, what was Judaea (less than England) to all the world? Was not
the Roman Empire, and Alexanders before that, far Greater than any Christian
Prince has now? And to this day, are not four sixth parts of the whole world
(at least) Heathens and Idolaters? Brierwoods Calculation is, that if you
divide the world into thirty parts, nineteen are Heathen, six Mahometans, and
five only Christians of all sorts: besides the vast unknown parts of the world,
which are not like to have any Religion of supernatural Revelation.

2. And do you not know, that Athens and Rome-Heathen were no Barbarians, but
of most polite literature, and the Fathers of the Learning now in use; and that
when the Christians arose among them, they accounted them Barbarians? And at
this day, and long before us, the Chinenses have been addicted to Arts and
Literature: And the Brachmanes and Bonzii are no Barbarians. And have not all
these souls to save or lose? And are all these so mad as to cast away their
souls upon a senseless contemptible Religion? If your reason be good, how much
more will it hold for the Heathens, than the Papists? Alas, what a handful are
the Papists in comparison of the present Idolaters! much more in comparison of
the Ancient Heathen world, before Christianity and Mahometanism dispossessed
them of those parts which they now hold!

With what greater show of advantage did the Heathens use the Arguments which
the Papists do now put their trust in, and lay their Cause upon!

1. Do they talk of Antiquity? Why, it was the Novelty of Christianity in
comparison of Heathenism through the world, which was it that hardened them to
contemn and persecute it.

2. Do they talk of Universality and Consent? Alas, how little a part of the
world were the Christians at first, and are the Papists now, in comparison of
the Heathens, then and now?

3. Do they talk of Greatness, Empire, Acts and Learning? How little are they
as to the first, to the Heathen Empires? And for Learning, they received it of
them: And Aristotle still is the Schoolmens Oracle. And yet doubtless all these
advantages are not sufficient to disprove the follies of Heanism, nor the
badness of their Religion? And yet will so much less serve to support the
credit of senseless Popery?


D. But Christians may well expect greater helps from God, than Heathens or
Mahometans: Therefore that so many Great and Learned and Religious Christians
should go such a senseless way to another world, methinks seems strange.


R. And are not Greeks, Armenians, Syrians, Abassines and Protestants, all
Christians as well as they? Their proud schismatical unchristening all but the
subjects of the Pope, is a silly proof that we are no Christians, or that they
are any better than others; unless Malignity, uncharitableness and Schism be
the true Excellency.

1. And are not other Christians More than the Papists? Bishop Bramhall reckons
the Papists to be about the fifth part of Christians: Suppose they be a third
part? They are still the Minor part.

2. And are not the Protestants as Learned as the Papists? Why then will not
your argument hold against them as well as for them? Have not all these
Christians souls to save or lose? And do they not take that for the true
Religion on which they trust their souls?


D. But though all these set together are more than the Church of Rome, yet no
one Sect of them is so great; and what matter is it how many various Sects are?


R. 1. The Greek Church is judged by wise men, te be yet bigger than the Roman,
even in this its broken state: But there is no doubt but it was much bigger
long after the first division, before the Turk did win the Eastern Empire.

2. But, if it were not so, your objection is frivolous. The Question is either
of Different Churches, or of Different opinions and parties in the same Church.
As to the first, There are but two opinions in the Christian world, that I know
of, about the Constitution of the Catholic Church. The one is the opinion of
the Papists only, that The Catholic Church is essentially constituted both of
Christ, and the Pope as his Vicar and universal Monarch, with all his subjects;
as the pars Imperans and pars subdita.

The other is the judgment of all other Christians, (that I know or hear of,)
that The Catholic Church is essentially constituted only of Christ as the
supreme Head, or King, or pars Imperans, and his subjects as the pars subdita;
And that Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. are but Officiales and subditi
primarii vel nobiles, constitutive parts indeed of their particular Churches
(some humane, and some Divine) but no essential parts of the Catholic Church.

This is the Grand difference between the Papists and all other Christians in
the World, What the Catholic Church is? Whether it have any Constitutive
Universal Head or Monarch besides Christ? Now seeing that Greeks, Abassines,
Armenians and all agree with us in this against the Papists, it is evident to
them that are willing to see that we are all of the same Catholic Church,
though not of the same particular Churches, nor all for the same Official
Ministers; Because we are all for the same Constitutive Head, and his subjects
as such, and agree in all the Essential parts, So that our differences among
all these parties or particular Churches or Countries is but the difference of
Opinions and parties in one and the same Church; and not a difference of
Catholic Churches (which can be but one.)

And if that be the question, I undertake to prove that there is no one Sect of
Christians known under Heaven, that has so many different opinions within it
self, (if half so many,) nor have written half so much against one another, as
the Papists have done.

3. But I must not here anticipate my further work: when I come to that, I
shall show you how small and how disagreeing a part of the Christian world the
Papists are. I have elsewhere recited the words of their Melchior Canus who
boasts that the Papacy yet stands, though almost all the world, and besides
Princes, almost all the Bishops and Churches have fought against it. Was it
then the Universal Church? And the words of Reynerius who says, that the
Churches of the Armenians and the others planted by the Apostles (without the
Empire he means) were not under the Pope of Rome. I shall, if I live to do
that work, yet fullier show you, that the Pope was but the chief Patriarch in
one Empire, as the Archbishop of Canterbury is the chief Bishop in England; and
that his General Councils were but General Assemblies of the Empire
(inconsiderable occasional accidentals excepted), even as our Convocations, or
the Scots General Assemblies were, though in a far larger Empire. But all this
I have done already in other writings, beyond all reasonable contradiction.


D. Tell me then, how it comes to pass that so many Princes, Nobles, Learned
men, and Religious can be so marvellously deluded?


R. Alas poor man; You talk as if you knew not your self nor mankind! how bad a
thing corrupt unsanctified nature is! Why do you not also ask, How comes it to
pass, that the far greatest part of the World (even five parts of six) are
Heathens and Mahometanes! and that most of the World are wilful
self-destroyers; many ruining their very bodies, Eating, and Drinking, and
Whoreing, and Idling them into Gowt, Stone, Dropsies and an hundred Maladies:
but far more ruining their souls. Why do you not also ask, How reasonable
Creatures (of all Professions) are so worse than mad, as to sell their souls
and everlasting hopes, for a dream and shadow, or for dirt and dung; even for a
few Cups or Morsels, or merry hours, which they know are like the mirth of
drunkenness, which is quickly gone, and ends in sickness and in shame! For a
great Name, and a large attendance in their way to the grave! For the thoughts
and breath of mortal man! And for that which all men first or last, are forced
to call mere Vanity and Vexation! Were not men mad in sin, had they never heard
a Preacher, the sight of a dead Carcass and a grave would do more to make them
sober and considerate, than is done with most. When most of the World will
obstinately follow the Devil their enemy, by known sin to everlasting misery,
against all the commands, exhortations, promises, threatenings, mercies and
warnings of God himself, and all the persuasions of their truest friends, What
wonder if the same men can be Papists or any thing?

But I will tell you some of the particular Causes.

I. Abroad in other Countries, there are all these Reasons easily discernible.
1. Who knows not how great an advantage Education has, to form men's
judgments to almost any thing, how bad soever? That which children receive, if
it be not disagreeable to their sensible interest, how commonly and tenaciously
do they follow? Whence is it that the whole Empires and Kingdoms of Pagans are
all of one mind; and the Kingdoms of Mahometans of another? One Kingdom almost
all Greek Christians and another Papists, and another Lutherans, and another
Reformists, etc? Has not education a great hand in this?

2. And the custom of the Country, and the company which they converse with,
is of no small power with men's minds. Especially when men live where almost all
are of a mind, they think that concord is a sign of truth, and modesty
forbids them to be wiser than all the Country.

3. And when they know few or none of another mind, how should they know what
they are? And when they hear an hundred lies against them, and never hear them
speak for themselves, they think that the Law of modesty, humanity and
converse, oblige them to believe, that so Many, so Great, and so Learned and
Religious persons will not impudently lie: When as perhaps the lie it self is a
Tradition which the liars received on the same terms in modest credulity from
their teachers or fathers.

4. And specially, the Names of Order, Government, Unity, and Concord, deceive
many millions of souls: For Order and Unity are justly amiable to nature it
self. And the purblind know not an Image from a Man.

5. Especially when civil Wars, or Church discords have distracted the World,
and made men aweary of all that is present, and suspicious of all things, which
seemed to have a hand in their disappointments; this makes men hearken to any
thing which pretends to certain settlement, Order and peace. Even as a man
that by turning round is wheelsick, will lay hold on the next post or fixed
thing, to keep him from falling down.

6. And when their Teachers make them believe, that all Christians besides them
do live like madmen, in Sects and Schisms, distractedly tearing out one
another throats, What wonder if this make men willing of any way which
pretends to peace, and glad to run into any Cottage which will keep them from
such a storm?

7. But the great cause is, 1. The Blindness of men's minds, 2. The wickedness
of all unrenewed hearts, and 3. The power of carnal Interest.

1. Few men are of great natural parts for wit, and fewer improve them, by any
serious study of things spiritual.

2. Almost all men study with the byas of prejudice and partiality, and as men
that would have one side to be right, because it is for their worldly ends.

3. Sin Rules in most souls, and the enmity against God and his Laws
prevails in carnal minds, Romans 8.6, 7, 8. And enmity is an ill student and
seeker of truth; and friendship is an incompetent judge of sin.

4. None but a few self-denying persons can bear to be reproached as Heretics
and Schismatics by all about them.

5. Especially the countenance or discountenance of Great ones, does more with
such than Heaven and Hell.

6. And that is not all, But he that will not be a Papist, in most of their
Countries must be undone, and in many must be rackt, tormented and burnt: And
it is but few that have learnt to go to so high a price for truth, and to be
Religious at such a rate.

8. Therefore it is a thing utterly unknown among them, who is heartily a
Papist, and who not. For when men must take on them to be Papists or be undone,
or burnt, millions will seem to be such that are not. For,

9. Most of the World have no Religion in truth and power, to overcome the
world and flesh: and therefore will seem to be of that Religion, which has the
upper hand, and serves their turns.

10. Yea, the very Belief of the Immortality of the soul, the Resurrection and
the life to come, is feeble, if not unsound and lifeless, in the most of men:
And so is the Belief of the Christian faith: And a man that doubts whether
there be another life or not, will make as sure as he can of the pleasures of
this present life. And I fear that this is the case of no small number of
Papists; to think, [I know not whether there be any other life of retribution:
I rather think that there is none: But lest it should prove true, I will be of
some Religion: And where can I be with more ease and safety, than in that which
my Rulers and Teachers and the whole Country say is right? If it prove
otherwise, I hope God will excuse me, while I obey my Governors, and do as the
most do.] He that much doubts of the truth of Christianity it self, may
easily fall in with any Sect which seems for his interest. I fear Melancthon
too truly said, that Italians maintain that Christ is in the Sacrament, when
they do not believe that he is in Heaven.

11. And many Nicodemites think, that a man needs not expose himself to danger
for his faith, but may keep it to himself, and do as his neighbors do:
especially where they have no other society to join with, they think it better
to join with the Popish Churches than none.

12. And I have reason to think that it is but few among the multitude, that
understand indeed what the Papists hold, while they go with them in the general
Name and profession: And in particular about Transubstantiation: When even the
subtle Schoolmen are not agreed of its proper sense; (as Durandus his instance
for one does prove.) I do not think that one of an hundred that receives their
Eucharist, does in his heart believe, that It is not Bread: But some think that
their Church it self means otherwise: And some say, [It is not for such as I
to contradict them and dispute; but I will leave every one to think as he will;
and so will I.]

13. And as for Princes and Lords abroad, Those that have once escaped Popery
will take heed how they entertain it again, unless lust and folly have sold
them for a prey: But they that live where their subjects are Papists, dare not
venture to shake so great a fabric, lest they overthrow themselves:

For 1. People are tumultuous;

2. The Popish Clergy are rich and powerful and exceeding numerous.

3. Religion is a thing that men are tender and tenacious of, who are seriously
of any.

4. The Popish doctrine of deposing and killing excommunicate Kings, makes
many Princes flatter the Priests, for fear of losing their lives. They think
that it is better make some advantage of the Popes friendship, than to have
such an enemy, whose Knives and poison have easy access, and whose armies we
must watch against in peace, as in a continued War, and we know not when they
are in our own houses or near us, nor where nor when we are in safety.

14. And, alas, the Great ones of the World have the greatest Temptations, and
not the weakest lusts and passions, and have more of worldly and carnal
Interest to carry them away!

15. And the Papists Religion is notably suited to their lusts and carnal ends:
All which, and much more, may tell you that it no wonder, that so many foreign
Princes, and States and Nobles can cleave to so senseless a way as Popery.


D. II. But how come so many among us in England to turn Papists of late years,
where Popery is discountenanced by the King, Parliament and Laws?


R. Many of the same Causes do this, which I need not rehearse. And 1. Too many
both Noble and ignoble are prepared by their Lusts, and by a vicious life.
There are many things in Popery which greatly accommodate a carnal mind and a
debauched guilty Conscience, which the Christian Protestant Religion affords
not. And a profligate flagitious person, is likeliest to be forsaken of God,
and to be given up to believe a lie, seeing they received not the truth in the
love of it, that they might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. I fear nothing so
much, as lest men turn Heart-Infidels and Tongue-Papists (as the suitablest
Reserve, lest Christian Religion and the life to come, should prove a truth).
And indeed great sins Cry for great Vengeance: And what Greater than for Mind,
Will and Life to be forsaken of God?

2. And alas, except Lawyers, Physicions and others bred up to Studies and
Employments, how few are there of Nobility or Gentry that are hard studying
men! And the great Mysteries of Religion will not be well learned and defended,
by a life of eating, drinking, playing, jeasting, gaming, hawking, hunting,
visitings of empty company, lustfulness, worldliness, or vainglorious pomp. No
men grow wise or Christians indeed by such a course.

3. And indeed the Popish Priests are more industrious than too many of our
Incumbent Ministers; for which they are Commendable in their way: The Erroneous
are often more zealous than the Orthodox. And they that apprehend themselves
between fear and hope, are usually more industrious than they that by
possession are secure: which makes the lower side so often get up, and the upper
side go down. And I would I might not say, that our Ministers are too few of
them able to deal with a trained Sophister: Some are unable in this particular
cause, because they take it as a baffled pack of notorious Errors, and thought
that few sober persons were in danger of it: And so they have (honestly) bent
their studies and labors to the winning of sensual persons from their sins;
and are unfurnished in the Popish Controversies; knowing that they can refer
them to multitudes of Books, which are unanswerable. But alas, too many also
are unable through mere ignorance, lowness of parts, and gross insufficiency or
negligence, not only in this, but other parts of their Ministerial work.

4. And we have incurred no small damage and danger, by ignorant Over-doing
against the Papists: Partly with the self-wise Sectaries, calling many laudable
or blameless things, by the Name of Popery, Antichristianity and Idolatry,
because they are cross to their pre-judging partial conceits: And partly by
some unsound doctrines, which some defend as parts of the Protestant Religion:
And partly by magnifying verbal differences, and making a noise about them as
if they were real, and such as salvation lies on: For want of skill to state a
controversy, and discern a verbal difference from a real. And when a Papist
can but show their Novices one such palpable error in the Writings of a
Protestant; What sad work will he make with it? and still harp upon that
string, and persuade the people that the rest of our differences are such like.
And thus many Overdoing well-meaning ignorant men both Ministers and people,
have unwittingly done as much to harden Papists, and increase their numbers,
almost as if Satan had hired them as Spies, to betray the Churches and Cause of
Christ: Yea, and if one better studied in these points, shall go a sounder and
more successful way to work, and take these weapons out of the Papists hands,
which some ignorant Protestants have given them, the same men's blind zeal will
rage against them, (as some did against Chillingworth, Anthony Wotton, and
diverse others our greatest Champions) as if it were not themselves but these,
that were befriending Popery. So that they neither can confute them soundly
themselves, nor will suffer others, but zealous Protestants assault Christ's
ablest servants at their backs, while their faces are toward the adversaries
whom they oppose.

5. But nothing among us (except Ignorance and wickedness) increases them
more, than the scandal of our numerous, and some of them abominable Sects. When
the people see many zealous professors turn Quakers, or Ranters, or Seekers, or
Antinomians, or Socinians, or Familists; and shall see the more tolerable
parties (Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Erastian, Separatists, and
Anabaptists) condemning, backbiting, reproaching and making odious (if not
persecuteing) one another, and shunning (many of them) the Communion of one
another, as they do the Papists. This makes them think, that they must seek
some surer soberer way than any of us have yet found: and the Papists set in
and tell them, [All these are branches broken off from the true Vine and
withered; This it is to depart from the Catholic Church; when they are once
gone thence, there is no stop or consistence, till they crumble all to dust and
atoms: You must become Roman Catholics, or go mad: You see to what confusion
all others tend: If you once leave our Church, you will never know where to
settle* Which Sect will you be of? If an Independent, why not an Anabaptist? If
an Anabaptist, why not an Antinomian? How will you ever know which one of all
these is in the right]? All this is easily answered by a man of understanding;
But to the ignorant Vulgar, it seems unanswerable. And alas, how many have
given them this scandal? Woe be to some by whom offense comes.

6. But the Contentions of our Clergy advantage them more than the divisions
of the people: when we are of many interests, and many parties, and proceed to
make each other contemptible and odious: especially when we come to hinder each
other from the work of our Ministry. A house and Kingdom divided cannot stand:
Christ tells us that the Devil himself is not so foolish, as to divide his
Kingdom. All our consent and best endeavor is too little to save men's souls
from sin and error: And when one part is cast by, and each part by contention
hinders the other: the Papists have the far easier work. When one part are
not to come within five miles of Cities or Corporations, where Papists are, and
those that may come near them are too few, and many too indisposed, or
negligent in resisting them; so that we are all overdone by their Priests in
constant diligence, (especially with the Greater rank of men, with whom one
part of our Ministers, have almost as little inclination as opportunity to
converse,) no wonder if the Roman work go on.

7. And, alas, how great advantage have they made of our late calamitous Civil
Wars, and manifold scandalous Rebellions? Though indeed it was the terror of
their murdering about two hundred thousand in Ireland (of which see Bishop
Jones, Sir John Temple, and the Earl of Orery against Welsh,) which frightened
those that I was acquainted with, out of their peace, and almost out of their
wits here in England, yet dead men are not heard on Earth, and their service
for the King in England serves not only for a Cloak for that, but for an
advantage against many that stand in their way. In all Civil Wars, if the
Clergy be drawn in to own several Causes (especially if they own an ill Cause)
who ever prevails, Religion suffers by it; while one part of them are laid
by, or hindered by the other.

8. And though God has greatly obliged this Nation to thankfulness, by
preserving our Superiors so much from Popery as he has done, yet some of
their names are injuriously abused, to entice men to the Popish way, as if it
had so much countenance and patronage, that Interest might invite them to it.

9. And the World is liable to changes, and weary of holding long in one way:
The name of Antiquity especially in Religion is venerable with all; but yet it
is Novelty that pleases in the Matter. And when Popery is to us a New way
honored with the name of The old Religion, it is a taking bait.

10. But the grand cause of all, is, the common peoples Ignorance, as being
ungrounded in their own Religion; and their badness, who measure all by carnal
Interests, and all our great and manifold sins, by which we have forfeited Gods
presence and his grace, and provoked him to leave us to the shame and ruin of
our own lusts and delusions to undo our selves. Great sins bring great
plagues. And most men are of their Religion who have the greatest interest in
their estimation and affections, or that have greatest advantage on them by
constant nearness, familiarity, kindred, kindness or power to do them good or
hurt in the World.

And therefore to your question Why so many of late turn Papists, I shall but
now concludingly answer you, as I begun with you, concerning the Cause of your
own doubts; They that have long lived under the light of the holy Gospel, and
among the mercies which have blessed this Land, and yet have been sincerely no
true Christians, but loved their fleshly lusts and pleasures, and their wealth
and worldly honor, more than God, or holiness, or Heaven, it is no wonder that
they easily change their party, and can be, in siding, of any Religion who are
in sincerity of none; and if God forsake their understandings, and give them up
to senseless and unreasonable opinions, who would not live according to the
knowledge which they had, nor obey the truth which was clearly opened to them.
And such hypocrites and perfidious rebels against Christ, all Protestants do
confess themselves to have been, who turn Papists, and know what they do:
Because they profess to go from a state of damnation, into a Church out of
which there is no salvation; if the Popes judgment be as powerful in Heaven,
as it is at Rome.


D. But is there no hope of ending these lamentable differences, and removing
the scandal of Infidels hereby? or at least of living together like Neighbors
without seeking each others blood or ruin?


R. 1. Yes; when God shall by his Providence take down the worldly Greatness
and Advantages of the Papacy, and level the King of Rome with the true Pastors
of his Church, and turn the usurping Monarch of all the World into a true
Bishop; that so worldly Power, honor and wealth, may not be stronger arguments
with their party than Heaven and Hell, and Gods commands. Till then their Great
twisted Interest is like to rule them, and keep them in the errors into which
it has involved them. Especially while their pretended Infallibility (against
all sense and reason) is their strength, which makes them uncurable in any
error which they once embrace.

2. But yet I did in the second Part of my Key for Catholics, long ago show
the terms on which we may live like neighbors, if not like Christians, if
their principles would allow their minds, to be but peaceable, and give
dissenters leave to live.

And I still profess that might we but secure our selves and our posterity, I
am none of those that would have the least injury, much less cruelty exercised
upon any man for being a Papist: If they will live peaceably with me, or but
give me leave, I will live peaceably with them. And I doubt not but as there
are some among them truly fearing God (though corrupt with the errors of their
education) so there are more that are of kind and civil natures, which their
ill opinions cannot make fierce and sanguinary nor overcome. And none of them,
I think, shall be more loving, kind and peaceable to me, than I will be to him.

And I confess I have a greater respect and honor for those whose Ancestors
have transmitted Popery to them under the name of the True Catholic faith, and
who live according to what they know (though perhaps in blind zeal they hate me
and such others for the Interest of their way,) than I have for those that
seemed once Protestants, and by filthy debauched lives have made it seem
needful or convenient for them to turn Papists, that they may have a seeming
Religion and Priests pardons to quiet or deceive their Consciences; or than I
have for those Papists who live in drunkenness, lust and common lying and
profane swearing, while yet they seem to be Religious and regardful of God and
their souls; or than I have for those Priests who befriend such men's wickedness
for the increase and interest of their Church.

Yea, I truly profess that if I know a truly Godly conscionable charitable
Papist, I must, I will love and honor him far more than an ungodly,
unconscionable, uncharitable Protestant. And as far as I can discern, both
Ministers and private Christians (but especially Ministers) whom I most
converse with, are of the same mind.


D. But is there no way possible to bring them fairly off, in this gross
business of Transubstantiation, without putting them upon the disclaiming of
the Popes and General Councils Infallibility?


R. I am not bound to devise accommodations to strengthen them in their other
errors, if I could. But yet I would cure any error in any, though they intend
their own cure to an evil end. I cannot be persuaded but their understanding
men are sorry at the heart that the Laterane Council has drawn them into such
a snare, by making Transubstantiation an Article of their faith; and that they
are very angry at them, and wish that it had never been done: but being done
they must take on them to believe it, lest they pull down with their foundation
all their fabric. I doubt not but they are troubled and ashamed to read the
Schoolmens disputes of Transubstantiation, exposing Christianity to the
Infidels scorn, which this Council has most occasioned. I know not how to
bring them off, unless they will hearken to what Dr. Tailor in his Disswasive
from Popery, and Dr. Heylin, and Dr. Pierson and Dr. Gunning in the Dispute,
have said against the Validity of that Laterane Council (could they but spare
the Canon for deposing Temporal Lords, and dispossessing them of their
Dominions, and absolving all their Papists subjects from their Oaths of
Allegiance and exterminating the rest; Yea it would be more serviceable to them
at last with Princes, to retract that also, than to keep it.) Their best way is
to take the help of these pretenses, and condemn the contrary Reasons of Mr.
Terret and his fellow Disputant against the foresaid Doctors, and expunge that
Council out of Binnius, Surius and the rest who number it with the approved
Councils; and because Matthew. Paris and others say that some at the Council
thought the Canons burdensome, and they were brought in by the Pope, and hastily
read, etc. therefore say, that They were not passed at least Conciliariter,
which you know is a word that serves their turn against another Council which
they dislike.


D. But what shall they do with following Councils, especially that at Trent,
which say the same?


R. The best shifts that I know are, 1. To do as they do about the condemning
of Pope Honoririus as a Heretic. They say that a General Council and Pope too
may err in a matter of fact; and so they did in judging of Honorius his
meaning: So they may say, that the Council of Trent did decree this as an
Article of faith, only because they thought that the Church so held it: which
was because they thought that the General approved Council of Laterane had so
decreed it* But now finding that it was not so decreed there, the error in
matter of fact ceasing, which was the supposition, the doctrinal error proves
to be no Article of faith, or Conciliariter decretum.

2. Or if this will not do, they are best yet stretch the words of Rome and
Trent, to a more tolerable signification, and say, That it is not the ceasing
of the substance of Bread and Wine which is meant; but the changing it into a
Relative new form: And so, as the Whole substance of a man is changed from
being a mere Common man, into a King, a Bishop, a Doctor, without any cessation
of his Humanity; but only quia forma ultima denominat, he is not any more to be
called merely A Man, but A King, A Bishop, etc. Or, as the whole substance of a
piece of Gold is changed into Current Coin by the Kings Stamp, etc. So the
whole substance of Bread is turned into the (Representative) Body of Christ,
and the whole substance of Wine into his (Representative) blood; which change
they call Transubstantiation.

But why should I give counsel to men that will not thank me for it, and that
obstinately refuse much better?


D. But why speak you nothing of their denying the people the Cup? I thought
you would principally have fastened on that.


R. Because it is no part of this present Controversy, which I was first to
handle, though it concern the same Sacrament: But it is such an instance, as
serves to tell those of the world that will understand, what horrid
unreasonable, audacious arrogance and Usurpation and Treason against God and
the true Head of the Church, this pretended Monarch of the world, and his
pretended Catholic Church (the Popish Sect) are guilty of: considering,

1. That it is as essential a part of the Sacracrament as the Bread is: For
Christ has made no difference.

2. It has the same Institution and express Command: He that said, [ Take,
Eat] said also [ Drink ye all of this:] He has said, [ Do this in remembrance
of me] of One as well as of the Other.

3. Therefore to take away an Essential part, is to take away the Sacrament,
and make it another thing. As it is not a humane body that has not both Head
and Heart: So here.

4. Therefore by the same authority they might have continued the Cup, and
taken away the Bread; or have taken away both.

5. And on the same reason they might have taken away Baptism, and all Christ's
positive Institutions. And for ought I know the Ministry it self as instituted.

6. But then Gersons question, de auferabilitate Papae would be next to be
debated: For were he of Christ's own Institution (as he is not) it is no more
than the Cup in the Lords Supper. Could he but prove an Institution of his
Papacy as evidently, who would not be his Subject? If you say, But who should
take him down, if it might be done? I answer, Kings in their own Kingdoms, and
his own General Councils. The Kings of France, Spain, etc. may easily prove,
that they have more power to cast out the Pope, than he has to cast out half
Christ's Sacrament: And they may better forbid their own Subjects to obey a
foreign Usurper, than he can forbid all the world to obey Christ.

7. And for all this, the wit of man can hardly devise What Reason they have to
do it? What point of their Religion? What Interest of their own did engage them
to it? Unless it be their Interest to show that they are Above Christ and the
Scripture, I do not yet discern their reason.

8. And yet they have, with Resolution and obstinacy, persisted herein diverse
hundreds of years, and denied the requests of Emperors, Nobles, and great part
of several Kingdoms in this point.

This and the leaving out the second Commandment, seem to be of purpose to show
that they are above the Maker of the Ten Commandments and of the Gospel. How
long Lord shall Tyranny oppress the Nations of the Earth, and the Honor and
Domination and Wills of Rebels, prevail to tread down Truth and Godliness, and
keep the notice of thy salvation from the sinful miserable world; whilst yet
we daily pray by thy Command, that Thy Name may be Hallowed, Thy Kingdom come,
and Thy Will be done, on Earth as it is done in Heaven?

Whether the Pope be the Antichrist meant in the Scripture (by that name) or
not, you see that my passing it by does show my cautelousness in resolving (as
Zanchy and others before me have done), because I am confessedly so far
unstudyed or ignorant of the sense of the Revelations and some other Scripture
Prophecies, as that I must leave such cases to such as Bishop Downame and
others that have deeper insight into them: Every man should be best at that
which he has most studied. But I must needs say, that though I take it to be
indispensible duty, to keep up all due charity to all professed Christians;
such instances as these which I have here opened do utterly disable me from
confuting that man, who shall assert that this pretended Vicar of Christ, and
King or Monarch of the world, (and so King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) is an
abominable Usurper, and insolent Traitor, against God, and the true King and
Head of the Universal Church. How long will Princes and Prelates, Learned and
Unlearned be deluded by him, or fear Power? And when shall he be restrained
from hindering Christ's Gospel, and the Peace and Concord of the Christian world?


FINIS.

