THE DIFFERENCE Between the POWER OF MAGISTRATES AND CHURCH-PASTORS, AND THE
ROMAN KINGDOM and MAGISTRACY Under the Name of a CHURCH and CHURCH GOVERNMENT
Usurped by the Pope, or liberally given him by Popish Princes: Opened by
Richard Baxter. To the Learned and Sincere Ludovicus Molinaeus Dr of Physic,
and Author of Jugulum Causae, Papa Ultrajectinus, and other Books on this
subject. For the Vindication of the true Pastoral Discipline, exercised by the
Ancient Churches, and claimed, but alas, too little exercised, by the Churches
called Protestant and Reformed. And to acquaint Posterity what we hold in this,
that false accusations misinform them not.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Sign of the three Crowns, near
Holborn Conduit. 1671.

READER
THE first Epistle is now written upon the sight of Jugulum Causae: The other
with the Propositions was written about a year and half ago, upon the sight of
Papa ultrajectinus, etc. and the Paraenesis contra Aedificatores Imperii in
Imperio: And the design of all is, to show how little or nothing at all the
sober moderate Protestants, called Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, and
Political or Erastian are disagreed in all this business, whilst I name you
near a hundred Propositions in which they commonly consent: That Princes and
all Magistrates may see, that they have no cause to be offended at the
Christian and Protestant Doctrine, or to judge the true Religion of any of
these parties, as such, to be contrary to their interest; when in very truth
they are in that all one: But that among all Sects and Parties, there will be
still some injudicious, intemperate and unpeaceable men; especially those whose
Interest in the world is Great, and cannot be upheld, without encroaching on
the rights of others: As Great Trees must have much room, and suffer nothing to
prosper under them, but Weeds and Briars. And it is to tell Politicians, that
the true Pastoral Power (being a Power to labor and suffer in patient
self-denial for the Church of Christ and the souls of men) is past all doubt of
Christ's appointment: And to diminish that Power, is but to diminish our
obligation to labor and suffer, and to gratify our sloth and fleshly
interest. But to diminish that Secular Church Power which Clergy men claim as
of Divine Right, is but for Princes to be Princes, whether the Clergy will or
no.

And as to the Learned Author, Dr. Lud. Molinaeus, my meaning is to second him
in awakening Magistrates to reassume their proper power, and to leave it in no
Clergy men's hands, of what party soever: But as to his reflections on the
Protestants Discipline, lovingly to chide him for making the difference seem
wider than it is, and to RECONCILE the four Parties, while I distinctly open
the common Doctrine of them all, excepting the rigid Opinions of some
interessed or intemperate individuals.

My Learned, Sincere and Worthy Friend,
WHEN I had hastily set down my judgment of the Cause which I found handled in
your Papa Ultrajectinus and other Writings which you sent me, I cast by that
Script (which I intended at the writing of it, for your view) that I might
surely keep it from the notice of others, in this Age wherein the prevalency of
Interest, Faction, Passion and Injudiciousness, does make it so great a
difficulty, to say any thing for the cure of any men's errors, enormities or
impieties, which shall not be charged with the same crime (or greater) which it
would cure, and be taken for a disturber of the Church and Peace, which it
would save or heal. But now seeing that you renew your endeavors in the same
Cause, and finding your Jugulum Causae directed to so many hands, by seventy
particular Epistles, and that you have honored me with a place among those
great and worthy persons, I take my self obliged to render you some account of
my judgment of your Writings, and especially of the whole Cause, by bringing
into the open light, those hundred Propositions which I had purposed to
conceal: And withal to tell you,

1. That (though you have much overvalued me in your recitation of their
report, who would have joined me with so Great, so Wise and Good a man as A
Bishop Usher, and that in so great a work; and experience may tell you, that
other men have other thoughts of me, as one unmeet to preach the Gospel in the
Land of my Nativity, much more unmeet to be a decider of the Churches
Controversies) yet you have truly described my judgment of your self and your
undertaking. I confess I hope not that ever you should make the Roman
Usurpation, more palpable, than the falsehood of their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; where they maintain (not only the Corporal Presence, which
is not it that I now mean, but) that Bread is not Bread, and Wine is not Wine,
when all men see, taste, smell and feel them: And if the Princes, Doctors, and
great men of the world, can thus obstinately deny (or take on them to deny) the
judgment which is made of sensible objects, by all men's senses, you may gather
what fruit you may expect of your labors, or of any Cause how plain soever,
where prejudice and seeming interest are against you? Can all the Writings or
Reasonings in the world, bring any thing to a more clear and sure decision,
than that of all the senses of all men in the world, about the proper objects
of sense? If flesh so far conquer flesh it self, and the interest of sensuality
can cause such men, and such multitudes to renounce the apprehension of all
their senses, what have we to do more for the cure of mankind?

You have made it plain enough, that it is really a part of the Secular
Government of Kings and States, which is now commonly called Ecclesiastical
among the Papists, and as such is challenged and usurped by the Pope, and that
Princes that subject their Kingdoms to his Usurpation, do take in a joint Ruler
with them, and divide their Kingdoms or Power between themselves and him. But
so they have done, and so they will do, till the Time of the Churches fuller
Reformation, and of the Coalition of the Christian world is come.

I know you may think that as Interest blinds them, so this great detection
of the Invasion of their Interest is the way to bring them to the truth. For
who will have a Co-partner with him in his Kingdom, that may choose? Who had
not rather Rule alone, than divide his Kingdom with the Pope? Undoubtedly they
give away more of their own Interest hereby, than you have opened? When they
deliver part of their power to one, who by an approved General Council of their
own, which is the Religion of their Party, Later. sub Innoc. 3. Can. 2. 3. may
depose Temporal Read the Declaration against the Oath of Allegiance by H. I.
for the Popes deposing Kings, pa. 16, 17, 27 43. Read Hottomans Franco-Gal.
cap. 7. and his Brutum ^^lmen, page 87, 97, 98. Read Withriagton and Barclay
against Bellarmia in Goldastus Tom. 3. de Mon. And Bellarmia against Barclay c.
9. Vid. Sua ez. ^. advers. sect. A^glic. li 6. cap. 4. sect. 14. and cap. 6.
sect. 22. 24. Azor. ^rs. Mor. par. 1. l. 8 c. 13. Dom. Bannes in Thom. 22. q.
12. art. 2. August. Triump. de potest. Eccl. q 46. art. 2. There is no doubt
(says he) but the Pope may depose all Kings when there is reasonable cause for
it.] See the Jesui^s Morals, and Mystery of Jesuitism, and Myster. Patrum
Jesuitarum.
Lords, (though no Protestants themselves) that will not exterminate those that
deny Transubstantiation out of their Dominions, and may absolve their subjects
from their fidelity, and may give their Countries unto others. When their most
Learned, Renowned, applauded Doctors teach, that the Pope may excommunicate
Kings, and that an excommunicated King is no King, and he that kills him,
kills not a King. When the Roman Council under Greg. 7. decrees, that the
Pope may depose Emperors: And the same Greg. 7. li. 4. Ep. 7. conspireth in
the like Doctrine. The Oration of Card. Peron is well known: If so great a
Kingdom as France, that glories of its Church-liberties, can bear so much,
what will not those bear, that are less able to deliver themselves? The words
of this Great and pretendedly Moderate Cardinal in a Moderate Kingdom, in a
public Writing against a Protestant Learned King (King James) page 453. (as
cited by A. Bishop Usher of Babylon, page 163. is fit to be written on the
Doors of all Princes, and of the Pope himself, in Capital Letters; viz. [By
this Article (that Kings may not be deposed by the Pope) We are cast headlong
into a manifest Heresy, as binding us to confess, that for many Ages past the
Catholic Church has been banished out of the whole world: For if the
Champions of the Doctrine contrary to this Article do hold an impious and
detestable opinion contrary to Gods Word, then
doubtless the Pope for so many hundred years expired, has not
been the Head of the Church, but a HERETIC and the
ANTICHRIST.]

What would you have more to satisfy Kings, than their own profession that,
Either the Pope may depose Kings, or (...) he is not the Head of the Church,
but an Heretic and Antich^i^t, and has been so for many hundred years. Can
you show their Interest plainlier than all this?

And lest any say, that this is but the Doctrine of the Jesuits, remember that
Perron was another kind of man, and the famous Perverter of King Henry the
fourth. And I will cite here the words of one more of a multitude, even one
that wrote so long ago, as to be numbered with the Fathers in Biblioth. Patr.
To. 4 p. 913. and a Roman Cardinal Bertrard Card. and Epis. Eduens. de Orig.
and usu Jurisd. Qu. 4. [ Respondeo and dico quod Potestas Spiritualis debet
dominari omni humanae Creaturae per rations Hostiensis -- Item quia Jesus
Christus silius Dei dum fuit in hoc mundo, and etiam ab aetern^ naturalis
dominus fuit, and de jure naturali in Imperatores and quoseunque alios
depositionis sententias far potuisset, and damnationis, and quaseunque alias:
Utpote in personas quas creaverat, and donis naturalibus and gratuito
donaverat, and etiam conservabat. Et eadem ratione etiam ejus Vicarius potest.
Nam non videtur discretus Dominus
fuisse (ut cum reverentia ejus loquar) nisi unicum post
se talem Vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia posset. Fuit
autem iste Vicarius ejus Petrus apud Mattheum: Et idem dicendum est de
successoribus Petri, cum eadem absurditas sequeretur, si post mortem Petri
humanam naturam a se creatam sine regimine unius personae reliquisset.]

I will English it lest the unlearned believe not what Fathers, what a
Biblioth. Patrum, what Cardinals, and what Doctrines the Roman Clergy obtrude
upon the Christian world.

[ I answer and say, that the spiritual Power ought to have domination over
every humane creature, by Hostiensis reasons -- Also because Jesus Christ the
Son of God while he was in this world, and also from Eternity, was the Natural
Lord: and by Natural Right, could pass the sentence of Deposition and of
Damnation, and any other, upon Emperors and upon any others; as being persons
that he had created and endowed with Natural Gifts, and freely, and also
preserved: And by the same reason his Vicar can do it: For the Lord seems not
to have been discreet (that I may speak with reverence
to him) unless he had left behind him one such Vicar, who
could do all these things. And in Matthew this his Vicar
was Peter: And the same must be said of the successors of Peter, seeing the
same absurdity would follow, if after the death of Peter he had left humane
nature created by himself, without the Regiment of One person.]

Do you think this is not plain dealing enough, if men are willing to
understand?

I know that there were Emperors and Princes that strugled hard, before they
suffered themselves to be thus subjected; And these Emperors had Lawyers,
Statesmen and Divines that took their parts; as all the Treatises in Goldastus
his three Volumes de Monarch. and his Imp. Constit. See Bellarm. de Pontif. To.
li. 5. c. 1. and 6. and 7. and 8. he says, It is the common judgment of all
Catholic Divines, that the Pope ratione spiritualis has at least indirectly a
certain Power, and that the highest in Temporals. Which c. 6. he says, is just
such over Princes, as the soul has over the body; or sensitive appetite: and
that thus he may change Kingdoms, and take them from one, and give to another,
as the chief Spiritual Prince, if it be but necessary to the safety of souls.
Yea, he says, that It is not lawful for Christians to tolerate an Infidel or
Heretical King, if he endeavor to draw his Subjects to his Heresy or
unbelief. But to judge whether a King do draw to Heresy or not, belongs to
the Pope, to whom the care of Religion is committed. Therefore it belong^th to
the Pope to judge a King to be deposed, etc.
show. But still those that sided with the Pope spoke contrary, as the
argumentations of those Books besides the Authors whom they oppose, do show.
And, alas, Occham, and Marsilius Patavinus, and Widdrington and Barclay came
all too late. For all that Secular Power which was cloaked with the name of
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, was before so deeply rooted in the Papacy, that
they durst plead for no more, than that Princes are not subject to the Pope in
Temporals: But as you truly note, abundance of Temporals, and of the
Magistrates proper work about things Ecclesiastical, was still veiled under the
name of Spiritual: And at last, even the Temporal Power again claimed more
subtly, and indirectly, as in ordine ad spiritualia.

But you will say, that All men are naturally so regardful of their own Interest,
and especially Princes, that it is not possible they should be so servile, tame
and self-abasing, as to give away so great a part of their Kingdoms to a
Forreigner, yea, to one that claims all, (by himself, or by his most famous
Writers) and by his Councils claims a power to depose them; They that with
their own Nobles and other Subjects, are so jealous of their Prerogatives,
would never so far depose themselves, if they did but know what they do: And
therefore when Popish Princes understand the matter, they will shake off the
yoke, and re^ssume their right.

Answ. It Is true, that Protestant Princes and States have done so; And the true
meaning of our Oath of Supremacy is the same with your main design: And though
some have stumbled at those words, that the King is Supreme Governor in all
Causes Ecclesiastical, the meaning is only (as has been often publicly
declared) that he is the Supreme Civil or Coactive Governor by the Sword, in
all Causes Ecclesiastical, so far as they fall under that Coactive or Coercive
Government. And hereby the King does but reassume the Royal Power over the
Clergy and the affairs of Religion, which the Pope had usurped under the name
of Ecclesiastical. For its well known what was called Ecclesiastical Power in
England in the times of Popery: so that this much of the Vail is removed long
ago among all Protestants. And if you peruse but Bishop Bilsons excellent Tract
of Christian Subjection, and Bishop Andrews his Tortura Torti (to pass by all
others) you will see that this Case is better opened, than I for my part am
able to open it. And it is seldom heard of (for all the industry and subtilty
of Rome) that any Prince or State does Voluntarily turn Papist, that is once
delivered from the Yoke, and that ever again parts with his power when he
has recovered it.

But yet that even this Argument from Notorious Interest, does not recover the
Liberty of Countries subject to the Pope, you will the less wonder, if you
consider these three things.

1. That the Papal Interest has got such rooting in their Subjects minds, that
it is not in their power to reassume their right. The Clergy are so numerous,
subtle, ubiquitary and potent, and the people so commonly deceived, and so
tenacious of ancient Customs, that to make this Change, might cast all into a
flame: And they think it better to lose part, than all. And no doubt but the
examples of Henry the third, and Henry the fourth of France, maked some think,
that if they displease the Pope and his Consederates, they have not sufficient
security for their lives.

2. And Princes stand usually on such terms of danger or jealousy from one
another, that they are fain to keep such a Peace at home, lest they expose
themselves to a greater mischief from abroad. And they are broken by the Papal
subtilty, especially in Germany and Italy, into such Fractions, and petty
Principalities, that few of them are strong enough to defend themselves against
the Confederates of the Pope (when potent Emperors heretofore could not do
it.) And many of them, especially the House of Austria, do take this
Copartnership of the Pope, to be a great part of their strength: And as
anciently many Emperors were forced to choose their Caesar's and Copartners,
when the defense of the Empire was too hard for themselves alone; so diverse
Princes are glad to make use of the Papal interest and power for their own
security; though upon terms that else would never be submitted to.

And in some Countries the Rebellious disposition of the Subjects drives them
to accept of this dear remedy; and they choose rather to strengthen themselves
by a Copartner, than to stoop to the wills of their inferiors.

For here you must take notice, that the pretense of a Jus divinum and of
Spirituality, and the Interest of Christ, and of the safety of their souls,
does make this kind of servitude much less dishonorable, than it is to be
overtopt by a neighbor Prince, or to be curbed by their subjects. For what
dishonor is it for a man to be subject to his Maker and Redeemer? Nay, what
greater honor can there be? And the Roman Clergy have used themselves to
Canonize those Princes that have been most zealous for their Grandeur, and to
raise the fame and praises of such, as have raised that which they call the
Church, that the very ambition of the Clergies Praises, does do much to tempt
some to a tame acceptance of a Copartner, who pretends to be the Vicar of
Christ: When this servitude goes for sanctity, and carries not with it the
reproach of other sorts of servitude.

3. And it greatly furthereth their success, that the Popes Agents are commonly
bred up in Learning, and so are made able to over-wit the Laity; And that it is
their great design, to gratify the Lusts of Princes, by indulging their
voluptuous sensual lives, that so they may spend their days in such things, as
will never advance their understandings to an ability to discern the cheats of
their Copartners: And they detestably cherish the Ignorance of the Common
Laity, that they may be the fitter to be led and mastered by them; even as men
keep women from Learning and great seize, lest they should be the more
incapable of subjection. And thus as Satan leads men to Hell, so the Papal
Usurper brings the Laity into their power, by their own consent, by such
pleasing baits, as make their servitude easy to them. And it is not your
telling them of their interest, that will prevail against all these
temptations. They that will lose Heaven, and their salvation by such cheats,
may lose half of their earthly Dominions by them, as long as the other half
suffices to satisfy their concupiscence, and to maintain their honor and
pleasure in the world.

The Roman Usurpation consists of two parts. 1. The Usurpation of such a
Pastoral Power as they have no right to. 2. The Usurpation of a great part of
the Magistrates power, sometime directly, and sometimes indirectly in ordine ad
spiritualia; and constantly by the cheat of the false name of Church power, put
upon the Magistrates part of Church Government, as if it were the Clergies part.

I. The Usurpation of a Pastoral power which belongs not to them, is the
chief part of their Iniquity. And it consists in these, among other
particulars. 1. In the impious, and arrogant claim of an Universal Pastorship
over all the world. The Roman Prelate must be the Teacher of all the world, the
High Priest of all the world, and the Spiritual Ruler of all the world; which
because he cannot do by himself, he must do by others, as far as he can to
uphold his usurpation. He must be the Lawgiver and the Judge of all the world,
even at the Antipodes, and where he has no acquaintance nor access. 2. By this
he undertaketh to be a Bishop in other men's Diocesses, and to rule in all
matters, where he has no more power, than any Pastor has in another Pastoral
Charge. 3. And by this he undertaketh to be the Spiritual Father and Governor
of all the Kings and Rulers of the Christian world, and so to have the power of
excommunicating them when he thinks there is cause, and to brand them as
incapable of Christian communion with their own Subjects; or with any other
Christians. 4. By this he usurpeth authority of imposing what Pastors he please
(even such as will carry on his interest) upon all the Churches in the world,
and depriving both Princes and people of their just liberty of choice. 5. By
this also he usurpeth the power of deposing what Bishops or Pastors he please,
and depriving the people of their necessary helps, and faithfullest Teachers.
Yea, of putting whole Nations under Interdicts of serving and honoring God in
Church Assemblies; commanding all Pastors to shut up the Church doors, and
forbidding them to perfom their office, and to preach Christ's Gospel, or
administer his holy Sacraments. 6. By this he sends forth his Missionaries*
and sets up Societies of Jesuits and Friars to do his work, and commands
all Princes and people to receive and countenance them. 7. By this he lays
claim to a right of maintenance for Himself and his Missionaries in all parts
of the world, in the name of Christ, who has said, that the labourer is worthy
of his hire. 8. By this he grants Dispensations, Pardons, Indulgences,
commands praying to Saints and Angels, and praying for the Dead, as being in
Purgatory, and by this he sets up his whole new frame of self-devised
Worship and Religion. Now I call not all this an Usurpation of Magistracy, so
far as he uses no Corporal force, and threatens no penalty but
excommunication and damnation. For every true Pastor with his own flock has
the Power of Guiding them by delivering Christ's Doctrine and Precepts, and
commanding obedience as his Servant or Ambassador in his Name, and of
denouncing his judgments, and of judging obligingly who are fit to be taken in
to the Church by Baptism, and who to be cast out as Impenitent by
excommunication in his own particular Charge or Society. And if the Pope usurp
a power of doing all this and more, as an Universal Pastor only, this is an
Usurpation of a Church Power, and not of a Magistracy. And indeed if you will
acquit him from the guilt of the Mystery of Iniquity any further than he
invadeth Magistracy it self, you will do him a great deal of wrong: For he is
the Vicarius Christi, and the Vice-Christ more notably by his Spiritual
Usurpation of a power proper to Christ himself, or at least of a power that
Christ never gave him.


II. His setting up a KINGDOM, and invading the MAGISTRACY is done I. Directly,
II. Indirectly and Consequentially.

I. Directly; 1. By holding a Secular Jurisdiction, as the King of Rome, where
he exercises the Supreme Civil Power, acknowledging no Superior Civil
Governor; either as to the Legislation or Execution, in all the parts of his
own Dominions. 2. By his laying claim to many Kingdoms as his own (among which
England is one, as pretended to be delivered to him by King John) and supposing
that the Kings do hold them as under him, and by his Grant. 3. By laying claim
to the Temporal or Corporal Government of all the world (say some) or of all
the Christian world (say others): Of which you may see a multitude of Volumes
written in the defense of his pretensions: In particular all those aforesaid
were of this subject, which all Goldastus his Collected Treatises, for the
Right of Princes do confute. I gave you Cardinal Bertrands words before.


And though some of their Clergy who live under Princes that are not willing to
resign their Crowns, do disclaim the Popes direct Title to the Universal Civil
Sovereignty, yet he himself disclaimeth it not, nor condemns the Books as
such, that have been written to defend it.

In the Jesuits Morals the last Chapter has this Title [ That the Jesuits
teach, that the Church cannot command spiritual and internal actions; That its
Laws and guidance are humane, and that it is it self only a Political Body]
Where the Jansenist charge them with destroying the Church from its
foundation, and making it altogether external, humane and Politic; and that
which needs only Politic Virtues for its Government, and the exercise of its
principal offices, and that they make its Laws but humane and politic, which
oblige only to things external: and charge them as Cyprian did the Novatians,
Quod Ecclesiam humanam faciunt] So that if he accuse them justly, here is no
room for any subterfuge: It is not the Spiritual and Temporal power that he
makes them claim, but the Temporal or External only: But what! does the
Jansenist himself therefore disclaim all Temporal Power in the Church, or is he
just to Kings? Judge but by page 388. where he boasts of Laymans Confession
of the Truth, that [ Ecclesiastic power is instituted immediately from God,
and the Civil power comes immediately from men: And that Civil power regards
properly and directly wealth and peace temporal only:] And he adds [ For the
Civil power regards the outward order and Civil tranquillity alone; and
prescribes none but outward and humane means to attain this end.] Which is all
false, and most injurious to Kings; whom this moderate Jansenist would hereby
set as far below every Priest; in real dignity and amiableness to the Subjects
as a Humane Creature is below a Divine, and the interest of the body is below
that of the soul. Whereas indeed God is the immediate Original of Civil and
Church power, though in both the Persons are designed by the means of men. And
both have God himself for their ultimate end, and the Common Good of the
Society for their Common End; which ever consists most in spiritual felicity,
referring to Eternal. Though the Magistrates weapon be the Sword, and the
Pastors only the Word, by which all this is brought to pass.

Indeed it is not possible that the Papacy in its present State can be defended
by any man how moderate soever, without Injury to Princes and States, whose
Power the Pope has so notoriously invaded and usurped: For how can they defend
him, that usurpeth the Power of Kings, or usurpeth a false Power over Kings,
and not be injurious to them that the Usurper injureth?

But it is most wonderful to me, that when W. Barclay defends the right of
Monarchs in such a Kingdom as France that has power and will to hold fast its
own, he should complain as if he undertook a Cause which most were against him
in, and in which he expected to be wondered at for his singularity.

4. By their Inquisition, and by their Decreeing Corporal Penalties in their
Councils, and Decreeing the deposition of Princes, and the giving away their
Dominions to others, as in the two forecited Councils, Roman. su^. Greg. 7.
and Lateran. sub Innoc. 3. In a word, by all that they do in their Usurped
Legislation, Judgment and Execution, by the Sword, or a forcing Power as in
themselves.

II. But the more successful Usurpation of the Power and Rights of Princes is
Indirectly, and as Bellarmin defends it, in ordine ad spiritualia; By using
their Ecclesiastical Usurped power upon men's Consciences, in such a way as
shall overtop the Magistrates power of the Sword: when they decree that all are
Heretics that believe their senses, and deny Transubstantiation, and that all
such Heretics shall be banished or burnt; the Clergy is not to do this
themselves, but to deliver them over to the Secular Power: The Pope and Clergy
do but charge it on their Consciences in the name of Christ. And if Princes
obey them not, or Temporal Lords will not burn or banish all such Heretics for
believing sense, the Pope is not to touch their bodies, but to excommunicate
them. And if they will not yet obey the Pope, when they are excommunicate, the
Pope, Good man, will not draw a Sword against them, but only use the Spiritual
Sword, by giving their Dominions to others, which is but by word of mouth; he
does but declare such a Temporal Lord to be dispossessed of his Title, and
require another to take his Lands, and let his great Divines publish that an
Excommunicate King is no King, and that to kill him, is not to kill a King: And
if Princes will defend themselves by Arms, the Pope will not send his Clergy in
Arms against them, but only by the Spiritual Sword, or Word, command other
Princes, States and people to arm themselves against their Emperors, Kings and
Governors, and to defend those to whom he has given their Dominions. How often
these Games have been seriously acted, the German Histories lamentably tell us:
and Guicciardine^ Italian, and the English, French and others are not wholly
silent.

So if the Clergy be exempt from paying Taxes, from Secular Judgments, if
their Lands and Estates be not under the Power of Kings, if they set up Courts
of Judicature with Offices like a Civil Court, if they assume to themselves the
sole judgment of Heretics, and Schismatics, and Apostates, and also of
Testaments of the dead, and of Causes of Adultery and Fornication, of lawful or
unlawful degrees of Marriage, and of Divorce, if the Pope lay Taxes on the
Clergy that are Subjects in all Princes Dominions, if he dispose of Buildings,
Tithes, Glebes, Monasteries, Lands, Almshouses, Colleges, and abundance such
like; all this is not by the Sword, but by persuading Kings and States that
they are bound in Conscience to promote all this, and obey the Pope as their
Ghostly Father herein: And that if they be stricken with the Thunderbolt of
Excommunication, they are in a state of damnation, and if they so dye, are
undone for ever: And by persuading other Princes and people, that the Arms
taken up against such Princes at the Popes Command (according to the foresaid
Councils) are meritorious, and shall procure their salvation.

And if Princes and people will believe all this, and will be deceived, and
will voluntarily subject themselves to such an Usurper, who can help it? Though
it excuse not the Pope, yet they have little reason to complain, that they lose
that power which they voluntarily give away, and that the Pope shall exercise
that power which they give him. And so much to your Cause against the Papacy.

II. But in your Epistle to Mr. Areskin and several others, you lay much of the
like charge upon the Reformed Churches, and you take our great Reforming
Divines, to have kept up the Mystery of Iniquity in their Discipline.
Concerning which give me leave to deal freely with you, and to tell you, that I
am persuaded that your meaning is sincere and good, and that it is an
usurpation or devised imitation of Secular Government by the Clergy which you
condemn; and that too great a part of the Protestant Clergy have given you some
occasion for these complaints: But that really you deal not accurately in the
Controversy, and Accurateness is the thing you want. You do not here exactly
describe the true difference between the several powers where you seem to
describe them; you leave out much that should be said. It is a more distinct
way of handling this point, that must decide the Controversy. To which end I
have laid you down an hundred Propositions, on occasion of your former Writings
sent me.

And as you say in Epist. ad D. Russellum, p. 248. that in this you would
believe one Physicion, one Coxe, Goddard; Lower, Ridgley, etc. (Though I have
reason to think that the first and last of these are more of my mind about
Church Government than of yours) before a thousand Augustines, Hieroms,
Gregory's, yea, Jewels, Davenant, Ushers, Dallees; so my opinion is, that
usually all men are wisest in their own Profession. And though I am naturally
somewhat unapt to take more than needs I must upon trust from any (since I have
had great experience of humane ignorance and vanity) yet I had rather take a
Physicions judgment in Physic, and a Lawyers in points of Law, and a
Soldiers in Military matters, and a Divines in Theology, than any of their
judgments about the matters of an aliene Profession. Not but that now and then
a man may arise, that shall know more on the by, than others that make it the
study of their lives: But that is not usual. And that one man would have been
yet wiser, in those things if he had been of that Profession. For surely
caeteris paribus, he that bestows twenty years, or thirty, or forty, or
threescore in the Study of Divinity alone, with its subservient helps, is liker
to understand it, than he that allows it, but now and then a spare hour, in
the midst of other diverting Studies. For my part, if I follow not one thing
only when I am upon it, but divide my thoughts among things heterogeneal, I
cannot pierce deep into any great difficulties, nor make any thing of
distracted Studies; neque quicquam recte fit, quod fit praeoccupato animo. God
does not use to give wisdom now by the way of Miracles; but they that seek
most, are likest to find. And therefore pardon me for telling you, that though
I am deservedly a great honourer of the Physicions you name, yet I set more by
the Judgment of one Usher, one Davenant, one Jewel, one Dallaeus, one
Blondel, one Camero, one Le Blank, one Petrus Molinaeus in matters of Theology,
than of abundance of Lawyers and Physicions. And of one Lawyer and Physicion in
matters of their Profession, than of many Divines. Being still of Pembles mind,
that one clear eye can see further than a Council of purblind ones.

And as to the matter of Partiality of which you suspect Divines, it is not
without cause as to all that party who seek for Riches, Ease and Honors, or
Domination and Preferments and Preheminency in the world: But such as that St.
Martin whom you mention out of Severus, who so vehemently opposed the Ithacian
Violence, You are mistaken when you twi^^ call Maximus Imperator Ethnicus, who
but for his ^^^patio^, ha^ been a Christian Saint.
and Maximus his using the Sword against the Priscillianists are as impartial
as you. Certainly if Christianity be what we all profess to take it for, it
will make that man best who is most a Christian: And he that is best will be
most impartially and self denyingly faithful to Christ, and will prefer Christ's
honor incomparably before his own. And he is like to be most a Christian, who
does sincerely give up himself to the closest study of it all his days. Deny
this, and your suspicions will fall upon Christianity it self.

But yet I will allow you to be moderately suspicious where you see that there
is any great bait of carnal interest to tempt men: A Popedom, a Cardinalship,
(I must name no more) may make the Roman Heathen say, I will turn Christian, if
you will make me Bishop of Rome, etc. But will you suspect that a good man,
yea, and all such good men, should be Partial where they put themselves on the
greatest self-denial? Where they have no profit, no preterment, no
man-pleasing, no worldly honor to invite them? Yea, where it is like to
diminish their gain, to hinder them from preferment, to make them hated by most
on whom their discipline is exercised? If a few out of a pang of Factious or
Phanatick zeal, may cast themselves on such a self-denying life, it is not like
that this will be the ordinary Case, of Learned, sober, godly men. If it be,
with whom shall the ignorant trust the conduct of their souls, that will not
make merchandise of them? Would you be partial and false to the Truth of Christ
your self, if you were the Pastor of a Church? Is the Office so malignant to
infect all that undertake it? If it be, how can our Religion be good? If not,
why should you think that others will not be as just and impartial as you would
be? Do you consider what excellent persons in all respects for Wisdom, and
Piety, and Integrity, were Melanchthon, Bucholtzer, Sohnius, Kimedontius,
Olevian, Ursinus, Zanchius, Paraeus, and those English men you named, and many
hundreds more; who more unlikely through Ignorance or partiality to betray the
truth?

But they say, that Interest will not lie. Do you not know that an able
Preacher, may better by many degrees consult his own Ease, his Profit, and his
worldly honors by Preaching only, than by this troublesome ungrateful work of
Discipline? I am confident that you and I do take one another for true plain
dealing honest men, and therefore can believe each other. And if you will
believe me, I did, in my Pastoral Charge (in those times when I was thought
tolerable in the Sacred Office) for about ten years (of the twenty that I had
leave to preach) exercise some Discipline upon some particular offenders,
according to the common judgment of Protestant Divines; And it was so much to
my labor, to my expense of time, to the grievous displeasure of those that
fell under it, and required so much self-denial, that when I consulted with
flesh and blood, if I might but have forborne it, and only preached, and given
the Sacraments to all that came, I should have thought my self so greatly
disburdened, as would have made my life to be sensually pleasant: so that,
though I had not any maintenance of my own, I think I could gladly have given
up all that I received for my Ministry, and made what other shift I could for
food and raiment, so I might but have been freed from the trouble of this
particular Discipline: I speak only what it was to flesh and blood, and not
what it was to faith, which says God cannot be served too dearly. Till I speak
this to one that has tried the thing I talk of, I shall take it for granted,
that my words are not half understood.

If you say, Why then did you not forbear a work so ungrateful? I now only
answer, Why does not the Judge and Sheriff forbear hanging Murderers and
Thieves: The rest of my Answer you shall have anon.

Though my following Propositions seem full enough in opening the difference
between the two Powers; yet I will here also briefly tell you, 1. Somewhat of
the nature of Church Power: 2. Somewhat of the certain Truth that Jesus Christ
did institute it: 3. Somewhat of the Necessity of it sub ratione m^dii ad finem.

I. For the first, take these few things together, and you may clearly see what
power we claim.

1. Our Office for the Original of it, is as immediately from Christ as that of
Magistrates, and is not made by Kings or any Monarchs. Therefore we hold it as
immediately from Christ.

2. For the Matter of it, it is only to expound and apply the Word of God, both
commonly in Sermons, and particularly to each man's several*Case, as Physicions
look to the Cure of individuals: And also to exercise the Keys of the Church or
Kingdom of Christ; that is, 1. To be the ordinary Judges who is to be taken in
by Baptism; 2. And also who is to be publicly admonished as scandalous, in our
particular Charge: 3. And also who is to be absolved as penitent: 4. And who is
to be declared unmeet for Church Communion, as obstinately impenitent, and to
be forbidden Communion with the Church, and the Church with him, and
consequently denied the privileges of the Church, and signs of Communion in
the Lords Supper, which it belongs to the Pastor to deliver only to the
capable, and by the peoples familiarity and brotherly Society, which they are
obliged to deny them. And this Sentence of the Pastor, if it should proceed on
mistake, does not make the man's Case the worse before God; but yet (till the
Church have ^ought its due remedy against mistaking Pastors) it remains so
far valid, as that none against it may obtrude himself on the Communion of that
Church. For, I pray you tell me, if Plato, or Zen^ mistake in their judgment
of a Disciple whom they refuse, or any Free Schoolmaster in judging of the
incapacity of a Scholar, shall others so misjudged intrude into their Schools,
and make themselves their Scholars against their wills? Or shall he whom by
misinformation you refuse or reject from your family or service, become your
household servant in despite of you?

3. And as to the Instruments and manner of exercising our Office, we
professedly disclaim all pretensions to any power of the Sword, or of corporal
penalty, that is coactive or coercive. You confess this once your self. We
claim no power but by the Word, either generally preached, or particularly
applied to the case of those that are of our charge. No other power of
Excommunication do we claim: If men will despise our Ministerial instructions,
reproofs and censures, we have done with them. Shall they force themselves into
our familiarity or communion in spite of us? Your Epist. 54. ad Mettagerium
opens the matter so fairly, that we little differ from it. If you say that
Presbyterians and Episcopal set up Courts, Judicatories, with Officers like
Civil Courts: I answer, 1. The more pomp and likeness to the Magistrates
coercive way, the worse I like it. 2. But how shall men be heard, if they be
not cited? How shall such things be Justly and Regularly, transacted, if there
be not a known Time and Place, and if Accusers and Witnesses be not summoned?
Are not such regular proceedings necessary even in Cases of mere arbitration?
If this be all, here is no more Sword, no more force, than in a Pulpit. And how
does Excommunication (that is, declaring an Impenitent person unfit for Church
Communion by Christ's Laws, and binding him over to the great day) I say how
does this touch men's bodies or estates, or work any otherwise than a
Pulpit-Sermon on the conscientious Volunteers? 3. And if horning, or Writs de
Excommunicato Capiendo, or imprisonment, or burning men as Heretics follow
this, all this is the Magistrates own doing? If it be well, praise him for it.
If it be ill, blame him for it. If Rulers will make such Laws, and if they will
so far be Executioners of the Clergies Decrees, who can hinder them? If it be
against their right, it is their own act, who give so much of their right away.
If you say, that Clergy men are too blame that urge them to it; you shall not
easily think worse of their so doing, than I do: It is greatly against our
wills that the Sword so closely follows Excommunication. I think it is the
effect of Carnal Clergy men's base conceit of their own Sacred Office, as if it
were a Leaden unpowerful Sword which Christ has put into their hands, and
Excommunication were invalid, when the Sword forces not the impenitent to
dissemble Repentance and Submission. When great worldly baits have enticed
worldly men into the Sacred Office, as to a worldly preferment and Trade, they
will judge accordingly and manage it like themselves (which is and has been
the Churches Pest) We would beg on our knees of Kings and Magistrates, if it
would prevail, to leave Church Censures to our Lords intended use; and valiant
quantum valere possunt; and to keep their Sword out of Church-mens hands, and
to punish men in their own Courts for every crime that deserves it; but not
quatenus excommunicate, or merely because the Clergy has judged them unmeet
for Church Communion. He that takes Excommunication alone for no punishment,
is not fit to be in the Communion of the Church, and therefore should not be
driven for fear of a Prison to that which he has no right to. So that you must
not charge the acts of Princes, nor of ambitious Cardinals, etc. neither on
Calvin, Beza, or any such as them.

And as to Lay Elders, or Lay-Chancellors, I am no more for them than you are;
that is, as the Magistrates Officers, or as the Churches Sub-Officers circa
sacra and non in sacris: But sure those of them who are introduced on a
mistaken conceit of Divine right, and do no more than the Pastors do, are no
Usurpers of Coercive power.

You see by the late Acts of King and Parliament in Scotland, that all External
Church power is declared to be in the King: And what would you have more? No
doubt the meaning is not, All power about external things: For the Sacraments
of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and the persons baptized, etc. are external
objects: Nor can it be all power that is exercised by the external parts of the
body. For the Tongue of the Preacher, and the Hand of the Baptizer, as well as
the Ear of the Hearer is an external part. But in these two senses it is true,
and commonly consented to, by all that I remember of my acquaintance that are
Christians. 1. That all the power of the Sword, or of forcing by Mulcts or
bodily punishments, as distinct from the power of the Word, that works
directly upon the soul alone (by the senses) is in the King, and not in any of
the Clergy, though it be about the matters of Religion. 2. And that all power
in Church matters and Religion. Extrinsecal to the Pastoral Office as
instituted by Christ, is of right the Kings, and his inferior Magistrates. And
what would you or any man have more?

4. And as to the exercise of our Office, we all confess (except the Papists)
that we are responsible to the King and Magistrates, for our faults, yea for
our injurious maladministration. And that though the King be not the Chief
Pastor, nor has the power of the Keys which Christ gave to his Ministers, yet
he is the Ruler of all Churches and Pastors by the Sword, as well as of all
Physicions. And is not all this enough to satisfy you, that we claim no part
of the Magistrates Office?

As you say, our power is but Persuasive. It is (...). By the Word; It is but
on the Conscience; It is under the Magistrates coercive Government: And so it
is like a Physicions or a Tutors in a College. But that I pray you leave not
out 1. That it is not under the Magistrates, as to the derivation of the office
or power, that is, It is no office which the Magistrate made or may unmake: 2.
That it is as immediately of Divine Institution as the Magistrates. And
therefore in your similitude you must suppose your Physicion and Tutor to have
a Commission from God. 3. That God has described our office, and limited the
Magistrates office, so that he has no power from God to hinder the Ministry.
4. But if he do it injuriously we must not resist, but patiently suffer for
obeying God. So much of the nature of the office.

II. Now that it is certain that God has committed to Pastors, such a
Government of his Church by the Word, as to stated commissioned Officers,
because I have past by the proofs in my following Propositions, I will add some
here. Supposing what Dr. Hammond has said of the Power of the Keys, and that
no man with common sense can take the Power of the Keys, for any thing less
than a power of Church Government, or Authoritative Guidance, and so a Power of
receiving in and putting out as there is cause; It is plain in that Christ
first recites his own Commission and Power, Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. and thence
dateth the Commission of his Apostles, as it was to endure to the end of the
age or world.

See Isa 22. 22. and Rev. 3. 7. and 1. 18. compared with Matthew. 16. 19. and
John 20. 23. The word Presbyter and Bishop can signify no less: as Acts 4. 8,
etc. compared with Acts 14. 23. and 15. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23. and 16. 4. and 20. 17,
28. Titus 1. 5. James 5. 14. 1 Pet. 5. 1. Rev. 4. 4, etc.

And nothing less can be meant by 1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders that Rule well are
worthy of double honor, etc. Heb. 13. 17. 24. Obey them that have the Rule
over you, for they watch, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. Know them that labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 4, 5. If a
man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a good work -- One that Rules
well his own house, having his children in subjection. -- For if a man know not
how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God. So Tit.
1. 7, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Many other I pass by.

And for the act of excommunication, or excluding unmeet persons from Christian
Church Communion, it would be tedious to stand to vindicate all those plain
Texts from any men's exceptions, 1 Cor. 5. per totum. Titus 3. 10. 2 John 10,
11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14. Rev. 2. 14, 15, 20.

But while I am writing this, I remember that I have long ago written a small
Book called Universal Concord, in which I have described all the Pastoral
Office and Work: If you can prove it less than I have there named in any one
point, you will so far ease us, and take nothing from us at all that gratifieth
our flesh: If you can deny none of that, we are agreed. And in the Preface to
the same Book I have given you twelve Reasons of the great use of Church
Discipline; which shall save me the labor of the third point which I intended
next to speak to; save only that I will briefly ask you,

III. Would you have any difference made between the Christian Church and the
Pagan and Infidel world? If not -- If you would, it must be such a difference
as Christ has appointed us to make? And does our Baptismal Covenant contain no
promise and profession of godliness and obedience, as well as of Belief; and so
of Repentance and a better life?

2. Who would you have to be Judge in this matter? Shall every one be Judge
himself? Then all Pagans, Murderers, Blasphemers may come in and turn Religion
and the Church into a scorn. If any must judge, you would not sure set the
Magistrates or people such a task (on pain of damnation) to leave their
Calling, to try and judge of the qualifications of expectants or Church Members.

3. Whom do you think Christ committed this business to? Who were the Judges of
the Capacity of persons to be baptized, or the desert of persons to be
rejected? Diotrophes could not have rejected Christians injuriously, if he had
not then had some Governing power.

4. Has not all Christ's Church exercised such a Discipline as I have described
since the Apostles days till now? (saving the corruption of it by ill
additions, or carnal neglects) And has all this Church been from the beginning
under a false Government in the main? Or is not Reformation a righter way than
extirpation, of Discipline as well as of Doctrine and Worship?

5. Is it not the wickedness of Christians that is the chief hardening of Turks
and other Infidels against Christianity? And would they not increase this
pollution that would have the most vicious to be equally received with the best?

6. Is not Faith for Holiness, and did not Christ come to purify a peculiar
people, and restore us to the Image of God? And if for want of Discipline
Saints and Swine be equally Church Members, and partakers of holy things, is
that agreeable to this design of our Redeemer?

7. If Oeconomical Government and School Government and College Government be
no wrong to Kings, neither is the Church Government which Christ has
instituted.

I do not say all this to intimate that you say the contrary. But because your
Charge on Luther, Calvin and other Protestants shows that you do sure mistake
them: And to tell you that I join with you in disowning the KINGDOM and
Magistracy of the Mock-Church of Rome; and of all that will imitate them; But
that I take the Enmity to and gross neglect of true Church Discipline, to be
one of Satan's principal services that is done him upon earth, against true
Godliness.

The Churches and the Magistrates Power stated in matters of Religion; In an
hundred Propositions, which almost all sober Protestant Teachers are agreed in.
A Reconciliation of the sober Episcopal, Presbyterians, Independents and
Erastians.
To my very Learned, sincere and worthy Friend Ludovicus Molinaeus Dr. of
Physic (The Author of many Treatises on this subject.) Dear Sir,
UPON the perusal of your Writings which you sent me, the love of the Church,
and of Truth and Peace and you, does command me to tell you as follows;

1. That I make no question, but that the Pride of the Clergy (with their
Covetousness) has for above twelve hundred years been a greater plague to the
Churches throughout the Christian world, than all the cruelties of the Laity:
And that the senseless forgetting the matter and manner of Christ's decision of
his Apostles Controversy, Which of them should be the greatest, has divided
the East and West, and corrupted and kept down Religion; whilst that the lives
of the Prelates have persuaded the observers, that they still took it for a
more important Question, Which of them should be the greatest? than, Whether
they or their people should be saved. And it has ever been a matter of easy
remarque, that there have been seldom any dangerous Schisms on one side, or any
cruel Persecutions on the other side, which the Clergy have not been the
principal causes of: And that the Laity would be more quiet, if the Clergy did
not delude them, or exasperate them; And that even the more mistaken and
violent sort of Magistrates, would have some moderation in their Persecutions,
if the Clergy did not make them believe, that a burning killing Zeal is the
mark of a good Christian, and is the same that in Tit. 2. 14. is called a zeal
of good works; and that to destroy the bodies of men truly fearing God, is the
way to save their own souls, or their Dominions at least; when indeed, the zeal
of Christ's commanding, is a zealous Love to one another, and a zealous doing
good to others, and the Devilish zeal (as St. James distinguishes it, James 2.
15, 16, 17.) is an envious, hating, hurting zeal.

2. That in all this the Laity are not innocent, but must thank themselves for
the evil that befalls them; and that on two notable accounts: 1. Because they
have ordinarily the choosing of the dignified and beneficed Churchmen, and they
have but such as they choose themselves: They think it is their wisdom as well
as piety, to make the Honor and Profit so great, as shall be a very strong
bait to Pride and Covetousness: And when they have so done, the Proudest and
most Covetous will certainly be the Seekers; and that with as much craft and
diligence, as an ambitious mind can use their parts to: And he that seeks (by
himself and friends) is likest to find: And the more humble and heavenly any
one is, and consequently most honest, and fit to be a Pastor of the Church, the
further he will be from the Seekers way! So that except it be where the world
has Rulers so wise and strangely pious, as to seek out the worthy who seek not
for themselves, its easy to prognosticate what kind of Pastors the Church will
have: And verily they that choose them, are the unfittest to complain of them.
Whereas if the Churches maintenance were such, as might but prevent the
discouragements of such as seek the Ministry for the works sake and for the
love of souls, that so Students might not make it a Trade for wealth, but a
self-denying dedication of themselves to God, the Churches would be accordingly
provided; And they that intend the saving of souls, would be the Candidates,
(by their own and their Parents dedication) as now they that intend a Trade to
live and serve the flesh by (in an honorable way) are too great a part of
them. Or men might be further rewarded ex post facto for their Merits, without
being tempted to study principally for that reward. And if we will needs have
carnal men, let us not wonder if they live carnally. And if the carnal mind be
enmity to God, and neither is nor can be subject to his Law, Romans 8. 6, 7. we
may easily prognosticate how Christ's enemies will do his work, and guide his
Church, and whether their wills and ways will be such as the conscionable can
conform to.

3. And the Laity are unexcusable, because it is they (in all those Countries
where Popery and Church-tyranny prevails) who put their Sword into the
Clergies hands, and give away their own authority, and set up men to vie with
them, and to overtop them: of which more anon.

3. I grant you also, that in all such Countries as aforesaid (where Popery and
Church-tyranny prevails) the name of Ecclesiastical Courts and Discipline, is
applied to that mungrel power, which is neither Fish nor Flesh; and that the
true Spiritual Power set up by Christ, is corrupted and turned into a secular
thing, or by confusion, a third sort arisen out of both. And that Popish
Princes are woefully abused by this deceit: while that the reverence of the name
of the Church and Church Government, does persuade them to ruin the Church
indeed, and to set up their Subjects to be the Governors of themselves, and to
give away their own power to their servants, and then to stoop to the power
which they have given.

4. And I grant you, that all this mischief would much be cured, if Magistrates
would keep the Sword to themselves, and use it only according to the judgment
of their proper Courts; and would leave the Power of the Church Keys to the
Pastors, and valiant quantum valere possunt; and let it be thought penalty
enough for an excommunicate person qua talis to be excommunicate: And not to
take him to be a penitent, or worthy of the Communion of the Church, that had
rather be there than in a Gaol. There be wiser ways of bringing men to
Repentance and to the Communion of the Church, than by saying [Choose this or
the Goal: You are worthy to be in the Church, if you had but rather be in it
than in a Prison.] Christ said, [ Forsake all, or ye cannot be my Disciples;]
And some say, [Be Christ's Disciples, or forsake all: The Church will receive
you, if you will but accept her communion rather than imprisonment or beggary.]
A kind Church indeed! of which more anon.

5. But notwithstanding all these concessions, I must further tell you, that it
is the Pastors of the Churches that must keep up the interest of Christianity
in the world; and that as the bad ones are the greatest plagues, so the good
ones are the greatest blessings of the earth; even the salt and lights of the
world: And none but the enemies of Christ are their enemies, (as such.) And as
the Ministry has grown better or worse, so has Christianity either risen or
fallen, in all times and places of the Church on earth. (Of which see Two
Sheets which I have written for the Ministry, against the Seekers and
Malignants long ago.)

6. And though the Carnal Clergy before described, deserve all the invectives in
your Books, and their Usurpations, and turning Church Discipline into a secular
thing, do call aloud for a just detection and rebuke, and it would be the
happiness of the world, if the eyes of all Christian Princes and Rulers, were
opened in this point; yet I must tell you, that I believe most sober, pious
Protestant Divines are really agreed in the main things that you desire and
intend; And that both you and some of your adversaries both do amiss, to make
the difference seem wider than indeed it is: And that making Verbal differences
seem real, and small ones seem great, is an ill employment; when a few
distinctions and clearer explications, would make both sides see, that they are
almost of one mind.

Therefore all that I shall do in this business is, to lay down my own
judgment, and I think the judgment of all the pious and sober part, of the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independents and Erastians (or Politicians) in certain
brief Propositions, which shall carry their own evidence past all contradiction
of Learned and Considerate Christians.

Prop. 1. THe work of the Gospel Ministry is not a work of mere Charity and
Liberty, but an Office-work: Authority, Reason and Love, are its principles,
Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Titus 1. 5. Acts 14. 23.

2. This Office is instituted by Christ himself, and by the Holy Ghost, Ibid.
Acts 20. 28, etc.

3* It was instituted for great and necessary ends, that the Ministry might be
Christ's Agents, Messengers, S^eward^, etc. for the furthering the affairs of
his Spiritu^l Kingdom, and men's salvation in the world, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 1 Timothy
3. 1, 2, 3, etc. Acts 20. 28. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. ^^b. 13. 17.

4. It was first put into the hands of Apostles ch^s^n by Christ himself; who
were to be the Gatherers, Edifiers and Guides of his Church, and to be its
foundation built on Christ, and the transmitters of the Gospel, and a stated
Ministry to the following Ages.

5. Though the extraordinary part of their work ceased with them, the ordinary
part continues after them, with a Ministry which is to continue to the end of
the world Ephesians. 4. 11, etc.

6. This Office was in time before a Christian Magistrate, and must be the same
where there is any such, and where there is none, Matthew. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 12,
14, 16, etc.

7. It consists in an Authority conjunct with an Obligation to do their
proper work.

8. This Ministerial Office is subordinate to Christ in the three parts of his
Office, Prophetical, Priestly, Kingly (as they are commonly distinguished) or,
in Teaching, Worshipping God, and Governing his flocks, John 20. 21. Matthew. 28.
19, 20. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, etc. and 5. 17. Acts 6. 4.

9. It is essential to the Office to have all these in Divine Authority, but
not in Exercise, nor in the Civil Liberty of exercising them (which may be
hindered) Acts 5. 18, etc.

10. The Office is to be judged of by Gods Institution, and not by the
Ordainers wills intention, or contrary expressions; if the essence of the
Office be delivered in general words.

11. Christ made these Officers the Key-bearers of his Churches, that is, the
Rulers or Guides, who have authority under him over Church communion, to judge
what members shall be taken in, and who shall be put out, Mat. 16. 19. Heb. 13.
17, 24. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.

12. The first and great act of this Key-bearing power (never denied them from
Christ's time to this day) is the power of Baptizing and of judging who shall be
admitted by Baptism into the Church or number of visible Christians, Mat. 28.
19, 20. Acts 2. 41. and 8. 12, 13, 38.

13. This power is not arbitrary but Ministerial, regulated by Christ's
universal Laws; which describes every man's Title to admittance; which is [ his
own (or Parents if an Infants) understanding, voluntary, serious Profession of
Consent to the Baptismal Covenant.] Acts 2. 38. and 8. 12. and 10. 47, 48. M^r.
16. 16. Matthew. 28. 20.

14. If one Minister refuse such Consenters, others must admit him: And if many
should agree utterly to tyrannize, both Magistrates by just Laws may correct
them, and the people desert them, for better Guides: 1 Kings 2. 27. 2 John 10,
11. Mat. 7. 15. and 16. 6.

15. The Churches Communion and Sacraments are not to be common to all the
world. Otherwise the Church were no Church, as consisting of Heathens, Infidels
and all, that would come even purposely to pollute and scorn the holy
Mysteries, 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Acts 2. 47, etc.

16. It is necessary therefore that some men be the Judges who are fit, and who
shall be admitted. Else there can be no difference. Of this see my Treatise of
Confirmation.

17. Every man is not to be the sole public Judge for himself: For then there
would be still no difference, nor the Mysteries kept from common scorns.

18. The Magistrate is not made the first and proper Judge: For then he must
make a Calling of it, and attend upon this very thing, to try the baptized and
the admitted* which is no small work. For he that judges, must first try the
Case, and that with the diligence which the weight of it requires, Acts 8. 37.

19. The People are not to be the ordinary Judges: for else they must all leave
their Callings to attend baptizings, and such works as th^se; and must do that
which most of them are unfit to do: And Christ has put all out of doubt, by
putting the Keys into the Pastors hands, and commanding their study and
attending to this work, and calling them the Rulers, Guides, Pastors, Fathers,
Stewards, Overseers etc. and commanding the people to obey them with
submission; and telling (not the people or Magistrates) but the Pastors of the
great and dreadful account that they must give, Heb. 13. 17. Matthew. 24. 45, 46,
47. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. and 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16.

20. He that will lay this work upon people or Magistrates, is their cruel
enemy; and brings on them a most heavy burden, and consequently makes it their
duty to prepare and study for it, and to avoid all other business that
hinders it, and would lay them under the terrors of a most tremendous
reckoning unto God.

21. Seeing it is a trust that must be committed to some or other, common
reason tells us, that it is better in their hands that Christ has put it in by
Office, and who spend their lives in preparation for it, than in theirs that
neither have the preparations nor the Office, 1 Cor. 9. 16. and 2 Cor. 5. 19,
20. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.

22. It is the great end of Christ's coming into the world to destroy the works
of the Devil, and to purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good
works, and to save his people from their sins, and to vindicate the Holiness of
God: And the world is so apt to judge of Christ's doctrine by his followers,
that the Holiness and Concord of Christians is one of Christ's great appointed
means, for his own and his Fathers glory in the world: That as Gods greatness
shines forth in the frame of nature, so might his Holiness in the Church: And
the Enemies of Holiness and condemned by their Creed, when they profess to
believe the Holy Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints. And Rome it
self does own the name and pretense of Holiness.

23. Travelers well know, that the great hinderance of the Conversion of
Infidels and Heathens, Turks, Persians, Indians, Tartarians, etc. is the wicked
lives of the professed Christians that are next them; when they see that
Christians are more false, and cruel, and drunken, and beastly, and divided,
etc. than themselves.

24. Those therefore that would have the Church lie common (without Christ's
Discipline) to all the most profane and wicked that will come in, and have
communion with it, are indeed Antichristian, even open enemies to the Church,
to holiness, and to the saving of the Infidel and Heathen world, 1 Cor. 5. 6,
11, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Tit. 2. 14.

25. The Devil has fought in all Ages as subtly and diligently against the
holy Discipline of Christ, as against the Christian Doctrine.

26. True Discipline does so wonderfully displease the guilty, and lose men's
love, and especially the Richer sort, and all men's carnal interest and nature
inclines them so much to man-pleasing and flattery, that Ministers have
abundance more need to be driven to the exercise of Discipline, than restrained
from it; except it be the corrupt and carnal Discipline which the Popish and
tyrannizing Clergy do exercise, where the Magistrate himself upholdeth them in
Grandeur, and lends them his Sword. Let Discipline be but such as Christ
appointed, and stand of it self, and then it is but few that will have any more
cause, to be restrained from it, than from too much preaching: Though still I
yield, that there must be limits for the wilful and the indiscr^et, 1 Cor. 5. 3
John 9.

27. The true Discipline of Christ has been acknowledged to be his Ordinance,
in all the Churches almost in the world, since the Apostles days till now;
save that (as you open it) since Constantines time it has been much corrupted
by the mixture of the secular force, and the Emperors lending his Church Power
to the Bishops and Councils.

28. Government has two parts: Antecedent to men's facts, which is Legislation;
and Consequent, which is Judgment and Execution. Christ is the only Lawgiver
of Universal Laws to the universal Church; and the Author of his own Doctrine,
and the substantials of his Worship: But yet there are many undetermined
circumstances, which may and must be antecedently determined, some by each
Pastor; some by a consent of Pastors, and some by Magistrates (if they please).
I will name you twenty lately named elsewhere; 1. What day (besides the Lords
day) and what hour, the Church shall meet. 2. How long the Prayers, Reading and
Sermons shall be. 3. When and how often public Fasts and Thanksgivings be. 4.
What place the Church shall meet in. 5. Of the Form, Ornaments, Seats, etc. of
the Temples. 6. The place and form of the Pulpit. 7. The subject of the present
Sermon, and the Chapter to be read. 8. The Method of the Sermon. 9. The Words
of Sermons and Prayers. 10. Of using or not using Books and Sermon Notes for
memory. 11. What Translation of Scripture to use. 12. And what Version and
Meeter of the Psalms. 13. And what Tune to sing in. 14. What form of Catechism
to use. 15. Of decent Habits, especially in public Worship. 16. By what
professing sign to testify our consent to the Churches Confession of faith:
Whether by speaking, or lifting up the hand, or standing up. 17. Of decent
Gestures in the acts of public Worship. 18. Of Font, Table, Cups, Clothes,
and other Utensils. 19. Making new Officers for these actions circa sacra, as
Door-keepers, Clarks, Churchwardens, etc. 20. Judging when any private man
shall speak in the Church, and when he shall be silent, and such other Orders
necessary to peace and Edification, 1 Cor. 14. 28, 29. 33. 26, 40.

29. Most of these should be left to every Pastors judgment; some may be
determined by the Magistrate; but yet some are fittest for the Concordant
determination of Consociated Churches, in a Synod, or by consent. But none of
them by any neighbor Pastor (that like the Pope) usurpeth authority over other
Churches. Nor should any standing Laws at all, be made of such things where
there is no need; especially where the case is mutable, and it belongs to the
Pastors function to determine it, as occasion serves. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Mat. 24.
45.

30. Whether these Antecedent Determinations of Concordant Pastors in a Synod,
shall be called Laws, or Canons, or Decrees, is but lis de nomine: And also
whether this power be called Legislative, or Jurisdiction. And who will trouble
the Church unnecessarily about words and names? But yet I think they may be
best called Canons or Agreements: And I wish that high Titles be laid aside,
lest it encourage the usurping Spirit, that aspireth after too high things.

31. Grotius de Imperi^ summarum potestatum circa sacra has said so much and
so well of all this Controversy, that it is a shame to us all that we need any
more, and a shame to me to trouble the world after him, with Writings on that
subject, so far less useful; and to any one, to cloud that which he has
clearly and judiciously stated; were it not that renewed occasions require it.

32. Pastors have not only the charge of right ordering the Assemblies, but
also of helping and overseeing all the individuals of their charge; And to help
them in the personal application of the Scriptures to themselves, and to
resolve their particular Doubts and Cases of Conscience; and to reprove,
admonish and comfort the individuals as there is need. As a Physicion is not
only to read a Physic Lecture to his Hospital, but to Govern each Patient in
order to his Cure.

33. Ordination is and rei and ordinis gratia an act of Office, by which the
Ministerial Office and Power is Ministerially delivered by way of Investiture
and Solemnization, as a house is delivered by a Key, and a parcel of Land by a
Turf and Twig, by the hand of a Servant appointed thereunto. Or as our Church
state is delivered to us by Baptism by the like investiture. Though yet it is
God directly, who gives the Power, and that secondarily by his servant thus
investeth us in it; though not without the previous Call which is necessary
thereunto.

34. Ordination is not an idle Ceremony which the Ordainer must perform upon
the judgment of others (Prince or people) without his own cognizance of the
person, or against his Conscience: But he that must ordain, must first judge
the person fit to be ordained; and therefore must also try his fitness, 1 Timothy
5. 22.

35. So much of the Antecedent power of the Ministry* in which it is to be
noted, that Ordination and Baptism are efficient acts, like Generation in
nature, under God the first efficient, as ex Quo omnia, and as they are ordinis
gratia, are the beginning of Government also. And Government is an Ordering
act, as under God the supreme Governor, ut per Quem omnia. And Sacramental
entertainment with Christ's body and blood in Church Communion, is Actus Am^ris,
a final act, of friendship, under God as the final Cause, ad Quem omnia.

36. The subsequent part of the Pastoral Government, is by using the members of
the Church in the exercise of the Pastoral Office, according to their several
deserts: which is by a General, and particular application of the Word of God
to their Consciences, and guiding them in circumstances, and judging of actions
and persons according to that Word, in order to the good of souls, and the
preservation of the Church and truth, Acts 20. 28. Heb. 13. 17.

37. When the whole Church falls into notorious sin, the Pastors must reprove
them, and call them to repentance: And if they apostatize forsake them, as
ceasing to be a Church.

38. When a single member falls into notorious scandal, the Pastor must
admonish him, and call him to repentance: and if he remain impenit^nt and
obstinate after due admonition, and public exhortation and patience, he must
[as Christ's Steward of his Word and Family, pronounce him a person unfit for
Church communion, and require or command him in the name of Christ to forbear
it, and the Church to forbear his communion, declaring him also unpardoned by
Christ till he rep^nt, and binding him over to his judgment.] So that
Excommunication is a Sentence of the person as incapable of Church communion
according to Christ's Laws, and a fore-judging him as unpardoned and condemnable
by Christ's judgment, unless he repent, and a command to the sinner to forbear
the communion and privileges of the Church, and to the Church to avoid him, 1
Cor. 5. Titus 3. 10, etc.

39. If the sinner repent, the Pastor is Christ's Officer, in his name to
pronounce him pardoned, if his repentance be sincere; and the Guide of the
Church to require them to receive him again into their communion, 2 Cor. 2. 7,
10, 11. Gal. 6 1, 2, 3.

40. Because Magistrates and people (as aforesaid) cannot attend so great a
work as this, without the neglect of their particular Callings, and are not to
be supposed so ^it as the Pastor, and because God has made it the work of his
Office, the people are to rest in his judgment about the fitness and Title of
those that have the public Church communion with them, (though they are the
Judges and Choosers of their Domestic and private familiars:) And they must
not separate from them that are thus regularly admitted.

41. Yet when the Pastors by mal-administration, give them just cause, the
flock may seek their due remedy: of which more anon.

42. This power is essentially in the Ministerial Office; and therefore is in
every single Pastor, and not only in some few, or in the abler sort, or only in
a Synod, Mat. 16. 19.

43. When a Church has but one Pastor he must exercise it alone (with due
consideration and advice.) But when a Church has many Pastors, they must
exercise it (and all Church guidance) in a way of Concord, and avoid all
dissentions among themselves, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 1. 10. John 17. 21, 22.

44. Therefore in such a case a particular Pastor may be obliged often to suspend
some such acts, because the Major Vote of his Syn-Presbyters are against it;
Not that they are his Governors for the Majority of Vote, but because the Laws
of Concord require the Minor part to submit to the Major.

45. The same is the reason why in Elections, Consents and other acts belonging
to the flock, the Major Vote should carry it in things lawful; not because the
people have any true Church Government; but because they are obliged to Unity
and Concord; And in that case, the Law of Nature calls the Minor part to
submit to the Major, lest there never should be any Concord had.

46. And the same is the reason why in Synods and Councils, the Major Vote of
the Bishops must prevail, in lawful things not forbidden of God.

47. If any Pastor in the world pragmatically thrust himself into another man's
charge, and pretend himself to be the Ruler of his neighbor Churches and
Pastors, and attempt to exercise authority over them, he is to be slighted as
an Usurper, and a disturber of the order and peace of the Churches of Christ, 3
John 9, 10.

48. Yet every Pastor is an Officer and Minister of Christ (as to the
unconverted world to call them, so) to the universal Church to exercise his
Office in it where ever he has an orderly call! And if he teach, or administer
Sacraments or Discipline, upon such a particular call, in a neighbor Church
pro tempore, he does it as an Officer of Christ (and their Pastor pro tempore)
and not as a Layman: As a licensed Physicion medicateth another Physicion, or
another Hospital, when called to it, not only as a neighbor that is
unlicensed, but as a licensed Physicion. So Timothy, Ap^llo, Silas, and others
did.

49. Therefore neighbor Pastors must have so much care of other Churches as to
admonish them against the infection of any Heresy or Scandal, which they see
them in apparent danger of; whether by heretical wicked Pastors, or others.

50 All neighbor Churches capable of correspondence, are bound to hold a
special concord among themselves, for the advantage of the Gospel by their
Unity, or for the conversion of the Infidel world, and for the preservation of
the several Churches from danger, by Heresy or discord, Acts 15. John 17. 21,
22. Ephesians. 4. 3, 6.

51. He that is excommunicated justly in one Church should not be received by
the rest till he repent: Therefore the neighbor Churches may do well, to
acquaint each other whom they have excommunicated, when there is cause.

52. This correspondence is to be kept by Messengers, Letters, or Synods.

53. Whether such Synods be stated, or occasional, and whether the President
shall be still the same or changed, with such other circumstances, are things
not determined in Scripture, but left to the determination of humane prudence,
as the case shall require, for the end intended.

54. Though the Major part in these Synods, be not the proper Governors of the
Minor, yet the Pastors there assembled are still the Governors of the flocks,
and they are also bound to Concord in things lawful among themselves. Therefore
their Decrees about such things, are Obligatory to the People ratione
authoritatis, and they are obligatory to one another (I mean the Pastors)
ratione concordiae: And this is the true state of the binding power of Synods.

55. Though the usual phrase of [ binding the Conscience] be unapt, (Conscience
being an act of science; and it is not to know that by the obligation now in
question we are bound to primarily) yet as to the sense intended, it is
certain, that the Commands of Parents, Magistrates and Pastors, in their proper
places, do all truly bind the soul, or will, or man, or as they say, the
Conscience; But it is only by a secondary obligation, from a derived power; as
God binds it by a primary obligation by the primitive power. He that has no
power of obliging, has no power of Governing. And he that obliges not the
soul and will, obliges not the man at all, by any Moral obligation: The body
alone or immediately is bound by Cords and Chains, but not by Commands and
Laws: He that may not bind the soul by a Command, has no commanding authority,
Col. 3. 20, 22. Ephesians. 6. 1. Tit. 3. 1. Heb. 13 17, 24. and 11. 8.

56. Therefore the distinction of Internal and External Government, and of the
forum interius and exterius, needs better explication, than is used by most;
or else it will be worse than useless. The true difference of the Government
Civil and Ecclesiastical is to be fetched, ab objecto, and fine proximo and modo
regendi. But as it means that which is In^rinsecal or Extrinsecal to the
Pastoral Office, it is of great use. And as it differenceth Government by the
Sword, from that which works only on the mind.

57. The same God who instituted the Office of the Magistrate, did also
immediately institute the Office of the Ministry: And therefore as to the
Foundation they are coordinate, and neither of them derived from the possessors
of the other.

58 As to the Work and End, the Magistrates work and the Ministers have each a
preheminency in their own kinds.

59. Magistrates, Ministers and Parents may all command the same thing, and all
their Commands be obligatory; As to learn a Cat^chisme, to observe the Lords
Day, etc.

60. It is not lawful for Pastors to Excommunicate either Kings, or their chief
Magistrates, or their own Parents (unless perhaps in some rare case) by any
public formal or dishonouring Excommunication. Because the great Command in
Nature [ Honor thy Father and Mother; Honor the King] lies lower than the
positive Command of Excommunication; and is antecedent to it: And as
affirmatives bind not semper and ad semper, so also they give place to Natural
Laws, and not Naturals (ordinarily to them. And the Rulers Honor is of more
public use and necessity, than excommunication in that particular act is. But
an Usurping Tyrant, who may be deposed, and dishonored, may be excommunicated.

61. Much less may a strange Pastor, to whom the Magistrate never committed the
care of his soul, presume to excommunicate him who is none of his charge: And
therefore the Pope and his Prelates excommunicating Kings and Rulers, seems
to me, to be nothing but a proclaiming open Hostility against them.

62. Pastors have no Power over any but Consenters: Nor can they use the Sword,
or have any Coactive power at all; that is, any power to touch a man's body or
estate: but only to work upon his Conscience, and his Church-reputation. The
forcing power belongs only to Parents, and Magistrates, and not to Ministers
as such at all, Luke ^^. 25, 26, 27. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 10. 4.

63. The similitude of a Physicions power, (if you will but suppose him to have
a Hospital of Volunteers, and his office to be of Divine institution); or of a
Philosophers or Tutors (on the like supposition) over adult Disciples, may much
explicate the Church power. No wise Physicion will take any into his Hospital
and Cure, upon unsafe destructive terms, which the Patient or Magistrate shall
impose; but will say, [It is my function to Rule you, as to Medicine for your
Cure; Take what I give you, and use your self upon it as I advise you, or else
take your course; you are no Patient for me; nor shall be in my Hospital: I
will not strike you, nor fine and imprison you; but I will be none of your
Physicion, (or says the Tutor, I will be none of your Teacher) nor shall you
be any part of my Hospital, (School) or charge.] Only still remember here the
Divine institution of the Ministry and Discipline, and the regulation of it by
Gods Laws, that it be not arbitrarily used.

64. The undoing of the Church of Christ (in those Countries where Popery and
Church-tyranny prevail) has long been by the Magistrates annexing their
executions to the sentence of the Church (as it is called) and becoming the
mere Executioners of the judgment of other men. No Magistrate should be
debased, so as to be made the Churches Executioner. If the Magistrate will
punish a man, it must not be merely quatenus excommunicate, that is, as
punished already; but for the fault for which he was excommunicate. And if so,
then he must try and judge him for that fault at his own bar, and not punish
him unheard, because the Church has sentenced him: And if Rulers would more
leave the Church to the exercise of its proper power, and let excommunication
do what it can of it self, (unless the nature of the crime require a distinct
Secular judgment and punishment) it would do much to heal all the divisions
and perturbations in the Christian world. For which course I have these Reasons
following to urge.

1. It is a great contempt and reproach to Christ's institution of discipline,
to tell the world, that it is a powerless uneffectual thing of it self, unless
the Secular Sword do enforce it. Such Pastors vilify their own power also,
which is so useless. 2. It is a corrupting of Christ's discipline, and
destroying the use of it: For it cannot be known now, what the Keys do of
themselves, when the Sword goes with them: No man knows when Repentance
professed is credibly real and moved by divine Motives; and when it is
dissembled for avoiding of the Secular punishment. 3. It must leave the Pastors
conscience unsatisfied in his administrations; and bind him to abuse Christ;
when he must say to men, [If you had but rather say that you repent, than lie
in a Gaol, I absolve you, and give you the Sacraments, and pronounce you
pardoned by Christ.] Who can administer on these terms? 4. It is a dangerous
deluding of the sinners soul, that seems intimated by this way. 5. It is a
wilful corrupting and confounding of the Church; when men shall be forced to be
its members, though they be Infidels, Heathens, or most impious, if they had
but rather say they are Christians than lie in Gaol. And by this means it is,
that no man can know, who are really of the Church of Rome, or of any
tyrannical Church, but only who had rather say they are of the Church, than be
undone: which any Infidel and Atheist will soon do. Therefore let not Rome
boast of the number of her members which are unknown. 6. It is a changing of
Christ's terms of Covenant, Christianity, Communion and Absolution: when Christ
says, [ He that from his heart believes and repents, and forsakes the
flesh and the world for me, shall be my Disciple and be pardoned; and he that
credibly professes thus much, shall be taken into the Church (which are truly
Christ's terms) now comes the Church-tyrant and says [ He that will say, that
he believes and repents rather than he will forsake the flesh and the world,
and will choose the Church before a Gaol, shall be pardoned, and have communion
with the Church, or at least have the seals of pardon to delude him. 7. By this
means the Church is mostly constituted, in such Countries, of the grossest
wicked hypocrites: And it is made a scorn to Infidels and Heathens, and their
conversion hindered thereby, when they see that Christians are worse than they.
8. And by this means these hypocrites ruin the Church it self (as an enemies
Soldiers in an Army): And nominal Christians and Pastors, that are heartily
enemies to Christ, do him more wrong, and cause more divisions and ruins in
the Church, than they could have done, if they had staid without. 9. It
destroys most of the hopes or the success of those Pastors, as to the
converting and saving of men's souls: Because when the Magistrate is made but
their executioner, the people take all their sufferings as from them: And they
will bear that from a Magistrate, which they will not bear from a Minister,
whose Office is to Rule them by Reason and by Love: And so such Pastors are
usually feared and hated by the people, whereby they are disabled to do them
that saving good, which can be done on none against his will, 1 Cor. 8. 13. and
9. 22. 1 Timothy 4. 16. 10. And hereby a Church-tyranny is set and kept up in the
world, by which persecutions and divisions have been maintained for many
hundred years; and the Ministers of Christ have been forbidden to preach his
Gospel, to the unspeakable injury of souls; and the lives of many hundred
thousands, have been a Sacrifice, to the Pride, and Avarice, and Cruelty of the
Clergy; to the great dishonor of the Christian Name. 11. And hereby Princes
have had a power set over them, to the diminution of their proper power, and
part of their dominion subjugated to others, under the false name of
Ecclesiastical Authority; yea, and their own standing made troublesome and
unsafe, and multitudes dethroned, and Wars raised against them by the Clergies
pretended power, or instigation; of which all the Wars between the ^erman
Emperors and the Papalines are full proof, recorded in all the Histories
collected by Freherus, Ruberus, and Pistorius, in Sabbellicus, Nauclerus, and
multitudes of other Historians; and our English Histories, by Ingulphus,
Matthew Paris, Hoveden, etc. And the Italian by Guicciardine and many others:
Nay, what Country is there, where the Papal and Tyrannical Clergy have not
overtopt or troubled the State. 12. And when all this is done, they would
deceive the Princes themselves into a Consent, and so into the guilt of their
own disturbance, and their peoples misery: And cast all the odium upon them,
and say, we do but deliver you into the hands of the Secular Power, it is they
that do the execution on you: when yet a General Council (the Rule of their
Religion) Later. sub Innoc. 3. Can. 2, 3. deposes such Temporal Lords that
will not do such execution.
65. He that desires the Communion of the Church, does take it for a grievous
punishment to be cast out of it. And he that does not desire it, is unfit for
it. Therefore he that cannot feel the penalty of an Excommunication alone (but
only of a Mulct or Prison) may be fit enough for further punishment, but is
unfit for the Communion of the Church.

66. Yet is the Magistrate the Protector of the Church, a Keeper of her Peace
and Privileges and of both Tables; and must use his power to promote Religion.

67. To which end he may prudently by moderate means constrain some that
neglect their own salvation to hear Gods Word, and confer with such as can
instruct them, and use those means, which God has made universally necessary,
to bring the ignorant to knowledge; and may restrain them from actual open sin,
and from scorn and opposition of the means that should convert them, and from
hindering others from the means of salvation, and from open seducing them from
God, or Christianity, or from a godly, righteous, or sober life: In all this,
moderate penalties may be used; and men may be thus far constrained, and
restrained: But not constrained to profess that which they do not believe, nor
to take the privileges which God forbids them to take. So that there are
fitter means left, for the Magistrate to help the Church by.

68. The King and Magistrates have curam animarum, though not in the same sense
as the Pastors have: They have the charge of Government, not only in order to
the corporal case, and peace and prosperity of their subjects, but also in
order to men's holy, sober and righteous living, and to the saving of men's
souls. And their Calling must be sanctified, by doing all in it to these high
and holy ends, Rev. 11. 15. Romans 13. 3, 4, 5. Isa. 49. 23, etc.

69. They are Gods subordinate Officers, and have their power from him, and
therefore for him, who is the beginning and the end of all, Romans 13. 2, 4, 5, 6.

70. Because their power is from him and for him, they have none against him.

71. Yet have they a power which we must submit to as from God, even when it is
used by accident against him, in some points of his will and interest; so be it
that we obey it not in doing any sin our selves.

72. They that make Kings and Magistrates to have no charge of Religion, (but
only as the Clergies judgment leads them,) but only to preserve men's bodily
power; and say that the Church has the care of men's souls and Religion, and
the King only of the Body and our outward wealth, do debase the Magistrate as
far below the Minister, as the body is below the soul; and teach the people to
esteem, love and honor the Minister as much above the Magistrate, as the soul
and Heaven are better than the flesh and earth: And they make the difference so
great, as that the holier any of the people are, the more they must prefer
their Minister before their King: which is a Popish and most unsufferable
debasing of the highest Officers of God.

73. The same points of Religion, the same sin and duties, come under the
judgment of the Magistrate and the Pastors; though to several ends. The
Magistrate is the Judge of Heresy, and the Pastors are the Judges of Heresy:
The Magistrate is the Judge of Murder, Adultery and Theft, and so is the
Pastor: That is, the Magistrate is Judge, who is to be corporally punished for
Heresy and Murder, and Adultery, etc. And the Pastors are Judges, who is to be
excommunicated as Impenitent in such guilt, 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5, etc.

74. Yet there are some faults, and some sorts of inquisition into faults,
which the Magistrates may prudently restrain the Pastors from meddling with, for
the safety of the public peace: especially when they would indirectly make
themselves Judges of men's Titles and Estates; or in controverted cases, where
the Magistrate must first decide, and the Pastors only follow, if the Pastors
will be the first deciders, and prevent the Magistrate and assume his work, or
otherwise wrong the public peace, or private right, they are to be restrained.

75. The Magistrate has all the Coactive Government, over Ministers as well as
over any others of his Subjects: And to exempt the Clergy from his subjection
without his consent, as traitorous. (And if he will consent, he may thank
himself.)

76. Magistrates may (by moderate penalties) drive on negligent Pastors to
their duty, and restrain them from mischieving the Church, and punish them for
notorious pernicious mal-administration: As Solomon deposed Abiather, etc.

77. But they must not on this pretense invade any part of the Pastors Office;
as to ordain, degrade, baptize, excommunicate ecclesiastically, nor impose on
the Pastors any of the circumstantials, which it is their own Office to
determine of.

78. Pastors must obey the Magistrates in all Lawful things, which belong to
his Office to command.

79. Many things are sinfully commanded (because without necessity or cause, or
because to ill ends, or with ill circumstances in the Commander) which yet it
is the Subjects duty to obey in: Because one Law may be for a Ruler, and
another for a Subject, and their duties various.

80. Where it is not lawful to obey, it is yet unlawful for subjects to resist
the higher powers, as being the authorized Officers of God, for our good, Romans
(...) 2, 3, 5, 6.

81. Though usually it is very unfit that Pastors be also Magistrates (both
because of some dissonancy in their necessary deportment and work, and because
one of the Offices alone is enough for any man faithfully to perform) Yet if
the King make Magistrates of Pastors, as Magistrates their coactive power must
be obeyed.

82. Magistrates may make Laws for the Church in circumstancials circa sacra,
which belong to their proper determination: And also to enforce obedience to
the Commands of God, as far as prudence shall justly direct them: of this see
Grotius de Imp. sum. pot.

83. Magistrates may call Synods and Councils: And the Pastors may also
voluntarily assemble, for mutual advice, either in cases of great necessity for
the safety of the Church, or in lesser cases, when the Magistrate forbids it
not.

84. In a time when Blasphemy, or Heresy, or Sedition prevails, the
Magistrate may name certain Blasphemies, Heresies, etc. which he may forbid his
Subjects to preach up.

85. And he may restrain all utterly unable persons, or heretical false
Teachers, or any that notoriously do more harm than good, from the liberty of
preaching in his Dominions, till they are proved fitter; that is, from abusing
the Gospel and men's souls.

86. But if on this pretense he should forbid Christ's faithful able Ministers,
to preach the Christian faith, and call men to repentance, and save men's souls,
(when there are not enough more, especially to do that work, as proportioned to
the number and necessity of souls) it would be a sin so heinous against Christ,
and against the souls of men, as I think it not meet now to aggravate or
express, 1 These. 2. 15, 16.

87. If faithful Ministers break good Laws, they must be punished as other
Subjects, in Purse, or Body, or Name, so as may least hinder them in the work
of Christ.

88. They that silence faithful able Pastors, for such faults as may be
otherwise punished, do grievously punish the faultless people (even in their
souls) for the fault of another. As if a man that has a family of an hundred
persons, were forbidden to give them bread to save their lives, because he was
drunk, or swore an Oath, which might be punished on himself alone.

89. The Magistrate may excommunicate in his way, as well as the Pastors do in
theirs. That is, the Magistrate may as a penalty for a crime, lay Subjects
under a note of infamy, and Outlaw them, and command all men to avoid
familiarity with them; (And this as bad Subjects, whether they be
Church Members or not.) And he may as a Keeper of the Churches Privileges and
Peace (till forfeited) restrain all excommunicate persons from forcing
themselves into the Communion of the Church which did excommunicate them.

90. So contentious are Pastors often times, and so necessary is the Magistrates
Office to the public peace, that every Church should be under the eye of some
Justices of the Peace, or Censors appointed by force to silence intruding
Bawlers and Railers, and to restrain Ministers from making it their public
work, unpeaceably to traduce and revile their Brethren, and represent
dissenters as odious to the flock. And if such Magistrates had kept the
Churches Order and Peace according to their Office, it had prevented abundance
of the Papal Usurpations, which were the fruit of Magistrates neglects.

91. Lay Chancellors exercising the Spiritual Power of the Keys (though they
should pro forma use the stale of an Ordinaries pronunciation) is such a sort
of Church Government, as I will never swear that in my place and Calling I will
not at any time endeavor to alter by lawful means.

92. The Parents are put in the fourth Commandment, rather than the Magistrate
or Pastor, because their authority is the most plenary Image of the Divine
Authority in these respects. 1. Their Authority is not by Contract, but by
Nature. 2. It is the primary radical power. 3. It is most universally necessary
to mankind. 4. And it represents Gods Government. 1. In that it is founded in
Generation, as Gods in Creation. 2. Because thence arises 1. The fullest Image
of his Dominion, in the Parents fullest Propriety in his Child. 2. Of his
sapiential Rule, in the Parents Government (as in presence) 3. Of his Love
which Parents are allowed to exceed all other Rulers in: Therefore God calls
himself Our Father.

93. Q. What if the Magistrate, Minister, and Parents have opposite Commands?
Which of them is to be obeyed? e. g. The Magistrate bids you meet in one place
for public Worship; the Bishop in another, and the Parent in a third? The
Magistrate bids you Learn one Catechism and no other; the Bishop another, and
not that, and the Parents a third. The Magistrate bids you stand, the Pastor
bids you kneel, the Parents bid you sit. The Magistrate bids you pray by one
form, the Bishop by another, and the Parents by a third or none. The Magistrate
commands one translation of the Scripture, and the Bishop another. The Bishop
commands you to use a Ceremony, or to keep a holy day, and your Parents
forbid it you? In such cases which must you conform to and obey?

Answ. When I am desired, and promised by those concerned in it, that it will
be well taken, I will answer such kind of questions as these. But till then I
will hold my tongue, that I may hold my peace.

94. No contrary commands of Churchmen (as they are called); nor any of our
own Vows or Covenants, can excuse us from obedience to the Higher Powers, in
lawful things, which God has authorized them to command; that is, which are
belonging to their place of Government to regulate. Though if the question be
but, e. g. What Medicine and Dose shall be given to a Patient, or by what
Medium a Philosopher shall demonstrate; or what Subject and what Method and
Words a Pastor shall use for the present edification of his flock; or how a
Surgeon shall open a Vein, or a Pilot guide his Ship, etc. the Artist may be
obeyed before an Emperor, (by him that cares for his life, or his
understanding). But yet as all these are under the Government of the King, so
he may give them general Laws, especially to restrain them from notorious
hurtfulness.

Sir, If all these Propositions be enough for the Concord of sober Christians in
these matters, I hope neither you, nor I, nor any lover of the Church and
Peace, shall need to use much sharpness against the Opinions of such
dissenters. But if they be not, I know not when we shall have concord. And yet
that you may see that I am not over sollicitous of my Peace, I will make up the
number with these less pleasing Propositions.

95. Because Corruption optimi, est pessima, Magistrates and Ministers are of
all men (usually) either the greatest Blessings or the greatest Burdens of
mankind on earth. Says Campanella, (Metaph.)

Potentiae Corruption, est Tyrannis maxima mundi mala.
Sapientiae Corruption, est Haeresis maxima mundi mala.
Amoris Corruption, est Hypocrisis maxima mundi mala.
(though indeed he might as well have named more.) As Tyranny is in the
greatest part of the whole world, (which is Heathen, Infidel and Popish) the
principal sin, which hinders the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, forbids the
preaching of the Word of life for men's salvation (And therefore a sin which no
Christian Magistrate or Preacher, should think of, but with great abhorrence,
and none by any palliation should befriend it); so Prudent and Good Princes are
under God the Pillars of the world; For they are the Chief Officers of God, to
show forth his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, Truth and Holiness, Justice and
Mercy, in their Government; And by their Laws to promote the obedience of his
Laws; And to encourage the Preachers and Practicers of Godliness, Sobriety and
Righteousness; And to defend them against the Malignity of those that would
silence, oppress and persecute them on earth; And by their examples and
punishments, to bring all ungodliness, intemperance and injustice unto shame.
None therefore that possess so great a mercy, should undervalue it, or be
unthankful.

96. Wise Rulers will watch the Plots of such enemies, as would use them as the
Devil would have used Christ, who carried him to the Pinnacle of the Temple, in
hope to have seen his fall the greater: who would have them with Herod arrogate
the praise of God unto themselves, or with Pharaoh or Nebuchadnezzar to disdain
to be under the Sovereignty of their Maker? and ascribe to them the Divine
Prerogatives; And would make it seem their honor to have Power to do the
greatest mischief; that the pretense and claim may make them odious, and so may
debilitate and undermine them. That like a draught of cold water to one in a
Pleurisy, they may kill them by pleasing them.

97. It is an unchristian carnal craft for the Protestant Clergy of several
Opinions, to lay false charges on one another, as being enemies to the Civil
Government, when really their principles therein are all the same; Or to make
the differences of Statesmen and Lawyers, to be taken for differences in
Religion: purposely to make one another (and their Religion) odious, and to
strengthen themselves by the errors and passions of Princes; till at last they
have tempted the world to think as bad of all and of Religion it self, as they
have said of one another, and by undermining others fall themselves.

98. But yet that Party who really make a Religion of the Doctrine of
Rebellion, are to be disowned by all that will be true to God and to his
Officers: In my Sermon to the Parliament the day before they Voted the
Restoration of the King, I said somewhat of the difference of the Protestant
and Popish Religion, in this point. And a Papist Gentleman first wrote an
Invective against me, as if I had given no proof of what I said; And several
persons of unknown names wrote Letters to me to urge and challenge me to prove
it: Blindly or wilfully overlooking the undeniable proof which I had there laid
down, from one of their General Councils, viz.

The Decrees of approved General Councils are the Papists Religion: The Decrees
of approved General Councils are for the Popes deposing Temporal Lords, if they
exterminate not such as deny Transubstantiation, and giving their Dominions to
others: Ergo, The Popish Religion is for the Popes deposing Temporal Lords in
that case, and giving their Dominions to others.

The Major is not questioned. The Minor, (besides the Council. Romans sub Greg. 7.
which determines that the Pope may depose Emperors) I there proved from the
express words of Council. Lateran. sub Innoc. 3. Can. 3. which utters it at
large. And if any Protestant do (with Dr. Tailor, Dr. Gunning, and Dr. Pierson)
doubt of the authority of those Canons, that's nothing to the Papists who
justify it as an approved Council, and vindicate it, as you may find with
copiousness and confidence, in the printed Answer to the last named Doctors.
What impudency then is it in these men to challenge me to prove, and yet
overlook my proof?

99. CHRISTIANITY according to the Scripture and primitive simplicity, in
Doctrine, Worship, Government and Life, does constitute a CHRISTIAN, and a
Christian Church. The making of humane additions and mutable adjuncts to seem
things necessary, does constitute a SECT. (And alas how small a part of the
Christian world, is not entangled in some such Sect.) To be united to all
Christians, in the bond of Christianity, is to be a Catholic: To trouble the
Churches peace by striving to set up one Sect or Faction, and suppress the
rest, is to be a Schismatic and Sectary.

So then if some will by a superstitious unscriptural rigor of Discipline,
make every Pastors power arbitrary (or the peoples, which is worse) in judging
of men's inward holiness, and will lay by the Scripture Title, which is ( a
sober Profession of the Baptismal Covenant) and think by this strictness to
advance the honor of their party, as to purity, They will but endlesly run
into divisions: And by setting themselves at a greater distance, from common
Christians, than God allows them, provoke him to cast on them some greater
shame.

And if any others will make their unnecessary forms of Synods, and other
adjuncts, to seem so necessary, as to enter into Leagues and Covenants to make
them the terms of the Churches Unity, God will not own such terms nor ways, nor
will they be durable, while the ground is mutable.

And if in the Countries where Popery and Church-tyranny prevail, any other
more lofty faction, shall persuade the people that there must be no King any
longer than their domination is upheld; and shall seek to twist the
corruptions, grandeur or mutable adjuncts of their function, by Oaths, into the
very Constitution of the State; Like the Trent Oath, swearing the Subjects to
obey the Church, yea, putting the Church before the State, and swearing them,
not at any time (though commanded by the King) to endeavor any alteration in
that Church Government; no nor to consent to any; that so the subjects may be
as fast bound to them, as they are by the Oath of fidelity to their Kings; It
is time in such a case to pray [ God save the King] and to write on our doors [
Lord have mercy on us.] And a true subject in such cases, when it comes to
swearing, must learn Seneca's Lesson, [ No man more esteems virtue, than he
that for the love of it can let go the reputation of it;] And must be content
to be called Disloyal, disobedient, factious, that he may not be so, nor betray
his Soul, his Prince, and his posterity.

100. But to put my self out of the reach of any rational suspicion, besides
what is said, I profess, that I ascribe all that Power to Kings, which is given
them by any Text of Scripture, or acknowledged by any Council General or
Provincial, or by any public authentic Confession of any Christian Church,
either Protestant, Greek or Popish, that ever I yet saw. And if this be not
enough as to matter of Religion, (leaving the Cases of Law to Lawyers) I can
give you no more.

Object. Eccles. 1. 18. In much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. 7. 16. Be not righteous over much; neither make
thy self over wise: why should thou destroy thy self? 9. 2. As is the good,
so is the sinner: he that swears, as he that fears an Oath. Isa. 59. 15.
Truth fails; and he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey. 1 Kings
22. 13. Let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak
good. --

Answ. V. 14. As the Lord lives, what the Lord says unto me, that I will
speak. Luke 12. 4. I say to you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the
body, and after that have no more that they can do. But, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15,
16. They please not God, and are contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to
the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always, for the
wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. Acts 20. 24. But none of these things
move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my
course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received, etc. 1 Cor. 4. 17, 18.
For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding eternal weight of glory: While we look not at the things which are
seen, but at the things which are not seen: For the things which are seen are
temporal; but the things which are not seen, are eternal.

Sept. 21. 1669.
Addition: Of the Power of Kings and Bishops out of Bishop Bilson and Andrews.
LEst you should wrong the sober Episcopal Divines, so as to think that they
claim as jure Divino, and as Pastoral, any Coercive forcing power, but only an
authoritative persuading power, and that of the Keys of the Church, I will
transcribe some of the words of that Learned, Judicious Bishop Bilson in his
Tract. of Christian Subjection; By which you will see, that all forcing power
claimed by them, is only Magistratical, as they are the Kings Officers, and not
from Christ.

Note also that constantly he distinguishes the Magistrates power from the
Pastors, by the [ Sword] as the instrument of execution, which even about
Ecclesiastical matters is proper to the Magistrate; As the power of the Word
and Sacraments, or Keys of the Church, is the Pastors: And these are the
shortest, plainest, and least ambiguous terms; and more clear than [ Internal,
Ecclesiastical and Civil] which have all much obscurity and ambiguity.

Page 238. Princes only be Governors in things and Causes Ecclesiastical, that
is, with the Sword -- Bishops be no Governors in those things with the Sword.]
Page 240. We confess Princes to be Supreme Governors, -- Supreme bearers of
the Sword -- We give Princes no power to devise or invent new Religions, to
alter or change Sacraments, to decide or debate doubts of faith, to disturb or
infringe the Canons of the Church.

But of these two last I must tell you, what we Puritans (as they call us) hold
1. That the King may and must decide doubts of faith, in order to execution by
the Sword (as, who shall be banished or imprisoned as a Teacher of Heresy) 2.
And that Canons circa sacra not taking the Pastors proper work out of his hand
may be made by the Magistrate even if he please without the Prelates* And if
Pastors make Canons, the^ are but in order to their proper way of execution.

Page 252. And if Princes shall not bear the Sword, in things and Causes
Ecclesiastical, you must tell us who shall -- Since by Gods Law the Priest may
not meddle with the Sword, the consequent is inevitable, that Princes alone are
Gods Ministers, bearing the Sword, to reward and revenge good and evil in all
things and causes, be they Temporal, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical: unless you
think that disorders and abuses Ecclesiastical should be freely permitted --
Page 256. This then is the Supreme power of Princes, which we teach -- That
they be Gods Ministers in their own Dominions, bearing the Sword, freely to
permit and publicly defend that which God commands -- So may they with just
force remove whatsoever is erroneous, vicious, and superstitious within their
Lands, and with external losses and corporal pains repress the broachers and
abetters of Heresies and all impieties -- From which subjection to Princes, no
man within their Realms, Monk, Priest, Preacher or Prelate is exempted: And
without their Realms no mortal man has any power from Christ judicially to
depose them; much less to invade them in open field, least of all to warrant
their Subjects to rebel against them. These be the things which we contend
for; and not whether Princes be Christ's Masters, or the functions to preach,
baptize, impose hands, and forgive sins, must be derived from the Princes power
and Laws; or the Apostles might enter to convert Countries, without Caesar's
delegations; These be jests and shifts of yours.

Page 261. To Bishops speaking the Word of God; Princes as well as others must
yield obedience: But if Bishops pass their Commission, and speak besides the
Word of God, what they list, both Prince and people may despise them.

Page 258. His Word is Truth: and therefore your Bishops cannot be Judges of
the Word of Christ, but they must be Judges of Christ himself that speaks by
his Word, which is no small presumption. -- My Sheep hear my voice -- They be
no Judges of his voice. --

Page 259. If you take judging for discerning, -- the People must be discerners
and Judges of that which is taught --

Page 271. Ph. If General Councils might err, the Church might err -- Th. As
though none were of or in the Church, but only Bishops! Or all the Bishops of
Christendom without exception, were ever present at any Council? Or the
greater part of those that are present might not strike the stroke without the
rest --

See page 350, 351, 352. Et seq. That only Magistrates may touch body or goods.

Page 358. The Watchmen and Shepherds that serve Christ in his Church, have
their kind of Regiments distinct from the temporal Power and State: But that
Regiment of theirs is by Counsel and persuasion, not by terror or Compulsion;
and reaches neither to the goods, nor to the bodies of any men --

Page 366. As for your Episcopal Power over Princes, if that be it you seek
for, and not to take their Kingdoms from them, I told you, If they break the
Law of God, you may reprove them: If they hear you not, you may leave them in
their sins, and shut Heaven against them. If they fall to open Heresy or
wilful impiety, you may refuse to communicate with them in prayers and other
divine duties; yea, you must rather yield your lives with submission into their
hands, than deliver them the Word and Sacraments, otherwise than God has
appointed.]

(Say you so; I promise you Sir, if Kings must be dealt so strictly with,
though it cost you your lives, I will be a Nonconformist a little longer,
though it cost me my livelihood, rather than give Baptism, the Lords Supper,
Absolution, and the justifying assertions at Burials, as commonly as I must do,
if I conform.)

P. 525. Pastors have their kind of Correction even over Princes: but such as
by Gods Law, may stand with the Pastors Vocation; and tend to the Princes
salvation: and that exceeds not the Word and Sacraments: Other Correction
over any private man Pastors have none; much less over Princes -- Princes may
force their Subjects by the Temporal Sword. -- Bishops may not force their
flock with any corporal or external violence. Page 526. Chrysostom says -- For
of all men Christian (Bishops) may least correct the faults of men by force:
Judges that are without the Church -- may compel -- But here (in the Church)
we may not offer any violence, but only persuade. We have not so great
authority given us by the Laws as to repress offenders: And if it were lawful
for us so to do, we have no use of any such violent power; for that Christ
crowns them which abstain from sin, not of a forced, but of a willing mind --
Hilary teaches the same Lesson; If this violence were used for the true faith,
the doctrine of Bishops would be against it. God needs no forced service: He
requires no constrained confession: I cannot receive any man but him that is
willing I cannot give ear, but to him that entreats. I cannot sign, (that is,
baptize any but him that (gladly) professes. -- So Origin -- For all the
crimes which God would have revenged, he would have them revenged not by the
Bishops and Rulers of the Church, but by the Judges of the world -- Bishops by
virtue of their Callings cannot command others, or authorize violence or arms.
--

Page 541. Parliaments have been kept by the King and his Barons, the Clergy
wholly excluded; and yet their Acts and Statutes good. And when the Bishops
were present, their Voices from the Conquest to this day, were never Negative.
By Gods Law you have nothing to do with making Laws for Kingdoms and
Commonwealths: You may teach, you may not command. Persuasion is your part:
Compulsion is the Princes.

Page 245. Far better St. Ambrose says [ If the Emperor ask for Tribute, we
deny it not: The Lands of the Church pay Tribute: If he affect the Lands
themselves, he has power to take them: no man among us is any let to him. The
alms of the people is enough for the poor. Let them never procure us envy for
our Lands: let them take them if they please: I do not give them to the
Emperor, but I do not deny them.

So far Bilson.

All this we allow: And if all this be the concurrent judgment of all sorts of
sober Protestants, called Episcopal or Presbyterians, what reason has any
Erastian upon the account of the Magistrates interest to quarrel with them. If
any practice not according to these principles, let them hear of it.

Indeed in point of convenience we greatly differ from some men: That is, 1.
Whether it be convenient for the King to make Churchmen Magistrates, or not?
2. And whether it be convenient immediately to back their Excommunications,
with the Sword; And for the Magistrate to be the Clergies Executioner, or to
imprison men eo nomine, because excommunicate and not repenting. 3. And whether
it be convenient to make the same Court called Ecclesiastical, so mixed of
Pastoral and Secular Power united, in one Chancellor (who is no Pastor, but a
Lay man) or in a Bishop, as that in and by it, the Magistrates, and the
Spiritual Government shall be either confounded, or so twisted as to be
undiscernable, or become one tertium.

But for this, as we love not to be too forward in teaching Magistrates what is
convenient, (though many of the ancient Fathers have done it plainly, and
spoken against the Magistracy of Priests; and Cy^il of Alexandria is branded by
Socrates and others with some infamy, as the first Bishop that used Coercive
power); so you have more cause to say what you have to say in this, to the
Magistrate himself, than to the Bishops or Presbyteries: For if the Magistrate
will needs-make Priests his Officers, and put his Sword into such hands, as
have enough to do in their proper work, Or if he will punish men with the
Sword, because they are punished already by excommunication, or because they
repent not, lest excommunication alone should prove uneffectual; quarrel not
for his actions with other men: It is his own doing; and it is himself that you
blame, when you blame these things: Say not that Prelates or Presbyteries take
the Magistrates power from him; but say the truth, that the Magistrate gives
it them, and will have it so to be. (Though I excuse none that urge him to it,
or voluntarily assume his Power.)

Bishop Andrews also says Tortur Torti p. 383. [ Cohibeat Regem Diaconus, si
cum indignus sit, idque palam constet, accedat tamen ad Sacramentum: Cohibeat
and medicus, si ad noxium quid vel insalubre manum admoveat: Cohibeat and
Equiso, si inter equitandum adigat Equum per l^cum praeruptum, vel salebrosum,
cui subsit periculum. Etiamre medico? Etiamne Equisoni suo subjectus Rex? Sed
de Majori potestate loquitur: sed ea ad rem noxiam procul arcendam: qua in re
Charitatis semper Potestas est maxima.

Here you see what Church Government is in Bishop Andrews sense, and how far
the Bishops hold the King himself to be restrainable even by a Deacon; And yet
but (I think) according to your own sense, I pray you judge then whether the
Bishops and you differ as far as you imagine; and whether the Courts and Church
power which offends you, be not set up by Kings themselves, who make the
Bishops their Officers therein. To which add what Bilson proves that
Patriarchs, Metropolitans and Archbishops Dignities are the gift of Princes,
and not the institution of Christ, and then you will see more, that it is the
Princes own doing.

I add to the like purpose more out of Bilson page 313. [ We grant, they must
rather hazard their lives, than baptize Princes which believe not, or
distribute the Lords mysteries to them that repent not, but give wilful and
open signification of iniquity, etc.] This is Church Government, which none can
contradict.

This is it that Chrysostom so often professes also, as that he would rather
let his own blood be shed, than give the blood of Christ to the unworthy.

And Beda Hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 5. tells us, that Melitus Bishop of London
(with Justus) was banished by the heirs of King Sabareth, because he would not
give them the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which they would needs have before
they were baptized.

(And by the way, if Bishops say that Kings must be used thus, the
Non-conformists are not such intolerable Schismatics, as some now represent
them, for desiring, that every Presbyter may not be compelled against his
Conscience to give the Sacrament to the basest of the people that are ignorant
what Christ or Christianity is, and to them that are not willing to receive it,
but are forced to take it against their wills for fear of a Prison; nor to
baptize the Children of such Parents as know not what baptism is, or as are
professed Infidels, having not so much as Christian Adopters, but only
Ceremonious persons called Godfathers and Godmothers.)

Papirius Massonus in vita Leonis 1. recites his words of the Magistrates
banishing the Manichees, and adds [ Ex hac rei gestae narratione perspicuum
est Romanos Episcopas relegare tunc non potuisse, nec in exilium reos mittere,
uti hodie faciunt; sed eos tantum censura coercere, and poen^ ecclesiastica
mulctar^.

I add no more, supposing that almost all sober Episcopal, Presbyterians,
Independents and Erastians are agreed in all the first ninety four
Propositions, (if not all) that are here asserted; and that all those may
suffice to signify their Concord, and promote their Reconciliation, if
Interest (mistaken) and Passion (mis-guided) did not much more than difference
of judgment in these matters, to cause their alienation.

And as I have written this to vindicate both the Power of Kings, and the
Office of Pastors from any men's unjust suspicions or accusations, who look only
on one side; and to show that these Offices are no more contrary than Head and
Heart, than Light and Heat: so I do require the Reader to put no sense upon any
thing here written, which is injurious to the Government of Magistrates or
Pastors, or contrary to the Laws: For all such senses I do hereby disclaim.

FINIS.

