A Moral Prognostication, I. What shall befall the Churches on Earth, till
their Concord, by the Restitution of their Primitive Purity, Simplicity, and
Charity.

II. How that Restitution is like to be made, (if ever) and what shall befall
them thence-forth unto the End, in that Golden-Age of LOVE.

Written by Richard Baxter.

When by the KING's Commission, we (in vain) treated for Concord, 1661.

And now Published, not to Instruct the Proud, that scorn to Learn; nor to make
them Wise, who will not be made Wise: But to Instruct the Sons of Love and
Peace, in their Duties and Expectations. And to tell Posterity, That the Things
which befall them, were Foretold: And that the Evil might have been prevented,
and Blessed Peace on Earth attained, if Men had been but willing; and had not
shut their Eyes, and hardened their Hearts, against the Beams of Light and Love.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes-Arms in Ludgate Street,
1680.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IT is many Years, since this Prognostication was written, (1661, except the
Sixteen last Lines) but it was cast by, lest it should offend the Guilty. But
the Author now thinks, that the Monitory Usefulness, may over-weigh the
Inconveniences of Men's Displeasure; at least, to Posterity, if not for the
Present Age; of which, he is taking his Fare-wel. His Suppositions are such as
cannot be denied. Viz.

1. Eccles. 1. 9. The Thing that has been, is that which shall be; and that
which is done, is that which shall be done: and there is no New Thing under the
Sun.

2. The same Causes, with the same Circumstances, will have the same Effects on
Recipients, equally disposed.

3. Operari sequitur esse: As Natures are, so they act; except where
overpowered.

4. The Appetite (Sensitive and Rational) is the Principle of Motion; and what
any Love, they will Desire and Seek.

5. Therefore, Interest will turn the Affairs of the World; and he that can
best understand all Interests, will be the best Moral Prognosticator; so far as
Men are Causes of the Events.

6. The Pleasing of God, and the Happyness of their own and others Souls, being
the Interest of True Believers; and Temporal Life, Pleasure, and Prosperity,
being the seeming and esteemed Interest of Unbelievers cross Interests, will
carry them contrary ways.

7. Contraries, when near and Militant, will be troublesome to each other, and
seek each others Destruction or Debilitation.

8. The Senses and Experience of all Men, in all Ages, are to be believed about
their proper Objects.

9. Men of Activity, Power, and Great Numbers, will have advantage for
Observance and Success, above those that are Modest, Obscure, and Few.

10. Yet Men will still be Men; and the Rational Nature will yield some
Friendly Aspect toward the Truth.

11. Those that are Ignorant, and misled by Passion, and carried down the
Stream, by Men of Malignity or Faction, may come to themselves, when
Affliction, Experience, and Considerateness have had time to work; and may
Repent, and undo somewhat that they have done.

12. As Sense will be Sense, when Faith has done its best; so Faith will be
Faith, when Flesh or Sense has done its worst.

13. Men that fix on a Heavenly, Everlasting Interest, will not be Temporizers,
and changed by the Worldly Men's Wills or Cruelties.

14. When all Men have tired themselves with their Contrivances and Stirs,
Moderation and Peace must be the quiet State.

15. When all Worldly Wisdom has done its utmost, an^ Men's Endeavors are
w^inged with the greatest Expectations; God will be God, and Blast what he
Nilleth; and will Overruled all Things, to the Accomplishment of his most
Blessed will. Amen.

On these Suppositions it is, that the following Prognostications are founded;
which I must admonish the Reader, not to mistake for Historical Narratives:
But, I exhort him to know what Has been, and what Is, if he would know what
Will be; and to make sure of Everlasting Rest with Christ, when he must leave a
sinful, restless world.

A Moral Prognostication Of what must be Expected in the Churches of
Christendom, TILL THE GOLDEN AGE RETURNS; OR, Till the Time of True
Reformation and Unity.
1. MAnkind will be Born in a State of Infancy and Nescience, that is, without
actual Knowledge.

2. Yea, with a Nature that has the innate Dispositions to sloth, and to
diverting pleasures and business; and more than so, to an aversness from those
Principles which are needful to Sanctification, and Heavenly Wisdom. The Carnal
Mind will have an Enmity against God, and will not mind the things of the
Spirit, nor be subject to God's Law, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8.

3. Sound Learning, or Wisdom, in things of so high a Nature, as are the
matters of Salvation, will not be attained without Hard Study, and Earnest
Prayer, and Humble Submission to Instructions; and all this a long time
Patiently Endured, or rather willingly, and delightfully Performed.

4. And if the Seeds of Wisdom be not Born with us, in a capacious disposition
of understanding; but contrarily a Natural Unapprehensiveness Blocks up the
Way; even Time and Labor, will never (without a Miracle) bring any, to any
great Eminency of Understanding.

5. And they that have both Capacity, and an Industrious Disposition, must have
also sound, and able, and diligent Teachers, or at least escape the Hands of
Seducers, and of partial factious guides.

6. There are few Born with good natural Capacities, much less with a special
dispositive acuteness; and few that will be at the pains and patience, which
the getting of Wisdom does require; and few that will have the happiness of
sound, and diligent Teachers; But fewest of all that will have a concurrence of
all these three.

7. Therefore there will be but few very Wise Men in the World; Ignorance will
be common, Wisdom will be rare.

8. Therefore Error or false Opinions will be common. For unless Men never
think of the things of which they are Ignorant, or Judge nothing of them one
way or other, they are sure to err, so far as they Judge in Ignorance. But when
things of greatest Moment are represented as True or False, to be believed or
rejected, the most Ignorant Mind, is naturally inclined to pass its Judgment or
Opinion of them one way or other; and to Apprehend them according to the light
he stands in, and to think of them as he is disposed. So that Ignorance and
Error will concur.

9. He that Erreth, does think that he is in the Right, and Erreth not: For to
Err, and to know that he Erreth in Judgment, is a Contradiction, and
Impossible. (However in Words and Deeds a Man may Err, and know that he Erreth.)

10. He that knows not, and that Erreth, perceives not that Evidence of
Truth, which should make him receive it, and which makes other Men receive it;
And therefore knows not that indeed another is in the right, or sees any
more than he.

11. Especially when every Man is a Stranger to another Mind and Soul, as to
any immediate inspection: And therefore, knows not another knowledge, nor
the Convincing Reasons of his Judgment.

12. As no Man is moved against his own Errors, by the Reasons which he
knows not; so Pride, and Self-love, and Partiality thence arising, incline
all Men naturally to be over-valuers of their own Understandings, and so
over-confident of all their own conceptions, and over-stiff in defending all
their Errors, As Pride and selfishness are the firstborn of Satan, and the
Root of all positive Evil in Man's Soul; so a Man is more Naturally Proud of
that which is the Honor of a Man, which is his Understanding and Goodness,
than of that which is common to a Beast (as Strength, Beauty, Ornaments, etc.)
Therefore Pride of Understanding and Goodness often Live, when sordid Apparel
tells you that childish Pride of Ornaments is Dead. And this Pride makes it
very difficult, to the most Ignorant and Erroneous, to know their Ignorance and
Error, or so much as to suspect their own Understandings.

13. He that sees but few things, sees not much to make him doubt, and sees
not the difficulties which should check his Confidence, and stiffness in his
way.

14. He that sees many things, and that clearly knows much; especially, if
he see them in their Order, and respects to one another, and leaves out no one
substantial Part, which is needful to open the signification of the rest.

15. He that sees many things disorderly, and confusedly, and not in due
method, and leaves out some substantial Parts, and has not a digested
Knowledge, does know much, and err much, and may make a bustle in the World of
Ignorants, as if he were an excellent Learned Man; but has little of the
Inward delight, or of the Power and Benefits of Knowledge.

16. He that sees many things but darkly, confusedly, and not in the true
place and method, cannot reconcile Truths among themselves; but is like a Boy
with a pair of Tarrying-Irons, or like one that has his Clock or Watch all in
pieces, and knows not how to set them altogether. And therefore, is inclined
to be a Sceptick.

17. This sort of Scepticks, differ much from Humble Christians; and have often
as high Thoughts of their Understandings as any others: For they lay the cause
upon the difficulties in the Objects, rather than on themselves: Unless, when
they incline to Brutishness or Sadduceisme, and take Man's Understanding to be
incapable of True Knowledge, and so lay the blame on humane Nature as such,
that is, on the Creator.

18. Few know so much as to see the difficulty of things, and make them doubt,
or Skeptical. But far fewer know, so much as to resolve their doubts and
difficulties: Therefore, though (as Bishop Jewel says of faithful Pastors) I
say not that there will be few Cardinals, few Bishops, few Doctors, few Deans,
few Jesuits, few Friars, (there will be anow of these) yet there will be few
Wise Judicious Divines, and Pastors, even in the best and happyest Countries.

19. Seeing he that knows not or that Erreth, knows not that another
Knows, or is in the Right, when he is in the wrong; therefore he knows not
whose Judgment to honor and submit to, if he should suspect or be driven from
his own: And therefore is not so happy, as to be able to choose the fittest
Teacher for himself.

20. In this Darkness, therefore he either Carnally casts himself on the
Highest and most Honored in the World, where he has the most advantages for
worldly Ends; or he follows the fame of the time and Country where he is, or
he falls in with the Major Vote, of that Party whatsoever it be, which his
understanding does most esteem and honor; or else with some Person that has
most advantage on him.

21. If any of these happen to be in the Right, he will be also in the Right
materially, and may seem an Orthodox, Peaceable, and Praiseworthy Man: But
where they are in the Wrong, he is contented with the Reputation of being in
the Right, and of the good Opinion of those whom he concurreth with; who
flatter, and applaud each other in the Dark.

22. When Wise Men are but few, they can be but in few places; and therefore
will be absent from most of the People (High or Low) that need Instruction.
Besides, that their studiousness inclines them (like Hierom) to be more
retired than others, that know less.

23. This confidence in an Erring Mind, is not only the Case of the Teachers,
as well as of the Flocks; but is usually more fortifyed in them than in others:
For they think that the Honor of Learning and Wisdom, is due to their Place
and Calling, and Name, and Standing in the Universities; how empty soever they
be themselves. And they take it for a double dishonor (as it is) for a Teacher
to be accounted Ignorant; and an injury to their work and office, and to the
People's Souls, that must by their honor be prepared to Profit by them; And
therefore, they smart more impatiently under any detection of their Ignorance,
than the common People do.

24. It is not mere Honesty and Godliness, that will suffice to save Ministers
or People from this Ignorance, Injudiciousness and Error; There having ever
been among the very Godly Ministers, few Judicious Men, that are fit to
investigate a difficult Truth, or to defend it against a subtle Adversary, or
to see the Systeme of Theological verities in their proper Method, Harmony, and
Beauty.

25. Morality has innumerable Difficulties as well as School Divinity: Because
that Moral Good and Evil, are ordinarily such by preponderating Accidents;
(Actions as Actions, being neither; but only of Physical Consideration.) And
the work of a true Casuist is to compare so many Accidents, and to discern in
the comparison which prepondorateth that it requires both an Acute and a Large
Capacious far seeing wit, to make a Man a true resolver of Cases of Conscience.
And Consequently to be a judicious Paster, that shall not lead the People into
Errors.

26. As few Teachers have Natural Capacity for Exactness, and a Willingness,
and Patience for long Laborious Studies; so many by their Pastoral oversight of
Souls, and many by the wants of their Families (especially in times or
Persecution, when all their public maintenance is gone, and they must Live
(with their Families) on the Charity of People, perhaps Poor and Persecuted as
well as they) are hindered from those Studies, which else they would undergo.

27. It is few that grow to much Exactness of Judgment without much Writing
(for themselves or others): For Study, which is to be Exactly ordered and
expressed by the Pen, is usually (at last) the exactest Study: As the Lord
Bacon says, [ Much Reading makes a Man full; much conference makes a Man
Ready: and much Writing makes a Man Exact.] There are few Camero's, Men of
clear Judgment, and abhorring to Write. And there are few Divines comparatively
that have opportunity to Write much.

28. They that Err in Divinity, do think their falsehoods to be God's Truth;
and so will Honor that which he hates, with the pretense of his Authority and
Name.

29. Therefore they will call up their own, and other Men's Zeal, to defend
those falsehoods as for God, and think that in so doing they do God Service.

30. And the Interest of their own Place, and Honor, and Ends, will secretly
insinuate when they discern it not, and will increase their Zeal against
Opposers.

31. Therefore, seeing they are usually Many, and Wise Men but few, they will
expect that Number should give the precedence to their Opinions, and will call
those Proud, or Heretical that gainsay them, and Labor to defame them, as
self-conceited Opinionative-Men.

32. Therefore too many Godly Ministers will be great opposers of many of those
Truths of God, which they Know not, and which they Err about, and will help on
the Service of Satan in the World; And will be the Authors of Factions and
Contentions in the Churches; whilst too many are [ Proud, Knowing nothing (in
those matters when they think they are most Orthodox) but doting about
Questions, and Strifes of Words, whereof comes Envy, Strife, Railing, Evil
Surmisings, Perverse Disputings of Men of Corrupt Minds (in this) and Destitute
of the Truth, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5.

33. And if many Good Men will Erroniously stand up against that Truth which
any Man Wiser than themselves makes known, the Worldly, and Malicious, that
have a manifold Enmity against it, will be ready to strengthen them by their
Concurrence, and to join in the Opposition.

34. Not they that are Wisest at a distance, but they that are Nearest the
People, and are always with them, are likest to prevail to make Disciples of
them, and bring them to their mind: So great an advantage it is, to Talk daily
and confidently to Ignorant Souls, when there is none to Talk against them, and
to make their Folly known.

35. Especially if the same Men can get Interest in their Esteem as well as
Neerness, and make themselves Esteemed the Best or Wisest Men.

36. Therefore Jesuitical, Worldly Clergy Men, will always get about Great Men,
and insinuate into Nobles, and will still defame them that are Wise and Good,
that they may seem odious, and themselves seem excellent, and so may carry it
by deceitful Shows.

37. And they will do their best, to procure all Wise and Good Men, that are
against their Interest, to be Banished from the Palaces of Princes and Nobles,
where they are; lest their presence should confute their Slanderers, and they
should be as Burning and Shining Lights, that carry their Witness with them,
where they come: And also to bring them under public stigmatizing Censures,
and Sufferings; that their Names may be infamous and odious, in the World.

38. And Heretical Pastors will play a Lower Game, and creep into the Houses of
silly People, prepared by ignorance, and Soul-disturbers to receive their
Heresies.

39. Between these two Sorts of naughty Pastors (the WORDLY and the HERETICAL)
and also the Multitude of Weak erroneous honest Teachers, the Soundest and
Worthyest will be so few, that far most of the People (high and low) are like
to live under the Influences and Advantages of Erring-Men; and therefore,
themselves to be an Erring People.

40. In that Measure, that Men are Carnal; their own Carnal Interest will Rule
them. And both the WORLDLY and HERETICAL Clergy, are Ruled by Carnal Interests,
though not the same Materially. And the Honester Erring Ministers, are Swayed
by their Interests too much; Insomuch, that on this account, is was no
over-valuing of Tymothy, or wrong to the other Pastors, that it should plainly
be said by Paul, Phil. 2. 21, 22. [ For I have no Man like Minded, who will
Naturally care for your State. For all seek their own, not the things which are
Jesus Christ's.] And Act. 20. 30. [ Of your own selves shall Men arise, and
speak perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them.] Besides the Grievous
Wolves which would not spare the Flocks.

41. The Interest then of the WORLDLY Clergy, will consist in pleasing the
Great Ones of the World; for Lordships, and Worldly Wealth, and Honor, and to
be made the Rulers of their Brethren, and to have their Wills: And the Interest
of Heretics will be to have Many to be of their Own Opinion to Admire them:
And the Interest of upright Ministers, will be to please God, and propagate the
Gospel, Increase the Church, and Save Men's Souls. Yet so that they have a
Subordinate Interest, for Food and Raiment, and Families, and necessary
Reputation, which they are too apt to overvalue.

42. Therefore, it will be the Great Trade of the WORLDLY Clergy, to please and
flatter the Rulers of the World, and by all artificial Insinuations, and by
their Friends, to Work themselves into their Favor, and by Scorns and
Calumnies, to Work out all other that are against their Interest.

43. And it will be the Trade of Heretics, to insinuate into the more ductile
People, especially as Ministers of Truth and Righteousness, that have somewhat
more excellent in Knowlenge or Holiness, than the Faithful Ministers of Christ.

44. And it will be the Work of Faithful Ministers, to Save Men's Souls. But
with such various Degrees of Self-denial or Selfishness, as they have various
Degrees of Wisdom and Holiness.

45. Many Great and Piously disposed Princes, like Constantine, will think that
to Honor and Advance the Clergy, into Worldly Power and Wealth, is to Honor
God and the Christian Religion: And Great Munificence is fit for their own
Greatness.

46. And because such Honor and Wealth cannot possibly be bestowed on All; it
must make a great Disparity, and set some as Lords over the rest.

47. And the unavoidable Weakness, Passions, and Divisions of the Clergy, will
make Rulers think, that there is a Necessity; that besides the Civil
Government, there should be some of their Own Office, to Rule the rest, and to
keep them in order, obedience, and Peace.

48. Ambition and Covetousness, will abuse this Munificence of Princes: And
whilst that any Church Preferments are so Great (beyond the Degree of a mere
encouraging Subsistence) as to be a strong Bait to tempt the desires of a Proud
and Worldly Mind, the most Proud and Worldly that are within the reach of Hope,
will be the seekers; by themselves, and by their Friends.

49. Mortified, Humble, Heavenly Men, will either never Seek them, or with no
gre^^ Eagerness; their Appetite being less, and their Restraints much greater.

50. Therefore they that have the Keenest Appetites to Church-grandure and
Preferments, and are the Eager Seekers, are likest to find.

51. Therefore the Lovers of Wealth and Honor, are likest still to be Lords
among the Clergy; except in such mavelous happy Times, when Wise and Pious
Princes, Call the more Worthy that seek it not, and reject these thirsty
seekers.

52. The greatest Lovers of Worldly Wealth and Honor, are the worst Men, 1 John 2. 15. Jam. 4. 4. etc.

53. Therefore, except in such times as aforesaid, the worst Men will be still
the Rich and Powerful in the Clergy, for the most part, or at least, the
Worldly that are very bad.

54. These Carnal Minds are Enmity to God, and cannot be Subject to his Law.
And the Friendship of the World is Enmity to God. And the Honor, and Wealth of
these Worldly Men, will be taken by them for their Interest: And they will set
themselves to defend it, against all that would endanger it.

55. The Doctrine and Practice of Humility, Mortification, Contempt of the
World, forsaking all, taking up the Cross, etc. is so much of the Christian
Religion, that however the Worldly Clergy may formally Preach it; their Minds
and Interests are at Enmity to it.

56. Such Men will make Church-Canons according to their Interests and Minds.

57. And they will judge of Ministers and People, according to their Interest
and Mind; Who is Sound, and who is Erroneous; who is Honest, and who is Bad;
who is Worthy of Favor, and who is Worthy of all the Reproaches that can be
devised against him?

58. The Humble, Mortified Ministers, and People, that are seriously the
Servants of a Crucified Christ; and place their hopes, and portion in another
World, have a holy Disposition, contrary to this Worldly Carnal Mind; And their
Manner of Preaching, will be of a different Relish, and the Tenor of their
Lives, of a contrary Course.

59. The generality of the best People in the Christian Churches, will perceive
the Difference between the Worldly, and the Heavenly manner of Preaching, and
of Living, and will Love and Honor the Later, far above the former; because
their new Nature suiteth with things Spiritual, and fitteth them, to relish
them.

60. The Worst of Vicious and Worldly Men, will disrelish the Spiritual manner
of Preaching and Living, and will join with the Worldly Clergy against it.

61. The Worldly Clergy being Hypocrites, as to Christianity-and Godlin^ss
(like Judas that loved the bag, better than Christ) They will make themselves a
Religion, consisting of the mere Corpse, and Dead Image of the True Religion; of
set Words, and Actions, and Formalities, and Orders, which in themselves are (
many, at least, if not all) good; but the Life they will not endure.

62. This Image of True Religion or Corpse of Godliness, they will dress up with
many additional Flowers out of their own Gardens, some Tolerable, and some
Corrupting: That so they may have something which both their own Consciences,
and the World, may take to be Honorable Religion; lest Known* Ungodliness
should Terrify Conscience within, and shame them in the World without.

63. This Image of Religion so dressed up, will suit their Carnal Auditors and
People too, (...) the same Ends; and therefore, will become their Uniting
Interest.

64. That which is but a Weed among these Flowers, the more Heavenly Ministers
and People will dislike, and much more dislike the Loathsome Face of Death (or
lifelesness) in their Religion.

65. These differences of Mind and Practice, will Engage both Parties in some
kind of Opposition to each other. The Worldly Clergy or Hipocrites, will have
Heart-risings against the Ministers and People that think meanly of them, and
will take it for their Interest to bring them down. For Enmity is hardly
restrained from Exercise. And Cain will be Wrath, that Abels Sacrifice is
better accepted than his own.

66. The better Ministers, will be apt through Passion, to speak too
dishonourably of the other: And the rash, and younger sort, and the Heretical
Hypocrites that fall in with them, will take it for part of a Godly Zeal to
speak against them to the People, in such Words as Christ used of the Scribes
and Pharisees.

67. Hereupon the Exasperations of each Party, will be increased more and more;
And the Powerful Worldly Clergy, will think it their Interest, to devise some
new Impositions, which they know the other cannot yield to, to work them out.

68. Whether they be Oaths, Subscriptions, Words, or Actions; which they
believe to be against Gods Word, the Spiritual, and Upright part of the Clergy
and People, will not perform them; resolving to obey God, rather than Man.

69. Hereupon the Worldly part will take their advantage, and call them
Disobedient, Stubborn, Proud, Schismatical, Self opinioned, disturbers of the
public Peace and Order, Pestilent fellows, and movers of Sedition among the
People, that will let nothing be quiet, but Turn the World upside-down, Act.
24. 5, 6. And will Endeavor to bring them to such Sufferings, as Men really
Guilty of such Crimes deserve.

70. And because the suffering, and dissenting party of Ministers, when
silenced will leave many Vacancies in the Churches they will be fain to fill
them with men, how Empty and Unworthy soever, that are of their own Spirit, and
will be true to their Interests.

71. The Exasperation of their Sufferings, will make many, otherwise sober
Ministers too impatient, and to give their Tongues leave to take down the
Honor of the Clergy, whom they suffer by more than beseems men of Humility,
Charity, and Patience.

72. When the People, that most esteem their Faithful Ministers, are deprived
of their Labors, by the Prohibitions of the rest, and themselves also
Afflicted with them; it will stir up in them an inordinate, unwarrantable,
passionate Zeal; which will corrupt their very Prayers, and make them speak
unseemly things, and Pray for the downfall of that Clergy, which they take to be
the Enemies of God, and Godliness. And they will think that to speak easily or
Charitably of such Men, as dare forbid Christ's Ministers to Preach his Gospel,
and by Notorious Sacrilege, Alienate the Persons, and Gifts that were
Consecrated solemnly to God; is but to be Lukewarm, and indifferent between
God and the Devil.

73. And when they take them as Enemies to Religion, and to themselves, the
younger and rasher sort of Ministers; but much more the people, will grow into
a Suspicion of all that they see their Afflicters stand for: They will dislike
not only their Faults; but many harmless things, yea many laudable customs
which they use; and will grow into some Superstition in Opposition to them,
making new Sins in the manner of Worship, which God never forbad or made to be
sins; and taking up new Duties, which God never made Duties; yea ready to
forforsake some old and wholesome Doctrines; because their Afflicters own them,
and to take up some new unsound Doctrines, and Expositions of Gods Word;
because they are inclined by Opinion, and Passion conjoined, to go as far as
may be from such Men, whom they think so bad of.

74. And the vulgar People that have but little sense of Religion (that are not
by the foresaid Interest, United to the Afflicting Clergy) having a Reverence
to the worth of those that are Afflicted, and an Experience of the rawness, and
differing lives of many that possess their Rooms, will grow to Compassionate
the Afflicted, and to think that they are injured themselves, and so to think
hardly of the causers of all this.

75. Hereupon the Powerful Clergy, will Increase their Accusations against the
Party that is against them, and Declare to the World in Print and Pulpits,
their ignorance, unpeaceableness, unruliness, giddiness, false opinions, and
conceits about the manner of Worship, and how unsufferable a sort of Men they
are.

76. By this time the Devil will have done the Radical part of his Work; which
is to Destroy much of Christian Love to one another, and make them take each
other for unlovely odious Persons: The one part, for Persecuting Enemies of
Godliness, and Hypocrites, and Pharisees: The other for pevish, seditious,
turbulent, unruly Sectaries. And on these supositions, all their after
Characters, affections and practices toward each other will proceed.

77. By this Enmity and Opposition against each other, both Parties will
increase in Wrath, and somewhere in Numbers. The Worldly Afflicting Clergy will
multiply not only such as are disaffected to them, but downright Fanatics, and
Sectaries that will run as far from them as they can, into contrary Extremes.
For when they are once brought into a distaste of the old Hive, the Bees will
hardly gather into one new one; but will divide into several Swarms and Hives.
As every Man's Zeal is more against the Afflicting party; so he will go further
from them: Some to be Separatists, some Anabaptists, some Antinomians, some
Seekers, some Quakers, and some to they know not what themselves.

78. For the Women and Apprentices, and Novices in Christianity, that have more
Passion than Judgment, will abundance of them quite overrun, even their own
Afflicted Teachers, and will forsake them if they will not overrun their own
Judgments, in forsaking those that do Afflict them.

79. And many Hypocrites that have no sound Religion; but Ignorance, Pride, and
U^charitableness, will thrust in among them, in these discontents; or spring up
in the Nurceries of these Briars of Passion, and will bring in New Doctrines,
and New ways of Worship, and make themselves Preachers, and the Heads of Sects:
By Reason of whom, the way of Truth shall be Evil spoken of.

80. And many unstable Persons seeing this, will dread and loath so giddy a
sort of men, and will turn Papists, upon the persuasions of them that tell
them, that there is no true Unity nor Consistency, but at Rome; and that all
must thus turn giddy at last, that are not fixed in the Papal Head. And thus
they that fly too far from the Common Prayer Book, will drive men to the Mass,
and the afflicters will make Sectaries, and the Sectaries will make Papists.

81. When the Violent Clergy, instead of a Fatherly Government of the Flocks,
have driven the People into Passions, Distempers, and Uncharitable
disaffections to themselves, and have also been the great Cause of multiplied
Heresies, and Sects by the same means, instead of being Humbled and Penitent
for their Sin, they will be hardened, and justify all their violences, by the
giddiness and miscarriages of those Sectaries, which they themselves have made.

82. And when they publish the faults of such, for the justification of their
own violence, they will draw Thousands into an Approbation of their Courses,
(to think that such a turbulent people can never be too hardly called or used)
and Consequently into a participation of their Guilt.

83. By all this, the Dissenters will be still more Alienated from them; and
many will aggravate the Crime of the Ministers that Conform to their
Impositions, and obey them; And for the sake of a few that Afflict them, they
will Condemn many Laudable Conforming Ministers, that never consented to it;
but could heartily wish, that it were otherwise.

84. And the younger, and indiscreeter passionate sort, will frequently
reproach such, as unconsionable temporizers, that will do any thing for Worldly
Ends, and that as Hypocrites for a Fleshly Interest, concur with the
Corrupters, and Afflicters of the Godly.

85. These censures and reproaches, will provoke those Conforming Ministers,
who are not masters of their passions, nor Conquerors of their Pride, to think
as bad of the Censurers, as their Afflicters do, and to join with them in the
displaying of all their Enormities, and promoting their further Sufferings, and
publishing the folly and turbulency of their Spirits, with Spleen and
Partiality.

86. By these kind of Speeches, Preachings, and Writings, Multitudes of the
Debaucht will be hardened in their Sin against all Religion: For when they
observe that it is the same party of Men, who are thus Reproached, that are the
strictest reprovers of their Lewdness, their Fornicatious, Tippling, Gaming,
Luxuries, and Ungodliness: they will think that it is no great matter, what such
a defamed giddy sort of People say, and that really they are worse themselves.

87. Each party of these Adversaries, will Characterize the adverse Party as
Hypocrites: The Passionate Sufferers, will call the Afflicters, [ Hypocrites
and Pharisees, that have no Religion, but a formal show of outside Ceremonies
and Words, and that Tithe, Mint, and Cummin, and wash the outside, while
within, they are full of Persecuting Cruelty, and are Wolves in Sheeps
Clothing, loving the uppermost Seats, and great Titles, and Ceremonious
Philacteries, whilst they are Enemies to the Preaching of the Gospel of Christ,
and get Revenues to themselves, and devour not only the Houses, but the Peace,
and Lives of others, under pretense of long Liturgies; and that devour the
living Saints, while they keep Holy Days, and build Monuments for the dead
ones, whom their Fathers Murdered, etc] And the Powerful Clergy, will call the
others Hypocrites, and labor to show that the Pharisees Character belongs to
them, and that their pretenses of strictness in Religion, and their long
Praying and Preaching, is but a Cloak to cover their Disobedience, and
Covetousness, and secret Sins; and that their Hearts, and inside, is as bad as
others, and that their Fervency in Devotion, is but an Hypocritical, Affected,
Whining, and Canting; and that they are worse, than the lesser Religious sort
of People; because they are more Unpeaceable, and Disobedient, and add
Hypocrisy to their Sin.

88. The Ignorant, Worldlings, Drunkards, and Ungodly despisers of Holiness and
Heaven, being in all Countries most contradicted in their way, by this stricter
sort of Men, and hearing them in Pulpit, and Press so brandid for Hypocrites,
will joyfully unite themselves with the Censurers; and so they will make up as
one Party, in crying down the Precise Hypocrites; and usually make some Name to
call them by, as their brand of common Ignominy: And they will live the more
quietly in all their Sins, and think they shall be Saved, as soon as the
Precisest, that make more show, but have no more Sincerity, but more Hypocrisy
than themselves.

89. The Suffering Party, seeing the Ungodly, and the Conforming Afflicters of
them thus United, and made one Party in Opposition to them, will increase their
hard thoughts of the adverse Clergy, and take them for downright Profane, and
the leading Enemies of Godliness in the World, that will be Captains in the
Devils Army, and Lead on all the most Ungodly, against serious Godliness, for
their Wordly Ends.

90. And the young and indifferent sort of People in all Countries, that were
engaged in neither part, being but strangers to Religion, and to the
differences, will be ready to judge of the Cause by the Persons; and seeing so
many of the Dignified Advanced Clergy, and the more sensual sort of the People
on one side, and so many Men of strict lives on the other, that suffer* also
for their Religion, and hearing too that it is some Name of Preciseness, that
they are Reproached by, will think them to be the better side; And so the title
of the Godly will grow by degrees, to be almost Appropriated to their Party,
and the Title of Profane and Persecuters to the other.

91. All this while the Nonconforming Ministers, will be somewhat differently
affected, according to the different degrees of their Judiciousness,
Experience, and Self-denial.

Some of them will think these Passions of the People needful, to check the
Fierceness of the Afflicters (which does but Exasperate it); And therefore,
will let them alone, though they will not encourage them.

Some of the younger or more injudicious hot-brained sort will put them on, and
make them believe, that all Communion with any Conforming Ministers or their
Parish-Churches is unlawful, and their forms of Worship, are Sinful and
Antichristian; and that they are all Temporizers, and Betrayers of Truth, and
Purity, that Communicate or Assemble with them.

The judicious, and experienced, and most patient, and self-denying sort, will
themselves abstain from all that is Sin; and as far as it is in their choice
and power, will join with the Churches, that Worship God most agreeably to his
Word and Will; But so, as that they will not be loud in their Complaints, nor
busy to draw Men to their Opinions in Controvertible Points, nor will unchurch
and condemn all the Churches that have something which they dislike as Sinful;
nor will Renounce the Communion of all faulty Churches, lest they Renounce the
Communion of all in the World, and Teach all others to Renounce theirs: But
they will sometimes Communicate with the more faulty Churches, to show that
they unchurch them not (so they be not forced in it to any Sin); Though usually
they will prefer the purest: yea, ordinarily they will join with the more
faulty, when they can have no better, or when the public good requires it.
They will never prefer the Interest of their Nonconforming Party, before the
Interest of Christianity, or the Public good: They will so defend lesser
Truths, as not to neglect or disadvantage the greater, which all are agreed in;
They will so preserve their own Innocence, as not to stir up other Men's
Passions, nor to make factions or divisions by their difference. They will so
dislike the pride and worldliness of others, and their injuries against God and
Godliness, as not to speak Evil of Dignities, nor to Cherish in the Peoples
Minds, any Dishonorable injurious thoughts of their Kings, or any in Authority
over them: They will Labor to allay the passions of the people, and to rebuke
their censorious, and too sharp Language, and to keep up all due Charity, to
those by whom they Suffer; but especially Loyalty to their Kings and Rulers,
and Peaceableness as to their Countries. They will teach them to distinguish
between the Cruel that are Masters of the Game, and all the rest that have no
hand in it; and at least not to separate from all the rest, for the sake of a
few: If they will go as far as Martin (in Sulpitius Severus) to avoid all
Communion with Ithacius and Idacius, and the Councils of Bishops, that
Prosecuted the Priscillianists, to the scandal of Godliness it self; yet not
for their sakes to avoid all others, that never consented to it: nor with
Gildas, to say of all the bad Ministers, that he was not Eximius Christianus
that would call them Ministers, or Pastors, rather than Traitors. They will
persuade the People to discern between Good and Evil, and not to run into
Extremes, nor to dislike all that their Afflicters hold or use; nor to call
things lawful, by the name of Sin, and Anti-christianity, nor to suffer their
Passions to blind their Judgments, to make superstitiously New Sin and Duties,
in opposition to their Adversaries: Nor to disgrace their Understandings and
the Truth, by Errors, Factions, Revilings, or Miscarriages; nor to run into
Sects, nor to divide Christ's House and Kingdom, while they pretend to be his
Zealous Servants: They will persuade the People to Patience, and Moderation,
and Peace, and to Speak Evil of no Man, nor by Word or Deed, to Revenge
themselves; Much less to resist the Authority that is set over them by God; but
to imitate their Savior, and quietly Suffer, and being reviled not to revile
again; but to Love their Enemies, and Bless their Cursers.

92. The soberer sort of the People, will be Ruled by these Counsels, and will
do much to quiet the rest. But the Heretical part with their own Passions, will
Exasperate many Novices and Injudicious Persons, to account this Course and
Counsel aforesaid, to be but the effect of Luke-wa^mness, and Carnal Compliance
with Sin, and a halting between two Opinions, and a Participation in the Sin of
Persecutors, and Malignant Enemies of Godliness: And they will believe that
whoever joyneth with the Parish Churches, in their way, is guilty of
Encouraging them in Sin, and of false Worship.

93. Hereupon they will defame the Non conforming Ministers last described, as
Men of no Zeal, neither Flesh nor Fish; and perhaps, as Men that would Save
their Skin, and shift themselves out of Sufferings, and betray the Truth. And
when such Ministers, acquaint them with their unsound Principles and Passions,
they will say of them, that they speak bitterly of the Godly, and join with the
Persecutors in reproaching them.

94. And they will carry about among themselves, many false Reports and
Slanders against them; Partly because Passion takes off Charity, and
Tenderness of Conscience; and partly because an Opinionative Modal, and Siding
Religiousness, has ever more Followers, and a quicker Zeal, than true
Holiness; And partly because they will think that humane converse obliges them
to believe the Reports, which those that are accounted good Men utter; And
partly because that they will think, that the upholding of their Cause (which
they think is Gods) does need the Suppression of these Men's Credit, and
Reputation that are against it.

95. But the greater part of the honest Nonconformist Ministers, will dislike
the headiness, and rashness of the Novices, and the Sectaries; and will approve
of the aforesaid moderate Ways. But their opportunities, and dispositions of
Expressing it, will be various. Some of them will do it freely, whatever be
thought of it; And some of them that have impatient Auditors, will think that
it is no duty to attempt that which will not be endured, and that it is better
to do what good they can, than none. And some will think, that seeing the
Worldly Clergy forbid them to Preach the Gospel of Salvation, they are not
bound to keep up any of their Reputation or Interest, as long as they have
themselves no hand in the Extremes, and Passions of the People. And some that
have Wives and Children, and nothing but the Peoples Charity to find them Food
and Raiment, being turned out of all public Maintenance by their Afflicters,
and Prosecuted still with continued violence, will think that it is not their
duty, to beg their Bread from door to door; nor to turn their Families to be
kept on the Alms of the Parish, by losing the Affection of those People, whose
Charity only they can expect Relief from: And therefore, they will think that
Necessity, and Preservation of their Families Lives and Health, will better
excuse their silence, when they Defend not those that would Destroy them,
against the overmuch Opposition of the People; than the Command of their
Afflicters will excuse their silence, if they neglect to Preach the Christian
Faith. And some will think, that finding themselves hated, and hunted by one
party; if they lose the Affection of the other also, they shall have none to do
their Office with, nor to do any good to; and that they shall but leave the
People whom they displease, to follow those passionate Leaders, that will tempt
them to more dangerous Extremities, against the Peace of Christian Societies.

But the most judicious and resolved Ministers, that Live not on the Favor or
Maintenanee of the People, or are quite above all Worldly Interest, will behave
themselves wisely, moderately, and yet resolvedly; and will do nothing, that
shall distaste sober and wise Men, nor yet despise the Souls of the most
Impotent or Indiscreet; but by solid Principles, endeavor to build them upon
solid Grounds; and to use them with the Tenderness, as Nurses should do their
crying Children. But yet they will not cherish their Sin, under the Pretense of
profiting their Souls; nor by Silence, be guilty of their Blood; nor so much as
connive at those dangerous Extremes, that seem to serve some present Exigence
and Jobb: but threaten future Ruin to the Churches, and Dishonor to the
Christian Cause. And therefore, they resolve not to neglect the Duties of
Charity, to the Bitterest of their Persecutors: And the rather, because that it
will prove in the end, a Charity to the Church, and to the Souls of the
Passionate, whose Charity they labor to keep alive. And Silence at Sin, is
contrary to their Trust and Office: And they will not be Guilty of that Carnal
Wisdom, which would do Evil, that Good may come by it; or that dare not seek to
cure the Principles of Uncharitableness, Divisions, or Extremities in the
People, for fear of losing Advantages of doing them Good; or that dare not
disown unlawful Schisms and Separations, for fear of encouraging those
Malignants, that call lawful Practices by that Name. They will do God's Work
(though with Prudence, and not destructive Rashness, yet) with Fidelity, and
Self-denial. And they will lay at Christ's Feet, not only their Interest, in
the Favor of Superiors; and their Peace; and Safety, and Liberty, and Estates,
and Lives, which are exposed to Malignant Cruelty, among the Cainites of the
World: but also, all the Good Thoughts, and Words, and Favor of the Religious
sort of People, yea, and Pastors too. And they will look more to the Interest
of the Whole Church, than of a Narrow Party; and of Posterity, than of the
Present Time: As knowing, that at long-running, its only Truth that will stand
upper-most; when Malignant Violence, and Sectarian Passions, are both run out
of Breath. And therefore, in Simplicity, and Godly Sincerity, they will have
their Conversations in the World; and not in Fleshly Wisdom, or
Selfish-blinding-Passions, or Factions. Let all Men use them how they will, or
judge or call them what they will; they will not therefore be false to God, and
to their Consciences. And seeing it is their Office to Govern and Teach the
People, they will not be Governed by the Favor of the most Censorious,
Ignorant, or Proud; but will Guide them as Faithful Teachers, till they are
deserted by them, and disabled. But the Sober, Ancient, Wise, and Experienced,
will always cleave to them, and forsake the Giddy and Sectarian way.

96. In the Heat of these Extremities, the most Peaceable and sober Part, both
of the Conformists and Non-conformists, will be in best Esteem with the grave
and sober People; but in the gratest Straight, with both the Extremes.

97. The Godly and Peaceable Conformists, will get the Love of the Sober, by
their Holy Doctrine and Lives: But they will be despised by the Sectaries,
because they Conform; and they will be suspected by the Proud and Persecuting
Clergy, as leaning to the Dissenters, and strengthening them by their Favor;
because these Ministers will, in all their Parishes, more love and honor the
Godly Non-conformists, than the Irreligious, Ignorant, Wordly, Dead-hearted
Multitude, or the Malignant Enemies of Godlyness.

98. Hereupon these Conformists being taken for the chief Upholders of the
Non-conformists, will be under continual Jealousies, and Rebukes. And perhaps,
new Points of Conformity shall be devised, to be imposed on them, which it is
known, their Consciences are against; that so they may be forced also to be
Non-conformists: Because Secret Enemies are more dangerous, than Open Foes.

99. These Conformists being thus troubled, will seel also the stirring of
Passion in themselves; and by the Injury, will be tempted to think more hardly
of their Afflicters, than before: And so will Part of them, turn downright
Non-conformists; and the other Part will live in Displeasure, till they see an
Opportunity to show it. And these are the likest to cross and weaken the
Worldly, Persecuting Clergy, of any Men.

100. And as for the Moderate Nonconformists, that understand what they do, and
why, and seek the Reconciling of all Dissenters; they will also be Loved and
Honored by the Sober, Grave, and Experienced Christians: But both Extremes
will be against them. The Sectaries will say, as before, That they are
Lukewarm, and Carnal, Selfish, Complying- Men: The proud imposing-Clergy will
say, That it is they that have drawn the People into these Extremes; and then
complain of them, that they cannot Rule them. And they will tell them, That
till they Conform themselves, their Moderation does. but. strengthen the
Non-conformists, and keep up the Reputation of Sobriety among them. And the
nearer they come to Conformity, the more dangerous they are; as being more able
to supplant it. And thus the Moderate and Reconcilers, will be as the Wedge
that is pressed by both Sides, in the Cleft of Church-Divisions: And no Side
likes them, because they are not given up to the Factious Passions, or
Interest of Either.

101. Only those will, in all these Extremities and Divisions, keep their
Integrity; who are, 1. Wise. 2. Humble and Self-denying. 3. Charitable, and
principled with a Spirit of Love. 4. And do take the Favor of God, and Heaven
alone, for their Hope and Portion, whatever becomes of them in the World. But
the WORLDLY Persecuting, and the SECTARIAN Party, will be both constituted by
these Contrary Principles; 1. Ignorance and Error. 2. Pride of their own
Understandings; every one thinking, that all are Intolerable, that are not of
their Mind and Way. 3. Uncharitableness, Malice, or want of Love to others, as
to themselves. 4. And over-valuing their Worldly Accommodations, Honors, and
Estates.

102. Hereupon the Instruments of a Foolish Shepherd, will still be used to the
greater Scattering of the Flocks. And because none are so able to Dispute
against them, as the Moderate; therefore they will be taken for their most
dangerous Adversaries: And when they are greatly inclined to the Healing of
these Wounds, the Violent and Lordly will not suffer them; but will pour Oil
upon the Flames, which Moderate Men would quench. And (as if they were
Blindfolding and Scourging Christ again) they will follow the People with
afflicting Wounds; and then charge the Moderate Ministers, with their
Discontents; and charge them, to reduce them to Peace and Conformity. And if
they cannot get them to Love and Honor those that are still Scourging them
with Scorpions, the Scourgers will lay the Blame on these Ministers; and say,
It is all long of them, that the People love not those that Wound them. And
they that cry out most for Peace, will not endure it; nor give the Peacemakers
leave to do any thing, that will accomplish it: nor will keep the Spurr out of
the Peoples Sides, whilst they look that others (spurred more Sharply)* should
hold the Reins; which yet, at the same time, they take out of their Hands, and
forbid them to hold, by forbidding them to Preach the Gospel. So that, it will
be the Sum of their Expectations, [ Perform not the Office of Pastors, nor
Preach the Gospel of Peace and Piety to the People, any more: But yet, without
Preaching to them, see that you Teach them all to Love and Honor us, while we
Silence you, and Afflict them; or else we will account you Intolerable,
Seditious Schismatics, and use you as such.]

103. In some Kingdoms or Countries, it will be thought, that the People will
be brought to no Obedience to the Lordly Pastors, till their most able or
moderate Ministers, are kept from them, by Banishment, Imprisonment, or
Confinement: Which will accordingly be done.

104. When the Ministers are Banished or Removed, that restrained the Peoples
Passions, the People will make Preachers of themselves; even such as are suited
to their Minds.

105. Where Papists or Heretics are shut out by Laws, they will secretly
contribute the utmost of their Endeavors, to make the Sufferings of Dissenting
Protestants, as grievous as possibly they can; that in despite of them, their
own Necessities may compel them, to cry out for Liberty; till they procured a
common Tolleration for all, and opened the Door for Papists and Heretics, as
well as for Themselves.

104. Surely, Oppression will make Wise Men Mad, Eccles. 7. 7.

107. Mad Men will speak Madly, and do Madly.

108. They that speak and do madly, will be thought meetest for Bedlam, and for
Chains.

109. When the Ministers are Banished or Removed, and the People left to their
Passions, and their ownmade-Guides and Teachers; passionate Women and Boys,
and unsettled Novices, will run into unwarrantable Words and Deeds; and will
think those Means lawful, which seem to promise them Deliverance, though they
be such as God forbids.

110. The Seditions and Miscarriages of some Few will be imputed to the
Innocent.

111. For the sake of such Miscarriages, in some Kingdoms, the Sword will be
drawn against them, and the Blood of many will be shed.

112. Hereupon the mis-guided, passionate Youth, being by the Proud Clergy,
deprived of the Presence of that Ministry that should moderate them, are like
enough to think Rebellion, and Resisting of Authority, a Lawful Means for their
own Preservation: And will plead the Law of Nature, and Necessity, for their
Justification.

113. If any of the Sober, Wise, Experienced Pastors be left among them, that
would restrain them from unlawful ways, and persuade them to patient Suffering;
they will be taken for complying betrayers of Religion, and of the Peoples
Lives; that would have them tamely Surrender their Throats to Butchery.

As in a Parenthesis, I will give them some instances for this Prognostic.

1. The great Lord Du Pl^ssis (one of the most excellent Noblemen that ever
the Earth Bore, that is known to us by any History) being against the holding
of an Assembly of the French Churches, against the Kings Prohibition, was
rejected by the Assembly, as complying with the Courtiers, (because they said,
the King had before promised, or granted them that Assembly): But the refusing
of his Counsel, cost the Blood of many Thousand Protestants; and the loss of
all their Garrisons, and Powers, and that lowness of the Protestant Interest
there, that we see at this Day.

2. The great Divine Peter De Moulin, was also against the Rochellers
Proceedings against the Kings Prohibitions (and so were some chief Protestant
Nobles): But he was rejected by his own party; who paid for it, by the Blood of
Thousands, and their ruin.

3. I lately Read of a King of France, that hearing that the Protestants made
Verses and Pasquels against the Mass and Processions of the Papists, made a
severe Law to prohibit it: When they durst not break that Law, their indiscreet
Zeal carried them to make certain ridiculous Pictures of the Mass Priests, and
the Processions: which moderate Ministers would have diswaded them from, but
were accounted Temporizers and Lukewarm: By which the King being exasperated,
shut up the Protestant Churches, took away their Liberties, and it cost many
Thousand Men their Lives. And the Question was, Whether God had Commanded such
Jears, and Scorns, and Pictures, to be made at so dear a rate, as the rooting
out of the Churches, and Religion, and the Peoples Lives.

4. Great Camero (one of the most judicious Divines in the World) was in
Montabon when it stood out in Arms against the King (accounted formerly
impregnable*) He was against their Resistance, and persuaded them to submit.
The People of his own Religion, reviled him as a Traitor: one of the Soldiers
threatened to run him Through: In a Scottish Passion he unbuttoned his Doublet,
and cried, Feri miser, Strike varlet, or do thy worst; And in the heat,
striving to get his own Goods out of the City, fell into a Feavor and Dyed: The
City was taken, and the rest of the holds through the Kingdom after it, to the
great fall of all the Protestants, and the loss of many Thousand Lives.

114. Where the Devil can bring differences to extremities of Violence, the
issues are not hard to be conjecturally foreseen; but are such as my
Prognostics shall no further meddle with, than to foretell you, that both
sides are preparing for the Increase of their fury and extremities, and at last
for Repentance, or ruinous Calamities, if they do, as I have described.

115. Carnal and discontented Statesmen, and Politicians, will set in on both
sides, to blow the Coals, and draw on feuds for their own Ends, and head the
discontented People to their Ruin.

116. But in those Countries, where the difference never comes to such
disorders, there will be a War bred, and kept up in the Peoples Hearts; and
Neighbors will be against Neighbors, as Guelphes and Gibellines.

117. When Kingdoms are thus weakened by intestine discontents; it will
increase the Hopes and Plots of foreign Enemies; and make them think that one
Party (that Suffer) will be backward to their own defense, as thinking they can
be no worse (which is the Hopes of the Turks in Hungary.)

118. It will be a great injury, and grief, and danger to Christian Kings and
States, to have their Kingdoms and Commonwealths thus weakened, and the
Cordial Love, and Assistance of their Subjects made so loose and so uncertain.

119. And it will be a continual vexation to Wise and Peaceable Princes, to
Govern such divided, discontented People; But to rule a United, Loving,
Concordant, Peaceable People, will be their Delight and Joy.

120. A WORLDLY, Covetous, Proud, Domineering, Malignant, Lazy Clergy, will in
most Christian Nations, be the great Plague of the World, and troublers of
Princes, and Dividers of Churches; who, for the Interest of their Grandeur, and
their Wills, will not give the Sober, and Peaceable, and Godly Ministers, or
People, Leave to serve God quietly, and live in Peace. And the Impatient,
Self-conceited, Sectarian Spirit, which like Gunpowder, takes Fire upon such
Injuries, is the secondary divider of the Churches, and hinderer of Christian
Love and Peace; and by their mutual Enmity and abuses, they will drive each
other so far into the Extremity of Aversation and Opposition, that they will
but make each other Mad; and then like Madmen, run and quarrel, while sober
Men stand by and pity them; but can help neither the one party, nor the other,
nor preserve their own, or the public Peace.

121. The grand Endeavor of the Worldly Clergy, will be (in most Kingdoms of
the World) to Engage Princes on their side, and to borrow their Sword, to do
their work with, against Gainsayers: For they have no Confidence in the Power
of the Keys; but will despise them secretly in their Hearts, as leaden,
uneffectual Weapons, while they make it the glory of their order, that the
Power of the Keys is theirs.

122. If Princes suppress disorders by the Sword, the said Clergy will ascribe
the honor of it to themselves; and say, It was their order, that kept up so
much Order in the Churches: And when they have put Princes to that trouble,
will assume to themselves the praise.

123. The Devil will set in, and do his utmost, to make both Rulers and People
believe, that all this Confusion is long of the Christian Religion, and the
strict Principles of the Sacred Scriptures; and so to make Men cast off all
Religion, and take Christianity to be contrary to their Natural and Civil
Interests.

124. And the Papists will every where persuade High and Low, that all this
comes by meddling so much with the Scriptures, and busying the Common People
with Religion; and leaving every Man to be a Discerning Judge of Truth and
Duty, instead of trusting implicitly, in the Judgment of their Church: And so
they would tempt Princes, tamely to surrender half their Government (that is,
in all Matters of Religion) to the Pope; and persuade the People, to Resign
their Reason or Humanity to him; (that He who is so far off, may Rule it all
over the World, by his Missioners and Agents, who must live upon the Prey) And
then he knows, that he shall have both Swords, and be the Universal King.

125. To this end, they will strive to make some Rulers as bad as they would
have them, to do their Work, and to make the rest thought worse of than they
are, that they may have a fair Pretense for their Treasons and Usurpations;
which was the Case of all the Writers, that plead for Pope Gregory the Seventh,
against the German Emperors; who took that Advantage, to settle the Cardinals
Power of Elections; and, in a Council at Rome, to declare the Pope to be above
the Emperor, and to Have Power to Depose him: And as bad was done in the
General-Council, at Later* under Innocent the Third. Can. 2, 3.

126. Concerning Princes, I shall give you no Prognostics, but Christ's; That
it will be as hard for a Rich Man to enter into Heaven, as for a Camel to go
through a Needles Eve. And therefore, that you may know what Men the Rich will
be, in most Countries of the World.

127. And the Rich will be the Rulers of the World; (and its meet, it should be
so: Not that Men should Rule because they are Rich, but that they that Rule
should be Rich; and not exposed to Contempt, by a Vulgar Garb and State.)

128. But some Wise and Good Princes and Magistrates, God will raise up, to
keep the Interest of Truth and Justice, from sinking in Barbarousness, and
Diabolical Wickedn^ss.

129. And where Princes and Magistrates are bad, they will seldom do so much
Hurt as Good, or prove very Cruel, where the Worldly or Corrupt Clergy, do not
animate and instigate them: Their Reason, their Interest, and their Experience,
will lead them, by Man-like Usage, to seek the Peoples Love and Quietness, and
their Kingdoms Unity and Strength. But Bloody Persecutions (such as that of
the Waldenses, Piedmont lately, France, Ireland, Queen Mary's, etc.) are
ordinarily the Effects of Clergy-Interest and Zeal.

130. The Grand Design of the Devil, through the World, will be to Corrupt the
Two great Ordinances of Cod, Magistracy and Ministry; and turn them both
against Christ, who gives them their Power. The Instances of his Success, are
most Notorious, in the TURKISH EMPIRE, and the PAPAL KINGDOM, called by them,
The Catholick-Church: (Which Campanella, de Regno Dei, does labor to prove, by
all the Prophesies cited by the Millenarians, or Fifth-Monarchy-Men, to be the
True Universal Kingdom of Christ; in which, by his Vicar the Pope, he shall
Reign over all the Kings and Kingdoms of the Earth.)

A Prognostication OF THE CHANGES That will be in CHRISTENDOM, IN THE Golden
Age, AND Time of True Reformation and Unity.
1. BEcause it is made part of our Prayers, [ Thy Will be done on Earth, as it
is in Heaven] and [ We look for a New Heaven, and a New Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness] I hope, their Opinion is not True, who think that the Earth
shall still grow liker and liker to Hell, till the general Conflagration turn
it into Hell, and make it the proper Seat of the Damned. Yet, lest this should
prove True, I will place my Chiefest Hopes in Heaven; remembering who said, [
Sell all, and follow me, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven;] (and not on
Earth.) But supposing, that ever the World will come to Full Reformation and
Concord, (which I am uncertain of, but do not despair of) I proceed to my
Prognostics of the way.

2. God will stir up some happy King, or Governor, in some Country of
Christendom, endowed with Wisdom and consideration; who shall discern the true
nature of Godlyness and Christianity, and the Necessity and Excellency of
serious Religion; and shall see what is the Corruption and Hinderance of it, in
the World: and shall place his Honor and Felicity in pleasing God, and doing
Good, and attaining everlasting Happyness: and shall subject all worldly
Respects, unto these high and glorious Ends. And shall know, that Wisdom, and
Godlyness, and Justice, leave the most precious Name on Earth, and prepare for
the most Glorious Reward in Heaven: In comparison of which, all fleshly Pomp
and Pleasure, is Dross and Dung, and worthy of nothing but Contempt.

3. This Prince shall have a discerning Mind, to know Wise Men from Foolish,
Good from Bad; and among the Ministers of Christ, to discern the Judicious,
Spiritual, Heavenly, Sober, Charitable, and Peaceable sort, from Self-seeking,
Worldly Men; that make but a Trade of the Ministry, and strive not so much for
Heaven, and the Peoples Salvation, as they do for worldly Honors, Power, and
Wealth. And he shall discern how such do trouble the Churches, and the World,
and cause Divisions, and stir up Violence, for their own VVorldly Interests,
and Ends.

4. He will take the Council neither of Worldlings, nor true Fanatics, and
dividing Persons; but of the Learned, Godly, Self-denying, Sober, Peaceable
Divines; with his Grave and Reverend Senators, Judges, and Counselors; that
know what is Reason and Justice, and what belongs to the Public Good, as
well as to the true Interest of the Church, and of Men's Souls.

5. He will know those Men, whom he is concerned to use, and to judge of, as
far as may be, by Personal Acquaintance and Observation; and not by the partial
Reports of Adversaries, behind their Backs: And so he will neither be deceived
in his Instruments, nor disappointed by them.

6. He will call together the wise, peacemaking Persons; and with the
strictest Charge, commit to them the Endeavors of Reconciling and Uniting the
several Parties; by drawing their Differences into the narrowest Compass, and
stating them rightlier, than passionate Men do; and by persuading them to Love
and Peace, and to all such Abatements and Forbearances, as are necessary. And
his own prudent Oversight and Authority, (like Constantine's at Nice) will
facilitate the Success.

7. He, and his People will enquire, what Terms of Concord are meet, not only
for some One Corner or Country, but for All the Christian World; that when he
has found it out, he and his Kingdom may be a Pattern to all Christendom, and
the Spring and Leven of an Universal Concord of all true Christians.

8. Therefore, he will enquire of Vincent. Lerinensis, Catholic Terms of Quod
1. Ab omnibus. 2. Ubique. 3. Semper, receptum est.

1. What all Christians are agreed in, as Christians, in the Essentials of
their Religion. 2. What all Christians did agree on, in the Apostles Time,
which was the Time of greatest Light, Love, and Purity. 3. What all
Christians, in all Kingdoms of the World, since then, to this day, in the
midst of all their other Differences, have been, and still are agreed in, as
their Religion.
For he will see, that there is no hope of Agreeing the Disagreeing World, (at
least, in many an Age) by changing Men's Judgments from what they are; and
bringing them all in Controverted Things, to the Mind of some Party; nor to
agree them on any Terms, in which they do not really Agree. But that their
Concord must be founded in that, which they are indeed all Agreed in: Leaving
the Superfluities or Additions of each Party, out of the Agreement.

9. The Peacemakers will then find, that Christian Religion is contained in
Three Forms.

1. In the Sacramental-Covenant with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as
the briefest Formula. 2. In the Creed, Lord's- Prayer, and Decalogue; as the
Summaries of the Credenda, Appetenda, and Agenda, Matters of Faith, Will, (or
Desire) and Practice, as the larger Form. 3. In that Canon of Scripture, which
all the Churches receive, as the largest Form or Continent.
And that he who is understandingly, a Sacramental-Covanter with God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, was ever taken for a Visible Christian. And
therefore, Baptism was called our Christening; and the Baptized taken for
Christians, before they knew the Controversies of this Church, or that: And
that the competent* explicit Understanding of the Creed, Lord's- Prayer, and
Decalogue, was ever taken for a competent Understanding of the
Sacramental-Covenant, and more. And that he that implicitly receives the
commonly-received Canonical Scripture, as God's Word (though he understand no
more than as follows) and that explicitly understands the Creed, Lord's-
Prayer, and Decalogue, and receives them, and consents to the
Sacramental-Covenant, always was accounted, and is still to be accounted a
Christian. On these Terms therefore, the Peacemakers will resolve to endeavor
the Union of the Churches.

10. Therefore, they will pare off, and cast away, (as the greatest Enemy to
Unity) all those unnecessary Controversies, or Things doubtful, which
Christians (yea, or Divines) were never agreed in; and which never were the
happy and successful Means or Terms of any Extensive Concord; and which have
long been tried, to be the great Occasions of all the Scruples, and
Contentions, and Divisions, and woeful Consequents in the Churches. And they
will once more say, [IT SEEMS GOOD TO THE HOLY GHOST, and to Us, TO LAY UPON
YOU NO GREATER BURDEN, THAN THESE NECESSARY THINGS, Act. 15. 28.] All
Christians shall in general, receive the Canonical Scripture as God's Word; and
more particularly, the Creed, Lord's- Prayer, and Decalogue, as the Summary of
Necessaries; and shall profess, with competent Understanding of it, their
Consent to the Sacramental-Covenant; and vow, and devote themselves therein to
God. And this shall be all the Title, which they shall be forced to show, for
their Visible, Church Communion. And though a higher Measure of the
Understanding of the same Principles and Rules, shall be required in Teachers,
than in the Flock; and accordingly, the Ordainers shall try their
Understandings, together with their Utterance and Ministerial Readiness of
Parts: Yet shall the Teachers themselves, be (ordinarily) forced to no other
Subscriptions, Professions, or Oaths, (besides their civil Allegiance) than to
Assent and Consent to all aforesaid; and to promise Ministerial Fidelity in
their Places. All Councils, called General or Provincial, Canons, Decretals,
Articles, Formula's, Rubricks, etc. shall be reserved to their proper Use; but
be no more used for ensnaring and dividing Subscriptions, Professions, or
Oaths; or made the Engines to tear the Churches.

11. When all those Superfluities, and Foot balls of Contention, are cast out
of the way, the Power of the Keys, or Pastoral Government, shall come to be
better known and exercised, and the Primitive Discipline set up; which took
place, before Cyril of Alexandria took up the Sword, and Pride swelled the
Bishops into a Secular State, and way of Rule. Then it shall be
Church Government, to see that the People be duly taken in the
Sacramental-Covenant, and learn the Creed, Lord's- Prayer, and Decalogue; and
be instructed in the Word of God, and Live together in Sobriety, Righteousness,
and Godlyness. And the Pastors shall leave all Secular Matters to the
Magistrates; and be no more troubled, nor corrupted by their use of any forcing
Power: Their Government shall be a Paternal, Authoritative Exercise of
Instruction, and of Love; and no more: Like that of a Tutor to his Pupils, a
Physician in his Hospital, a Philosopher in his School, (supposing a Divine
Commission and Rule.) The Church it self, shall be all their Courts, (supposing
the Magistrates) and the People the Witnesses; and the present incumbent
Pastors, be the Judges, without Excommunicating and Absolving Lay-Chancellors,
Surrogates, Commissaries, or Officials. And all the Materials of Contention
being now gone, they shall have nothing to do in these Courts, but to try,
whether the People have learnt, and understand their Cathechisms, and consent
to God's Covenant, and Communicate in his Worship, with the Church: And when
any are accused of Wicked Living, contrary to Sobriety, Righteousness, and
Godlyness, to try, whether these Accusations be well proved: And if so, to
persuade the Offenders to Repent; and by plain Scripture-Arguments, to convince
them of the Sin; and with Tears, or Fatherly Tenderness and Love, to melt them
into Remorse, and bring them to confess, and forsake the Sin. And if this
cannot be done at once, to try again and again; and pray for their Repentance.
And, when there is no other Remedy, [to Declare such a one openly incapable of
Church Communion; and to require the Church, to avoid Communion with him; and
him, to forbear intruding into their Communion: and to bind him over by a
Ministerial Denunciation of God's Displeasure, (as against the Impenitent) to
answer it at the Bar of God himself; as one that is under his Wrath, till he do
Repent.] And this is the utmost of the Pastoral Power, that shall then be used,
(supposing private Admonitions): And this only, in that Church, or
Congregation, wherein the Sinner had before his Communion; and not at a
distance, nor in other Churches, or Parts of the World, where the Pastor has
no Charge. Yea, this Much shall not be exercised Irregularly, and at Random,
to the Injury of the Flock; but under the Rules and Remedies afterward here
expressed.

12. The Primitive-Church-Form shall be Restored: And as (where there are
Christians enough) no Churches shall be too small, so none shall be greater for
Number or Distance, than to be one true particular Church; that is, A Society
of Christians united as Pastor and People, for Personal Communion and
Assistance in God's Public Worship, and Holy Living: That is, so many as may
have this Personal Communion, if not all at once, yet per vices, as often as is
fit for them to meet with the Church, (which all in a Family, cannot usually do
at once.) So that, Ignatius his Church-Mark shall be restored, [ To every
Church there is one Altar, and one Bishop, with his Fellow-Presbyters and
Deacons.] And there shall no more be a Hundred, or Six Hundred, or a Thousand
Altars to one Bishop, primi Gradus, and in one Church of the first Form, called
a Particular Church: Nor shall all the Particular Churches be Un-churched, for
want of true Bishops; nor all their Pastors degraded into a new Order of
Teaching-Ministers, that have no Power of Pastoral-Government: Nor the true
Discipline of the Churches, be made a mere impossible thing; whilst it is to
be exercised by one Bishop only, over many hundred Congregations; which do
every one of them, afford full work for a present Bishop. Nor shall the Bishops
Office be thought so little Holy, any more than Preaching, and
Sacramental-Administrations, as to be performable by a Lay-Delegate, or any one
that is not really a Bishop. But the People shall know them, that are Over them
in the Lord, which labor among them, and admonish them; and shall esteem them
very highly in Love, for their Work sake; and shall be at Peace among
themselves, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Such Bishops as Dr. Hammond in his Annot.
describes; that had but One Church, and Preached, Baptized, Chatechized,
Visited the Sick, took Care of the Poor, Administered the Lord's- Supper, Guided
every Congregation as present in Public Worship, and privately instructed and
watched over all the Flocks, shall be in every Church that can obtain such.

13. Where the Churches are so great as to need (as most will do) and so happy
as to obtain, many faithful Presbyters or Pastors, whether they shall Live
together in a single Colledge-life, or Married, and at a distance; and whether
one as the chief, or Bishop, shall be President, and have a Negative Voice, or
all be equal in a Concordant guidance of the Flocks, shall be left to the
choice and liberty of the several Churches, by mutual Consent of Pastors, and
People, and Magistrates, to do and vary, as their several States and Exigences
shall require: And shall neither be called Antichristian or odious Tyranny on
the one side, nor made of necessity to the Churches Communion, or peace, on the
other, as long as the true Pastoral or Episcopal Office is Exercised in every
particular Church.

14. Neither Magistrates nor other Bishops, shall make the Bishops or Pastors
Sermons, and Prayers for him; but leave it as the work of the speakers Office,
to word his own Sermons and Prayers; and to choose a set form or no set-form,
the same or various, as the case requires: yet so as to be responsible (as
after) for all abuses and mal-administrations, and not suffered to deprave Gods
Worship, by confusion or hurtful Errors, or passionate and perverse
Expressions: But to be assisted, and directed to use his Office in the most
edifying ways, by such kind of helps, as his personal weaknesses shall require.
And where set-forms are used, none shall quarrel with them as unlawful.

15. None of the People shall have the high Privileges of Church Communion,
and Sacraments bestowed on them, against their Wills: No more than a Man
impeninent and unwilling, shall be Ministerially Absolved from the Guilt of
Sin. For every Sacramental Administration, whether of Baptism, or of the Body
and Blood of Christ, is as full an Act of Ministerial Absolution as any Pastor
can perform: And what he does to particular Persons upon their Penitence after
a lapse, that the Pastor does to the whole Church at the Lords Supper. And as
Consent is made by Christ, the Condition of Pardon and Covenant-Ben^fits, which
no Non-consenter has a Title to; so therefore Professed Consent is necessary
to the Sacramental Collation or Investiture: And those that are but constrained
by the apparent danger of a Fine or Jail, are not to be accounted Voluntary
Consenters by the Church; when the Lord of the Church will account none for
Consenters, that will not forsake all, and endure Fines and Jailes, rather than
to be deprived of the benefits of Mystical and Visible Church Communion. The
Magistrate therefore will Wisely, and Moderately, bring all the People to Hear
that which is necessary to their good; but will not by Penalties, force the
unwilling to receive either Absolutions or Communion with the Church, in its
special privileges. But if the Baptized refuse Church Communion afterward,
they lamentably punish themselves; And if it be found meet to declare them
Excommunicate, it will be a terrible penalty, sufficient to its proper use.

16. The Magistrate will not Imprison, Harm, Confiscate, Banish, or otherwise
punish any of his Subjects, eo nomine, because they are Excommunicate: For that
is to punish his Body, because his Soul is punished. Nor will he hearken to
those unbelieving Clergymen, that cry up the Power of the Keys as their
Office; and when they have done, scorn it as an uneffectual shadow of Power,
which will do nothing without the Magistrates force. But he will himself hear,
and judge before he Punish, and not be debased to be the Clergies Executioner,
to punish before he have tried the Cause: Because Clergy-Mens Pride and
Passions, may else engage him to be the Instrument of their Vices and Revenge.
Yea, as he that sees a Man punished in one Court, will be the more delatory to
bring him to punishment in another, for the same Crime; so the Magistrate that
sees a Man Excommunicated for his fault, will rather delay his civil force
against that Man, to see what effect his Excommunication will have: Because the
Conjunction of the Sword against the Excommunicate as such, does corrupt
Christ's Ordinance, and make the Fruit of it utterly undiscernable, so that no
one can see whether ever it did any thing at all, or whether all was done by
the fear of the Sword. And verily, a faithful Minister, that sees a Sinner
come to Confession of his fault, but when he must else lie in Jail and be
undone, will be loath to take that Man for a true Penitent. And to force
Pastors to absolve or give the Sacrament, to every one that had rather take it,
than lie in Jail and be undone, is to set up such new Terms of Church
Communion, which Christ will give Men little thanks for. Church Communion is
only a Privilege due to Volunteers and Penitents. But yet the Magistrate may
punish Men with Fines or other Penalties, for the same faults, for which they
are Excommunicate, having Tried and Judged them in his own Court: But not
quaterus Excommunicate, but according to the nature of the Crime.

17. The Schools of Learning and Academies, shall not Educate Youth, either in
Idleness, Luxury, or Hypocritical formality; but under Learned, Pious Tutors,
in Learning, Sobriety and Piety; From whence they shall not over-hastily leap
into the Pastoral Office.

18. None under Thirty Years of Age (at what time Christ himself entered on his
public Works) shall take a Pastoral Charge, except in case of mere necessity
of the Church, no not on pretense of Extraordinary fitness: But till then shall
employ themselves as Learners, Catechists, Schoolmasters, or Probationers. Nor
shall they meddle in the Pulpits, with matters of such Controversies, as the
Church is in Danger to be troubled with.

19. Ministers shall all be commanded by the Magistrate, and advised by the
Neighbor Pastors, to forbear all unnecessary Controversies in the Pulpits; and
to teach the people the foresaid Substantials, the Covenant of Grace, the
Creed, Lords Prayer, and Decalogue, the Duties of Faith, Love, Repentance, and
Obedience: And shall reserve their Subtiler and curious Speculations, for
Schools and Theological Writings; And so the Christian People shall be bred up
in the Primitive, Plain, Simplicity of Doctrine and Religion; And their Brains
shall not be heated, and racked with those new-coined Phrases and Subtilties,
which will but distemper them into a proud, contentious, wrangling Disease; but
will not be truly understood by them, when all is done. And so when it is the
peoples work, to hear only (usually) the Doctrine of the Catechism, and simple
old Christianity, and to talk of no other; 1. Their time will be employed in
promoting Faith, Repentance, Love, and Obedience, which was wont to be spent in
vain Janglings, and strife of Words. And, 2. Religion will be an easier thing;
and consequently, will be more common, (as cheap Food and Raiment is every ones
Pennyworth): And Ministers may hope to bring the generality of their People,
to be savingly and practically Religious: Whereas the Fine spun Religion of
Novelists, and Wranglers, that pretend new Light and Increase of Knowledge,
does not only dwindle into a Cob-web of no Use, or Life, or Power; but must be
confined to a Few, that can have leisure to learn to Talk in new Phrases, and
will but become the Matter of ignorant Men's Pride and Ostentation; and make
them think, that they only are the Religious People; and all that cannot talk
as they, are Profane, and not to be admitted to their Communion. When as the
Apostolic, Primitive, plain Religion, without the Laces, and Whimsies, that
Dreamers have since introduced, would make Men Humble, Holy, Heavenly,
Obedient, Meek, and Patient; and spare Men the Loss of a great deal of Time.

20. The Maintenance of the Ministry shall neither be so poor, as to discourage
Men from devoting their Children to the Office, or disable them from a total
Addictedness to their proper Work, by any distracting Wants or Cares; or yet
wholly disable them from Works of Charity: Nor yet so Great, as may be a strong
Bait to Proud, Covetous, Worldly minded Men, to intrude into the Ministry for
fleshly Ends. It shall be so much, as that the Burden of their Calling may not
be increased by Want: But yet not so much, but that Self-denial shall be
Exercised by all that under-take the Ministry; and of the Two, the Burden of
the Ministerial Labors, with its proper Sufferings, shall to Flesh and Blood,
seem to preponderate the worldly Advantage. So greatly needful is it to the
Church, that all Ministers be Self-denying Men; that valuing Things
spiritually, can practice Humility, Mortification, and Contempt of the World,
as well as preach it.

21. There shall be a Treble-Lock upon the Door of the Ministry: 1. Whether
they are fit to be Ministers in the general, the Ordainers shall judge. 2.
Whether they are fit to be the Pastors of this, or that particular Church; the
Members of the Church shall so far judge, as that none shall become their
Pastors, without their own consent. 3. Whether they be fit for the Magistrates
Countenance, Maintenance, and Protection, the Magistrate himself shall judge.


And therefore, all Three shall severally try, and approve each Pastor: Yet so,
that the Two First only be taken, as necessary to the Office it self; and the
Third only, to the Maintenance and Encouragement, or Defense of the Officer.
And though sometimes, this may occasion Disagreements and Delays, for a time;
yet ordinarily, the securing of a Faithful Ministry, and other good Effects,
will countervail many such Inconveniences.

22. No One Church, shall have the Government of Another Church: And the
secular Differences of Metropolitans, Patriarcks, etc. which was set up in one
Empire, upon secular Accounts, and from secular Reasons, shall all cease. And
no Differences shall be made necessary among them, which Christ has not made
necessary. But Christian Princes shall take warning by the Greek and Latin
Churches, and by all the Calamities and Ruins, which have been caused in the
Christian World; by Bishops striving who should be the Greatest, when Christ
decided the Controversy long ago, Luke 22.

23. As Christians hold Personal, Christian Communion, in their several
particular Churches; so Churches shall hold a Communion of Churches, by
necessary Correspondencies, and Associations: Not making a Major Vote of
Bishops in Synods, to have a proper Government over the Minor Part. But that by
counsel and concord, they may help and strengthen one another; and secure the
common Interest of Christianity. And that he that is a Member of one Church,
may be received of the Rest; and he that is cast out of One, may not be
received by the Rest, unless he be wronged. So that, it shall not be One
Politic Church; but a Communion of Churches.

24. The Means of this Communion shall be, 1. By Messengers. 2. By Letters and
Certificates Communicatory. 3. By Synods.


25. These Synods shall, as to a few Neighbor Churches, be ordinary and
stated: And the Meetings of Ministers in them, shall be improved; 1. To the
Directing and Counselling of one another, in matters doubtful; especially of
Discipline. 2. To edify each other by Conference, Prayer, and Disputations. 3.
That the Younger may be Educated under the grave Advice and Counsels of the
Elder. 4. That the Concord of Themselves, and the Churches under them, may be
preserved.


But if they would grow Imperious, Tyrannical, Heretical, or Contentious, the
Magistrate shall hinder their stated, ordinary Meetings; that it be not
accounted a thing simply necessary, nor used to the Disturbance of the Church
or States. And all Provincial, National, and larger Councels, shall be held by
the Magistrates Consent.

26. He that takes himself to be wrongfully Excommunicated in one Church,
shall have a Treble Remedy: 1. To have his Cause heard by the Associated
Pastors of the Neighbour-Churches; though not as Rulers of the Bishop, or
Pastor of that particular Church; yet as Counselors, and such whose Judgment
binds to Concord in lawful things. 2. To be admitted by another Church, if it
appear that he is wronged. And, 3. To appeal to the Magistrate, as the
Preserver of Justice, and Order, in all Societies.


27. The Magistrate shall appoint some of the most Grave, and Wise, and Godly,
and Moderate of the Ministers, to have a general Inspection over many Churches;
and to see, that they be well Taught and Ordered, and that Pastors and People
do their Duty: who shall therefore often Visit them, and shall Instruct and
Exhort the Younger Ministers; and with the countenance of the Magistrate, and
their own Seigniority and Ability, shall rebuke the Sloathful and Faulty
Ministers; and persuade them to Diligence and Fidelity: But shall Exercise no
outward Force by the Sword; nor any Excommunication by themselves alone, or
otherwise than in the foresaid Regular way.

28. All Ordinations shall be performed, (except in case of Necessity) either
in the Assembly of the Associated Pastors, with their President; or in the
Vacant Church, by some of them, appointed by the rest: Or by the General
Visiter, last mentioned, with a competent Number of Assistants. But still, an
Ordination to the Ministry in general, shall not be taken to be formally the
same; as the affixing him to this or that Church, in particular: No more, than
the Licensing of a Physician, is the same with the Affixing him to a particular
Hospital.

29. A Catalogue shall be drawn up, of some of the greatest Verities, which are
not expressly found in the Creed, Lord's- Prayer, or Decalogue; which, as the
Articles of Confession, of the Associated Churches of the Nation, shall serve
for these Three Uses: 1. To satisfy all Foreign Churches, against any
Accusation, that they are Orthodox. 2. To examine the Knowledge of such as are
admitted to the Ministry, by: (but not to be Subscribed, unless only as to a
general Acknowledgment of the Soundness of their Doctrine; without saying that,
There is nothing Faulty in them.) 3. To be a Rule of Restraint to Ministers, in
their Preaching; that none be allowed publicly, after Admonition, to Preach
against any Doctrine contained in them.


30. The Usurped, Ecclesiastical Power, of Bishops, and Presbyteries, and
Councils, (which were co-ercive, or imitated, secular Courts, or bound the
Magistrate to execute their Decrees) being cast out, and all Pastors restrained
from playing the Bishops in other Churches, out of their own Charge; The
Magistrate shall Exercise all Co-ercive, Church Government himself; and no more
trust the Sword directly, or indirectly, in the Hands of the Clergy, who have
long used it so unhappily, to the Disturbance of the Christian World, and the
shedding of so much Innocent Blood. Where it may be had, there shall be a
Church-Justice, or Magistrate, in every considerable Parish; who being present,
shall himself hear how Ministers preach, and behave themselves among their
People. And all Ministers and Churches shall be Responsible to the Magistrate,
for all Abuses, and mal-Administration. If any Minister Preach or Pray
seditiously, abusively, factiously, railingly, against tolerable Dissenters, to
the destroying of Christian Love and Unity, or Heretically, to the Danger of
the Peoples Souls; or shall exercise Tyranny over the People, or live a Vicious
Life; or be negligent in his Office of Teaching, Worship, or Discipline, or
otherwise grossly mis-behave himself: He shall be Responsible both (as
aforesaid) to the Associated Pastors and Visitor, (or Archbishop) and also to
the Magistrate; who shall Rebuke and Correct him, according to the measure of
his Offense. And it shall appear, that the Magistrate is sufficient for all
Co-ercive, Church Government, without all the Clergies Usurpations; which
uphold the Roman, and other Tyrannical Societies.

31. The Question, Who shall be Judge of Heresy, Schism, or Church-Sins?
shall be thus decided.

1. The Bishops or Pastors of the particular Churches, shall be the Judges; who
is to be denied Communion in their Churches, as Heretics, Schismatics, etc.
2. The Associated Churches shall be Judges, (in their Synods, or by other
Correspondence) who is to be commonly denied Communion in all their Churches;
and what Pastors and Churches, shall have the Dextram Communionis, and who not.
3. The Magistrate shall be the only Judge, who is to be punished for Heresy or
Schism, etc. with Fines, or any Outward, Corporal Penalty. And no one shall
usurp the others Right.
32. The Magistrate shall silence all Preachers that after due Admonition, so
grossly mis-behave themselves in Doctrine, Worship, or Conversation, as to be
the Plagues of the Churches, and to do apparently more hurt than good. But as
to all worthy and able Ministers, if they commit any fault, they shall be
punished as other Subjects, only with such Penalties as shall not by silencing
or restraint, be a punishment to the innocent peoples Souls, nor hinder the
Preaching of the Gospel of Salvation: Even as if the common Bakers, Brewers,
Butchers, Carpenters, perform their work perniciously (Poisoning their Beer,
Bread, and Meat) they shall be forbid the Trade: But for other faults, they
shall be so punished, that the People be not left without Bread, Beer, Meat,
Houses, for their faults.

33. If any Heretics (as Arrians, Socinians, etc.) would creep into the
Ministry, there shall not be new-forms of Subscription made to keep them out
(which its like, with their vicious Consciences would be uneffectual, and would
open a Gap to the old Church-Tyrannies and Divisions); nor an uncertain Evil be
uneffectually resisted by a certain greater Mischief. But while he keeps his
Error to himself, he is no Heretic as to the Church ( non apparere being
equal to non esse:) And when he venteth his Heresy, he is responsible all the
ways aforesaid, and may be by the Magistrate punished for his Crime, and by the
Churches be branded as none of their Communion; which is the regular way of
reforming Crimes' viz. By Judgment and Execution, and not by making new Rules
and Laws, as fast as Men break the old: As though Laws could be made, which no
Man can break.

34. The Magistrate shall countenance or tolerate no Sin or Error, so far as
he can cure it by just Remedies, which will not do more harm than good: But he
shall unwillingly tolerate many tolerable Errors and Faults; because it is not
in his Power to remedy them, by such means. But, 1. The Sound and Concordant
Ministry only, shall have his Countenance and Maintenance. 2. Smaller Errors
and Disorders, shall be best cured by gentle Rebukes, and Discountenance, and
denial of Maintenance; together with the disgrace that will be cast upon them,
by the judgment and dissent of all the united Concordant Ministers and Churches
(which two together will do more and better, than Exasperating Cruelties will
do*) 3. The publishing of pernicious Principles, shall be restrained more
severely.


But though Men may be restrained from venting pernicious Falsehoods, they
cannot be Constrained to believe the Truth (we are not so happy;) Nor shall
they be Constrained to lie, and say that they believe it when they do not.

35. All matters of Quarrels, division and cruel usage of each other, being
thus cut off and gone; bitterness, and revengeful thoughts will cease, and Love
will revive in all Men's Breasts, and Unity, and Peace will follow of its own
accord. And if any Heretical or contentious Sect arise, the Hearts of all
United People will so rise against them, that desertion and shame will quickly
Kill them.

36. Then will the Hearts of the People cleave to their Pastors: And they will
be no more put on the great difficulties of Loving the Bishops that hurt them,
or of Loving them in Jailes; But it will be as easy to Love them, when they
feel the Love to their Souls in the labors and kindness of their Pastors, as
to Love their dearest and nearest Friends. And then Love, will open the Peoples
Ears to the Teachers Doctrine, and it will do them good: And then the labors
and lives of faithful Ministers, will be sweet and easy, when the Love, and the
Unity, and Faithfulness of the People, is their daily Encouragement. O how
good, and how happy will it be for Pastors and People, thus to Live in Love and
Unity! It will not only mind us of Aarons perfume, but of the Spirit of Love
that dwelt in our Redeemer, and which he promised should be his Seal and Mark
upon all his true Disciples! Yea, and of the Celestial Society, and Life of
perfect Love.

37. Then shall Neighbors exercise their Charity, for the help of the Ignorant
about them, without the suspicions of venting Heresies, or Sedition, or
Encroaching on the Pastors Office. And Neighbors when they come together,
shall not take Praying together, or holy Conference, or singing Gods Praise, or
Reading good Books, or repeating their Teachers Sermons, or Counselling each
other, to be a bad or dangerous work: But the Ignorant, that cannot spend the
Lords day in holy Exercises at home (because they cannot Read or remember much)
shall join with the Families of their more Understanding Neighbors, who can
help them; (as they met Act. 12. 12. for Prayer; and as Neighbour-Families were
to join in Eating the Passover, with the Family that had not enough to Eat it.)
For Love and Unity shall end these Jealousies. And all shall be done under the
Guidance and Oversight of their Pastors; and not in Enmity or Opposition to
them, or to the Concordant Church Assemblies. And, O what Helps and Comfort
will this be to all Faithful Pastors, when all the Work lies not on them
alone! but every one sets his Hand to Build, in his proper place! And when they
that Converse together all the Week, are seconding that which he more seldom
teaches them in Public.

38. The Younger sort of Ministers, that are now Bred up in Vulcan's Forge,
shall be then Trained up under grave and peaceable Men; where uniting, and
peacemaking Principles, shall be the Rudiments of their Literature.

39. And the Younger sort of the People, shall be no more tempted into envious
Heats against their Afflicters; nor into contentious Sects, because of
Controversies: But shall be fed with the Milk of peaceable Principles, and be
Educated in the Love of Love it self. And the names of Sects, and
Church-Divisions, and proud Pretendings, shall by use, be made as disgraceful,
as now the Names of Swearing, Drunkenness, and Whoredom are.

40. And, O how Dear! how Amiable! how Honorable will their Governors be, to
such a People! (Especially, that Blessed Prince, that shall first perform this
Work!) How heartily will they Pray for them, Plead for them, and Fight for
them! And, How freely will they Contribute any thing in their Power, to their
Aids! And, How impatient will they be against every Word, that would dishonor
them! How Blessed will the People be under such a Prince! And, How Sweet and
Easy will the Life of that Prince be, that is to Govern such a People!

Grant, O Lord, that this great Honor and Comfort, may fall into the Hands of
the King of England, before all others in the World! Kings will then see, that
it is their Interest, their Honor, and their greatest Happyness on Earth, to
be the Wise, Pious, Righteous Governors, of a Wise, Pious, Just, United
People; that Love them so much, that still they would fain serve them better,
than they are able.

41. The Ignorant, Vulgar, and Ruder sort, observing this Amiable Concord, and
all the blessed Fruits thereof, will admire Religion, and fall in Love with it:
And Multitudes, that shall be saved, will be daily added to the seriously
Religious; and the House of Christ, will be filled with Guests.

42. Hereupon the Scandalous and Flagitious Lives of Common Protestants, will
be much cured: For the Number of the Flagitious, will grow small; and Crimes
will be under common Disgrace. Besides that, they will be punished by the
Magistrate: So that, gross Sin will be a Marvail.

43. The Books of plain Doctrine, and holy Living, with the Pacificatory
Treatises of Reconcilers, will then be most in Esteem and Use; which now are so
Dis-relished by turbulent, discontented, siding Persons. And abundance of
Controversal-Writings, about Church Government, Liturgies, Ceremonies, and many
other Matters, will be forgotten, and cast aside, as useless Things: For the
Swords shall be made into Plow-Shares, and Pruning Hooks.

44. The happy Example of that happy Prince, and Country, that shall begin and
first accomplish this Work, will be Famous through all the Protestant-Churches;
and will inflame such Desires of Imitation in them all, and be such a ready
Direction in the way, that it will greatly expedite their answerable
Reformation. And the Famous Felicity of that Prince, in the Reformation and
Concord of his Subjects, will kindle in the Hearts of other Protestant-Princes
and States, an Earnest Desire of the same Felicity. And so, as upon the
Invention of Printing, and of Guns, the World was presently possessed of Guns,
and of Printed-Books, that never before attained any such thing: So here; they
that see the Happyness of one Kingdom brought about, and see how it was done,
will have Matter enough before their Eyes, both to excite their Desires, and
guide their Endeavors, in the Means to bring all this to pass.

45. The Protestant Kingdoms and States, being thus Reformed, and United in
themselves, will be enflamed with an earnest desire of the good of all other
Churches, and of all the World: And therefore, as Divines have held something
called General Councils for the Union of all those Churches; so these Princes
will by their Agents hold Assemblies for maintaining Correspondency, to the
carrying on of the common good of the World, by the Advantage of their United
Counsels, and Strength: And then no Enemy can stand long before them. For, they
that Love, and serve them Zealously at home, will venture their Lives for them
Zealously abroad, if there be Cause.

46. The excellent, and successful use of the Magistrates Government of the
Churches in their Dominions, will quite shame all the usurping claims of the
Pope, and General Councels, and their mungrel Ecclesiastic Courts, and all the
train of Artifices and Offices, by which their Government of the World is
managed: And the World, and especially Princes will plainly see how much they
were abused by their Usurpations; and that there is no need of Pope or
Cardinal, nor any of those Officers or Acts at all: But that these are the mere
Contrivances of Carnal Policy, to keep up an Earthly Kingdom under the name of
the Catholic Church. And also the Purity and Unity of the Reformed Churches,
where the vulgar have more Religion and Union, than their Monasteries, will
dazzle the Eyes of the Popish Princes, States, and People; And when they see
better, and especially the happiness of the Princes, they will forsake the
Usurper that had Captivated them by fraud, and will assume their freedom and
felicity; And so the Roman Church-Kingdom will fall.

47. The deluded Mahometans seeing the Unity, and Glory of Christendom, as they
were before kept from Christ by the Wicked Lives, and the Divisions of
Christians (thinking that we are far worse than they) so now they will be
brought to admire and honor the Christian Name, and fear the Power of the
Christian Princes. And one part of them will turn Christians; and the rest,
even the Turkish Power, the Christians force by the Power of God, will easily
break. And so the Eastern Churches will be delivered, and reformed; and the
Mahometans come into the Faith of Christ.

48. The poor scattered Jews also, when they see the Glory and Concord of
Christians, will be convinced that Christ is indeed the true Messiah: And being
Converted perhaps, shall by the Christian Powers, be some of them
Re-established in their own Land: But not to their ancient peculiarity, or
policy and Law.

49. And then the Christian Zeal, will work to the Conversion of the poor
Idolatrous, Heathen World; And part of them will yield to Reason and Faith, and
the rest by just victories be subdued. And so the Kingdoms of the World, will
become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and his Christ; And the Gospel shall be
Preached in all the World.

50. And when the Kingdom of Grace is perfected, and has had its time, the
Kingdom of Glory shall appear, upon the Glorious appearing of Christ our King;
and the Dead shall Arise; and they that have overcome, shall Reign with Christ,
and sit with him upon the Throne, even as he overcame, and is set down with the
Father on his Throne. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

John 17. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
Neither Pray I for these alone, but for them also, which shall believe on me
through their word: that they all may be one, as thou Father, art in me, and I
in thee; that they also may be one in us, that the World may believe that thou
have sent me: And the Glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they
may be One, even as we are One. I in them, and Thou in Me; that they may be
made perfect in One, and that the World may know that thou have sent Me, and
have Loved them, as thou have Loved Me; Father, I will that they also whom thou
have given Me, be with Me where I am, that they may behold My Glory, which thou
have given Me.

Object.
But if this World should ever become so happy, it would be more amiable, and
so be a greater snare to our Affections, and make us willing to stay from
Heaven.

Answer.
No Amiableness or Pleasantness, steals the Heart from God, or keeps it
from Heaven, but that which hides the Glory and Goodness of God and Heaven,
from our Minds, or corrupts, and diverteth the will and affections by some
inconsistency or contrarity: But the spiritual excellency of the Reformed
Concordant Church on Earth, will so much more clearly Represent Heaven to our
conceptions, and give our Hearts so pleasant a foretast of it, that above all
things it will Excite our desires of that fuller Glory, and call us most
Powerfully to a Heavenly Mind and Life: As the first fruits, and earnest do
make us desire the Harvest, and the full Possession. And as now those that Live
in the most Heavenly Society, and under the most Excellent helps and means,
have usually more Heavenly Minds and Lives, than they that in more tempting and
distracting Company, never enjoy such Heavenly beams.

Consectary.
ALL the Romish-Dreams of Church-Union, arise from Ignorance of the true State
and Interest of the Church, and the true and necessary Terms of Union.

And all the Plots also, of the Moderating Papists, that Talk of a Political
Church-Catholick, having a Visible Constitutive, or Governing-Head; whether
Monarchial, (the Pope); or Aristocratical or Democratical, (the Patriarchs, or
a General-Council): And that Talk of Universal Laws of this Church, made by
such a Universal-Head; besides the Universal Laws of Christ, And falsely feign
the Councils called General, in a Particular Empire, called or ruled by one
Emperor only, in his own Dominions; to have been Universal, as to all the
Catholic Churches on Earth, And that feign these Councils to have been
Infallible, which so often erred, and crossed each other: And that set the World
upon the undeterminable Controversy, Which were true General Councils; and,
How many we must Receive, and Conform to: Whether only Four, or Six, or Eight;
and till what Age. And that would persuade the Christian World, that whatever
diversity of Canons, Customs, or Church-Laws, or Ceremonies, are allowed among
them, it must all be done or held by this same Authority of the Pope, or
Council, or Both: to which (though Foreign) Kings and Bishops must all be
subject; and from which, they must receive their Christianity; and by which,
all their Reformations must be tried, And that none must be taken as
Catholics, nor any Churches tolerated, that hold not such a Factious Union,
under such an Usurping Head, Personal or Collective, But as Tertullian
speaks, rather than endure such Wiser and Better Societies; Solitudinem
facerent, and vocarent Pacem; And as a Worldy Clergy, whose Church and Kingdom
is only of and in this World, would banish from it all (save a Lifeless-Image)
which has any Kin to Heaven; and suffer none to Live in this World among them,
but themselves.

I say, all this is, 1. From Ignorance of the True Nature of the Christian
Religion, Church State, and Terms of Unity and Concord; which I have lately
opened in a Book, Entitled, [ The true and only Terms of the Concord of all
the Churches.]

2. And from Contention about Ambiguous Words, and Self-Conceitedness in their
Controversies, ignorantly thence raised; which I have sought to End in a Book,
called, [ Catholic Theology.]

3. And from vicious Passions and Partiality; which I have sought to Heal in a
Book, called, [ The Cure of Church-Divisions.]

All written long since the Writing of this Foregoing Prognostication.

FINIS.

