GODS GOODNESS, VINDICATED For the help of such (especially in Melancholy) as
are Tempted to deny it, and think him Cruel, because of the Present and Future
Misery of Mankind; With respect to the Doctrine of Reprobation and Damnation.

By Richard Baxter.

Published and Prefaced by a Friend at whose desire it was Written, and to whom
it was Committed.

1 John 4.16. GOD is LOVE, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and
God in Him.

LONDON, Printed for N. Simmons, at the three Crowns near Holborn Conduit. 1671.

The Publisher to the Reader.
HOW much the Glory of God and the Salvation of men is concerned in the right
understanding of his Goodness in all his ways and counsels toward them, is
evidently seen by all that have any true notion of the Divine excellency and
man's felicity. Gods Goodness is his most solemnly proclaimed Name and Glory. It
is his Goodness duly known that leads sinners to repentance, and unites their
hearts to fear his name, and excites and for ever terminates that love which is
our holiness and happiness to eternity. It is also too well known how much this
amiable divine Goodness is denied or doubted of. What cavils are raised against
it by men of corrupt minds! What secret prejudice lies against it and how
deeply rooted in our depraved nature! Yea with how fearful suggestions and
apprehensions are some godly Christians (especially those that lie in the
darkness of Melancholy) sometimes perplexed about it! And even such as are
grounded and settled in it, are liable to be assaulted, and may sometimes
stagger and stumble at it. And indeed though the kindness of God toward men
has appeared in the World as visible as the Sun in the Firmament; yet man's
darkened understanding and his connate sensuality and selfishness taking
occasion from the more mysterious parts of Providence, and those especially
that most contradict the wisdom and interest of the flesh, has caused disputes
and raised doubts against the truth of that which is in it self as clear and
sure as that there is a God or a World, or anything existent. Whereupon this
Author was earnestly desired by a friend to collect some principles in a narrow
compass, that might silence Cavillers, succor the Tempted, and confirm the
sound mind. And for these ends they are with his permission by his friend made
public. Hos. 14.9. Who is wise? and he shall understand these things; prudent?
and he shall know them. For the ways of the Lord are right and the just shall
walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.

April. 27. 1671.
Gods Goodness Vindicated, For the help of such, (especially in Melancholy) as
are tempted to deny it, and think him cruel, because of the present and future
misery of mankind with respect to the Doctrine of Reprobation and Damnation.
TO help all such persons out of the snare of this dangerous and troublesome
temptation, as are described in the propounded case, we must have respect. I.
To the special case of the Melancholy, who are more liable than others to such
disturbances* II. To the common cause of their trouble and perplexity, as it
consists in such opinions as you describe.

I. With the Melancholy, the greatest difficulty lies, in making them capable
to receive plain truths. For it will work, not as it is, but as it i^ received.
And Melancholy does breed and seed such kind of thoughts, as naturally as a
dead Carcass feeds Vermin: Of forty or fifty Melancholy persons that I have
to deal with, there is scarce four that are not burried with suggestions to
Blasphemous thoughts, against God or the Sacred Scriptures; and scarce two that
are not under dismal apprehensions that they are miserable, undone creatures,
(except only some that are all carried to conceits of Prophecies, Revelations,
and some rare exalting communications of light unto themselves.) This unhappy
disease of Melancholy is first seated in the Organs of Imagination and Passion
both, that is in the spirits, and thereby in the very Imagining faculty it
self: Though the Natural parts being without pain or sickness, they will not
believe that it is a disease at all. It inclines them usually to solitariness,
to Musing and to dismal thoughts, that they are undone, graceless, hopeless,
etc. which because they passionately seem to feel, no words, which silence
them, will satisfy them; or if you seem a little to satisfy them to day, its
all gone to morrow: For a Melancholy man is like the eye that looks on all
things through a colored glass, or in an ophthalmie, and sees them according
to the medium.

The Disease in some few begins with overstretching thoughts and troubles
about things spiritual; But in most that I have met with (ten to one) it
begins with some worldly cross, loss or trouble, which grieveth them and
casts them into troublesome anxieties and cares; and then when by these the
spirits are diseased, it presently turns upon Conscience; first against
themselves aggravating sin and misery, apprehending calamity from every thing
which they see, hear, or think of, and next against God and Scripture;
perplexed in every thing that comes before them, and quarrelling with all; and
offended in all; And usually they are importuned, as if it were by something
else within them, to say some blasphemous word against God, or do some mischief
against themselves. No doubt through Satan's special instigation, who can work
on men according to the advantage of their bodily and sensitive distempers, and
can do that on a Melancholy^man (though a Godly man) which he cannot do on
another; as he can also work on the Chollerick, Phlegmatic, etc. according to
their temper.

1. The cure of this must be by these means, (1.) You must not suffer them to
be much alone. (2.) You must divert them from all musing, and turn it to
Discourse. (3.) You must keep from them displeasing things and persons, and
help them to suitable pleasing company and converse. (4.) You must change their
air and company sometimes, that strange objects may change their imagination.
(5.) Above all, if they have strength, you must not suffer them to be idle, to
lie in bed longer than they sleep in the day; nor to sit musing, but must get
them upon the work of a lawful Calling, and drive them on to so much diligence,
that body and mind may be closely employed. This will be more than all other
ordinary means. (6.) In most, meet physic also will do very much, which must
be ordered by an experienced Physician that is with them, or well knows them.
(7.) Lastly, their false thoughts also must be confuted, and their minds have
due satisfaction. And if you cannot have all, or most of these done, you can
hardly expect a cure, unless time wear it off, which is doubtful.

II. The falsehood and vexation of such men's thoughts, whether the Melancholy or
others are brought to pass, 1. By a false method of Reasoning, 2. By false
opinions which they have before received: (I.) It is a grossly deluding and
subverting way of Reasoning, to begin at dark and doubtful consequents, thence
to argue against certain, clear fundamental Principles: As if from some doubts
about the position and motion of the Stars, or of the nature of light heat and
motion, men should argue that there is no Sun, or Moon, or Stars at all: or
that they have no power of Light, Heat or Motion: or as if from the many
difficulties in Anatomy, about the circulation of the blood, the oleum
nervosum, the Lympha, and its vessels, the passages and succus of the panereas
and gall, the transcolation through the intestines into the venae lacteae, the
chylie glandules, and such like, one should arise to a conclusion that there is
no blood, no chyle, no veins, no glandules, no head no body: or from the
Controversy, whether the Heart be a mere Muscle without any proper
paronchymae, one should grow to conclude that there is no heart: so such
persons from points beyond man's reach, about Gods decrees and intentions and
the mysteries of providence, conclude or doubt against Gods Goodness; that is,
whether indeed there be a God: I have spoken so fully to this case in my
Reasons of the Christ. Rel. p. 95. and in that whole Chapter, that I would
desire you to peruse it. I shall now only give you twenty Questions which the
tempted person may challenge all the subtilty and malice of Hell to answer; for
it is easy to Justify the Goodness of God.

Quest. 1. Is it not certain that there is a world, in which is abundance of
Created Goodness? The Earth is but a point as to all the World: There is a Sun,
and Moon, and multitudes of glorious Stars, which are many of them manifold
greater than the Earth. There are Angels, there are men, there are variety of
Creatures in this low part of the Creation, which have all their excellency;
All the men on Earth cannot by any contribution of their counsels, discern the
ten thousandth part of the excellency of this little parcel of Gods works: And
as to the whole, it is next to nothing which we comprehend: Every Worm, every
plant, excels the highest human apprehension: Is there no Physical Goodness
in all this unmeasurable, this harmonious, this glorious frame? Look about you,
look upwards, and deny it if you can: And is there no Moral goodness in holy
men and Angels: And is there no felicity and Glorious Goodness in all the
Heavens? What mind can be so black, as to deny all Created Goodness?

Quest. 2. Is not all the Goodness of the whole Creation communicated from God?
Did it make it self? or who else made it? Are not all effects from their
causes? And is he not the first cause? see what I have said to prove this fully
in the aforesaid Treatise.

Quest. 3. Has God made a world that is better than himself? Could he give
more goodness than he had to give? Must not he needs be better than all his
works?

Quest. 4. Is he fit to be quarrelled with for want of Goodness, who has
infinitely, more Goodness than the whole world besides: More than Sun and
Stars, Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men, all set together in all their single
and their united, harmonious worth? If he be better than all, is he not most
beyond accusation or exception?

Quest. 5. Must not God necessarily excel his works? must he needs make every
worm a God? or must he make any God, or equal to himself? Is not that a
contradiction? And is there not necessarily an Imperfection in all that is not
God? Nothing can be so great, so wise, so good, so holy, so immutable, so
self-sufficient, so blessed, as God.

Quest. 6. Is not Gods Creation a harmonious Universe, of which Individuals are
but the parts: Are not the Parts for the whole, and their worth to be valued
for the whole, or for the common ends; must every pin in a Watch or every
stitch in your Garment or every part of your house, or every member of your
Body and every humor or excrement in it, have that excellency which may simply
dignifie it self in a compared or separated sense? or rather must it not have
that excellency with belongs to it as a part of the whole, for the common end
of all together? Is not that best, that is best to the order, beauty, and
usefulness of the universal frame?

Quest. 7. Is it necessary to ^his end, or to prove Gods Goodness that all
Individuals, or species of Creatures must be of the highest rank or excellency?
Is God wanting in Goodness, if every Man be not an Angel, or every Angel made
unchangeable, or every unlearned man a Doctor, or every Star a Sun, or every
cloud or clod a Star, or every beast a man, or every Worm an Elephant, or every
Weed a Rose, or every Member a Heart or Head, or every excrement, Blood and
Spirits: will you think that a man does reason like a man who thus disputes,
[He that does not do that which is best when he can do it, is not perfectly
good, and therefore is not God. But he tha^ makes Toads and Serpents and
makes the guts the passage of filthy excrement when he could have mad^ them
equal with the heart does not do that which i^ best when he can do it Therefore
he is not perfectly good, Therefore he is no^ God: Therefore there is no God:
Therefore there i^ no Creator, Therefore the World has no cause, o^ made it
self and preserves it self: Therefore I made my self, and must rule and
preserve my self*] Conclude next, [Therefore I will never suffer, nor die, and
thus prove the wisdom of such reasoning, if you can.

Quest. 8. If God made man and all things, Did he not make them for himself,
for the pleasure of his own will? Must be not needs in reason be the end of
all, who is the Beginning and cause of all? And is not that means the Best,
which is aptest to the End? And does not the proper Goodness of a means consist
in its aptitude to promote the End? And then is not that the Goodness of all
Creatures, (partly to be what the Creator efficiently makes them, and partly)
to fulfill his will, and what Creature has not this Goodness a^ to the absolute
will of his Decrees which all fulfill.

Quest. 10. Are not now both these conclusions of infallible certainty, and
therefore not at all contradictory, 1. That God is most Good, because he is the
cause of all the Good in the whole Creation, 2. And yet that there are Toads,
Serpents, Darkness, Death, Sickness, pains, etc. which therefore are no whit
inconsistent with his Goodness? neither of them being capable of a denial, or
of a sober doubt.

Quest. 10. Is not an Angel, and Man, endued with Reason and Free Will, and
left to choose or refuse his own Rectitude and Felicity (or misery,) capable of
Knowing, Loving, Serving and Enjoying God, if he will; and instructed by a
Perfect holy Law (with Rewards and Punishments) to choose aright, I say, Is not
such a Creature as noble and as meet for God to make as a stone or a toad or
worm, or Serpent? If God choose to please his own holy will, by making a world
of such Intellectual free agents, whom he will (ordinarily) rule by the way of
Moral Laws and Motives, is this any disparagement to his Wisdom and Goodness?
It is true, that such a mutable free will is below a confirmed immutable will.
But it is as true, that a Toad is below a man. And that Infinite wisdom
thought not meet to make all his Creatures of one rank or size, not to make all
faces alike, nor all the stones in the street alike, but in wonderful variety.
It is not then unbeseeming God to make a world of Rational free agents; under
such a moral Government by Laws.

Quest. 11. If all these free agents have abused their Liberty and undone
themselves, if he so far show mercy to them all, as that they may be all happy
if they will, and none of them shall perish but for wilful and final refusing
of the saving means and mercy which is offered to them; and if they will, they
may live with God himself, and Christ and Angels in endless Glory; and none
shall lose this free-given felicity but for final refusal and contempt,
preferring certain vanity and dung before it, And if officers be commissioned
and means provided, to acquaint all, in several measures with the reasons why
they should choose Heaven and Holiness before the dirty pleasures of sin, and
to importune them daily to such a choice; And if a life of mercies be granted
to allure them, and afflictions to drive them, and examples to invite them to
choose aright. I say after all this, have any of these persons cause to
complain, that God deals not mercifully with them? Shall they, that will not
accept of life and mercy offered them, accuse him as cruel that importuneth
them to accept it?

Quest. 12. Is the Goodness of a King to be judged of by the Interest of
Murderers in the Goal? when he restrained them by Laws, when he warned them by
legal penalties, when he encourages and protecteth all the Good, When the
lives of the Innocent need this severity against the wicked; when the Common
Wealth would take him to be bad, that would not restrain Thieves and Murderers
by penalties: Yea though this King could if he would, have set a constant guard
on these men to have kept these men from Murdering, but he thinks meet only
to Govern them by Laws: Will you rather argue, (That the Goal is a place of
misery, Therefore the King is cruel) Then (The rest of the Kingdom flourish in
prosperity and peace: Therefore the King is wise and gracious.) And is not this
little dirty spot of Earth, the next door to Hell, a place defiled by wilful
sin, and unfit to be the Index of Gods benignity, from whence we should take an
Estimate of it?

Quest. 13. Do not all men in the World confess Gods Goodness first or last? Do
not all true believers (that are themselves) acknowledge, that he is Infinitely
Good, and Good to them, and that his mercy is over all his works, and endures
for ever? And do not the Consciences of the Damned grind and tear them for the
contempt of Goodness, and setting against mercy, even mercy to themselves? This
is the fuel that feeds Hell not by way of delusion, but experimental
conviction. If the man that doubts of Gods Goodness and mercy to him, do
despair, or fear damnation, he foolishly contradicts himself. For Hell and
Damnation is a state of misery and torment, in the loss, and in the Conscience
and sense of refused and abused mercy. If therefore God be not merciful to you,
then you need not fear being damned, for sinning against and refusing mercy:
For that which is not, cannot be sinned against, or abused: If God be merciful,
you may be saved if you will accept this mercy: If he be not, you cannot in
Justice be damned for rejecting that mercy which was none. And if God be not
merciful and Just, he is not God. And if there be no God, there is none to damn
you. But all confess in Heaven and in Hell, some with Joy and some with
self-tormenting anguish that God was unconceiveably Good and merciful.

Quest. 14. What if it were but one or two in a whole Kingdom that were damned,
and that only for obstinate unperswadable final refusal of grace and salvation,
and all the rest of the World should be saved; tell me, would you then still
suspect God of cruelty, or deny his Goodness? If not, I further ask you;

Quest. 15. Have you so good acquaintance with the extent of the universe, the
superior World* the number of Angels and blessed spirits, as that you are sure
that it is proportionably more in the whole universe, that are miserable?
Though some pievish men have wrangled at what I have said of this in my
forecited Books, I am so far from flattering their self conceited Wisdom that I
will say it over again, That it is agreed on by Philosophers that the Earth as
to the universe, is no bigger than a point or inch is to the whole earth; we
see over our heads, a wonderful Sun, a multitude of fixed and unfixed Stars, of
wonderful magnitude, diverse of them many times bigger than all the earth;
besides the vast Ethereal interspaces; we see in a Tube or Telescope a
mavelous Likeness of the Moon to this Earth, with Shades, inequalities, etc.
Multitudes of Stars in the Galaxie and elsewhere, are discernable in the
Telescope, which without it no eye can see; Little know we how far the World
extends it self, beyond all these Stars and Sun which we can see: or whether
there be Millions of the like beyond our sight: The Scripture tells us of
innumerable Angels, Holy and Glorious spirits that attend Christ in the service
of this lower World. No Scripture tells us whether all the Glorious or
blessed Spirits be thus employed as Angels for Mankind, or whether ten Thousand
Thousand fold more be otherwise employed. No Scripture or Reason tells us
whether Sun or Moon, Stars and intermediate Ether, be inhabited or not? It is
temerity to affirm that they are. And it is as great temerity to say that they
are not: It is lawful to doubt: And it is lawful to conjecture that it is most
probable they are, Considering, 1. That l^fe is the excellency of the Creation,
and the deadest parts are the basest, 2. That the Earth, and Water, and Air
are full of Men, Beasts, Fishes, Birds, Worms, Flies, etc. 3. That it is
incredible to him that looks upward, that Sun, Moon, Stars and Ether, are
baser Regions than this dirty Earth; and consequently that they are baser as to
their use and inhabitants: These thoughts of an uncertain thing, are lawful, to
him that will go no further than he has evidence, and not make an uncertain
thing seem certain; And certain it is, that spirits are innumerable. And though
some of these are fallen to be Devils, God has not told us how many: Nor can
we know that it is one to a million of happier Creatures. And can that man
then, who is offended with God, not for damning a very few, but for the
proportion of the damned in comparison of others, tell what he says: can he
say, if God had cast off all this Earth; that it had been more than one of a
million of millions as to the whole Creation. Its true I cannot tell the
number: But it is as true that when our foundation is sure; that God is
infinitely wise and Good, it is madness to accuse him as unwise, or evil, or
cruel, for that which we must confess we do not know; and to talk against him
in the dark. Stay till you see who dwells in all the superior Regions and
then take your selves for fitter discerners of your makers ways.

Quest. 16. Are you well acquainted with the nature and degrees of the future
miseries which tempt you to think that God is cruel? They are not all of one
degree; What if much of them be still voluntary to the miserable souls? The
Devils who are now tormented in Hell, are yet inhabitants of the air, and
exercised in voluntary acts of Malice. I take it to be no small degree of Hell
which the ungodly choose and love and possess among us here on Earth, and will
not be dissuaded from; They are without all holy Communion with God, and they
would be so, They are out of Heaven and they would be so; They are debased and
confined to sensual pleasures, and wordly vanities and they will be so; They
are the drudges of the Devil and the servants of the flesh, and the slaves of
men, and they would be so; They are defiled with sin, and imprisoned in their
own Concupiscence and they would be so: They are corrupted and tantalized, and
vexed, and tossed up and down by their irregular desires; In a word, they have
the plague of sin and have neither holiness nor true happiness, and so they
will have it to be and will not be cured; Now these tempted persons can see a
misery in pain; but can see no such evil in sin, for which such pain should be
inflicted: when as sin it self and that which they are willing of, is so great
a part of their misery, as that in this life, the rest is as nothing to it. And
though, no doubt, much will be involuntary hereafter, we know not what the
proportion will be between the voluntary and Involuntary part.

And what makes these men that they do not pity a Drunkard, a Fornicator, a
Worldling, a sensual Lord or Gentleman that has no better than the shadows
which he chooses? Neither the Tempted, nor they themselves would call God
cruel if he would let them so live in health for ever; even a healthful Beggar
would call God Merciful if he might never die, nor be more miserable. But
Princes or Lords would call him cruel if he should put them into the Beggars or
Laborers case: You accuse not God as Cruel for making Toads and Serpents,
Worms and Vermin, because they are not troubled with their own condition; But
if you could imagine them to have the knowledge how much happier Man is, the
case would alter: Or if God should change men into Toads and Serpents, you
would call him unmerciful; when yet he is no more bound antecedently ^o man
than unto them: Thus because these tempted persons have as Adam, when his eyes
were opened, (...) disquieting knowledge, to know Good and Evil penally; their
own apprehensions (as Adams of his Nakedness) makes that seem cruelty, which
seemed a fruit of Goodness before.

The sum is, when you come into another world, and see what manner of
punishment it is that God exercises on the damned, (as well as on how many)
you will then be perfectly satisfied, that there is nothing but that amiable
Justice, which is the fruit of Holiness, Goodness and Wisdom in it all; and you
shall see nothing in the punishment of the miserable which you shall either
blame or wish were otherwise, if you come to Heaven.

To which let me add, when you come to see the Heavenly Glory and how the God
of infinite Goodness has advanced such innumerable Hosts (if not Worlds) of
Men and Angels into such wonderful felicity, and compare this with the
sufferings of the Devils and of his damned followers, instead then of
quarrelling with the Goodness of God, you will be wrapped up in the admirations
and Praises of it with ful^ delights, to all Eternity.

Quest. 17. And tell me, Is he fit to entertain suspicions and quarrels with
God* who knows God to be God* and knows himself to be but a man; I speak
not only in respect of our inferiority, as the Potsheard should not quarrel
with the Potter: But in respect of our great and certain Ignorance: Are we not
puzzled about the poorest Worm and pile of Grass (whose manifold mysteries no
Mortal man can yet Discover) Are we not grossly ignorant about every thing (even
visible and palpable) which we see, and touch and have to do with: Do we not
know that we know but little, even of our selves, or of any thing about us in
the world? And shall the darkened soul, while it must operate in such a puddle
of brains and humors, be so madly proud, as to presume of a knowledge, which
finds out errors and badness in God, who is infinitely wise and good?
Nothing is more sure than that God is most wise and Good; and nothing should be
easilier known to us, than that we are very blind and bad: And if such wretches
then cannot reconcile their thoughts about Gods works, should they not rather
suspect themselves than him? suspect, did I say? should they not take it as the
surest verity, that it is, God, that is not only Justifiable, but infinitely
Amiable and Laudable, and that it is worse than bruitishness, for such Moles to
be his accusers?

Quest. 18. Yea is this accusing God, a fit employment for that person, who
lives in a Land of mercies; who has been bred up in mercy, preserved by
mercy, (...) differenced by saving mercy from the ungodly; who has been called
from blindness, carnality and profaneness, and entertained many a time in holy
Worship with God; who has been washed in Christ's blood and Justified from so
many and grievous sins, and made of an enemy an adopted Child, and of an heir
of Hell, an heir of Heaven, and all this by the tender mercies of a provoked
God, a gracious Redeemer, and a holy Sanctifier? Shall this person? I say,
this, be one that instead of praising God with the raptures of continual Joy,
shall turn his accuser? O let the guilty that reads this, stop here, and fall
down on his knees to God, and melt into tears in the sense of such unkindness.

Quest. But can a Child of God be possibly guilty of so great a sin as this?

Answ. I speak not now of the malignant Atheist: But of the Melancholy tempted
person: Alas, it is the Melancholy disease, and the Devil, more than he: God
pittyeth his Childrens frowardness, especially when necessitated naturally by
Diseases: and he that pardoned pievish Jonas, that said, I do well to be angry
to the death; and complaining Job; and excused his sleepy Disciples with [ The
Spirit is willing but the flesh is weak,] will not condemn an upright soul, for
the effect of a feverish deliration, or a Melancholy that overcomes his
natural power of resistance.

Quest. 19. Would you thus argue or quarrel against Gods Greatness and Wisdom,
as you do against his Goodness? You suspect him to be unmerciful, because he
cures not men's sins, and preventeth not their damnation. And have you not the
like occasion to argue against his other perfections? Do you think he reasons
soberly that says, [ He that makes Asses when he might have made them men, or
makes Idiots, or makes stones that know nothing; He that is the Governor of
such a foolish, distracted, confused world as mankind is, is foolish himself or
unskilful in Government or wants wisdom: But God does thus] Is he not worse
than a fool that will accuse his God of folly? Does not the admirable harmony
of all the world, and his wonderful work in every Creature, prove his
incomprehensible Wisdom? And what would you say to him that should thus reason
[ He that makes impotent worms, that suffers the Good to die, that
suffers the Tyrants of the Earth to persecute his Church and cause, is
Impotent, and not Almighty: But so does God] Would you not say, [ I have the
wonderful frame of Heaven, and Earth, the Sun and Staars, the Sea and Land to
prove to me that he is Almighty. This therefore is a proved foundation truth,
to which all doubts must be reduced:] And if you dare not be so impudent as to
deny his Omniscience or Omnipotence, when you think there is error or
impotency in his works: Why will you any more deny his Goodness, when you dream
that there is badness in his works? Do you not know that Power, Wisdom and
Goodness are Gods Three essential Principles of Operation, Virtues, or
Properties? And that they are none of them greater or less than other? And that
his Goodness (though not as to be measured by humane Interest) is equal to his
Wisdom and his greatness? And do you not know that to deny any one of the
three, yea to deny the perfection of any one of them, is to deny that there is
any God? And is he sober that will argue [ There are Frogs and Toads there are
Worms and Asses there are fools and miserable sinners, Therefore there is no
God.] When as there could neither be any of these, nor any world or being, if
there were no God?

Quest. 20. Lastly, now Consider, whether evidently, the root of all this sin
be not (besides Melancholy and Satan) the power of selfishness and sensual or
fleshly Interest. Alas, poor men, that were made for their God, to rejoice
wholly in Pleasing him and to show forth the luster of his Glory, are fallen
unto Themselves and Flesh; and now they that should wholly devote and referr
themselves to God, do strive to make God a servant to themselves, and measure
his Goodness by the Standard of their fleshly sense and Interest; And God shall
be with them no longer Good, that is no longer God, than he will give them
their wills, and serve their flesh, and keep them from crosses, and losses, and
pains, and govern the World according to their fancies; And when they are
committing this odious self-exalting Idolatry, and abasing God, even then will
they Judge themselves both Wiser, and more merciful than he: Yea, when a
Melancholy man despaireth in the sense of his own sin and badness, at that very
time he thinks himself more Merciful than the God of Infinite Goodness, and
accuses his God for being crueller than he himself. O man into what
distraction and confusion art thou fallen, when thou departest from thy God and
sinkest into that blind and wretched self?

And tell me, what if but the wills of all the poor, the pained, the dying,
etc. were but reconciled to their suffering-state? would that which pleases
the will be matter of any complaint? You may see then that it is not Gods
providence, etc. but the wills and ways of sinners that are the diseased
causes of all their wranglings. And if our wills were cured and reduced to Gods
will, we should find no fault with him; If I can but be truly willing of
imprisonment, poverty, or death, how can I feel any thing in it to complain of?
When even sinners (as aforesaid) do obstinately here take their misery for
their happiness, and are contented with it so far as it is voluntary.

By that time these twenty Questions are Answered, the accusations of God as
wanting Goodness, will all turn to the accusers shame.

II. I am next briefly to detect the false opinions, which do ordinarily cause
these persons errors,

1. It is false doctrine to affirm that God condemns the greater part of his
Intectual Creatures (as I have showed) though he condemn never so many of this
ungodly world.

2. It is not true that God decrees to condemn any man but for sin (for sin, I
say, as the cause of his damnation.)

3. God decrees to condemn none at age (which I add but to exclude foolish
cavils) for Adam 's sin only; nor for any other sin only that is not conjoined
with an obstinate final impenitencie, and rejecting offered mercy, and
neglecting means appointed for their salvation.

4. Gods Decrees do cause no man's sin, (nor his damnation any further than as
as supposing sin:) for Dr. Twisse himself still professes, 1. That Reprobation
is an Immanent act, and nihil ponit in objecto, puts nothing at all into the
person. 2. And that Reprobation infers no necessity of sin or misery, but
that which is called necessitas consequentiae, and not any necessitas
consequentis; and Arminius and all confess that Gods bare foreknowledge causes
or infers a necessity consequentiae; which truly is but a Logical necessity
in order of argumentation, when one thing is proved by another; and not by
Physical necessity in order of causation, as one thing is caused by another.

And whereas they say [ Then man might have frustrated Gods decree] I ask them,
whether man can frustrate Gods foreknowledge; suppose God to foreknow sin
without decreeing it (of which more anon) is not this a good argument ( All
that God foreknoweth will certainly come to pass. But God foreknoweth, e. g.
Judas sin, Therefore it will certainly come to pass) And what of all this? It
does not come to pass because God foreknoweth it, no more than the Sun will
rise to morrow, because you foreknow it.

And if you say, That no power can frustrate Gods foreknowledge, I answer, They
are delusory words of one that knows not what he says: For it is one thing
to have power to make God Ignorant, and another thing to have power to do
otherwise than that which he foreknoweth you will do. No man has power to make
God ignorant: But all sinners may have power to do otherwise than that which
God foreknoweth we will do. For God does not foreknow that e. g. Gehezi, shall
not have Power to forbear a lie; but only that he will not forbear it: Yea
more, Gods foreknowledge does prove that sinners have power to do otherwise;
For that which God foreknoweth will be. But God foreknoweth that men will abuse
their power to sin, or will sin when they had Power to do otherwise, Therefore
it will be so in the Event.

Now if you will call their power to do otherwise, a power to frustrate Gods
foreknowledge, you will but speak foolishly: For the Power it self is
foreknown: And the object of knowledge in esse cognito, is not after the act of
knowledge: And if the person will not actually sin, God could not foreknow that
he will sin: So that foreknowledge is here (when it is not causal) but a medium
in a Syllogism, and infers only the necessity of the consequence in arguing
and does not cause the thing foreknown.

Now when Dr. Twisse says that all the Schoolmen agree that no necessity
Consequentis or of Causation, but only Consequentiae, does follow the decree of
Reprobation, see how far he and Arminius are in this agreed, (Though I know
some give another fence of necessitas consequentiae:) But I come closer to the
matter yet.

4. God Decrees no man's sin: Neither Adams nor any others. He may decree the
effect which sinners accomplish (as the death of Christ) And he may overrule
men in their sin, and bring good out of it, etc. But sin is not a thing that he
can will or cause, and so not Decree, which signifies a volition.

5. God cannot be proved to Decree, or Will the Permission of man's sin: For to
Permit is nothing. It is but, not to hinder; which is no act: And to Decree and
Will is a Positive Act: And if you fain God to have a Positive Volition or
Nolition, of every nothing, or Negative; then he must have positive decrees of
every mere possible Atome, Sand, Worm, Name, Word, Thought of Man, etc. That
such and such a nothing shall never be: whereas there needs no more to keep
any thing from being (in this case) than Gods not Causing it, not Willing it,
not Decreeing it. The Creatures Active Nature, Disposition, Objects, and
Circumstances, are here presupposed: And the Impedition necessary, is by Act,
(or substraction of these aforesaid) And Gods nonagere needs no positive
decree; I must tell the Learned Reader that this room will not serve to Answer
his foreseen objections: but I hope I have done it sufficiently elsewhere.

6. God has not only Decreed to give, but actually given a great deal of mercy
to them that perish, which had a natural tendency to their Salvation. Christ
has so far dyed for all, as that none shall perish for want of a sufficiency
in the satisfaction made; He has purchased and given for all, a grant or gift
of himself, with Pardon, Justification, Adoption and right to glory, on
condition of acceptance (where the Gospel comes.) In a word, so that none of
them shall perish, that do not finally refuse the Grace and Salvation offered
them.

7. Men are not Impenitent and Unbelievers for want of that called natural
faculty, or Power to choose and refuse aright; but for want of a right
disposition of their own wills: And by such a moral Impotency which is indeed
their viciousness, and the wickedness of their wills, and does not excuse but
aggravate the sin (see Mr. Truman of Natural and Moral Impotency.)

8. To rectify men's wicked wills and dispositions, God gives them a World of
means; The whole Creation, and Documents of providence; all the precepts,
promises, threats, of Scripture; Preaching, Example, Mercies, Judgments,
Patience, and inward motions of the spirit: All which might do much to men's
Conversion and Salvation, if they would but do what they could on their own
part.

9. Adam could have stood when he fell, without any more Grace than that which
he abused and neglected. Gods grace which was not effectual to him, was as much
as was necessary to his standing, if he would have done his best: And it was
left to his free will, to have made that help effectual by improvement: He
fell; not because he could not stand, but because he would not.

10. For ought any can prove, multitudes that believe not, now, but perish, may
have rejected a help as sufficient to their believing, as Adams was to his
standing.

11. All men have power to do more good, and avoid more Evil than they do; And
he that will not do what he can do, Justly suffers.

12. Heathens and Infidels are not left unredeemed under the remediless Curse,
and Covenant of Innocence which we broke in Adam; but are all brought by the
Redemption wrought by Christ, under a Law or terms of Grace. 1. God made a
Covenant of Grace with all mankind in Adam, Genesis 3.15. who was by Tradition to
acquaint his posterity with it, as he did to Cain and Abel the Ordinances of
Oblation and Sacrifice. 2. This Covenant was renewed with all mankind in Noah.
3. This Covenant is not repealed, otherwise than by a perfecter Edition to them
that have the plenary Gospel. 4. The full Gospel Covenant is made for all, as
to the Tenor of it, and the command of Preaching and Offering it to all. 5.
They that have not this Edition may yet be under the first Edition. 6. The
Jews under the first Edition were saved without believing in this determinate
person of Jesus, or that he should die for sin, and rise again, and send down
the spirit: For the Apostles believed it not before hand, Luke 18.34. Joh.
12.16. Luke 9.45. Mark 9.34. Luke 24.21, 25, 26. Act. 1.6, 7, 8. yet were they
then in a state of saving grace as appears by Joh. 14. and 15. and 16. and
17. throughout. 7. The rest of the world that had not the same supernatural
Revelation were not then bound to believe so much as the Jews were, about the
Messiah. 8. God himself told them all, that they were not under the unremedyed
curse of the Covenant of Innocence, by giving them a life full of those mercies
which they had forfeited, which all did tend to lead them to repentance, and to
seek after God, Romans 2.4 Act. 17.27. and find him yea the left not himself
without witness, for that which may be known of him, and his invisible things
are manifested and clearly seen in his works, so that the wicked are without
excuse, Romans 1.19.20. Act. 14.17. So that all Heathens are bound to believe
that God is, and that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb.
11.6. and are all under the duty of using certain means in order to their own
recovery and salvation, and to believe that they are not commanded to do this
in vain: So that Gods own Providence by a course of such mercies, which cannot
stand with the execution of the unremedyed violated Law of Innocence, together
with his obliging all men to Repentance, and to the use of a certain course of
means, in order to their salvation, is a promulgation of a Law of Grace,
according to the first Edition, and distinguishes man from unredeemed Devils.

And they that say that all the Infidel World have all this Mercy, Duty, Means,
and hope, without any Redemption or Satisfaction of Christ as the procureing
cause, are in the way to say next, that the Churches Mercies too, might have
been given without Christ. 9. Of a truth, God is no respecter of persons, but
in every Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted with
him; Act. 10.34, 35. For God will render to every man according to his deeds:
To them who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and honor and
incorruptibility, eternal life, Romans 2.6, 7. Glory, honor and peace to every
man that works good, to the Jew first and also to the Greek, v. 10. For there
is no respect of persons with God. v. 11. For when the Gentiles which have not
the Law, do by nature the things conained in the Law, these having not the Law
are a Law unto themselves. Which show the work of the Law written in their
Hearts, their Consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing or else excusing one another, v. 14, 15. And they shall be
Judged according to that Law which they were under, (Natural or Mosaical,) even
by Jesus Christ, v. 12.16. (And it is the work of the spirit promised, to
believers, to write the Law of God in their hearts.)

10. Though a special promise was made to Abraham, as an Eminent believer, and
the Jewish Nation were the peculiar people of God, advanced to greater
privileges than any others in the World; yet were they not the whole Kingdom
of God the Redeemer, nor the only people that were in a Covenant of Grace, or
in a state of Salvation: For Sem was alive after Abraham's death, who was not
like to be less than a King, and to have a Kingdom or people Governed according
to his Fidelity. And Melchizedock was a King of Righteousness and Peace (not
like to be Sem by the Situation of his Country.) And a Righteous King would
govern in Righteousness: Job and his friends are evidences of the same truth.
And we have no proof or probability that all Abraham's seed by Ishmael and Esau,
and Keturah, were Apostates (for they continued Circumcision.) And what all the
rest of the World was, we know not save that in general most grew Idolatrous,
and the Canaanites in special. But that they all apostatized from the Covenant
of Grace made with Adam and Noah there is no proof: We have not the History of
any of their Countries fully, so as to determine of such cases. In Nineve God
ruled by that Law of Grace, which called them to repent, and spared them upon
their Belief and Repentance; Because he was a gracious God and merciful, slow
to anger, and of great kindness, and repents of the Evil, Jonah. 4.2.

And that God deals not with mankind now as the mere Judge of the violated
Law of Innocence, he declares not only by the full testimony of his Providence
or Mercies given to the sinful World, but also by the very name which he
proclaims unto Moses (which signifies his nature, and his mind toward
others, and not what he is to the Jews alone,] Exodus 34.6, 7. [ The Lord, The
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for Thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and
sin,] (All which is inconsistent with the Relation of God as a Judge of a
people only under the Curse of an unremedied violated Law, and unredeemed,
though he add, [ and that will by no means clear the guilty, etc.] that is,
will neither Judge them innocent that are guilty of the Crime, nor Judge them
to Life, that are guilty of Death, according to the tenor of the Law which
they are under; [ Purificando non purificabit] as the literal version; that is,
will not Judge unjustly by acquitting him that is to be condemned, or, as the
Chaldee Paraphrase has it, [ not Justifying those that are not converted.]

It is enough for us therefore to know that the visible Chruch has manifold
privileges above all others, Romans 3.1, 2, 3. etc. And that salvation is more
easy, sure and plenteous where the Gospel comes than with any others, and
that we have therefore great Cause to rejoice with thankfulness for our lot,
and that the poor World lies in wickedness and must be pittyed, prayed for,
and helped to our power, and that God is the Savior of all men, but especially
of them that believe, and that he is good to all and his mercies are over all
his works, and that he will never damn one soul, that loves him as God. But
what is in the Hearts of all men in the World, and consequently how they shall
be used at last, he only that searches the heart can tell, and it is neither
our duty nor our interest nor possible to us, to know it of all particulars;
much less to conclude that none among them have such Love, who believe him to
be infinitely good, and to be to them a merciful pardoning God. And we know
withal, that all they that know not Jesus Christ as this determinate person
that was Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified,
Dead, Bu^ied, Rose again, etc. do yet receive all the foresaid mercies by him,
and not by any other Name or Mediation, nor yet without his purchasing
Mediation.

13. And if besides all the mercy that God shows to others, he do
antecedently and positively Elect certain persons, by an absolute Decree, to
overcome all their resistances of his spirit, and to draw them to Christ, and
by Christ to himself, by such a power and way as shall infallibly convert and
save them, and not leave the success of his Mercy, and his Sons preparations to
the bare uncertainty of the mutable Will of depraved man, What is there in this
that is injurious to any others? or that represents God unmerciful to any,
but such whose eye is evil, because he is good, and as a free Benefactour may
give more mercy to some than others of equal Demerits? If they that hold no
Grace but what is universal, and left, as to the success, to the will of man,
as the determining cause, do think that this is well consistent with the
mercifulness of God; surely they that hold as much universal Grace as the
former; and that indeed all have so much as brings and leaves the success to
man's will, and deny to no man any thing which the other give, do make God no
less merciful tha^ they, but more, if they moreover assert a special Decree and
Grace of God, which with a chosen number shall antecedently Infallibly secure
his Ends in their repentance, faith, perseverance and salvation; Is this any
detraction from, or diminution of, his universal Grace? or rather a higher
Demonstration of his Godness? As it is no wrong to man that God makes Angels,
more holy immutable and happy.

14. And what if men cannot here tell how to resolve the question, Whether any,
or how many are ever converted and saved, by that mere Grace which we call
sufficient, or rather Necessary, and common to those that are not converted;
and whether man's will ever make a saving determining improvement of it; must
plain truth be denied, because difficulties cannot easily be solved? And yet in
due place I doubt not but I have showed, that this question it self is formed
upon false suppositions, and is capable of a satisfactory solution.

15. I conclude in general, that nothing is more sure than that God is most
Powerful, Wise and Good, and that, All his works, to those that truly know
them, do manifest all these in conjunction, and perfect Harmony, and that as to
his Decrees and Providence, he is the Cause of all Good, and of no sin in act
or habit, and that our sin and destruction is of our selves, and of him is our
Holiness and Salvation: And that he attaineth all his ends as certainly as if
man's will had no liberty, but were acted by Physical necessitation: And yet
that man's will has as much natural Liberty, as if God had not gone before it
with any Decree of the Event, and as much moral liberty as we have moral virtue
or holiness.

And these Principles I have laid down in a little room that Tempted persons
may see, that it is our dark and puzzled brains, and our selfish diseased
hearts that are the cause of our quarreling with God, his Decrees, and
Providence, and as soon as we come to our selves and are cured, these odious
apprehensions vanish, and God appears, as the unclouded Sun, in the Luster of
his Amiable Goodness; And when we come to Heaven we shall see to our Joy and
his Glory, that Heaven, Earth, and Hell declare him to be all perfectly Good,
without any mixture of evil in himself, or in any of his word or works. And we
shall find all our sinful suspicions and murmurings turned into a joyful
consent to the Angelical praises; Psalm. 136.1.2, 26, etc. O give thanks unto
the Lord for he is Good, for his mercy is for ever. O give thanks unto the God
of Heaven, for his mercy is for ever. Romans 4.8, 11. Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come -- Thou art worthy O Lord to
receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: for thou have Created all things; and for
thy Pleasure they are, and were Created. -- Rev. 7.12. Amen, Blessing and Glory
and Wisdom and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might, unto our God
for ever and ever Amen. The Lord is Good to all, and his tender Mercies are
over all his works. The Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger
and of great Mercy. Psalm. 145.8, 9. The Word of the Lord is right, and all his
works are done in truth: He loves righteousness and judgments; the Earth is
full of the goodness of the Lord. Psalm. 33.4.5. O how great is thy Goodness
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee; which thou have wrought for
them that trust in thee before the sons of men. Psalm. 31.19. O therefore that
men (instead of quarrelling with his unknown mysteries) would praise the Lord
for his Goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Children of men, Psalm.
107.8, 15, 21, 31.

In the Conclusion, I take it to be wholesome advise to those that are under
this Temptation:

1. That they will often read over the Psalms of Praise; and think when they read
them, whether David and the ancient Church, were not like to know what they
said, than a self-conceited, or a melancholy tempted sinner?

2. That they would consider who it is that is the Grand enemy of the Glory of
Gods Goodness; And they shall soon find that it is no other than the Devil:
None but he that is most evil, can most envy Infinite Goodness his honor: And
is the Devil fit to be believed against God? And that after the warning of our
first Parents ruin, which befell them for believing Satan when he slandered,
both Gods Wisdom, Truth and Goodness to them?

3. That they would bethink them to what end it is that the Tempter and the
Enemy of God does thus deny his Goodness. Is it not a plain act of malice
against God and us? Is it not that he may disgrace God as evil, and rob him of
his Glory; and also that he may hinder man from Loving him, and so destroy all
piety, and virtue, and goodness in the World? Who can Love him whom he
believes to be bad, and so unlovely? And what Grace or happiness can there be
without the Love of God?

4. That they would think what horrid wickedness this sin contains (where
Melancholy and involuntariness does not extenuate it.) Is it any better than a
denying that there is any God? As is said before; To be God is to be Perfectly
Powerful, Wise and Good: And if be none such, there can be no God: And then who
made the World, and all that is Good in it by derivative goodness? Yea is it
not to represent the most amiable blessed God, in Satan's Image (who is most
evil and a Murderer from the beginning Joh. 8.44.) that so men may hate him and
fly from him as they do from Devils? And can you tell how great a crime this is?

5. That they would consider, how this impious conceit is calculated for the
licensing of all manner of villainy in the world, and to root out all the
relicts of goodness from among mankind. For who can expect that any man should
be better than his Maker; and that he should have any Good, which denies God
to be Good?

6. That they would labor hard to be better themselves. For he that has a
true Created Goodness, is thereby prepared to relish and admire Gods primitive
uncreated goodness. Whereas a wicked or a guilty sinner, cannot much value that
which he is so unsuitable to, and which he thinks will be to him a consuming
fire. Truly God is good to Israel, and to such as are of a clean heart, Psalm.
73.1. But he that lives in the Love of sin, will be doubting of the Love of
God, and fearful of his wrath, and unfit to relish and delightfully perceive
his goodness. Psalm. 34.8. Taste and see that the Lord is Good* blessed is the
man that trusts in him.

7. Study Gods Love as manifested in Christ: Then you shall see what man on
earth may see. But think not falsely, narrowly, basely of his office, his
performance or his Covenant.

8. Dwell in the believing foresight of the Celestial Glory: The reflections of
which may wrap up a believing soul on earth, into ecstasies of gratitude and
delight.

9. Remember what Goodness there is in the Holiness of God, which is
demonstrated in his severest Justice; Yea what mercy it is to forewarn men of
the punishment of sin, that they may want no necessary means to escape it.

10. Remember how unfit the selfish Interest of obstinate despisers of Grace
and salvation, is, to be the measure or index of the Goodness of God: And how
much more credible the concordant testimony of the Heavenly Host is, who Live
in the Love of Love it self, and are everlastingly delighted in the Praises of
the Infinite, Greatness, Wisdom and Goodness of the most perfect, blessed,
Glorious God.

FINIS.

