THE ENGLISH Nonconformity, As under King Charles II. and King James II. TRULY
STATED and ARGUED,

By RICHARD BAXTER.

Who earnestly beseeches Rulers, and Clergy, not to Divide, and Destroy the
Land, and cast their own Souls on the dreadful Guilt and Punishment of National
PERJVRY, Lying, deliberate Covenanting to Sin against God, corrupt his Church,
and not Amend, nor by Laws or blind Malignity, to reproach faithful Ministers
of Christ, and Judge them to Scorn and Beggary, and to Lie and Die in Jails as
Rogues, and so to strengthen Profaneness, Popery and Schism, and all for want
of WILLINGNESS and PATIENCE to READ and Hear their just Defense; while they can
spend much more time in Sin and Vanity. The Author humbly begs that he and his
Books of unconfutable Defense of a Mistaken persecuted Cause may not be
Witnesses against them for such great and wilful Sin to their Condemnation.

Mat. 12. 25. Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Desolation.

Luke 13. 3 5. Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise Perish.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower
End of Cheapside. 1689.

The Preface.
IT is agreed on by all real Christians, that Man being made an Intelligent
Free Agent, not under brutish necessitating Determination by Objects, is
governed by God by the Moral way of Law; that is by the Signification of his
Ruler's Will, making his Duty, and not by mere natural or forcible Motion: And
it is agreed that GOD himself is his only absolute Universal Ruler, and his
Laws given in Nature and by Revelation are the only Universal Laws, which no
Humane Power can abrogate or dispense with: And that Kings and Magistrates are
his Ministers for Men's good, and have no Power but from him, and none against
him or his Laws; and that it is not Man but God, by whom we must all be judged
to everlasting Reward or Punishment: And therefore that all men must obey God
before Men, and must not fear them that can but kill the Body, but him who is
able to cast both Soul and Body into Hell.

And it is agreed on by all Sober Christians, that therefore as Subjects must
use their own Reason as discerning Self-Governours, to Judge who is their King,
and who is a Usurper, and what Actions are commanded or forbidden by Man's
Laws; so must they first and chiefly use their own reason, to judge
discerningly what Actions are commanded or forbidden by God, and must do
accordingly whoever is against it. This Judgment is commonly called Conscience;
which if it err not must be followed, but if it err, it must be rectified: for
then it is not God indeed that is obeyed: for God's Law changes not as
Conscience does: yet to go against such a Conscience is Sin, because it i^
interpretatively to go against God, while the Man thought this had been God's
Will.

On Supposition of this certain truth, all that ever I yet read that Condemn
the Nonconformists, and Preach for their Reproach and Ruin, do confess, that
If any one thing required of us as necessary to our Ministry or Communion be
Sin, our Nonconformity is but our Duty; and all the whole Ministry of England,
on whom this was imposed by the Act of Uniformity on Ba^tholomew-Day, 1662.
were bound in Conscience to have been Nonconformists: (Whether also to bave all
ceased to Preach the Gospel, I leave to their Consideration.) This being the
Confession of all that Silence us, and send us to Gaols, and call out for our
utter Extirpation, I know no shorter or likelier way, to stop all this burning
Wrath, and end our Mischievous Dissentions, than to try whether no one thing
required of us be Sin. Forty of the things required of Ministers, and Twelve of
those required of the Laity, in all Fifty two, I have proposed to Examination,
not as accusing the Laws or the Conformists, whatever I think of them; but only
rendering briefly the Reasons of our own refusals. And Forty three Points in
which many falsely suppose we Conform not (and some may perhaps be found that do
not Conform to them all) I have first instanced in, as being such as we oppose
not, nor are any Parts of our Nonconformity.

If all the Justices and Ministers of England, who censure us, and prosecute us
as intolerable Sinners, for our fearing these as Sin, have impartially tried
all these Points, and Reasons, or yet will do, and can find no Sin in any one
of the Fifty two, and it prove so indeed, I must say that all the Two Thousand
Ministers that in 1662. were Silenced, were as unhappy and strangely blinded
Men, as most in the World that are true Christians; that after all their Study
and Prayers, they should affright themselves into so calamitous a State,
against all the reason of their Worldly Interests, as well as against the
welfare of the Church, and their Duty to God: 2. But I must say, past doubt,
that the accusing Clergy are deeply guilty of it, who these Twenty one years
have no better answered the Reasons of our fear, nor used more Wisdom and
Charity for our just Conviction. For our Consciences are of such a temper, as
will not be convinced with a Scorn or a Iail, nor take all Writings or Words as
satisfactory, that are poured out with supercilious Confidence, and called
Satisfactory by the Self-esteeming Authors.

I am told by diverse, That I have written enough already on these Subjects,
were it only my first and second Plea for Peace, my Treatise of Episcopacy, and
that of Concord, and my Apology for our Preaching. And they say, You must
expect to do no good, nor so much as to be read by Adversaries, much less with
Diligence and impartial Willingness to know the Truth; but contrarily to be
hated, and accused of some odious Crime, and laid in Iail, among Malefactors
till you die; and a Prison will be more grievous to one in your pain and
languishing than to another. On the other side, I have been long importuned to
give an account of the Reasons of our Nonconformity: I have by Bishops been
reproved for not doing it: Lords and Persons of great Quality have been
persuaded, that we keep up a dangerous Schism in the Land, to the cherishing of
Discontents and Sedition, only for things which we confess to be indifferent,
and no Sin: the Laws accuse us: The numerous Addresses of Counties, Cities and
Corporations, revile us as the Nurses of Rebellion: No small number of
Preachers plead for our Ruin on the same Supposition, and tell the People that
it is no Sin that we stick at, but Humor, Pride and Faction make us
disobedient Schismatics without any reason for what we do. The Iails are
filled with Nonconformists: Nine Ministers are now in Newgate, and many more in
other Places. And almost all of them Mulct and Fined in far more than ever they
were worth. Their Goods and Books taken by Distress: They are fain to fly or
abscond that are not in Prison: Their Wives and Children in Distress and Want:
They are judged by the Justices unworthy so much as to be summoned to Answer
for themselves before they are judged, or to be heard Plead their own Cause, or
to know and question their Accusers and Witnesses; But as I my self was
Distreined of all my Goods and Books on five Convictions before ever I heard of
any Accusation, or saw a Judge, so is it with many others, and more. In a word,
Lords, Knights and Clergymen take us for unsufferable Persons in the Land,
unfit for Humane Society, Enemies to Monarchy, Obedience and Peace, and
Corporations promise to choose such Parliament Men as are for our Extirpation.
And all this is for our Nonconformity, which they all confess to be our Duty if
it be any Sin that by the Impositions is required of us.

And if so small and easy a task as proving one or many such Sins required,
would recover the Charity and Justice of all these Men, and save themselves and
the Land from the guilt of Prosecuting and Oppressing the Innocent, and
Condemning Men for Obedience to God, and driving conscionable and loyal Persons
out of the Land, or overwhelming them with false Accusations, because of other
Men's Treasons or Sedition, is not he that will forbear his Part and Duty in so
dreadful a Case, a greater Sinner than he that when the City is on fire, will
not do his best to quench it; or that will not put out his hand to save a
Friend or Child in fire or Water, for fear of some trouble to himself?

I did in my first Plea for Peace, only name the Matters which we dare not
Conform to, and durst not give the Reasons of our Fear and Nonconformity:
Whereupon many since have importuned me for those Reasons, as without which I
could not expect that Men should understand our Case. Why should I deny this?
Is it through despair that Rulers and Clergymen will not regard Reason, or will
not bear it, but answer it with Contempt or Prisons? That is to accuse them of
such Injustice, Uncharitableness, and Inhumanity as I must not accuse any of
that do not by open practice accuse themselves.

Is it lest I should suffer by them? My Life and Labors have been long Vowed
to God: He has preserved my Life, and succeeded my Labors above forty Years,
by a continued course of remarkable Providence, beyond my own and other Men's
expectations. What he has thus given me, is doubly due to his Service; which
has been still so good to me, that it has made even a painful life, a
continual pleasure. He never failed or forsook me: I dare not ask any longer
life of him, but for more and longer Service. And if my Service be at an end,
why not my Life also? If I refuse his Service, I invite God to cut off my Life:
And what Service else can I now do? I have neither leave nor strength to
Preach. I have these fourteen Months been disabled so much as to go to any
Public or Private Church, or hear a Sermon. My Body with pain and languid
feebleness is a daily heavy load to me. I suffer more by it every day, than
from all my Enemies in the World. And shall I be guilty of the heinous Sin of
the Omission of my Duty in a time of such urgent and crying Necessity, to save
so calamitous a Life, which I am still looking when it ends? Is not a Prison
as near a Way to Heaven as my own House? I will not do as those Christians that
Cyprian writes to Comfort, who were greatly troubled at Death, because they
died not by Martyrdom. But I take a Death for so public and pressing a Cause
of Truth, Love, Innocence and Peace, to be a more comfortable sort of
Martyrdom, than theirs that were Burnt in Smithfield for denying the Real
Presence, and such like; and if God will so end such a painful Life when
Sickness and Natural decay is ready to end it, I hope he will teach me neither
to repine, nor to be utterly unthankful.

And as to the uncertainty of success, He that observes the Wind shall not
sow; God must be trusted to bless our Work while we Plant and Water; It Is my
part to do my Duty, and God's part to give success: I commend my self living
and dying into the hands of my Creator and Redeemer, and end this Preface in
the words of St. Paul, Act. 20. 23, 24. Bonds and afflictions abide me: But
none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so
that I might finish my course with Joy, and the Ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.

Richard Baxter.
London, Sept. 28. 1683.
An Instance of the ACCUSATIONS which call for our Defense; (besides those in
the Act for Banishment from Corporations, etc.)
Devon ss. Ad General. Quarterial. Session. Pacis Dom. Regis tent. apud Castr.
Exon. in and pro Comitat. praed. Secundo die Octobris, Anno Regni Dom. nostri
Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensor. etc. Tricessimo quinto, Annoque Dom. 1683.
WE have been so abundantly convinced of the Seditious and Rebellious Practices
of the Sectaries and Phanaticks, who through the Course of above One hundred
years since we were first infested with 'em, have scarce afforded this unhappy
Kingdom any interval of rest from their Horrid Treasons, as that we must esteem
'em, not only the open Enemies of our Established Government, but to all the
common Principles of Society and Humanity it self. Wherefore, that we may
prevent their Horrid Conspiracies for the time to come, and secure (as much as
in us lies) our most Gracious KING and the GOVERNMENT from the Fury and Malice
of 'em, we resolve to put the Severest of the Laws (which we find too Easy and
Gentle, unless enlivened by a vigorous Execution) in force against 'em.

1. We Agree and Resolve, in every Division of this County, to require
sufficient Sureties for the good Abearing and Peaceable Behavior of all such
as we may justly suspect, or that we can receive any credible Information
against, that they have been at any Conventicles and Unlawful Meetings, or at
any Factious or Seditious Clubs; or that have by any Discourses discovered
themselves to be disaffected to the present Established Government, either in
Church or State; or that have been the Authors or Publishers of any Seditious
Libels; or that shall not in all things duly conform themselves to the present
Established Government.

2. Because we have a sort of False Men, and more perfidious than professed
Phanatiques, who either wanting Courage to appear in their own shape, or the
better to bring about their Treasonable Designs, privately Associate with, and
encourage the Seditious Clubs of the Sectaries, and with them Plot heartily
against the Government; and yet, that they may pass unsuspected, sometime
appear in the Church with a false show of Conformity, only to save their Money,
and the better to serve their Faction: that we may (if possible) distinguish
and know all such dangerous Enemies, we will strictly require all
Churchwardens and Constables, at all our Monthly Meetings, to give us a full
account of all such as do not every Sunday resort to their own Parish-Churches,
and are not at the beginning of Divine Service, and do not behave themselves
Orderly and Soberly there, observing all such decent Ceremonies as the Laws
enjoin: And that they likewise Present unto us the Names of all such as have
not received the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in their own
Parish-Churches Thrice in the Year.

3. Being fully satisfied, as well by the clear Evidence of the late Horrid
PLOT, as by our own long and sad Experience, That the Nonconformist Preachers
are the Authors and Fome^^ers of this Pestilent Faction, and the implacable
Enemies of the Established Government, and to whom the late Execrable Treasons,
which have had such dismal effects in this Kingdom, are principally to be
imputed, and who by their present obstinate refusing to Take and Subscribe an
Oath and Declaration, That they do not hold it Lawful to take up ARMS against
the KING, and that they will not endeavor any Alteration of Government either
in Church or State; do necessarily enforce us to conclude, that they are still
ready to engage themselves, (if not acutally engaged) in some Rebellious
Conspiracy against the KING, and to invade and Subvert his GOVERNMENT:
wherefore we resolve in every Parish of this County, to leave strict Warrants
in the hands of all Constables, for the Seizing of such Persons. And as an
encouragement to all Officers and others, that shall be instrumental in the
apprehending of any of them, so as they may be brought to Justice, we will give
and allow Forty shillings, as a Reward, for every Nonconformist Preacher that
shall be so secured. And we Resolve to Prosecute them, and all other such
Dangerous Enemies of the Government, and common Absenters from Church, and
Frequenters of CONVENTICLES, according to the Directions of a Law made in the
Five and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH, Entitled, An Act for
the keeping Her Majesty's Subjects in due OBEDIENCE.

Lastly, That we may never forget the infinite Mercies of Almighty God, in the
late Wonderful Deliverance of our Gracious KING, and his Dearest BROTHER, and
all His Loyal Subjects, (who were designed for a Massacre) from the Horrid
Conspiracy of the Phanatiques, and their Accomplices; and that we may
perpetuate as well our own Thankfulness, as their Infamy, that the Generations
to come may know their Treachery, and avoid and never trust men of such
Principles more; and also, that we our selves may perform our public Duty to
Almighty God, before we enter upon the Public Service of our Country: We
Order, Resolve, and Agree, with the Advice and Concurrence of the Right
Reverend Father in God, our much Honored and Worthy Lord BISHOP, to give and
bestow for the Beautifying of the Chapel in the Castle of EXON, and for the
erecting of decent Seats there, Ten Pounds: And we will likewise give and
continue Six Pounds to be paid yearly to any one of the Church of Exon, whom
the said Lord BISHOP shall appoint, to read the DIVINE SERVICE, with the
Prayers lately appointed for the day of Thanksgiving on the Ninth of September
last, and to Preach a Sermon exhorting to OBEDIENCE, in the said Chapel, on
the first day of every general Quarter Sessions of the Peace held in the said
Castle, to begin precisely at Eight of the Clock in the Morning.

And may the Mercies of Heaven (which are infinite) always protect our
Religious and Gracious KING, his Dearest BROTHER, and every Branch of that
ROYAL FAMILY; and may all the Treasonable Conspiracies of those Rebellious
Schismatics be always thus happily prevented.

Hugo Vaughan, Cler. Pacis Com. praed.
That the continued Care of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County
of DEVON, for the Safety of His Majesty's Sacred Person, the Preservation of
the Public Peace, and advancement of true Religion, may be fuller known, and
have a better Effect; I do hereby Order and Require all the CLERGY of my
Diocese within the County of Devon, deliberately to publish this Order, the
next Sunday after it shall be tendered to them.

THO. EXON. (Now Archbishop of York.)



THE CONTENTS.
CHap. 1. The Introductory Conference. Chapter 2. The things presupposed as agreed
on. Chapter 3. What our Nonconformity is not, in 50 Instances. Chapter 4. A brief
Enumeration of the things imposed on us, which are the Matter of our
Nonconformity. Chapter 5. I. Of Reordination. Chapter 6. II. Of the Oath and Covenant
of Canonical Obedience to Bishops and Ordinaries. Chapter 7. III. Ordained
Ministers forbidden to Preach, or Expound any Scripture, or Matter or Doctrine,
Can. 49. Chapter 8. IV. and V. Of Subscribing that there is nothing in three Books
contrary to the Word of God, and Declaring Assent and Consent to all in the
Liturgy, etc. Chapter 9. VI. Of Assenting that it is CERTAIN by the Word of God,
that Infants baptized dying before actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved (qua
tales) not exceepting the seed of Atheists, Jews, or any. Chapter 10. VII. Of the
English sort of Godfathers at Baptism and their Vows. Chapter 11. VIII. Of refusing
to Baptize such as have not such Godfathers. Chapter 12. IX. Of the Dedicating
symbol of Crossing at Baptism. Chapter 13. X. Of denying Baptism where Crossing is
refused. Chapter 14. XI. Of Rejecting from Communion all that dare not receive
Kneeling. Chapter 15. XII. Of consenting to the false Rule, as true, for finding
Easter Day always: Whether small lies be Sin? Chapter 16. XIII. Of Pronouncing all
Saved that are Buried, except the Excommunicate, Unbaptized, and
Self-Murderers. Chapter 17. XIV. Of Consenting to read so much of the Apocrypha.
Chapter 18. XV. Of Assenting to Mis-translations of God's Word, and subscribing
that they are not contrary to it. Chapter 19. XVI. Of Consenting to reject all from
Christian Communion, who desire not the English manner of Episcopal
Confirmation. C. 20. XVII. Of Consenting to all the Ornaments of Church and
Ministers which were in use in the Second year of King Edw. 6. Chapter 21. XVIII.
Of giving account to the Ordinary of all that we keep from the Sacrament, that
he may proceed against them according to the Canons: which leads us to consider
those Canons. Chapter 22. XIX. Of Publishing Lay-Chancellors Excommunications and
Absolutions, according to the Canons. Chapter 23. XX. Of Publishing
Excommunications according to the fourth Canon. Chapter 24. XXI. Of Publishing
Excommunications according to the fifth Canon. Chapter 25. XXII. Of Publishing
Excommunications by the sixth Canon. Chapter 26. XXIII. Of Publishing
Excommunications by the seventh Canon. Chapter 27. XXIV. Of Publishing
Excommunications by the eighth Canon: Chapter 28. XXV. Of Excommunicating all that
call Dissenters a Church, according to the 9th, 10th, and 11th Canons. Chapter 29.
XXVI. Of executing Canon 27, rejecting Nonconformists from Communion. Chapter 30.
XXVII. Of refusing others Parishioners from Communion according to Can. 28. Chapter
31. XXVIII. Of Can. 38. Excommunicating Ministers for Repenting of their
Subscribing. Chapter 32. XXIX. Of Can. 57. Excommunicating Men for going for
Baptism and Communion from Ministers that never Preach to those that do. Chapter
33. XXX. Of Can. 58. making the Surplice necessary to Ministration. Chapter 34.
XXXI. Of forcing Ministers by Can. 68. to Baptize all Children without
exception of Atheists or Insidels. Chapter 35. XXXII. Of Can. 72. against Fasts and
Prayer unlicensed. Chapter 36. XXXIII. Of Excommunication by the three last Canons.
Chapter 37. XXXIV. Of renouncing all Obligation by the Covenant, as on me or Any
other, to Endeavor any alteration of Church Government. Chapter 38. XXXV. Of the
Oxford Oath, never to Endeavor such Al^^^io^. Chapter 39. XXXVI. Of Subscribing and
Swearing that the Position is Traitorous of taking Arms by the King's Authority
against those Commissioned by him in Pursuance of such Commission; without
Exception. A Lord Keeper's Seal to a Commission to Conspirators to seize the
King's Forts, Magazine and Guards may so depose him. Chapter 40. XXXVII. Of
Assenting and Consenting to the damning Clauses in Athanasius's Creed. Chapter 41.
XXXVIII. Of saying Common Prayer twice a day, every day in the year or
dinarily. Chapter 42. XXXIX. Of forcing unwilling Men to the Sacrament and Accusing
and Excommunicating the refusers. Chapter 43. XL. Of forsaking our Ministry and
ceasing to Preach the Gospel; Whether it be not Sacrilege and Cruelty in us:
and of Banishment 5 miles from all Corporations, etc. Chapter 44. Of
Lay-Conformity. I. Whether all men must trust their Souls on the Pastoral
Conduct of all such, as our Patrons will choose, and the Bishops institute. Chapter
45. II. Whether Parents have not more right than our Patrons, to choose Pastors
and Church Communion for their Children. Chapter 46. III. Of forcing Men to Schism,
by renouncing Communion with true Christians and true Churches. Chap. 47. IV.
Of binding all the Laity to live without any more benefit of Church Discipline,
than is used by the Bishops and their Courts. Chapter 48. V. Of discountenancing
the fear of Sin, and the serious practice of Godliness: diverse instances. Chapter
49. VI. The Laity denied Baptism, who refuse the foresaid sort of Godfathers,
excluding the Parents. Chapter 50. VII. Baptism denied to them that dare not submit
to the dedicating Symbol of Crossing. Chapter 51. VIII. Of Rejecting not-kneelers
from Church Communion. Chapter 52. IX. Of denying Laymen Communion in a Neighbor
Parish Church, when they dare not Communicate with their own Parishes: For the
Reasons aforesaid. Chapter 53. X. The Laity must Swear never to endeavor any
Alteration of Government in the Church, without Exception. Chapter 54. XI. The
Laity must swear an Abhorrence of taking Arms against any Commissioned by the
King, without Exception: when they understand not whether every one be the
King's Commission that is signed by the Lord Chancellor or Privy Seal, though
it be against Law, and tend to overthrow King and Kingdom. Chapter 55. XII. Whether
all trusted in Corporations may declare that there is no Obligation on them or
any other, from the Oath called The Solemn League and Covenant, not so much as
to repent of Sin, or oppose Profaneness, Popery or Schism, and defend the King:
and so that G. Monk's Army, and all the rest of the Three Nations that restored
the King as obliged to it by that Vow, were all deceived, and not so obliged:
and whether all the Subjects must be sure of this? Chapter 56. Of Thirty tremendous
Circumstances and Principles which all agree in, that affright Men from
Conformity. Chapter 57. The Reasons for Conformity considered. Chapter 58. Whether
Communion with so faulty a Church be lawful. Separation confuted. Chapter 59. A
Draught (in ten Articles) of that which the Reconciling Nonconformists desire
for healing our Church Divisions: In the words which they judge meetest to that
use. Chapter 60. The Reasons of those ten Articles distinctly rendered. Chapter 61.
Whether the Extirpation of the Nonconformists be not rather to be attempted,
than a Union with them by these means: Handled with reference to a late
Treasonable Plot against the King. Chapter 62. Fifty Questions proposed to unjust
Silencers.
ERRATA.
Page 100. l. 31. for [I] read [It] p. 103. l. 22. for [Corners] r. [Courts] p.
107. l. 38. for [is] r. [is not] p. 113. l. 13. for [our] r. [one] l. 14. for
[Clergy] r. [Churches] p. 115. l. Penult. r. [Stoughton] p. 124. l. 13. for
[our] r. [one] p. 129. l. 15. for [it is] r. [is it] p. 131. l. 25. r. [well
as] p. 134. l. 13. r. [If it] p. 144. l. 23. dele [revoked.]

THE True CASE OF THE English Nonconformity. In a DIALOGUE between A Silenced
MINISTER and a LAWYER.
CHAP. I. The Introductory Conference.
Lawyer. SIR, the danger of the Kings Dominions by our Irreligious Contentions
about Religion, possesses the observers with just indignation; but all know
not on whom to lay the blame; some lay it on the Bishops, and some on the
Nonconformists, and some on both: I am unwilling to wrong any; but when I think
of our danger, and hear that it is but Ceremonies, and things indifferent for
which you break the Law, and make a Schism in the Church, and weaken us by
divisions; I cannot but think you deeply guilty.


Minister. How long have you so judged?


L. These twenty years, ever since you were put out.


M. Did you ever by Reading and Conference with those that you censure,
acquaint your self truly with their Case.


L. I have seen some of your Books, but I have not talked much of these matters
with any of you, but I read and hear from the Doctors of the Church what you
are, and what you hold.


M. Will you take us to be the just reporters what they are and hold?


L. No, you are Adversaries and partial.


M. And are not they as much so to us? Is not every man fitter to profess his
own Faith than his Adversary is? And have you done well to judge before you
heard and tried? Shall Judges do so on the Bench? Have you not all these years,
continued guilty of false judging and uncharitableness, and that against a
great number of the innocent? And if you every day prayed for forgiveness but
as you forgive, even an enemy and real injury, what have you done all this
while in condemning the guiltless?


L. Why have you not in Writing given the World just satisfaction if you are
guiltless? What sin have you proved to be in the Conformity required of you? I
see no such proof.


M. You know what penalties the Law lays on any that deprave the
Common Prayer Books, and that all are Excommunicate ipso facto, that do but
affirm any thing to be against Gods Word, in any Office of your Church
Government, in any Word or Ceremony in your Liturgy, etc. Can. 5. 6, 7, 8. And
you know what follows Excommunication here. And you know that till of late
years the Press was shut up to us: But have you seriously read and studied what
is written by us? I my self have told you; 1. In a Book called A Plea for
Peace, what things they be which Nonconformists take to be sinful in
Conformity, and how great and heinous the sin is which they fear; and what
separation is unlawful and what is necessary. 2. In a full Treatise of
Episcopacy I have showed what Episcopacy we are for, and what we are against,
and why, and what Antiquity held hereabout, and what we have to say to most of
the Learned Men that have written for that Diocesan form, which we cannot
approve 3. In an Apology, I have proved it our duty to Preach, though
forbidden, as far as we are able, and men's necessities require it. 4. In a
second Plea for Peace, I have fully given the World an account of our Doctrine,
of Magistrates Power and Subjects Duties in matters Civil and Ecclesiastical,
etc. 5. In a Treatise of Church Concord, I have fully proved that the Primitive
simplicity in things divine, few, plain and sure is the only possible matter of
Universal Christian Unity and Concord. I know not of any one of these that are
Answered, or any thing like an Answer to them written, save that to some part
of the first, some mere impertinent noise was made by some one that is confuted.


L. We that have other Employment have not leisure to read so many tedious
Writings: Tell us your Case in a few words if you would have us understand you.


M. Did you get your skill in Law by so easy and so short a Study? Or is any
kind of Knowledge so easily got, where Controversy has drowned the matter in
contradicting words. You know that it is multitudes of Volumes that are written
on the other side: And it is impossible to Answer them all in a few words: And
if they be unanswered, they will say, we have done nothing. But had you as
seriously studied but one or two of these Books, (e.g. my first Plea for Peace,
and Treatise of Episcopacy) as you do Law Books, I scarce think you would have
been long unsatisfied. But if indeed you have no time to hear, read and study,
say also you have no time to know or judge: And no more censure what you know
not.


L. How comes your Case to be so little understood if you have done so much to
open and justify it?


M. You may know by your self. 1. Men study their own matters in which they
feel themselves concerned; and as for ours they think they are not much
concerned to know them. 2. At least not at the rate of any hard and diligent
study, which neither love nor necessity leads them to. 3. Most are strangers to
us, even they that dwell near us, and converse not with us. 4. The rather
because that as we are out of the rising way, and are under public
discountenance, and banished from Corporations, and much from converse with men
of public place and interest, so our familiarity is become fearful, lest it
brings those that are familiar with us into suspicion. 5. And they converse
with those that through Ignorance or Malice do describe us and our Cause and
Books, as they would have all men think of us; and it is not good manners or
safe to contradict them. And so the notice of our Mind and Case must be
received, not from us, but from our accusers. Do you observe this method in
Westminster minister-Hall. 6. And how much interest can byas men's judgments,
common experience too easily tells us: They that are uppermost seldom want
applauders, nor dejected men accusers. Every Schoolboy can tell you out of
Ovid. de Trist. Dum fueris foelix multos numerabis amicos: Nullus ad amissas
ibit amicus opes. Aspicis ut veniunt ad candida tecta Columbae: Accipiet nullas
sordida turris aves. A few serious Believers that look for a more righteous and
important judgment after death, do not lose the treasure of Truth and Innocence
in Shipwreck, it being as near them as themselves: But caetera fortunae non mea
turba fuit.


L. But if there be no cause, how come you to be so odious to others?


M. If you that dwell in England cannot answer that your self, when you have
taken a survey of the quality and life's of them that hate us, and them that
they hate, and of their distinct interests and motives, I will not answer it to
you?


L. But whence is it that Clergymen of the same Profession so much disagree?


M. The former answer shall serve to this: Whence is it that the Clergy by
disagreement about Opinions and Superiority have broken the whole Christian
World into that state of doleful division, in which in Asia, Africa and Europe,
it lies to this day? If you know not read the History of the Church.


L. Which part of you soever is guilty, the guilt must needs be very heinous,
when the Preachers of the Gospel of Love and Peace, so hate each other, and
persuade all to do the like, and will not let the World be quiet.


M. No doubt but Love and Concord are so great Duties and Blessings, and there
is so much of Satan in the contrary, that you can hardly aggravate the guilt
too much. If it were better for that man that offends or stumbleth one of the
least, that he had never been born, or he had been cast with a millstone about
his neck into the Sea; what a case are these Church Pastors in that tear the
Church, and Preach down Love, and harden thousands in Ungodliness and Cruelty,
and endanger the loss of Religion to the Land.


L. If I knew which of you had done most for Love an Peace, and least against
them, I should know to whom to impute our troubles.


M. We justify not our selves, and we leave others to their judge: We have
deserved worse from God, than we have suffered. But we must say; 1. That we
impose not our words, our books, our forms, our different rites on any, nor
would do, by violence, had we power: We put no Oaths, Subscriptions,
Convenants, Professions or Practices doubtful upon any: To them that tell us we
did so in former times, we still say, let them use no other so but those that
used them so, and we are satisfied: I know not six in England of all the
present Nonconformists that did so: We are not for Silencing or Imprisoning
them, nor forbidding them to worship God: In 1660 we motioned no change of
Church Government, which should take down any of their Lordships Maintenance or
Episcopal Power, but only Archbishop Vshers Draught of the ancient Episcopacy,
and thankfully accepted what the King then granted in his Declaration of
Ecclesiastical Affairs. 2. We never craved Preferment of them, but leave to
serve Christ and his Church in the Office which we were Vowed to. We certainly
knew what impediments hindered the desired Unity, and what divisions must needs
follow were they not removed, which by others they might easily have been,
without cost or danger. We Pleaded, we Wrote, we Petitioned, and Begged for
Peace, even for that which the King had granted: And what could we do more?
Since then above twenty years we have labored as we could, sometime to few,
and sometime to more; and have patiently lived upon Charity, and suffered -- I
need not tell you what.


L. But why could not you Conform to the Law as well as they?


M. 1. Can men believe what others list because they bid us? Is there nothing
that you or they would refuse if it be but commanded you? What use have we for
a Law of God then? If we must disobey it as often as we are bid, that were to
renounce God, and all Religion and Salvation. And we have not our own
understandings at command; we have offered them our Oaths these twenty years,
that we would obey them in all, except at the rate of sinning and damnation.

2. And if we had done as they did we must have professed our Assent and Consent
to all things contained in and prescribed by a Book which we never saw: For so
did we suppose above seven thousand men, the Book not coming out of the Press
till about the day that they were so to Assent to it, Aug. 24. so that no doubt
they did it on an implicit trust in others; except the few that were in or
near London: This fully shows that, though almost all the nine thousand or more
Ministers that were in possession when the King came in, did before conform to
the way of the Directory, and not to the Common Prayer Book, yet there was a
great latent difference between the seven thousand that conformed, and the two
thousand that did not.


L. But seeing all the stress lies upon the question, Whether it be only
things Lawful, indifferent or good, which you refuse, or any thing which God
forbids: I pray tell me plainly, what it is that you take to be sinful in
the Conformity required? And what it is that you would have as necessary in its
stead.


M. I will tell you on these Conditions; 1. That you pardon me for repeating
here what I have already written. 2. That you bring not your self a Conscience
so laxe as will take nothing for sin, which men use to make light of, though
God forbid it, and then think that our Consciences should be as wide as yours.
3. That we may premise the things presupposed as agreed on.


CHAP. II. The things presupposed as agreed on.
L. WHat are the Agreements which you presuppose?


M. These following.

1. That God is the Absolute Sovereign Ruler, and has made in Nature, and in
the Sacred Scripture, Universal Laws for the whole Church and World: And that
Kings are His Subjects and Officers, and have no Power but what He gives them
directly or indirectly, and therefore none against Him; no more than a
Constable against the Sovereign Power; and that he and all men are bound to
obey Gods Laws, whoever are against it or forbid it.


L. I cannot deny this, without denying God to be God, and the Law of Nature
and Scripture to be His Law and Word.


M. II. That next to his Government, God in order of Nature and Time made
Self-Government and Family-Government before the Government of Republics,
Kingdoms or Cities: And that public Polity has no Authority to abrogate
Self-Government or Family-Government, but only to over rule and use them for
the common good and safety.


L. This is undeniable, if you state the Governments presupposed (...).


M. III. That it belongs to Self-Government to discern by reason, whether the
Commands of Men be against the Commands of God or not, which we call Iudicium
discretionis, by which all men must guide their actions.


L. Shall every man be a judge of the Law, whether it be just and good? How
unfit are the vulgar to judge of Laws.


M. They are no public judges to decide the case for other men, nor does their
judgment restrain or bind the Magistrate; nor if they judge amiss will it
justify themselves, or suspend the execution of the Law against them. But if
they must not have the foresaid discerning judgment to guide their actions, it
will follow; 1. That they are not governed, nor must obey as Men by Reason and
Free Will, but as Brutes. 2. That Kings have Absolute Power against God, and
must be obeyed in all that they command, e. g. if it be to curse or blaspheme,
or renouce God or Christ, to command the Subject to live in Murder, Adultery,
Perjury, etc. and so to abrogate the Law of Nature. 3. It follows, that there
is no God (that is, a Supreme Ruler) but the King. 4. And I pray you tell me
what you will have the Subjects do in case of Usurpation or Competition for the
Government, as between the Houses of York and Lancaster, Jane and Queen Mary,
etc. when one says fight for me, and the other fight for me. If the Subject
have not a judgment of discretion to know which is his rightful Sovereign, the
King must be forsaken? He that will stand to the command of another, must judge
who his Commander is.


L. And will you have Infants and Idiots judge of their Parents commands? Or
Children in their minority.


M. 1. Infants and Idiots have not the use of Reason, and so far are to be
ruled by force as Brutes: And Children in that measure as they are short of
reason. But 2. If they come to reason, and the King command them one thing, (e.
g. what Church to go to.) and their Parents the contrary, would you not have
them judge which they must obey. 3. Much more if Parents should command them to
sin against God, to Steal, Lie, Murder, Blaspheme, and Curse the King, etc.
surely they must judge as far as they are able.


L. I cannot deny it, proceed in your presuppositions.


M. IV. That no men have power to command us to damn our Souls, or to do any
thing that tends to it.


L. None will deny you that; but perhaps some things may cease to be sin, and
dangerous if commanded.


M. None can dispense with the Laws of God, but we grant that some things that
are unlawful by some accident or circumstance may become a duty when commanded,
when the good of Obedience, Order and Concord therein, weighs down against the
accident: It may be a sin to go on Warfare before one is commanded, and a duty
when he is commanded. It is a fault in a Servant to go before he is sent, and a
duty after.

V. We presuppose that deliberate Lying is a sin.


L. Is there any one doubts of that?


M. If they do not, our Case will soon be decided. But indeed many deny it. The
Iansenists name you many Jesuit Casuists: And Groti^^ de Iure Belli, and Bishop
Ier. Tailor, deny that Lying is any sin when it is profitable, and wrongeth
none; as in a Physician to fice down a Medicine.


L. And what have you to say to the contrary?


M. I must not stay to dispute all such matters with you: I have fully answered
it in my Catechism on the Ninth Commandment. Briefly this may satisfy you: No
ones private good must be sought by a means that would destroy all Humane Trust
and Converse: But if you give men leave to lie when they think it needful or
harmless, it will destroy all Humane Trust and Converse: For almost all will
think their lies are profitable. And we have had Learned, Moderate Conformists
that have trusted to this Argument, and openly defended it: If Knaves would
take my Purse, I may defend my self with my Hands: Ergo, If they would deprive
me of my Maintenance and Ministry, I may defend my self with my Tongue.


L. And how do you answer them?


M. That no man must defend himself by means which will do more hurt than his
Ministry or Life is worth: But to let men loose so to lying is such; and more
forbidden of God than ^anddefence: And sin ever does more hurt than good.


VI. We may suppose also that Perjury is unlawful, and would much more destroy
all Mutual Trust, and consequently Humane Converse.

VII. And we may suppose that he that either commands or persuades others to
be prejured, or that openly justifies their perjury, by telling them that it
is no perjury, or no sin, is guilty of their perjury.

VIII. And we suppose that to draw whole Churches and Kingdoms into perjury, by
force, persuasion, example or justification of it, and telling them that they
need not repent of it, is one of the hainousest sins that man can commit,
except making it the very Mark or Stigma without which none may be Magistrates,
Ministers or Freemen.

L. No one I hope will deny any of this.


M. IX. We presuppose that all Vows, Oaths, Covenants, Professions, imposed by
Superiors, must be taken in that sense in which they any way expound them,
without forcing them either by a laxe or an over-rigid interpretation: But if
they do not otherwise expound them, they must be taken in the sense as those
words are commonly used and understood, by such as treat of the subject which
they belong to.


L. You have so cautelously expressed it, that I cannot contradict you.


M. I must not be tedious in writing the same things often. If any doubt whether
our expositions of Oaths and Subscriptions be not over-strict or rigid, I pray
read the words of Dr. Sanderson, cited by me in the end of my first Plea for
Peace, and know that we stand to his rules of exposition.

X. We may suppose that, seeing repenting and amending is the condition of
forgiveness, to make a Covenant in any sin that we will never repent and amend,
is so heinous a crime, as is next to the renouncing of Pardon and Salvation:
And in National guilt and danger deliberately to Covenant that we will never
endeavor any amendment of the Nations sin, is next to begging Gods Curse on
the Land; e. g. If a man were a Fornicator and Perjured, and the Land commonly
guilty of the same, he that would make a Bargain or Covenant, and that
deliberately, that he will never amend, nor ever endeavor to amend the Land or
any other -- What would you think of that man's case?


L. What should I think but that he is a Monster and miserable Wretch? But
what is that to us? I hope there are none such in England, that worse than
Witches, would sell themselves and the Nation to the Devil.


M. I pray overrun me not in the application: I do but tell you what I suppose
we are agreed in: I shall tell you after why I speak it.

XI. I also suppose that bare Possession proves not a Bishop or Pastors right
to the place and power which he claims: Nor is any disseized of his right by
being disseized of separable accidents.


L. That Is true: But what use you will make of it I know not.


M. XII. Lastly, I must desire you to remember, that as we profess to stick at
nothing but sin against God (and not things indifferent as we are slandered),
so if but one of all the imposed Acts of Conformity be certainly sinful, and if
but one of all the Arguments which I shall use do prove it so, not only the two
thousand that were ejected were bound to be Nonconformists, but also all the
English Ministry, and the Act of Uniformity (if Conformity be sin) did
vertually, though not actually, turn out all the Clergy at once, because all
were bound rather to resign than sin.


L. The truer and more dreadful the consequence is, the hardlyer will I believe
the antecedent, till I needs must.


M. You cannot expect that we affirm it: For 1. We know how cautelous we must
be in meddling with the case of other men: Let them judge themselves who are
called to it. 2. And I told you before what the Law threatens, and the Canons,
against them that affirm any of the impositions to be sinful; much more that
shall so deeply accuse the Laws. 3. But sure no Law or Reason forbids men to
fear sinning against God themselves, nor to tell the World what it is that they
fear, and why they dare not do it, without accusing any other.


CHAP. II. What our Nonconformity is not?
M. BEfore I tell you wherein our Nonconformity does consist, I must tell you
wherein it does not consist, to avoid the false reports that commonly go abroad
against us.

And therefore I must premise that I pretend not to tell you the opinion of
every odd person that Conformeth not; no more than you justify all that
Conform in all their opinions. I think few doubt not but that some Atheists,
Sadducees, Infidels, Hobbists, Soci^ians, if not Papists, outwardly Conform:
Yet we charge not their errors on the Church; and so on the other side. But
those that were called by the King, and one another, 1660 and 1661, to treat of
Concord, and that Assembled at Sion College, and elsewhere about it, did
openly make known their minds: And I think they meddled not against any of
these things following, by any accusation of them as sinful.

I. They never denied the Lawfulness of a form of Prayer or a Liturgy: Though
some falsely so accuse them.

II. They denied not the soundness of the matter of Prayer, contained in the
form of the English Liturgy, in the main: They though it a good Book, and the
making of it a great Reformation, and honored the excellent men that made it;
but they thought it not such as could not or should not in any thing be
amended, or that all might say was without fault.

III. They thought not the Imposition of it a reason sufficient to prove it
unlawful for them to use it were there no more.

IV. They offered to use it when amended, and if that could not be had, they
told you in their Reply, their purpose rather to Communicate in the use of it
than not at all, and to have used all the lawful part themselves if they might
be suffered in their public places and Ministry on such terms.

V. They never accused the use of Holy days, as days of Thanksgiving to God,
for giving such Holy Apostles to the Church, and whose memory we honorable
commemorate.

VI. They never accused our Kneeling at the Lords Supper as unlawful, but only
the casting Godly persons from Communion for not using it, when they take it to
be sin. About the Kneeling the old Nonconformists were not of one mind; some
thought that every objectum motivum of Adoration was forbidden that was a
Creature: But others said that every Creature in the World may be such an
object: Our Meat is objectum motivum when we pray for a Blessing on it. If I
see the Relicts or Picture of a Friend that I wronged while he was alive, I may
well be moved by it to beg pardon of God. All his works must move me to adore
and praise him* But we may not make any Image objectum terminativum, or ad
quod, to which we direct our Divine Worship, as a Medium of our sending it to
God. The only great difficulty about this is from the argument of scandalous
hardening the Papists that live among us: Though indeed our Doctrine avoideth
that scandal.

VII. They never accused the Ceremony of laying the hand on the Book, and
kissing it in taking an Oath.

VIII. They never spoke against the Ring in Marriage.

IX. They meddled not with the Surplice, Tippet, Hood, Rochet, Cope, but only
the casting men out of the Ministry that dare not use them, thinking them
unlawful: Though we justify them not.

X. They accused not all significant use of the Cross, but only that in Baptism
it seemed to have all or most of the nature of a Humane Sacrament of the
Covenant of Grace, as it is expounded in the Liturgy and Canon.

XI. They spoke not against Episcopacy, as it is a presidency among and over
Presbyters differing in Degree, and not in Office, called ORDER, and that in a
Church of the lowest Species.

XII. They opposed not Archbishops as over many such Churches and Bishops, nor
Diocesans, as Archbishops ruling but by Gods Word.

XIII. They said nothing against Metropolitans, Patriarchs, Lay-Chancellors,
Commissaries, Officials, Surrogates, Archdeacons, etc. as Officers of the King,
appointed to do nothing (besides the Sacred Ministry, if they be Clergymen)
but what belongs to Magistracy.

XIV. They said nothing against any promise of Obedience to them only in the
capacities, and in the exercise of the power forementioned.

XV. Much less did they ever oppose or question Swearing to the King, according
to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: And I with diverse others also being
(for some ends) entered as his Chaplains in Ordinary, took also that Oath of
Fidelity which the Kings Household Servants take.

XVI. We never were for any dishonouring of Kings by public Excommunications,
much les by Subjects or Foreigners, whom Kings never choose to be their
Pastors; but only in case of necessity, for such a denial of Sacramental
Communion to them, as Bishop Andrews in Fortura Tor^, and Bishop Bilson plead
for; which is but to forbear our selves a sinful act.

XVII. We never pleaded for any Elders (or Chancellors) power of the Keys, who
are but Laymen.

XVIII. We never held that Magistrates are bound to add their force by the
Sword, to the censures of the Church as such, and to punish men more because
the Church has by Excommunication cast them out, or because they are not
reconciled.

XIX. We never thought that things indifferent do become unlawful to us,
because the Magistrate commands them.

XX. We never held that the Scripture is a particular Rule, commanding every
accident and circumstance about Gods Worship, but only a general Rule
(requiring all to be done in Love and Peace, and to edification, and decently,
etc.) in those circumstances which must be some way determined, and God has
left to variable Humane determination: Such as are Time, Place, Utensils,
Translations, Sections, Metres, Tunes, Methods and Words in Preaching and
Prayer, Habit, Gesture, and many such.

XXI. We never held it unlawful to do one of these actions, though it were by
mistake unlawfully commanded; e. g. If the Rulers prescribe a Time, Place,
Meter, Tune, etc. unfit, if it be not so bad as to overthrow the ends and use
of the Worship, the fault of the Commander will not disoblige us from the duty
of obeying. And whereas some argue, that no man has authority to sin, ergo, we
are not bound to obey that which is no act of authority: I answer, Rulers have
authority to command that which is good, though not in a faulty manner; and
when we cannot do the good without the faulty manner, it is their fault and not
ours: e. g. If an inconvenient Time, Place, Text, Tune, etc. be chosen, the
Union and Concord which is held by agreeing in those* Modes is necessary: He
that will not join in them cannot join in the Worship. So that we obey the
Ruler or Guide as a determiner of the means of Concord, which is necessary, and
not sub ratione erroris, as misdetermining, though in that which is
misdetermined. If a Master bid his Servant go at an unseasonable time about his
work, it is his duty to go at that time. We never pray without some fault in the
manner, and yet must rather do it so than not at all. The mistaken Ruler bids
us not sin: It Is his sin to choose a mis-circumstance; and it is not his own
action that he bids us do, but ours: And its to us a lawful circumstance,
because necessary to Concord, and commanded though mistakingly.

XXII. We never held it unlawful to join with a Church or Minister that has
some faults, both Personal and in their acts of Worship; as if all that joined
were guilty of all the faults there committed: No not though we knew before
hand that some false Doctrine would be uttered, or fault committed: Else we
must separate from all the world, and all from us.

XXIII. We never thought it a duty to separate from every Church, that culpably
neglects Discipline, and has open wicked men therein: If we be not guilty of
it, and cannot lawfully live in the Communion of a more obedient reformed
Church.

XXIV. We never judged needless affected singularity a duty, but judge it best
in lawful things for Concord sake to Conform to the custom of the Churches
where we live or come.

XXV. Though we think not that men may command us to destroy our Neighbors
Souls by scandal, yet when disobedience to a Rulers Law is like to do more hurt
than the scandal taken at it comes to, we are for avoiding the greater hurt.

XXVI. We never separated from any tolerable Parish Ministers or Churches, as
if they were no true Ministers or Churches, nor persuaded any so to do, nor to
take the Communion of such Churches for unlawful to us, either occasionally or
constantly, when we can have no better without more hurt than benefit to our
selves and others.

XXVII. We hold it unlawful to reproach all Churches that we see to be faulty;
but it is our duty to keep peace with all.

XXVIII. We hold mental distant Communion in Faith and Love, with many
Churches that by imposing sin do deny us local Communion.

XXIX. Though I here tell you once for all, that I justify not all that I can
thus bear with, yet we can submit by peaceable silence to many abuses in a
Church, which we dare not subscribe to and approve, and use also passive
Obedience where active is unlawful.

XXX. We are not against Godfathers and Godmothers, as used of old; that is,
when the Parents are the Covenanters for their Child, and their Death or
Apostasy is feared, for others to promise if they dye or apostatize to take
care of the Child; or for any Adopters or Owners to do it that take the Child
as theirs.

XXXI. We are so far from being against true confirmation, as it is the taking
persons that own their Baptismal Covenant, solemnly into the number of adult
Members and Communicants, that we desire it (and have written for it) as a
chief means of the true Reformation of all our Churches in the Land.

XXXII. We differ not in Faith or mere Doctrine from the Church of England, as
it is in the Thirty Nine Articles, but only in One new Article, put into the new
Liturgy, of the Salvation of Baptized Infants, as undoubtedly certain by the
Word of God, without any exception, if they then dye.

XXXIII. We are not against reading the profitable part of the Apocrypha, as
other Humane VVritings may be read, sufficiently distinguished from the word of
God.

XXXIV. We are for Corporal Worship, as a due expression of Spiritual: And we
are against all undecent expressions in Praying or Preaching, and all undecent
Habits, Gestures or Actions.

XXXV. We blame not the Liturgy for extending the words of Charity and Hope as
far as there is any reasonable ground, in Sacraments, Absolution and Buryal.

XXXVI. We are not for men's invading the Ministry unordained, but believe that
Senior Pastors or Bishops are ordinarily the regular Judges of the fitness of
Candidates for the Ministry.

XXXVII. We are not for unlimited Toleration: But that the Rulers justly
distinguish in Law and License; 1. The approved, whom they must own and
maintain. 2. The tolerable, whom they must tolerate. 3. The intolerable, whom
they must restrain from doing hurt.

XXXVIII. We are for making true Religion as National and extensive as may be;
and for a National Church; 1. As the associated Community of Churches in a
Nation is so called. 2. And as they are all accidentally united under one
Christian Sovereign: Though we abhor the casting out all that be not of our
opinion and measure, and that cannot submit to all that I here enumerate, which
I and others of my mind can submit to.

XXXIX. We are so far from desiring to draw people from the Parish Churches
into Conventicles, that we would keep up the honor of them to the utmost of
our power, as knowing how greatly the countenance and maintenance of Rulers
conduces to the furtherance of Religion; and that the public Religion will be
the common and National Religion; and most will be there: And if the Protestant
Religion were reduced to Tolerated Conventicles, Popery would possess its
place, and become National, and soon withdraw even private Toleration, as we
see in France.

XL. We are not for Preaching when we are forbidden, where there is not a real
and evident need of our Labors.

XLI. We believe not that the Scots Covenant, or any other does oblige us to
Sedition, Rebellion, Schism, or any sin; nor does disoblige us from any
Obedience due to any Superior.

XLII. We refuse not the Oxford Oath, or any such, because it is an obligation
to obey our Rulers in Lawful things, nor because it restrains us from
resisting Authority; for we give as much to Humane Sovereignty, and confess as
much obedience due to them from Subjects, 1. As any Text of Scripture speaks:
2. Or any General Council, save what they give to the Pope and his Vassals. 3.
Or as any Confessions that we know of, of any Christian Churches agree in. 4.
Or which Lawyers, Politicians, and Historians, Protestants, Papists or Heathens
agree in, as far as we are acquainted.

XLIII. We are not against the use of Synods or Councils, nor against Princes
using their advice for such Laws circa sacra as belong to them to make: We
believe Councils should be used as far as the common good and Communion of the
Catholic Church requires it; though no Foreigners have Jurisdiction over us.
And we hold that if they agree of any thing conducible to the common good,
though their agreement be not a Law, but a Contract, yet the general command of
keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, obliges all to hold such
concord for the ends sake, that have no special reason against it.

In these Forty three things we oppose not conformity.


L. And if yet after all this Agreement we must be destroyed by divisions, the
heavy Curse of God is on us, and will surely fall on them that are the causes
of it, who ever they be.


CHAP. IV. A brief enumeration of the things imposed on us which is the matter
of our Nonconformity.
M. DO you know what it is that we are required to conform to?


L. I know it is to use the Liturgies, Ceremonies and submit to the Bishops, as
your Governors: I know no more.


M. And yet dare you become our Judge? If you are no more exact and just in
matters of Law, your Clients must pay for it? Before I come to handle the
particulars, I will set together here the things required of us; and how much
of them we refuse, I will tell you when I try them, and give you our Reasons
against them.

I. Whereas few of the Nonconforming Ministers were at Age, and Ordained till
Diocesans were put down in England, and were Ordained by an Assembly of Senior
Pastors, which were then in possession of the Power, and had many years the
Approbation of the whole National Assembly of Divines at Westminster, before
they were admitted to any Incumbency; none of these may now exercise their
Ministry unless they be Re-ordained by Diocesans.

II. No man can be Ordained by them, and admitted to any Cure, that will not
take the Oath of Canonical Obedience (as they call it) and in his Ordination
Covenant to obey his Ordinary.

III. No man must Preach the Gospel by the authority of his Ordination and
Office, till moreover he have got a License from the Bishop to Preach: and till
he have got that License to Preach, he may not take upon him to Expound in his
own Cure, OR ELSEWHERE ANY SCRIPTURE OR MATTER OR DOCTRINE, but shall only
study to read plainly and aptly without glossing or adding, the Homilies
already set forth, or hereafter to be published by lawful Authority. Can. 49.

IV. No man may be Ordained, or be a Licenced Preacher, or Catechize who does
not subscribe these words, Ex animo, That the Book of Common Prayer, and of
Ordaining of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, contains in it nothing contrary to
the Word of God, and that it may lawfully be used, and that he himself will use
the Form in the said Books prescribed in public Prayer and administration of
the Sacraments, and no other.

V. No man is to be Ordained a Minister, nor have any place or Benefice or
Cure, that does not openly and publicly before the Congregation declare his
unfeigned Assent and Consent to the use of all things in the said Book
contained and prescribed in these words and no other. [I A. B. Do here declare
my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every thing contained and prescribed
in, and by the Book entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Ordaining.] And
every Lecturer also; the first Lecture and every Month must publicly and
openly declare his Assent to, and Approbation of the said Book, and to the use
of all the Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders therein contained
and prescribed.

VI. By this all must Assent and Consent to this Article of Faith or Doctrine.
[It is certain by the Word of God that Children which are Baptized, dying
before they commit actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved.] Not excepting any,
though the Children of Atheists, Infidels or Sadducees.

VII. We must Assent and Consent, that at public Baptism, persons called
Godfathers and Godmothers, who take not the Child for their own, do in the name
of the Child Covenant with God, without the Parents, who are forbidden to be
Godfathers or Godmothers, or to speak one word, nor must be urged to be
present; nor may the Godfathers, etc. speak one word but what is written in the
book. And they are there not only to promise for the future, but to profess in
the Name of the Child at present [I renounce them all] (the Devil, World and
Flesh) and [All this I steadfastly believe] and (to be baptized) [This is my
desire] and for obedience [I will.] And these Godfathers also engage as their
parts and Duty, to see that [this Infant be taught so soon as he shall be able
to learn what a solemn Vow, Promise and Profession he there made by them: And
that they call on him to hear Sermons, and chiefly that they provide that he
may learn the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the vulgar
Tongue, and all other things that a Christian ought to know and believe to his
Soul's health, and that the Child may be virtuously brought up to lead a godly,
and Christian life]. All this these three persons must promise as before God
and the Church, but the Parent is not only excused from any such promise, but
forbid it by the Canon.

VIII. We must Assent and Consent to refuse to baptize the Child of any godly
Christian, who brings not his Child to be baptized with such undertaking
Godfathers; either because he can get none that will seriously promise him to
do what they must Vow to do, and so dare not draw them into sacrilegious
perfidiousness, or because he thinks it his own part to enter his Child into
God's Covenant, and thus to promise for its Education.

IX. We must Assent and Consent to sign the Infant with the transient Image of
the Cross [In token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith
of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his Banner, against Sin, the
World, the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier and Servant to his
lives end. Which the Canon farther expounds thus [To dedicate them by that
Badge to his Service, whose benefits bestowed on them in Baptism the name of
the Cross does represent] [an honorable Badge whereby the Infant is dedicated
to the Service of him who died on the Cross.]

X. We must Assent and Consent to Baptize none publicly without this Sign,
but to deny Christendom to all that dare not receive it, and their Children.

XI. We must Assent and Consent to reject all that dare not receive it
Kneeling from the Sacramental Communion of the Church.

XII. We must Assent and Consent to a false Rule to find out Easter Day for
ever, in these words; [Easter-day (on which the rest depends) is always the
first Sunday after the first full Moon, which happens next after the one and
twentieth day of March.] The common Almanacks tell you it is often false.

XIII. We must Assent and Consent to use words at the Burial of all, except
the Unbaptized, Excommunicate and self-murtherers which plainly pronounce them
saved, viz. [For as much as it has pleased Almighty God to take to himself the
Soul of our dear Brother here departed.] And [we give thee thanks, for that it
has pleased thee to deliver this our Brother out of the miseries of this
sinful world.] and [that we may rest in him, as our hope is this our Brother
does.]

XIV. We must Assent and Consent to read public Lessons out of Judith, Bell
and the Dragon, Tobit, and other Apocryphal books, from Sept. 28. till Nov. 24.
every day, except some proper Lessons interposed.

XV. We must Assent and Consent to all the mistranslations of the Psalms, etc.
and not only use them (which we refuse not) but subscribe that none of them are
contrary to the word of God.

XVI. We must Assent and Consent to admit none to the holy Communion till [such
time as he be Confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be Confirmed] that is, by
Bishops in the English method.

XVII. We must Assent and Consent that [such ornaments of the Church, and of
the Ministers thereof, at all times of their ministration shall be retained in
use, as were in this Church of England by that authority of Parliament in the
Second year of Edward VI.

XVIII. We must Assent and Consent to give an account within fourteen days of
every one that we keep from the Sacrament, to the Ordinary. And that the
Ordinary proceed against the offending person according to the Canons.

XIX. We must publish all such Excommunications and Absolutions, as are
according to the Canons decreed by Lay Chancellors.

XX. This binds us to consent and publish the Excommunication of all that
affirm that the Liturgy contains any thing in it that is repugnant to the
Scriptures] And the Oath of canonical Obedience binds us to such publication,
if it be commanded us.

XXI. And we are both these ways bound to publish all Excommunicate, ipso
facto, (if commanded) who affirm any of the Rites and Ceremonies such as may
not be approved and used lawfully.

XXII. And all that say any of the Thirty Nine Articles in any part may not be
subscribed, though it be but about Traditions or Ceremonies.

XXIII. And we must, if required, publish all, ipso facto, Excommunicate who
say the Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the
rest that bear Office, is against God's word.

XXIV. We must, if commanded, publish all Excommunicate who affirm that the
Form and Manner of Making and Consecrating Bishops, Priests or Deacons
contains any thing in it that is repugnant to the word of God. (Though it
assert that the Bishops and Priests are distinct Orders, which even in K.
Aelfrick's days the Church of England denied.)

XXV. We must publish them Excommunicate who affirm that the Nonconformists may
truly take the name of another Church, etc. and that any assemblies of Subjects
not allowed by Law, are true and Lawful Churches.

XXVI. No Minister must wittingly administer the Sacrament to any but such as
Kneel, nor to any of the foresaid depravers of the Liturgy, Ceremonies, Orders
of the Church, etc. Can. 27.

XXVII. None of other Parishes are often to be admitted to Communion.

XXVIII. All Ministers that repent of Conforming must be suspended,
excommunicate and deposed at last, Can. 38.

XXIX. We must give the Sacrament to none that go for it from unpreaching
Ministers, but must send them home, Can. 57. Nor must Baptize their Children.

XXX. Ministers must not be suffered that wear not the Surplice, Can. 58.

XXXI. No Minister must refuse or delay to Christen any Child that is brought to
the Church to him on Sundays or Holydays to be Christened, without exception of
Atheists or Infidels Children. Can. 68.

XXXII. No Minister may keep any Fast in public or at private Houses, or be
present at any (on what necessity soever) without the Bishops License for it
under Hand and Seal, or the Laws appointment.

XXXIII. We must if commanded publish all Excommunicate that affirm that the
Sacred Synod is not the true Church of England by representation; or that
deprave it as a faction, etc.

XXXIV. No man was to be ordained or suffered in the Ministry for twenty years
that did not subscribe thus [I do declare that I do hold that there lies no
obligation on me, or on any other person from the Oath commonly called the
Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of Government
in Church or State.]

XXXV. All Nonconformists must swear that they will never endeavor any
alteration of the Church Government, or else be banished five miles from
Corporations and all places where ever they preached since the Act of Oblivion.

XXXVI. All Ministers must subscribe and Nonconformists swear that they abhor
the Traiterous position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against those
that are Commissioned by him.

XXXVII. We must assent and consent to the damnatory sentence in the Creed
called Athanasius's.

XXXVIII. Every Minister consents to say the Morning and Evening Service
every day in the year, not being let by sickness or other urgent cause.

XXXIX. Ministers must concur to force the unwilling Parishioners to the
Sacrament, or else to Excommunicate and ruin them.

XL. If we dare not Conform for fear of sin we must forsake our Ministry to
which we are Ordained and Vowed, and give over Preaching the Gospel what ever
need there be, and must also remove our dwelling from all places aforesaid.

These are the parts of Ministers Conformity.

Lay Men's Conformity is as follows;

I. They must trust their Souls with the Pastoral oversight of those, and only
those as their fixed Pastors, whom Patrons will choose for them, and Bishops
institute: Though the Conformists accuse many Patrons of such heinous sins, as
speaks them unfit for so strange a trust, besides those that are Papists, and
Bishops say they have not power to keep out the unfit.

II. They are not only hereby deprived of the exercise of Self-Government for
the saving of their own Souls, but of due Family Government for the safety of
Wife and Children, and Servants, and must not bid them choose better Pastors.

III. They are forced to forbear Communion with all Nonconformists, and to
separate from all others besides Conformists, though they account this
Schismatical separation.

IV. When God commands them [If thy Brother trespass against thee tell him
his fault between thee and him; if he hear not tell the Church, etc. And with
Drunkards, Railers, Fornicators, etc. not to eat.] They are forced to have
Communion with Parishes where no such Discipline is exercised, nor can they
perform any such duty, and to lose all the benefit of this Christian Order and
Discipline, none being so much cast out as Conscionable Dissenters.

V. Conscionable care to obey Gods Law is greatly discouraged and made a
dangerous thing, while it must be men's utter ruin to deny Conformity, even in
a Ceremony, to men, when it is done for fear of sinning against God.

VI. They are to be deprived of Baptism and Christendom for their Children, if
they dare not use the foresaid way of Godfathers, as described.

VII. They are also to be unchristened if thinking our Crossing is used as an
unlawful Humane Sacrament, they dare not receive it as a dedicating Badge of
Christianity.

VIII. If they think Kneeling at receiving the Sacrament an unlawful hardening
the Papists, they are denied Communion.

IX. If any dissent but from Confirmation, Organs, Kneeling at the Rails,
taking a Reader or unfit man for their Pastor, they must not be received to
Communion by a Conformist in another Parish.

X. All the Land is engaged (Ministers, Vestries, Corporations and Militia) by
Oaths or Covenant never to endeavor any alteration of Government in the Church.

XI. They are all engaged to abhor the position as traiterous, of taking Arms
by the Kings Authority against any Commissioned by him in pursuit of such
Commission.

XII. All Corporation Government and Trust is confined to them that declare
that there is no obligation on them or any other from the solemn Covenant or
Vow, not excepting so much as to oppose Schism, Popery or Profaneness, to
defend the King, or repent of sin, though these be Vowed.

I have now told you what Conformity is, in Ministers and People.


CHAP. V. I. Of Reordination.
L. YOU have named a great number: But I doubt whether all these are imposed,
and in many of them I see no harm.


M. I told you that if any one of them (imposed) be sinful, Nonconformity is a
duty, which all the Ministers in England were bound to.


L. What sin can you find in Reordination?


M. I must first state the Controversy before I argue it.

1. The word [Ordination] may signify either the first Dedication and
Ordination to the Ministerial Office as such, by which a man is separated from
the Laity to Gods Ministry: Or else, a Mission on some particular Ministerial
work, as Paul and Barnabas were sent abroad, Acts 11. Or a Minister may be sent
to America, etc. Or else a fixed appointment to some one particular Church or
Flock, which is done here by Presentation, Institution and Induction. It is
neither of the two last that we speak against. They may be often done: But its
only the first.

2. The word [Ordination] may signify; 1. That Moral action by which a man is
made a Minister of Christ, which is, his solemn Contract with Christ, expressed
by his Consent, and by the Ordainers investing action: This is it which we mean
in the Controversy, which may not be done twice. 2. Or it may signify the
mere words of the Ordainers and Ordained, which make up the said Moral action.
We deny not but the same words repeated may make up one Moral Ordination: If
the Bishop by tautology repeat them twice or thrice: Or if they should to
satisfy men of diverse Languages that are present, be first spoken in English,
and after in French, or when some that doubted require it, should go over them
again; all this is but one Ordination.


L. How prove you that our Bishops intend any more, when they say, it is only
to satisfy the Law, that you may be capable in England.


M. 1. That it is not a mere relation to some particular cure that they mean,
is undeniable: 1. Because they call that by the name of Institution and
Induction, and not of Ordination. 2. Because they never ordain any over and
over upon removals. 3. Because the words of Ordination in the Book tell it us.

2. That they do it not as a Repetition of the same valid Ordination is past
doubt. 1. Because the same repeated by the same men will not serve. 2. It is to
be done, again ten or twenty years after the first. 3. He is to be fined in an
hundred pound that administreth the Sacrament without it. 4. He is taken for no
true Minister without it, which cannot be true of a bare repetition of words:
No reasonable men would lay so much on that.

3. It is undeniable that they take men for unordained, and no Ministers till
they ordain them: 1. Because they all disown reordaining; they know that the
Canons called the Apostles, and the whole ancient and later Church condemn it
as like Anabaptistry; and no one Bishop in England will not renounce it:
Therefore its certain that they take the first Ordination for null. 2. And they
have so declared their judgment in many words and writings, and in the Act of
Uniformity, it is plainly intimated in the penalty.


L. And what harm is there in being twice Ordained?


M. 1. Ad hominem I need not dispute it? All the Bishops disclaim it as
unlawful, so that we have their confession.

2. It is the same fault as Anabaptistry. If they be blameless why make you
such a noise against the Anabaptists. To be twice made a Christian, and twice
made a Minister is of the like kind.

3. It is something causelessly to cast our selves under the Censure of all the
Church that has been against it, and to be condemned by them.

4. It is a plain profanation of God's holy name, and of a great and holy
Ordinance, by Lying and taking God^s name in vain. For they are said to be now
admitted to the Office, and this day to receive it, and God is told that they
are now called to it. And all their Examinations and Answers imply that they
were no Ministers before, and the Bishop says [Receive the Holy Ghost, for the
Office and work of a Priest now committed to thee by the Imposition of our
hands] which all imply it not done before. And in so sacred a contract with
God, to lie to him, and profanely abuse his name, and the holy Ghosts, and the
Duty of Prayer and Praise, is tremendous. Be not deceived God is not mocked.

5. It is a confederacy with Corrupters and Usurpers, that arrogate and
appropriate valid Ordination to themselves, and a confirming all their injury
to posterity, that all that shall hereafter imitate them may be encouraged, by
alleging our Re ordination.

6. It is a heinous injury to all the other Reformed Churches as if we degraded
their Ministers and separated from them all as no Churches. For one part of
them have no Diocesans, and the rest have Bishops, that at the Reformation were
Ordained by Presbyters.

7. It is contrary to one of the Articles of our Religion, 23. These we ought
to judge them lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this
work, by men, who have public authority given to them in the Congregation to
call and send Ministers, etc. But in other Countries, Presbyters have public
authority, given them. And Art. 36. The book of Consecration does contain all
things necessary to such consecration and Ordaining. But it has nothing for
Re-ordaining those before Ordained.

8. It is a plain condemnation of the Church of England, which has professed
Communion with the Reformed abroad, as with true Ministers and Churches of
Christ. And we are now told that to communicate with Schismatics induces the
guilt of Schism.

9. It introduces Anabaptistry, or utter confusion into the Nation, leaving
men in doubt whether for fourteen years the people had any true Baptism (while
it is a controversy whether Laymens Baptizing be valid, and Mr. Dodwell makes
all men to be out of any Covenant-title to Salvation that have not the
Sacraments from a Minister that has successive Episcopal Ordination) And all
Christians must question whether they have not so long here lived out of the
Church of Christ, without Ministry and Communion.

Do you think that none of these nine Reasons prove Reordination sinful.


L. But because the Bishops deny it, let me hear your proof that the former
Ordination here by Presbyters is not a nullity.


M. I. Ad hominem, the Church of England has, as I said, judged the like valid
in the Reformed Churches, by holding Communion with them. I cited a great
number of Bishops and Doctors in my Christian Concord.


L. But they say that necessity differs their case from ours here; And even
Doctor Sherlock tells you that if God make necessity; necessity will make
Ministers: But ours Schismatically pulled down the Bishops and now disown the
very Order.


M. There is a satisfactory concession in these words, but the accusations are
made up of falsehood and deceit.

1. Archbishop Usher and others that thought the Ejectors of Episcopacy were
guilty of Schism, yet maintained that their Ordination was valid: He told me
how he pleaded it to the King.

2. Do they think that Salmasius, Blundel and all others that have written more
against our Prelacy than the English, were deprived of it against their wills
by necessity.

3. What necessity can they pretend to the Hollanders, Helvetians, Geneva,
Embden, Bremen, the Palatinate, and Scotland heretofore? might they not have
had Prelates when they would.

4. Was not the necessity far more notorious to those that I now plead for.
They lived in a Land where Episcopacy was cast out, and kept out by a potent
Army. I think there were but four or five Bishops alive when it was restored.

5. It is false that they cast out the Bishops. Those Ministers that joined
with the Parliament to cast them out, were Ordained by Bishops, and therefore
are none of the men that we are speaking of: These that were Ordained by
Presbyters were then young men at School, or in the Universities. And what are
other men's actions to them?


L. But they are of the same mind and party.


M. Are you a Lawyer, and do you accuse men in the Temple without naming them,
and bringing proof of their guilt. Noxa caput sequitur, should all the Clergy
be called guilty if Sibthorp, or Manwaring, or Heylin were proved so? what
error you accuse them of, prove and punish them for no other.

6. But I prove that the Bishops themselves made other Ordination necessary.
Because they would Ordain none without sinful subscriptions and conditions,
which must not be yielded to: If you can prove the terms lawful on which they
Ordain, I shall try your skill anon.

II. I farther prove the Ordination in question valid, thus, Where there is a
true notification of God's will that this person shall be a Minister of the
Gospel, there is no want of validity in his Ordination; But those here ordained
by Presbyters might have such a true notification of God's will -- Ergo, The
major is plain; Because God's will and Man's consent are the fundamentum of the
Relation; therefore nothing can be wanting to it is being and validity.

The Minor is proved. Those men that have laudable ability, and willingness,
and the consent of a people in true necessity, and the approbation of a
National Assembly of Learned Divines (of which many Bishops were called to be
members) and the investing Ordination of the gravest Senior Pastors, that were
then to be had, had a true notification of God's will that they should be his
Ministers. But such were these in question. Ergo.

III. The way of ordination, which was valid in the Primitive Church is now
valid. -- But such is that in question. Ergo.

As to the Minor; The Ordination of such Pastors as were but the Rectors of
single Congregations, was it that was valid in the Primitive Church. But such
is that in question.

Doctor Hammond labors to prove that in Scripture time there were no other
Bishops or Presbyters but the single Pastors of single Assemblies: Mr. Clerkson
has fully proved, and I more fully in my Treatise of Episcopacy, that for a
hundred and fifty years, if not much more, there were no particular Churches
bigger than our Parishes. A Bishop then was but the chief Parish, or
Congregational Pastor, who guided it with his Assistance. And such are all our
Incumbents (especially in great Towns) who have Chapels and Curates and
Lecturers to assist them. And Grotius de Imper. sum. Pot. shows that really
the chief Pastor of a Church is a Bishop, whatever they call him. But I have so
largely proved in my Treatise of Episcopacy, page 231, 232, etc. that our
questioned Ordainers were scripture Bishops, and that those now called
Presbyters Ordained long after, that I must not repeat the same things here
again.

IV. Those that are in Orders may confer Orders: Ordinis est Ordinare, as Usher
was wont to say; As Physicians make Physicians, and Philosophers make
Philosophers, and Gene^ation propagateth the Species: And our Church consents
to this. 1. In that Presbyters must concur in Ordination by Imposition of
hands, which is an act of authority and collation. 2. In that the Convocation
has a greater power, even Canon making; and that Convocation consists half
and more of Presbyters, and the Canons Excommunicateth all that deny it to be
the represensative Church of England.

But Presbyters have the power of Order (as Bishop Carlton de Iurisdict.
proves it commonly acknowledged) equal with Bishops. page 7. And the Church of
England in King Aelfrik's time (ad Wolf. in Spelman, page 576. l. 17.) Affirm
that Bishops and Presbyters are but one Order.

V. Those may ordain validly whose Ordination is more warrantable than that of
Roman Bishops (for our Bishops own theirs as valid and ordain them not again
when they turn Protestants): But the Presbyters that Ordained here fourteen
years, did it more warrantably than the Roman Bishops. Ergo,

1. The Papists Ordain men to a false Office; to be Mass-Priests: But the said
Pastors ordained none but to the same office that Christ instituted.

2. The Papists have their power of Ordination from the Pope, whose own power
and office in Specie is a false Usurpation: But it is not so here, where the
ordaining Pastors were lawfully called.

3. Papists Ordination enters them into a false Church in Specie (a pretended
catholic Church headed by the Pope); but our Pastors entered them into no
Church but Christ's.

4. Papists make them take sinful Oaths and Conditions before they Ordain them.
But these Pastors (at least that imposed not the Covenant) did not.

If yet any will nullify the Reformed Churches and Ministry and their
Ordination, and not the Papists, we may understand what their Mind and
Communion is.

VI. That Ordination is valid which is less culpable, than many Diocesans: But
such is that in question. Ergo,

To the proof of the Minor (which only needs proof here).

1. Some Diocesans here have been Papists (as Godfrey Goodman of Gloucester)
and diverse have pleaded for and owned a Foreign Jurisdiction, which the Oath
of Supremacy abjureth.

2. I have fully proved in the said Treatise of Episcopacy that the Office of
Pastors of single Churches is more warrantable than our Diocesans who are the
sole Bishops of many score or hundred Churches.

3. The said Presbyters (at least who meddled not with the Covenant) imposed no
unlawful condition on the Ordained, as too many Bishops have done.

4. Many Bishops plead the derivation of their power from Rome: And what theirs
is I showed before.

But because I must not write a Treatise on this one question, you may read it
done copiously and unanswerably by Voetius against Comel. Iansenius de
desperata Causa Papatus.

Yet I add one difference more. The Ordainers and Ordained in question, had the
consent of the Flocks and neighbor Ministers; but the said Bishops come in by
the Magistrate without the consent or knowledge of the Flocks, and so do the
Ministers usually whom they Ordain. And what the ancient Church thought of
this, abundance of Canons show. I Will now cite but one, Council. Nic. 2. Can. 3.
Omnem Electionem quae fit a Magistratibus, Episcopi Presbyteri vel Diaconi
irritam manner ex canone dicente, siquis Episcopus secularibus Magistratibus
usus, per eos Ecclesiam obtinuerit, deponatur and segregetur, and omnes qui cum
eo Communicant. Oportet enim eum qui est promovendus ad Episcopatum ab
Episcopis eligi, quemadmodum a sanctis patribus Nicaenis decretum est in Can.
qui dicit [Episcopum oportet maxim quidem ab omnibus qui sunt in provincia
constitui. And many Councils nullify their Episcopacy that come not in by the
election or consent of Clergy and People, which ad hominem is somewhat to them
that urge such Councils against us.


L. I confess your reasons seem unanswerable, at least as to the case of
necessity, which I am convinced was the case of those that were ordained when
there were no Bishops to whom they could have access, or no place in the
Ministry without Presbyters Ordination, and who then durst not be twice
Ordained: And for Churchmen that must be strictly Religious to suffer on such
terms I cannot speak against. But we secular men think these too little things
to suffer for.


M. If your consciences can call such profanation of Gods Name, such
condemnation of Protestant Churches, such strengthening the hands of -- a
little thing, they shall be no measure for our consciences: For we believe that
we must die, and that there is a God and a righteous final Judgment.


CHAP. VI. II. Of the Covenant and Oath of Canonical Obedience to our Ordinary
or Bishop.
L. WHat harm is there in your promising or swearing obedience to your
Ordinary, in things Lawful and Honest. What a man should do, he should not
refuse to swear or promise.


M. I will first tell you the words imposed, and then I will state the
Controversy, and then I will tell you our Reasons.

The Words at Ordination are these. 1. On Deacons and Priests. [Will you
reverently obey your Ordinary and other chief Ministers to whom is committed
the Charge and Government over you; following with a glad Mind and Will their
godly Admonitions and submitting your selves to their godly Judgments? Answ. I
will so do, the Lord being my help.

The Form of the Oath which they use to impose is this.

Ego A. B. Iuro quod praestabo Veram and Canonicum Obedientiam Episcopo
Londinensi ejusque successoribus in omnibus licitis and honestis. (And little
know we of What Religion their Successors will be, or who will have the
choosing of them? I Will not swear to I know not who.)

The Bishops themselves also must take this Oath of due Obedience to the
Archbishop. In the Name of God Amen: I N. chosen Bishop of the Church and See
of N. do profess and promise all due reverence and obedience to the Archbishop
and to the Metropolitan Church of N. and to their Successors. So help me God
through Jesus Christ.


L. What is your Controversy against any of this?


M. 1. We do not question the duty of obeying the King and all his Officers,
governing as Magistrates by the power of the Swords which the King may commit
to them. If Bishops or Lay Chancellors be made Magistrates, we will obey them
as such: And therefore when they summon us, we appear and answer, because the
King authorizeth them. And many Non-conformists have defended the taking the
Promise as supposing that the Word [Ordinary] signifies only the Judge of a
Court set up by the King as Supreme Governor by the Sword in matters and over
persons Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, according to the true sense of the
Oath of Supremacy.

2. We do not refuse to promise and swear due Obedience to such as are our
Lawful Pastors, ruling the Church by the power of the Keys according to the
Word of God: Though we think that requiring such Oaths is an irregularity in
them, against the ancient Canons, and a far higher presumption than the
Independents Covenant.

3. We do not deny a patient and quiet submission to unlawful persons and acts
of Government, not owning their sin our selves, and doing no evil at their
command.

But these are the things which we are not satisfied in.

I. Obedience has essential Relation to the Laws and Mandates of those that we
obey: And the Canons of England are the Laws by which they openly profess to
Rule the Church: And therefore they call it the Oath of Canonical Obedience,
that is, of obeying the Church Government according to the Canons; And when we
know the Canons beforehand, we know what Government and Obedience is meant.
And we swear fraudulently if we take not the Oath in the sense of the Imposers:
And they commonly tell us, that this is the meaning of [Due Obedience], and if
Godly Admonitions, or [in licitis and honestis] be put in, that does but
suppose that Obedience according to the Canons is Godly and licitum and
honestum, and not that we are left to choose which Canons we will obey. All
Bishops I doubt not will stand to this Exposition of the sense.

Now there are abundance of things in the Canons which we think to be greater
sins than we think meet to call them.

II. We know that the Rule of the Bishops is by Chancellors Courts and other
such, where Laymen exercise the Church Keys, by Decretive Excommunications and
Absolutions: which wise men think to be sacrilegious Usurpation, and a
Profanation of a dreadful part of Christ's Government: And Lawyers and
Civilians tell us, that the word [Ordinary] signifies the appointed Ordinary
Judge of the Court, and so that we swear or Covenant to obey Lay-Civilians
using the Keys. And [other chief Ministers] can mean no less than all the
Archdeacons, Officials, Commissaries, Surrogates, etc. whom we covenant to
obey; not in civil things or the circa Sacra belonging to Magistrates, which we
refuse not, but in the exercise of the Church Keys.

III. They that think they have fully proved that Diocesans Ruling many hundred
Churches without any Bishops under them, are an Office in Specie contrary to
Gods Word, and the practice of the Primitive Church, and that it corrupts or
excludes true Church Discipline, do think it a sin to conform by an Oath of
Allegiance or Obedience to them, though they live peaceably under them.

IV. They that think that by Scripture, and Reason, and Universal Church
Customs and Canons, they are no Bishops or Pastors that come in by Magistrates
without the Election or consent of the Flocks and Clergy, think that to swear
Obedience to them is to be guilty of their Usurpation.

These four be the things refused in this Oath and Covenant of Obedience.


L. And what have you against obeying according to the Canon?


M. I. You may gather it from the foregoing enumeration of the Canonical
Impositions: Many things of a heinouser nature than Liturgies, Ceremonies or
things Indifferent.

1. We dare not obey an Order for Excommunication according to the 4th. Canon,
against any man that affirms that the Book of Cammon-Prayer contains any
thing in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures. Judge that by the proof that I
shall anon give.

2. The same I say of the Excommunication in Can. 5, 6, 7, 8. and many others,
which are after to be particularly mentioned.

3. And there are many things in the Canons which we dare not practice, and
therefore dare not swear Canonical Obedience.


L. That Oath does not oblige you to approve of all that is in the Canons, no
more than a Justices Oath to execute the Laws does bind him to approve of, or
execute every Law.


M. We would not be guilty of an over rigorous Exposition: But had it been in
the days of Queen Mary, when the Six Articles, and other Laws for Murdering
Innocents were on foot, and were actually expounded by Execution, I would not
have been one of the Justices that should have sworn to execute them. Though a
Justice be not bound to approve every Law, he is bound in the main to execute
them in his place; And if he know that the Imposers of his Oath did mean, that
he should in a special manner execute e. g. the Laws against Protestants, he
should not take that Oath contrary to their sense. Our Canons make these things
forementioned their principal part, as you may see by putting them first with
that strange penalty of Excommunication ipso facto. And indeed it is no small
part of the whole Book that we dissent from.

II. But moreover we dare not promise or swear Obedience to our Ordinaries,
till we know that Laymen governing by the Keys are not those Ordinaries. I
have consulted Lawyers, and some say that only the Bishop is meant by our
[Ordinary]; But I think they are but few that say so. And indeed we are bound
to believe the contrary, because terms of Art or Science are to be understood
according to the use of the men of that Art or Science. But men of that
profession commonly call other Judges of their Courts our Ordinaries, besides
the Bishops: So does R. Cousins in his Tables and others.

2. And other Governing Ministers whom we must obey, are mentioned in the
Ordination Covenant also besides our Ordinaries.

Our Reasons against this are these.

1. It is unlawful to confederate with Sacrilegious Propha^ers of a great
Ordinance of God, in stablishing and practicing that Sacrilegious Profanation.

But to Covenant or Swear Obedience to Laymen in usurping the power of the
Keys of Decretive Excommunication and Absolution, we fear is such; and as to
the Minor the reason of our fear is, if it be Sacrilegious profanation for a
Layman to usurp the other parts of the Pastoral Office, then it is so for him
to usurp the power of the Keys. But the Antecedent is confessed, as to the
Sacraments and the charge of ordinary Teaching and Guidance of the Flocks, etc.

2. Ad hominem. If the Bishops take it for Usurpation in Presbyters to exercise
this power, supposing it proper to themselves, they must judge it much more so
in Laymen.


L. The Laymen do it by the Bishops Authority and in his Name; and so he does
it by them: His Name is to the Excommunications.


M. 1. The Chancellors have their Commissions from the King, which the Bishops
cannot alter.

2. If it be so it is the worse.

1. That the Bishops name should be abused to a Sentence, when he never heard
or tried the Cause. If this be against the Bishops Will, it is a forgery; if he
consent, it seems he trusts his Conscience in the Chancellors hands, and
Excommunicateth all at a venture that the Chancellor Excommunicateth, though he
know not whom nor why, which is against the Light of Nature, and the common
Justice of the World.

2. And it is contrary to the nature of the Pastoral Office to execute it by
men of another Calling: Either it is proper to Bishops or not; if not,
Presbyters or Laymen may use it; if yea, then none, may be deputed to use it,
that are not Bishops. If the Keys and not the Sacraments may be used by
Laymen, then the use of the Keys is not proper to Pastors, but only
Sacraments. But no man can give a just reason why Laymen may not give the
Sacraments as well as use the Keys.

Yea indeed the Sacramental administration cannot be proper to the Pastoral
Office if the Keys be not: For the ^se of the Keys is to Judge who shall be
admitted to Sacramental communion: and if only Delivering and not Judging to
whom, be proper to the Pastor, then he is but a carrier or crier and
Executioner of Laymens Judgment, perhaps lower than the Deacon. Barely to say
over the words and do the action, is but an outward Ministration, and no act of
Power at all.


L. But it is not the Chancellor but the Surrogate that Excommunicateth.


M. 1. Ask those that have been much among them, how often they have heard a
Lay-Civilian say at once, [I admonish you, I admonish you, I admonish you, I
excommunicate you].

2. Hypocrisy is but an aggravation of Sin: The Layman decrees the
Excommunication, which is the judicial act; when they use a Surrogate Priest,
it is but as a hireling Servant to pronounce the Decree, to mock the Church
with a Formality.

3. If indeed it be the Priest that Excommunicateth and Absolveth, when no
Bishop is there, then they confess that the power of the Keys is not proper to
a Bishop, but may be validly used by a Priest.


L. But what have you against swearing Obedience to the Bishops themselves,
supposing the Canons were materially Lawful.


M. III. We have nothing against a peaceable submission to them, if they were
proved all Usurpers. For my part, when I think how the High Priests were made
(out of a wrong line, by Roman power and purchase, etc.) in Christ's time, and
how much he was for submission to them, and a use of all that was good and
lawful, done by those bad unlawful intruders, it resolves me to regard bare
Possession, so far as our own edification and the common peace requires. But
as Christ was a Nonconformist to the Pharisees vain Traditions, so he was so
far from swearing Obedience to these Usurpers, that he often plainly and
vehemently reproves them. Many, for the bonum publicum, which is Suprema Lex
and finis regiminis, did live in quiet submission to the Usurpers of civil
power here, who yet would never have sworn obedience to them or justified
their Usurpation.

That the frame of Diocesans as the only Bishops is unlawful tota specie, I
have so largely proved in my Treatise of Episcopacy, that I must not here
repeat it, as long as the Diocesan party by not answering it seem to grant it.
I have proved,

1. That this Diocesan Species destroys the old Species of particular
Churches, turning the Parishes into no Churches, but parts of a Diocesan Church
while they make a Bishop essential to a Church.

2. That they set up a false Species instead of it, viz. A Church infimae
speciei, which has many score Parishes, if not many hundred in it, without any
under-Bishop to them.

3. That it deposes the old species of Bishops and Presbyters both, which were
[to every Church of the lowest species] a Bishop with his Presbyters ejusdem
ordinis (if they could be had) so that many score or hundred Bishops are put
down, on pretense of setting up Episcopacy.

4. And they set up both Bishop and Presbyters of a humane unlawful sort
instead of those deposed, viz. Archbishop infimi ordinis, over a thousand or
hundred Carcasses of Churches: and half Presbyters that have not the power of
the Keys, nor are of the same Order with the Bishops.

5. That they deposed Christ's true Church Discipline, and made it as impossible
as for one Schoolmaster alone to govern all the Schools in a Diocese, or one
Physician many hundred Hospitals, or one Mayor many Hundred Corporations,
without any Schoolmaster (but an Usher or Monitor) or any Physician, or any
Mayor or Justice under him.

6. That they have set up a false humane Discipline (before described) instead
of Christ's, which they have taken down. And all this we dare not justify by a
confederacy by Oath.

IV. And we think that the fourth thing which we stick at needs no other
reason; suppose the species of Diocesans were of God's appointment, and only
the numerical Bishops usurpers, we can submit and live peaceably, but we cannot
swear obedience to them. They plead more than we for the power of ancient
Councils, and Canons. I have elsewhere fully proved (as Paul of Venice has
done, and Mr. Clarkson, and Dr. Burnet, and many others) that many great
Councils nullified the Episcopacy of all that came in without the election, or
consent of the Clergy and Flocks: And we our selves cannot conceive how any man
can be the Pastor of those that consent not; though we can easily conceive that
Dissenters may often be obliged to consent when they do not; so may a Son or
Daughter be obliged to obey their Parents in consenting to Marry, such as
Parents choose for them, when yet it is no marriage till that consent. How few
in a Diocese ever know of the Bishops Election till it is past, and how few
consent, I need not tell. We can submit to these, but not swear Allegiance to
them.

V. And in all the foresaid cases, we have another disswasive.

1. It is so much of the King's Prerogative that all Subjects must swear
Allegiance and Fidelity to him, that in almost all Nations it has been thought
dangerous, to make the Subjects also swear obedience to every Justice or
inferior Officer, lest it should make them too like Kings. 2. Lest the Subjects
should be entangled between their Oath to the King, and their Oaths to all
these Officers, in case of the Officers contradiction to the King's. 3. Lest so
many Oaths should make that Government a snare to the conscientious, which
should be for their ease and safety. 4. Lest so much swearing make Oaths
contemptible, and bring in perjury, and endanger the King, who should by our
Oaths be secured.

2. And I have elsewhere named many Councils, and Canons which prohibit Bishops
this practice of making the Clergy swear fidelity to them, and have condemned
it, as of dangerous consequence. And they that are for Councils should not
engage us causelessly against them.

3. The present Impositions greatly stop us, till we better know what it is
that we must do. We have cause to make a stand, when we are all sworn [never to
endeavor any alteration of the Government of the State] which we readily obey,
and yet seem to be called to do that which we are told by some is an alteration
of it: That is, the making of our present species of Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, yea Chancellors, Officials, Commissaries, etc. as
unchangeable a part of the Government as Monarchy it self is, and so disabling
the King to make any alteration in them.

For set all this together and consider, 1. All the Clergy is bound or sworn to
obey both Bishops and every Ordinary. 2. The Canon ipso facto, Excommunicates
every man that affirms that the Church Government under his Majesty by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons and THE REST THAT BEAR OFFICE in the
same, is repugnant to the word of God; so that all the Lords and Gentlemen in
England that have affirmed that the Government by the Keys as used by Diocesans
over hundreds of Churches, or by Archdeacons, Lay Chancellors, etc. is
repugnant to God's word, being already ipso facto Excommunicate, how far they
are capable of being Parliament Men I know not: but I suppose if in Parliament
they shall affirm any such repugnancy they are Excommunicate; and without the
Act of King and Parliament no alteration can be made. 3. And now to fix them
all, the Kingdom is sworn never to endeavor any alteration in the Church
Government: viz. In the Corporation Act, the Militia Act, the Vestry Act, the
Oxford swearing Act, after the Act of Uniformity. And is not every Chancellor,
or Archdeacon, or Bishop now made as immutable necessary a part of the Kingdom
as the King?


L. You speak ignorantly for want of acquaintance with the Law: Do you think
King and Parliament oblige themselves. It is only particular subjects out of
Parliament that they oblige.


M. I. But when the Parliament is dissolved, are they not all particular
subjects save the King. And are they not all then hereby bound? And do you
think that it was the meaning of the Act that they who swear never to endeavor
alteration, may yet endeavor it, if they be chosen Parliament men? I will
manifestly disprove it. All these Oaths do join the Government of Church and
State together: Yea, and put the Church Government first, as if it had the
preeminence. But it was never the meaning of the Oath, that the Parliament may
endeavor to alter Monarchy, which is the State-Government: Ergo, it meant not
that they may endeavor to alter Prelacy or Church Government.

II. But suppose it be as you say, They that know the present thing called the
Church of England know that their Writers openly maintain that the Obligation
of the Canons depends not on the Parliament, save only as to the forceable
execution of them, but on the authority of the Church as a Society empowred by
Christ: And therefore that King or Parliaments at least may be Excommunicated
by them as well as others. All are Excommunicate men that do but call their
Government sinful.


CHAP. VII. II. Of the restraint of Ordained Ministers from Preaching, and
expounding any Scripture, or Matter or Doctrine, Can. 49.
L. WHat is it that you have against Conformity in this?


M. I. That men are at once made Christ's Ministers, and forbid to exercise
that which they are Ordained to.

II. That we are laid under the heinous guilt of breaking our Vow, when they
have engaged us to make it; and of betraying men's Souls, by omitting a vowed
duty.

3. That we are forbidden that which is the duty of every Lay Christian that is
able, as if they would suppress Religion and Charity it self.


L. But you do not swear or subscribe to this Canon.


M. 1. But we are bound by them to obey this Canon; for it is the Law of the
whole Church of England.

2. I have showed you that swearing obedience to them must mean, obeying their
Laws which are far more of weight than particular mandates.


L. But as long as you may have Licenses, how does this put you on any sin of
omission or commission?


M. Both their words and their deeds tell us that they Ordain more than they
License to Preach or Expound any Doctrine. And is it no sinful omission think
you for all the rest to forbear all this?

2. And many were Ordained heretofore, who by the new Act of Uniformity, are
denied Licenses without new Professions and Covenants and terms which they
undertake to prove sinful.

3. And our Ministry is by this made arbitrary to the Bishops will. He may bind
us to the Office, and when he has done keep us from it.


L. If they deny you Licenses they bind you not to preach.


M. Ordination is a Vow and Dedication to the sacred Office: Mark the Covenant
which they impose on us [Are you determined out of the Scriptures to instruct
the people committed to your Charge, etc. Answ. I have so determined by God's
Grace. Q. Will you give your faithful diligence always so to minister the
Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ as the Lord has
commanded, etc. that you may teach the people committed to your Care and
Charge, with all diligence to keep and observe the same. Answ. I will so do by
the help of the Lord. Q. Will you be ready with all faithful diligence to
banish and drive away all erroneous and strange doctrines contrary to God's
word, and to use both public and private monitions and exhortations, as well
to the sick as to the whole within your Cure, as need shall require, and
occasion shall be given. Answ. I will the Lord being my helper.]

Is it not treachery to draw men into all these Vows, and then to command them
never to Preach nor Expound any Doctrine or matter any where? Does it not come
near to an Atheistical prohibition of Religion, may they not tell their people
the meaning of Baptism, or the Creed, or Lord's-Prayer, or Commandments? May
they not teach their own Children and Servants these. If a Priest may not do
it, much less the Laity and Vulgar.


L. The meaning is not, against expounding to their children or wives at home,
but in the Church?


M. Can the Church of England tell such a meaning no plainer than by saying
[either in his own Cure or elsewhere.] Is not his House or his Neighbor's
House elsewhere: If they can speak no plainer, I would they would make us no
Laws till God License them.

2. But suppose that [elsewhere] speak only of Churches, you know that other
Canons forbid them Preaching in private houses.

3. And what a Priest is that who must be forbidden to teach the people in the
Church: or there to tell Children the meaning of the Catechism? How like is
this to the Moscovy State?


L. You know that many men are unable to Preach, Expound or speak sense about
Divinity if they should attempt it.


M. And are such fit to be made the Teachers and Guides of the Flock, shall the
same men make a man Physician to an Hospital, and when they have done forbid
him to do any more than read to them a Physic Book of their making? Is it not
an ability to teach men, at least the Essentials of Christianity, Essential to
a Minister? Do they not then make No-ministers and call them Priests, if they
ordain men that cannot Teach the essentials.


L. Reading the Scripture, and Homilies is Teaching.


M. It is so: but if that only will qualify one for the Priesthood, one may be
a Priest that knows no more than an Infidel or Atheist: and if Reading will
qualify men for a Benefice, many will study for no more: and the people will
value them accordingly.


L. But you know that when the Land came out of Popery, we must have mere
Readers in most places, or worse.


M. And you know that these Canons were made in K. James's days long after
that, and that they are now continued as the Church Laws: Did our last
Convocation alter them? It is such excellent men as the world is not worthy of
(Ames, Bayn, Parker, Hildersham, Dod, etc.) that have been forbidden to Preach,
whilst these that could not preach were Ordained and inducted. It is only the
present things that I am speaking of.

2. And though men of mean abilities, if tolerable, may be tolerated, yet men
that want essential qualifications should not be made Ministers; but if bare
Reading be necessary, they may Read as Laymen.

I conclude therefore that as making such Priests and Canons is a sin in them,
so to obey them by omission of Ministerial teaching, for want of a License from
the Bishops would be sinful Conformity in any true Minister of Christ if he
live where his Ministerial work is necessary. And to forbear all Expounding any
matter, or doctrine, save by Reading our Homilies, is sacrilege and
perfidiousness, and uncharitable inhumanity.


CHAP. VIII. IV, and V. Of subscribing and declaring Assent and Consent.
L. WHat is your next exception to Conformity.


M. Subscribing according to the Canon, that there is nothing in the book of
Common Prayer contrary to the word of God. and that we will use no other form.
2. And publicly declaring our Assent and Consent to all things contained and
prescribed in and by it, and our Approbation of all the Forms, Orders, etc, as
aforesaid.


L. What have you against this Approbation of the Liturgy?


M. Negatively, 1. We blame nothing in it that is good: And I take it for a
good Book, in the main, but not faultless. As you said of the Canon of allowing
Readers, so say I of the Liturgy; it was better immediately after Popery than
it is now, that is, it was more congruous, and was a great Reformation, and we
honor the Book and their Memory that made it.

2. We do not think that there is any such faultiness in it, as makes it
unlawful to join in the public Worship, and ordinary Communion, with the
Church where it is used, We honor them as true Churches of Christ.

3. I do not think it unlawful to read the ordinary Lords day Service, when the
public good requires it, and we can have no better without greater hurt than
benefit: Our objections being most against the by-offices, especially of
Baptizing and Burial.

B^^, 1. We think it unlawful to Covenant to use no other Forms in public
Prayer. II. And unlawful to subscribe and declare that it is faultless.

I. For the first we have these Reasons. 1. The Bishops themselves by the
King's order, do upon special occasions of Fasts and Thanksgivings, prescribe,
impose and use other Forms? and we must not covenant to disobey them. 2. The
public Ministers have and do in the Pulpits before Sermon use other Forms: And
so break this Covenant themselves.

3. It belongs to the office of a Pastor, as well to word his own Prayers as
his own Sermons: And it is sinful to renounce so much of the work of the Office
which we are vowed and ordained to.


L. These instances are a clear exposition of the Canon, and show that by [no
other Form] they intended not to exclude other Pulpitprayers, or other Forms,
prescribed by the Bishops.


M. 1. If the whole Church of England here also can speak no more intelligibly,
than by [no other Forms] to mean only [till the Bishop prescribe it, and except
your own daily Form in the Pulpit] I would they would leave us to God's own
Laws, and not take on them to be necessary interpreters of its great
difficulties. If such men forbear that expounding, which they forbid others
till they will do it better, the loss will be the less; Scripture speaks
plainlier than this.

2. But who gives this exposition? To expound the Law by a common obligatory
Exposition, is proper to the Lawmakers: He that makes the words makes not a
Law if he make not the sense; Judges make not the sense but decide particular
Cases by it as they understand it. The Canons are made by the Convocation,
which he that denies to be the Representative Church of England, is
Excommunicate. The Pulpit Preachers, nor the particular Bishops are not the
Convocation, and therefore have not power to expound their Canons, by any
Common obligatory exposition; much less contrary to the express words. Which
way most of the Clergy went under Bishop Parker, Grindal and Abbot, is well
known: And yet now they are so far from being taken for the Expositors of the
Churches sense, that they are openly scorned, as popular fautorer of Puritans,
and those of their mind called Grindalizers.

II. But it is the second, that is the Trojan horse whose name is Legion, I
mean that has many more evils in the belly of it, viz. that we must profess
that the three Books, Articles, Liturgy and Ordination are so utterly faultless
that there is nothing in them Contrary to the word of God, and that we Assent
and Consent to all contained and prescribed in and by them.


L. What have you against this? what is there in it that is contrary to God's
word?


M. God's word is perfect and forbids the least faulty error, or defect. If we
had never seen the Book, we know that men made it, and that every one that made
it had ignorance, error and sin, and can a perfect faultless volumn be made by
such faulty men? Operari sequitur esse. They renounce all pretensions to
Infallibility in the Articles of Religion.


L. You interpret the words rigorously: By [nothing contrary] they me^n nothing
so contrary, as that one may not use the Books.


M. If by [nothing] they mean not [nothing] and if by [contrary] they mean not
[contrary] we will better know what they mean before we subscribe, else you may
make it lawful to subscribe to any thing in the world, and say that the,
Imposers mean better than they speak.


L. And Assent and Consent is expressly confined to the use.


M. 1. I shall prove that that is not true. 2. That if it were true it no whit
amends the matter, nor makes it lawful to us.

I. It is not true: For. 1. The words of the declaration are as expressly
universal as man can speak: And the foregoing words [to the use] do speak but
de^fine, and the words of the Declaration de mediis: And all Lawyers agree that
when the title of a Law expresses the End, that limiteth not the sense of the
words of the Law, because the Means may be larger than the End. As the Oxford
Act of Confinement is in the title to keep Nonconformists from Corporations;
And yet Lawyers resolve that it extends also to Conformists, if one of them
should but once preach in a Conventicle. The Parliament and Prelates thought
that the way to secure the Use, was to oblige them to Assent and Consent to all
in the Book contained and prescribed: 1. Therefore they ty all to declare in
that same form of words, and to add no other, least they should make any
exposition that limits them. 2. And the word Assent signifies an Act of the
understanding, which must have Truth for its object. 3. And it is after expressed
by the word [Approbation] whereas a man may use that which he does not approve
of.

2. Oaths, Covenants and Professions must be taken in the most usual proper
sense, unless another be expressed to be the Imposers meaning; which is not here
done, and the words are most universal and without exception.

3. And to put all out of doubt, the Parliament expounded themselves. 1. At the
making of the Act, this was debated, and reasons given against the limited
expressions, which prevailed. 2. Since then a new Act against Conventicles
being made, it was moved in the Lords House, that seeing Non-conformists were
thus far forbidden private worship, they should be so far invited to
Conformity, as that a Proviso might be added to this Act, that the Declaration
in the Act of Uniformity should be understood to oblige men but to the Use of
the things required: and the Commons rejecting that Proviso, it came to a
debate or conference between the two Houses, where the Commons gave their
reasons against that sense and proviso: In which the Lords acquiesc't. Though I
was not present, the Parliament Men that were, reported this, and I never met
with man that contradicted it, or questioned the truth of it.

II. But if it were otherwise, it were to us never the better. For, 1. It were
an ignorant reproach of the Church of England, to say that they have put any
thing in their Liturgy which is of no use. This will Include every syllable.
They themselves tell you in their Prefaces, what use the very Calender, and
every other part are of. The use of the Articles of Faith and Doctrines is our
understanding, assent and belief of them in order to Love and Practice. The use
of the orders in the Rubric is to oblige us to obedient practice, and so of
all the rest. And to Assent, approve and Consent to every thing contained and
prescribed practically, even to the use of them, is more than a bare
speculative assent.


L. Wherein lies the sin of such a Declaration?


M. 1. In general it is incredible, as I said before, in consideration of the
matter, and the Authors together: The Book of Articles, Liturgy and Ordination
are a big Volumn, and contain great variety of matter, and that high and
mysterious; The Authors were every one of them men of imperfection, that had
ignorance, error and sin: And operation exceeds not power. Who dare say that
any Sermon, or Prayer that ever he makes, has nothing in it but what he may
assent and consent to: Much less so great a Book.

2. The Articles which must be subscribed as faultless, say Art. 15. [Christ
alone is without sin -- But all we the rest (though baptized and born again in
Christ) yet offend in many things, and if we say that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us] And Art. 21. [General Councils.
For as much they be an Assembly of men whereof all be not governed with the
Spirit and Word of God, they may err, and sometimes have erred, even in things
pertaining to God]. And are our Convocation more infallible than General
Councils? The Church must be exemplary in humility; and is it humility to say,
we Bishops and Priests having written three Books; he shall not preach Christ's
Gospel that will not declare that there is not a word in them that is faulty,
or repugnant to God's word, and will not assent and consent to all therein.

3. The Papists hereby scandalized, do scorn us, and say, The question is not
now of an Infallibility, or a Judge that all must assent to. It is but who this
Infaliible Judge is: whether it be the Pope and a General Council, or the
English Convocation, which is liker to be of greater authority and
infallibility; we require no greater assent and consent of you to the Canons of
the Universal Church, than the State and Church of England require to their
Books.

4. This seems to us to let the Articles, Liturgy and Ordination Book above
the Bible. 1. God himself has not made the assent and consent to every thing
contained and prescribed in the Bible necessary to Salvation, or to the
Ministry. 1. There are diverse Books in our Bibles whose Divine authority, many
have questioned, who yet were not for that degraded. The Apochryphal books are
yet controverted by men tolerated on both sides. There are hundreds of various
Readings, where no one is necessitated to determine for this or that.
Translations are all faulty, being the work of faulty men: And no wise men will
declare that this or that or any Translation has nothing in it contrary to the
Original Word of God. And are our Bishops Books more faultless?

5. It is a sin to Confederate with and Encourage such audacious Lording it
over the Faith and Souls of men, and such ill Examples.


L. Your instances show that you expound them too strictly: Can you imagine
them so insolent and impious as to impose their own Books more strictly than
the Bible, and require more Assent and Consent.


M. Call it what you will: I must suppose that matter of Fact which is
undeniably evident to our senses: It Is an ill argument [This is unreasonable
and ungodly or inhumane. Ergo, It was not done] What is so false, absurd or
impious that man may not do?


L. Some say, They are Articles of Peace only, and not of Faith.


M. Some Brains will be cheated with a mere noise of words, as Birds with a
whistle: We deny not but Peace is one of the ends of the Impositions: but the
question is what are the Means: Or whether they will take it for Conformity to
promise [I will live peaceably] or [I Assent that I should live in Peace]. Are
you not bound in order to peace, to Assent and Consent to all things in the
Books? Say, [I Assent that some things are true and good, and some things false
and bad, which yet for Peace I will use] and try how it will be taken?


L. Well: What is there in these Books contrary to Gods Word, or which you may
not Assent and Consent to?


M. The number is greater than we would have them. I will come to the chief of
them, which I before named to you.


L. I forgot to tell you, that it is not all contained, that is Assented to,
but all that is both contained and prescribed.


M. 1. A mere quibble to cheat Conscience: Ask the Bishop Morley and Bishop
Gunning yet living, whether this was the sense, and I will take their answer.

2. Then [Assent and Contained] had been put in in vain and to deceive, if
[Consent and Prescribed] signify as much without them.

3. The word [approbation] in this Act, and [nothing contrary to Gods Word] in
the Canon, confute this quibble.

4. I told you were it so it is never the better. All in the Book is prescribed
to some use. They are outside men that think Use reaches but the Body: Are
Articles of Faith Assertions of no use?


CHAP. IX. Point VI. Of the Article of Baptized Infants Salvation.
M. THE sixth Point of our Nonconformity is a new Article of Faith in these
words, in a Rubric which we must Profess, Assent and Consent to [It is certain
by the Word of God, that Children which are baptized and dying before they
commit actual sin are undoubtedly saved].


L. And what have you against Assenting to this?


M. 1. That it is a New Article of Faith. 2. That it is arrogant and divisive,
making a grand Controversy one Article of Faith. 3. It is certainly false in
most if not every one that declares such assent. 4. It is a dangerous adding
to the Word of God.


L. Why call you a Rubric an Article of Faith?


M. It is most expressly made such: What is an Article of Faith but that which
must be Assented to as certain by the Word of God? Will you deny the Name where
there is this Definition?


L. But how do you prove it to be new?


M. Because it was never made for us before; you have the affirmative: If you
say it was ever before, prove it. It Is not in the Bible, it is not in our 39
Articles, nor Creed.


L. Are not the old words of the former Book to the same sense?


M. Not at all: If they were why did the New Convocation alter them? The old
words plainly signify no more than this that Infants baptized have all ex
part ministri, and may be saved without Confirmation, Exorcism, Chrysme,
Spittle, Salt, Milk and Honey, and such other additions, supposing him ex part
sui under the promise of Salvation, that is, to be the seed of the Faithful:
Though I verily believe that after the making of the Common Prayer Book, our
Canon-Makers in Bancrofts days began to warp toward a worser sense. But our
Defenders of the Liturgy expound it as I say; and the tenor of the words may
tell the Reader that they meant no more.


L. Tell me first where it is that your Controversy lies?


M. I. Negatively, 1. It is not whether the Infant Seed of one believing Parent
should be Baptized: This is agreed on.

2. It is not whether those may be dedicated to God as our Children and
baptized, who are Adopted, or any way made our own Children, as Abraham's bought
and born to him in his house as his propriety were. Though we cannot say we are
certain of this, yet we will not contradict them that say they are.

3. It is not whether Hypocrites Children have not so far a right to Baptism
Coram Ecclesia as that the Minister ought to baptize them if it be justly
demanded.

4. It is not whether there be a certainty of the Salvation of all the baptized
Infants of true faithful Christians, that die before actual sin: Though all
good Christians are not certain of this: yet with the Synod of Dort we hold
that Christians have no just cause to doubt of it.

5. It is not whether they may not be good men that think all baptized ones
absolutely in a state of Salvation. None of these are the Controversy.

II. But it is 1. Whether all Infants without exception that be baptized, are
saved if they then die.

2. Whether this be certain by the Word of God.

3. Whether all that be not undoubtedly certain of it, should be no Ministers?


L. But it is not said [All Infants], but [Infants] indefinitely.


M. 1. There is no place of doubting of their universal sense. For an
Indefinite term in re necessaria is equal to an Universal. And they except the
unbaptized from Christian Burial.

2. It is Baptized Infants as such that they speak of, and that under no other
Character, nor with the least exception. And a quatenus ad omnes valet
argumentum.

3. The Canon commands Ministers to baptize all Infants without exception
that are brought to them on any Sundays or Holydays to be baptized after the
Manner of the Church of England.

4. I have spoken with the Bishops that brought in and promoted this Article,
and they own the universal sense, supposing the true form of Baptism; and say,
that as any man has right to take up an exposed Infant in the streets and take
it in, so has any one to bring the Child of a Heathen, Infidel, Atheist or
Sadducee to baptism.

5. If they had meant it only of some baptized Infants and not all, they knew
the Non-conformists were of the same mind; and then they would have told us,
what sort they mean.


L. I. And why may not an Article of Faith be newly declared? we have not read
the Fathers? It may not be unknown to them: And I have heard that they are for
it.


M. The most ancient Churches were so much employed in baptizing the adult
Converted from Infidelity, that we read little or nothing expressly and
particularly what they did about Infants in Baptism: They baptized none at age
without a serious Profession of true Faith and Repentance and holy Dedication
to Christ: They used to keep these as Learning Catechumens long before they
baptized them, save in case of necessity near death. Therefore they had their
set-times of the year for baptizing (two or three times) as our Bishops have
now for ordaining. And after all this strict preparation, they pronounced the
baptized in a state of Salvation, but it was only on supposition that he was a
sincere penitent covenanting Believer. Even Hildebrand (Pope Greg. 7.) in his
time concludes that baptism saves none that dissemble or have not the Faith
and Repentance which they profess: which the Papists do ordinarily confess, and
Protestants much more.

And as for Infants, the Ancients compelled* not Christians themselves to
baptize them, but left them to their own choice. Tertullian is for long delay
till-they understand, saying, Cur festinat innocens at as: Greg* Nazianzene
would have them stay at least three years: In danger of Death they always
hastened: Augustine and many others that had Christian Parents were not
baptized till at Age. And they took Christians Infants, as Paul did, to be not
unclean but holy, and would receive others brought by such as adopted or owned
them as Pro-parents. But it was never the judgment of the ancient Churches that
all Heathens or Infidels Children have right to Baptism and Salvation if any
will but offer them to Baptism. Much less that it is certain by Gods Word that
all such are saved.

2. Articles of Faith are all contained in the Scripture, and that is not new;
therefore nothing that is new can be an Article of Faith; nor can it be said to
be newly declared which was there from its beginning.


L. II. And why call you it arrogant and dividing?


M. Because it presumptuously condemns the Reformed Churches and the
Christian World, determining that to be so certain by Gods Word, that none
should doubt of it that will be a Minister, when the Christian World is of many
several opinions about it.


L. What be those Opinions about it?

M* 1. Some hold that the Covenant being the same pardoning saving Covenant
that is made to the faithful and their Seed, and their Children expressly called
Holy, they are all in a state of pardon and salvation before baptism, and
baptism does but celebrate and invest them in it before the Church; and
solemnly seal their Covenant right. And that this saving right is given only to
the seed of the sincerely faithful, or at most to those that have such
Pro-parents, though the Seed of Hypocrites must be received by the Church, that
know not men's hearts. And this I take to be the Truth.

2. Some others hold that this right to Salvation belongs to them that have
Grandfathers and Grand-mothers or remote Ancestors that were truly Godly
Christians.

3. Some hold that it belongs to all the Seed of professed Christians how bad
soever the Parents be.

4. Some hold that it belongs only to the Children of true Believers that are
baptized, but not to the unbaptized.

5. Some hold that it belongs to Hypocrites Children that are baptized, but
not to the unbaptized.

6. Some hold that it belongs to all baptized ones if they have Godfathers
that profess Christianity.

7. Some hold that it belongs to all baptized by a true believing Minister,
for the Faith of the Church.

8. Some hold that it belongs to none that by Baptism are taken into any
Congregation guilty of Heresy or Schism.

9. Some hold that it belongs to all that are baptized by a Minister who is
ordained by Bishops that have uninterrupted Canonical Succession, and not to
others.

10. Some hold that the Baptism of a Layman or a Woman may be effectual to
the Salvation of such.

11. Some Conformists hold that all Infants in the World are saved, baptized
and unbaptized.

12. The most of the Papists hold that the baptized are saved both from the
pain of Sense and of Loss, but the unbaptized are saved from the pain of sense
only, but not of loss; and so have neither Joy nor Sorrow.

13. Many wise Men hold that Salvation is certain according to the first
Opinion to the Seed of Sincere Believers, but that we have no certain notice at
all, what God will do with all the rest (baptized or unbaptized).

14. Many think that God has a certain number of Infants Elect whom he will
save, and will cast away the rest, but that no man can know who they be; though
the Faithful may have some uncertain hopes for their Children more than others,
but no Promise.

15. Some think that the Common state of Infants in the Life to come is utterly
unrevealed and unknown to us.

I do not say that none of these opinions should be disclaimed: But among all
which Learned, godly men of all Countries hold, to say he that is not certain
of some one of them as God's word is unmeet to be a Minister is dividing
arrogance, of men that overvalue themselves.


L. III. How then can you make good your charge of falsehood? May it not be
true among many false ones?


M. I make it good two ways; men must say they are certain that are not
certain. 1. No man can be certain that God's word says that which it does not
say: But God's word does not say directly, or by consequence that all baptized
dying Infants are undoubtedly saved. He that says there is such a word, let
him produce it.

It is suspicious that these same men that subscribe, that nothing is necessary
to Salvation, but what is contained in the Scripture, or may be proved by it,
would impose this belief on us, and never tell us so much as by a Marginal
citation of any one text of Scripture where it may be found. All that ever by
talk I could hear of them is, Gal. 3. 26, 27. Ye are all the children of God by
faith in Christ Jesus, for as many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. As if they would have us believe. 1. That all Atheists and
Infidels children have faith in Christ Jesus if they be but baptized. 2. Or
that all the Galathians that Paul wrote to were in a state of certain
Salvation, when it is apparent that he spoke to the adult, whom elsewhere he
says he fears lest he have bestowed on them labor in vain, and as bewitched
men, they had disobeyed the truth, etc. 3. Or that all that put on Christ
Sacramentally by Profession and Baptism were in a state of certain salvation,
even Simon Magus. How commonly when they confute the Separatists, that allege
the titles of Saints, holy, children of God, etc. given to all the Churches by
the Apostles, do they themselves expound it of a sanctity of Profession and
Relation as distinct from a saving state of Grace, as to many of the visible
members of the Church. And must we now believe that the visible and the
invisible membership are of equal extent. If this prove that all the baptized
adult have put on Christ savingly, and have right to Heaven, it will confute
the universal Church that has ever believed the contrary, and it will be good
news to all worldly hypocrites: But St. Peter says, It is not the putting away
the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience to God. And he told
Simon Magus that he had no part in that matter, not for apostasy, but because
his heart was not right in the sight of God. And sure it is no straight gate by
which men enter into a state of Salvation, if all the hypocrite flagitious
sinners are in it, that will but be baptized.

But if this Text say not that all adult hypocrites baptized, so dying are
saved, much less does it say it of all the children of them, and of all
Infidels that are baptized. Is this to give us proof of undoubted certainty?

They allege also Mar. 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, what then. Ergo, all Infants that are baptized, that neither believe,
nor are the seed of believers shall be saved. This is a new Gospel, and no
proof that the authors of it say true.

Another is Ioh. 3. 3, 5. Except a man be born again of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Does this prove that all are
born again of the Spirit that are baptized? Is this proving by God's word.


L. What is your other proof, that it is a false profession of them that declare
Assent to this Doctrine.


M. 2. It is this. He that says a thing is undoubtedly certain by God's word
which God's word contradicts, does certainly speak falsely. But so does he
that makes this profession.

That God's word contradicts it, I have proved so fully in my two
Disputations of original sin, and my Treatise of Infant Baptism, and Methodus
Theologia, that I must not here repeat it, viz. by abundance of plain Texts
that appropriate the Covenant-blessings to the Faithful and their Seed, and
exclude or curse the seed of the wicked, at least as out of the Covenant of
God: I will now repeat but one. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy. If the children of Infidels are not holy but unclean,
they have no right to the promise of Life, or to the Seal and Investiture by
Baptism. But, etc. Ergo.

I know Dr. Hammond will have Holiness here to be nothing but [the Church uses
to baptize such on presumption that they will be educated to Christianity:] and
uncleanness to be but [the Churches use to refuse such, supposing they will not
be so educated. And so that the Seed of the Faithful have no special promise of
pardon and life. But, 1. I have as aforecited and to Mr. Tombs proved many
such promises to the Seed of the Faithful, which Divines should not
unthankfully like Anabaptists deny.

2. And I ask such Doctors what baptism does for the Infants at present and on
what account? Does it put them in a present right to Salvation? If not, why are
they at present baptized, when God instituted no baptism but one, which is for
signification and investiture in the present remission of sin^: And so says
the Liturgy: And if so then on what account is an Infant saved? Is it merely
because another undertaketh to teach him hereafter? No man can undertake that
he shall believe or live. If he could, that would but prove that he shall be
pardoned when be believes and not before. And if all Infants, whom any
Christian will undertake hereafter to teach, though they never live to be
taught, or will never believe, be by this put into a present right to
Salvation, a stranger's undertaking of mere teaching upon utter uncertainty of
life and success, is supposed to have such a promise which yet these Doctors
deny to be made on the accounts of their own parents interest in Christ and
them; and his dedicating them to Christ. And if these promising Godfathers be
mere Liars, the Child is supposed to be baptizable and savable by it.

But if they say that the right to Salvation comes, ex opero operato, by mere
baptizing, whether the Child have undertakers or not, I answer, that a
profanation of God's ordinance is not a saving act: God has said no such
thing, but that the Children of Infidels are unclean and unholy, and does not
say except some body will baptize them. And why should not the Church baptize
as many Infidels Children as they can catch up, though none undertake for them,
if baptizing them do certainly save them if they so die.

I conclude therefore that seeing no man can be certain that all the baptized
Children of Heathens, Infidels, Jews, Atheists or Diabolists are in a state of
Salvation, God never promising it, but saying the contrary, whoever professes
this undoubted certainty, speaks falsely, that which he has not.


L. But they say not [I am undoubtedly certain of it] but only that it is
undoubtedly certain in it self.


M. This is to jest with holy things? To be certain is to be a Truth that has
ascertaining evidence, if you mean objective certainty: and how can any man
profess or affirm that who knows it not? He that affirms that it is
objectively certain, does therefore affirm that he knows it to be so, and is
subjectively certain, if he mean that it is evident and certain to others and
not to him, it is a contradiction: for if he know it not to be certain he cannot
tell that another does.


L. But though you be not certain of it, the subscribers may.


M. 1. I have proved that no man is certain of it, 2. Judge by all the rest of
their wisdom, whether every Youth that comes for Ordination from the
Universities, be so much wiser than we, that they are certain of this which we
think uncertain or false. Judge by their other qualifications, whether the
seven thousand Ministers that declared their assent to the Book before they
ever saw it, are like to be certainer than the two thousand that were cast out:
And are they certain of this that are uncertain of many great and weighty
truths through ignorance?

3. Yea many Conformists and Papists, say that Infant Baptism cannot be proved
by Scripture, but by Tradition. And can Ten thousand Ministers then be certain
by Scripture that baptized Infants are saved? How gross a contradiction is this?

4. And judge farther of the credit and modesty of such men: some Divines say
that Faith it self has not evidence, and that he that doubts of Christianity
and the Life to come may be saved, if his belief of it be but strong enough to
make him trust and prefer it before all this world. And I hear their greatest
Divines say that few would be saved if none but they that are undoubtedly
certain of the Life to come, and of the truth of the Gospel should be saved.
And yet all must be cast or kept out of the Ministry that will not affirm that
they are more certain of a hard Controversy if not of an untruth, than Christ
requires us to be of our very Christianity.


L. IV. What is the fourth part of your reason against this point?


M. 1. We dare not father that on God which he never spoke. 2. And we dread the
curse, Rev. 22. against them that shall add to his word, viz. that he will add
his curses upon them. How terribly are false Prophets threatened that say, Thus
says the Lord, when the Lord never said it: This is to belie God and to take
his name in vain. And for Nine thousand or Ten thousand Ministers to affirm
that this is certain by God's word that they are undoubtedly saved, and when
they have done cannot to this day, show us one word of God that says it, is
such an adding to his word as we had rather still be called all that is naught,
and imprisoned than be guilty of.

We take it for a Fanatic presumption in Papists to pretend to be infallible
in Councils, in determining those things which out of the Council through
ignorance they understood not: and how it should be but by Enthusiasm, or
fanatic pretense of Inspiration, that a multitude of raw ignorant fellows, or
lads should come to find that in God's word as undoubtedly certain, which none
of us in forty or fifty years search could ever find there, I cannot tell.


L. I know not what to say to this: I would they had left it to men's free
thoughts.


M. And do you think now that it is lawful for us deliberately to Assent and
Consent that this is an undoubted certainty when we are not certain, nor
believe it to be true. Should we lie to be conformable, were there but this one
thing it obliges us to Nonconformity whatever we suffer for it.


CHAP. X. Point VII. Of the English sort of Godfathers at Baptism.
L. WHat have you against our use of Godfathers in Baptism. M. I. Negatively,
we are not at all against the old sort of Patrimi, Susceptors, or Sponsors that
were used at Baptism in the ancient Churches; though we think it but a
prudential thing, and not of necessity to Baptism.


L. What mean you by the ancient sort? what did they?


M. At first, the adult were themselves Baptized: for their Children had no
right till the Parent was a Christian. And for three hundred years Christians
were under Heathen persecution; in which some forsook Christ for fear by
apostasy, and others died while their Children were in Infancy, who were
thereby exposed to desertion, or to Infidel Education. Wherefore to secure the
Education of these Infants, the Susceptors that joined with the Parents as
their Seconds. 1. Did testify their opinions of the Parents, as serious
Christians, not like to apostatize. 2. And did promise that if the Parents
either die or apostatized, they should undertake the Childrens Education. But
if the Parents were dead already, they undertook to Educate the Child
themselves as their own. But they were Sponsors for no Infidels Child, unless
they first adopted him, or took him for their own.


L. And what does our Godfathers differ from this, for which you take them to
be sinful, or not approveable.


M. The difference is so great, and makes so great a change in our
Christening, as I am loath to name to you. 1. With us godly Christian Parents
themselves, are forbidden to be Godfathers with the rest, and to speak one
word, much more to profess that they dedicate them in Covenant to Christ: Nor
must the Minister urge the Parent to be present: lest his consent seem
necessary.

2. The Godfathers and Godmothers are neither tied to bring the Children of
Christians only, nor only such as they take for their own; but without
difference may bring the Infants of any Atheists, Sadducees, Jews, Infidels, or
open enemies of Christ and godliness, without taking them for their own.

3. They personate the Child in promising and professing in his name, without
authority so to do.

4. They do not only promise what the Child shall do hereafter but they at
present profess that the Child by them, or they personating it, do Believe,
renounce sin, and desire Baptism: As if the Child were bound to do this by
himself or by another.

5. Godfathers too commonly covenant for the future Education of the Child,
themselves to do it or cause it to be done, which they neither ever purposed to
perform, or ever made the Parents believe that they intended; and so make
Christnening a perfidious Vowing, or Covenanting with God: These are not things
indifferent, I think.


L. 1. How prove you that the Parents may not be prime covenanters, or Sponsors
for their own Children? Are not they obliged to get Godfathers and Godmothers
for them? who are supposed to come by their procurement? And does not that
signify their own consent, to what these are to undertake.

M. It signifies only that the Law constrains them to let their Children be
baptized, to avoid their own punishment, and to get others to enter them into
the Christian Covenant. But not that they either are Christians, or consent to
that Covenant themselves, either for themselves, or Children. For

1. Known Atheists, Infidels, and Sadducees that deny Christianity, are bound
by the Law to get Godfathers for their Childrens Baptism, as well as
Christians; and such cannot be supposed to covenant for them with Christ
themselves. The Sixty eight and Sixty nine Canons command Ministers to refuse
no Child that is brought, nor to refuse or delay to baptize in private in case
of danger who ever desires him to do it.

2. The Twenty nine Canon says [No Parent shall be urged to be present, nor be
admitted to answer as Godfather for his own Child: Nor any Godfather or
Godmother shall be suffered to make any other answer or speech than by the Book
of Common Prayer is prescribed in that behalf] The Parent may say what he will
to God in secret. But at the Christening of his Child, if he should but say [I
believe God's promise to the faithful and their seed: I do devote my Child to
Christ, and engage him in his Covenant: or I promise to educate him to
Christianity] he breaks the Canon, and goes against the Churches Law. I did
before the Bishops at the Savoy, 1661. put the case to them, thus without
fiction: An Infidel of my Parish that uses openly to talk against the
Scripture and Life to come, to avoid inconveniences, resolves to send his
Child to be baptized; and I must not refuse it by the Law: Has the Child right
to Baptism, and is it undoubtedly saved? Dr. Sanderson in the Chair answered,
nemime contradicente, that if he brought him with Godfathers according to the
Church of England, I need not doubt it. But there were but two in the Parish
that openly declared themselves to be of his opinion, and those two being his
familliers are likest to be the Godfathers. If the Child have not Right for
Infidel Parents sake, how can Infidel neighbors, called Godfathers, give him
right.


L. But the Canon says that the Godfathers shall be only such as have received
the Sacrament.


M. Alas none are forwarder than these to receive the Sacrament, and laugh at
it, and say they will obey the Church. Yet I doubt not but a faithful Parent
may be present if he will, and may tell the Godfathers in private, that his
presence shall signify his devoting act; and when the Priest speaks to the
Godfathers, he may bow his head whether the Priest will or not, to signify
that act of his. But this is nothing to the sense of the Church, nor to our
Assent and Consent to their exclusion of the Parent.


L. I confess it sounds to me as unnatural. But what is your other reason
against our sort of Godfathers?


M. I^. My second Reason is, that it is a profanation of this great and sacred
Ordinance, to invest those in the visible state Christianity (and Salvation
pretendedly) that have no right to such investiture, so they have but
Godfathers they are to baptize the children of any Jews, or Heathens, or open
enemies to Christ, as well as of Christians; which is a manifest profanation.


L. What is the fault of it.


M. 1. It supposes a false Doctrine, that Infidel Children are within the
Covenant, and may be baptized as well as Christians which in the Books
aforecited, I have fully disproved.

2. It is a dangerous adding to God's word and worship.

3. It is a deceiving of men's Souls as to childrens state, to make them believe
that their children dying when baptized are all saved, how bad soever the
Parents be

4. It is a dreadful belying of God, and profanation of his name, if men shall
in the name of God pronounce pardon and salvation to those whom he never gave
them to.


L. But God will not punish the Children for their Parents sin.


M. Not those that see their fathers sins and forsake them, and live not as
their Parents did: and that is all that the Scripture says for such. But if you
will read my two foresaid Disputations for Original sin you will see it fully
proved that God punishes Infants, because they are the guilty, and corrupt
seed of guilty and corrupt Parents. Do you believe our Church Articles and yet
deny original sin? If Infants have no guilt and sin what need have they of
Baptism, or of a Savior? If they have need of both, sure it is for no actual
sin done by them, was not the World lost for Adam's sin? Was not Cain's
posterity cursed for his sake? Were not all the Infants of the old World, and
all the Infants of the Sodamites burnt with fire from Heaven, and the Infants
of the Canaanites and Amalakites, etc. killed for their Parents sin. Did not
Christ tell the Jews, Mat. 23. that all their Forefathers persecutions should
be punished on that Generation? The Jews knew this that said, His blood be on
us and on our Children. Our Liturgy says, Remember not Lord our offenses nor
the offenses of our Forefathers, etc.

2. And yet I tell you, that it is for their own sin that the seed of the
wicked perish, sin is made their own, when soul and body were for guilty
corrupt Parents, made such by themselves. I do not say that God imputes their
Parents infidelity to them. But this infidelity is the reason of their not
being delivered from their own original guilt. If Rebels forfeit Life and
Estate, and so their Children live in beggary, and the King offer to restore
Father and Children, if the Father will thankfully accept his grace: If the
Parent refuse this, his Children will be beggars. Not because the King
punishes them for their Fathers fault, but because he first deprived himself
of the Estate which he should have left them, and next because he refused to
deliver them. If a Father will set the Pox on his children, and after refuse a
Physician that would cure him and them, the Physician does not punish the
children.

All Scripture and Nature tell the world that it is so deep an interest that
Parents have in children, as being causes of their very essence by
Communication from their own essence, and it is so natural a power that Parents
have over their children, that it should seem no strange thing to Christians,
or Infidels, that God makes a very great difference between the seed of the
faithful and of the Infidels and wicked: And its strange that any men should
rather lay their title to pardon and salvation upon a mere neighbor or
stranger that perhaps is a wicked wretch himself, than on the Parents of the
child.


L. But will God save children for their Parents Faith?


M. If he destroy Infants for Adam's sin, do you think that Justice is so much
more extensive then Mercy, that he will show no mercy for Parents sake? But the
case is this, Christ the Second Adam has merited pardon and salvation to be
given conditionally to all: Not absolutely, for then all would be saved: What
the condition is to the adult, we are agreed, viz. Faith and Repentance and
Dedication to Christ by covenant consent: And do you think that Infants pardon
and salvation has no condition? If none, than all Infants are saved; if any
condition, what is it? 1. Is it barely that they be baptized without any right
but what all have. This is an injurious fiction, God never said it: And its an
unreasonable imputation on God, as if he would save thousands merely for water
and words, and comdemn thousands that had not the opportunity of these. And it
is certain that Christians never dreamed of this absurd opinion, or else godly
Emperors would have forced Baptism on the children of all their Heathen
Subjects, and would where their conquering Armies came in Charity have caught
up their children and baptized them. And Bishops and Doctors would have taught
and entreated them so to do. To make mere baptising alone the condition of
Infant salvation, is to lay Heaven on such a ceremony quite out of the Infants
power, as would but tempt the rational Infidels to deride Christianity. No
sober men lay a child's Estate or Life on such a thing.

2. If there must be some condition of Right to Baptism antecedent to it, what
is it. 1. It is not actual faith in that Infant, that understands not? 2. It
must then be some others act or nothing? If another, whose should it be so
likely as the parents from whom the Children have their essence? Whom nature
has taught to take them as almost parts of themselves; and so has the custom
of all Nations; and who are obliged above all other to provide for them, and
whose will in their Infancy disposes of them till they come to have a rational
will of their own (in act:) And Scripture from end to end confirms this.

But besides this you know not whither to look for a title-conditione, unless
to some Pro-parent, whose the child is, upon the Parents Death or Resignation.
For 1. If you say it is the Faith of the Church (as some) that gives the Child
Title, what Church mean you? The Universal, or National or Diocesan or
Parochial. And how does the Church give right to Pardon and Life to Infidels
Children. If it be merely volendo, as if Heaven were at their Will, why do they
not sit at home, and make a deed of Gift of Heaven to the Infants at the
Antipodes and of all the World: If it be by baptizing them, I showed before
that Baptism merely as such, does it not. And if it be the Will of the Baptizer
they must mean the Priest, Deacon or another: And to say that these are the
Terms of Infant Title to Baptism and Salvation, that if the Priests will they
shall be baptized and saved; or else not, seems a New Gospel.

2. But it seems with us it is the Godfathers that give them Title, else the
Church could save them when they will without Godfathers: And if so, where is
the proof of it, in Scripture or Reason, that God will accept and save Infants
because a mere Neighbor will bring them to be baptized, and promises to bring
them up well if they live. It is supposed that these Sponsors own not the
Children, and how come they then to have the power to be their Representatives,
and to dispose of their Souls?


L. But any Beggars Child has right to be taken into your house, if you are so
Charitable as to do it? And so much right to Baptism and Salvation by it,
Christ has given to all.


M. Where is that deed of Gift to be found. It is not a Forgery? He has made a
Covenant to the Faithful and their Seed. But where has he said, I will save
all Infidels Children, if any Priest or Christian will but Baptize them? He
that said Go to the highways and hedges and compel them to come in, excepted
the Refusers, and required none but persuading compulsion: And its Parents that
have power of their Children. He that can believe to day that God has made a
Gift of Salvation to all Infants that any body will baptize, may easily believe
to morrow that he will not cast away the rest merely because no Carrier will
bring them in, or because no body will wash them and say over them the words of
Baptism. God has made even in the Second Commandment, and in Exodus 34. when
he proclaimed his name and nature, so great a difference between the Seed of
the Godly and the Wicked, that we dare not consent to the confounding of them,
nor with the Anabaptists unthankfully to deny this Mercy, nor to deny or
corrupt Paul's plain assertion, Else were your Children unclean but now are they
holy.


L. III. What mean you by your third Exception.


M. I have told you while I opened the former. They personate the Child without
Authority: And it is a great doubt whether the Covenant and Baptism were not a
mere Nullity, did not Parents besides the Laws of Conformity some way signify
their own Agency therein. If any Neighbor should make a Covenant in the name
of your Child, binding him at Age to Marry an Heiress, who has a Lordship to
her Portion, would this either oblige your Son, or give him any present right
to her or her Estate?


L. If the Donor or person empowered Consent, it gives a conditional right,
which becomes Actual when he marries her; and so here if God consent its so
far valid.


M. God has given Christ and Life conditionally to all before they believe or
are baptized: But all must not therefore be baptized: This is not Actual Right,
and so such Infants have no right by this Rule, till they believe in Christ.
But Baptism is an actual Marriage with Christ, and its a Mockery where neither
Party does consent. Christ does not consent: for he has made no Promise but to
the faithful and their Seed. Let them that affirm more, show it. The Infant
does not consent, having no Will of his own in Act, and the thing being done by
one that had no power to personate or oblige him. And he may say, It was no act
of mine, personally or Legally.


L. Any one may accept a gift for another, and bind him to gratitude, which if
he refuse he forfeits it.


M. If the Donor give it on those Terms, it is true. And if you can prove that
God has made his Covenant Gift of Pardon and Salvation to all the Seed of
Infidels, Atheists and Wicked Men, on Condition that any body will but Accept
it in their names at present, and bind them to accept it at Age, it will then I
confess prove a valid act of Charity: And I see not but why some good man
should say [Lord, I accept of Christ and Salvation for all the Infants on
Earth, and I bind them to accept it when they come to Age; and I hope the mere
want of washing shall not deprive them of that which I have power to accept for
them] I never heard of valid contracts made for Infants by any one that will
but pretend to personate them.


L. Thus you would make rebaptizing necessary, if such Baptism be a nullity.


M. 1. Not to any whose Parents, though besides the Laws of Conformity own
their agency, and dedicating their own child to Christ, which I hope is the
case of most, custom through God's mercy teaches them better than the Canons
and Common Prayer Book.

2. And I think not to any other, whose Parents in Infancy, and themselves at
Age do own the Covenant, and think that it was valid Baptism. For to such the
end of Baptism is attained. If it were no Minister, or were one unauthorized
that baptized him, it would not be a mere nullity as to the ends, if by mistake
it were supposed well done. Factum valet, was judged by some, when Athanasius
by a Boy was baptized in Sport.


L. What is your fourth Objection against our way of Baptism?


M. That in personating the Child, they say that they (and so he by them) does
at present Believe, renounce, desire, etc. falsely intimating that Infants are
bound at present to do this by another: And yet the same men plead that God
does not accept him for the Faith of his Parents; As if his Godfathers Faith
were his, and not his Parents: when as God requires no Faith, or Repentance of
Infants, but only that [They be the Seed of penitent Believers, devoted to
Christ.]

And in the Catechism it is said that [Repentance and Faith are required of
persons to be Baptized.] (And Repentance and Faith have a promise of Life) and
that Infants who cannot perform these are Baptized because they promise them by
their Sureties, which promise when they come to Age themselves are bound to
perform.

Where note that the former Book had [They perform them by their Sureties] They
perceived that having said Faith and Repentance are requisite: Infants they saw
must have at present what is requisite at present: And they knew that they had
them not themselves; and so were fain to hold that the Sureties Faith and
Repentance was theirs, and a performance of that required condition. But our
new Bookmakers saw that this would not hold, and so they say, Though Faith and
Repentance be required of persons to be baptized, yet Infants are baptized
because they promise them by their Sureties to be hereafter performed; amending
the former error by a greater, or a double one. 1. Granting that Faith and
Repentance are pre-requisit, and yet confessing that Infants have neither, of
their own or Sureties imputed to them; and yet are to be baptized: 2. Or making
a Promise of future Faith and Repentance to be present Faith and Repentance. 3.
Or like the Antimonians that say, all that are Elected to believe hereafter are
justified before they believe, so they imitate that; though Faith and
Repentance be requisite in baptizandis, yet God at present will justify and
save all that have it not in infancy, because they promise it hereafter. All
plain contradictions: as if they said, it is requisite in persons to be
baptized, and it is not requisite.


L. How would you have them have answered these.


M. Professed Faith and Repentance are requisite in adult persons to be
baptized: And in Infants, that they be the Seed of the Faithful, devoted by
them to God in Christ, according to his offered Covenant of Grace.


L. V. What mean you by your fifth Objection*


M. Alas, the worst is yet behind. The common Perfidiousness that is committed
under the name of Godfathers Baptismal Vows and Covenants: Baptism is one of
the greatest actions of all our Religion and Lives. Our rising from Death to
Life; our visible new Birth, our solemn Covenanting with God the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost: Our solemn Translation from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that we may receive remission of Sin, and inheritance
among the Sanctified: What more holy, great and venerable action can be done by
mortal man, than to enter a solemn Covenant with God and our Redeemer, in which
we wholly give up our selves to him, and Covenant for a holy Life, and are to
receive the pardon of all sin, and the gift of Grace, and right to Everlasting
Glory: And if men turn this great Ordinance which is the Sum of all our
Religion into perfidiousness and mockery, how heinous sin must this needs be?

And here let us consider, I. Who these Godfathers in England usually be. II.
What they do, III. How they perform what they Vow and undertake.


L. I. They are usually some of the Parents Friends.


M. They are usually such as these: 1. The poor that have no rich Friends do
sometimes entreat a poor neighbor to do the office, and sometimes hire any man
that will do it: Which I never knew tell in London, by begging they made me
understand that men do it as Labourer's work for their wages: About half a
Crown is the ordinary pay of Beggars, or very poor Folks Godfathers. But the
Poor and Middling sort do use to try some rich Friend or Neighbor; if they
have any such, in hopes of some small gift; some give us for the Child a
Shilling, some half a Crown, some a silver Spoon. The Richer sort seek to
persons rather above than below their Rank, in expectation of a piece of Plate,
or some such bigger gift. And in other Nations Princes are Godfathers to
Children whom they never see, nor perhaps the Land of their nativity: And with
us it is very often some that dwell not very near, who often sevre as Proxy to
stand in their place, and they only give the expected gift and bear the name.

II. What they are to do, I told you before, 1. To personate the Child, and
take on them to say as in his name [I believe, I renounce, I desire] when they
are three and the Child but one, and so three persons by fiction represent one,
and say that He does that which he does not, either, per se vel per alios.

2. They Vow or promise solemnly to do all the things before named. Chapter 4.
Numb. 7. viz. To see that the Child be taught as soon as he shall be able to
learn what a solemn Vow, Promise and Profession he made by them; and that they
call on him to hear Sermons, and chiefly that they provide that he may learn,
the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the Vulgar Tongue,
and All other things that a Christian ought to know and believe to his Souls
health, and that he be virtu^usly brought up to lead a Christian and Godly
life. All this they solemnly undertake to God and the Church.

III. And so far are they usually from performing it. That 1. I never yet knew
one Parent that expected any such thing from them, or that ever seriously asked
them, Do you understand what you are to promise? and do you resolve to do it.

2. I never in all my life knew one Godfather that made the Parent before hand
believe that he intended any such thing.

3. If he had, it is not credible that three persons should all intend to
educate one child of another man's, and perform it?

4. Nor did I yet ever know to this 68th. year of my age, one Godfather that
before adopted the child, or took him for his own, and took him home with him,
unless he was a Grandfather and did it as such and not as Godfather; much less
could all three do it.

4. Nor did I ever to this day know one man or woman that performed this which
all three undertake. A very few I have known that will ask How does my Godson,
and say, you must be a good Boy and learn your Book, and perhaps give him a
piece of Silver: But usually they never look after them.

I confess with shame that I have been Godfather to four; to one when I was a
Child and knew not what I did, but thought, it was only to be a Witness of
Baptism. And to three more when I was twenty three years of age; of all which I
agreed beforehand with the Parents to be but a Witness, and that they should
stand there themselves as the undertakers and signify it. Two of these I never
saw since; a third now dead, I never saw since his Infancy till a little before
he dyed, and the fourth never since till that lately he came a begging to me.

I confess one Bishop told me once that he knew one or more that had performed
this Vow, so did never I, who have lived in many parts of the Land. Those that
perform it not, sure are guilty of heinous perfidiousness; as breaking so
solemn a Vow to God. And if this be so common in England that to this Age I
could never know of one performer, is not the case doleful and dreadful; that
the Nation should by such perfidiousness be made Christians?


L. But this is the Parents or Godfathers fault: what is this to the Minister,
or to your Assent and Consent?


M. If it be not nothing to the Canons and to the Liturgy, it is not nothing to
him that must Assent and Consent to all things in that Liturgy, and must swear
Canonial obedience. And 1. Do you think that the Nation can so commonly live in
this sin, and the Church Governors and Orders be innocent in it. Can those
Canons and Orders be blameless that without any more opposition, let such
perfidiousness go to our Christening? Can the medicine be laudable that so many
miscarry in the use of it?

2. By the Canon all men are constrained to get some Godfathers, and they can
force none that is unwilling.

3. No Conscionable persons will Promise and undertake that which they never
purpose to perform. I never in all my life met with one godly man, that if you
opened all the undertaking plainly to him, would say seriously, I am resolved
to do all this? but would refuse the office when he knows it is expected.

3. If there be hundreds or thousands in a Parish that are grossly ignorant of
the nature of Baptism, and what they do, or that ere Atheists, Infidels, wicked
men not Excommunicate, the Minister can not deny to take them for Godfathers,
if they did but ever once receive the Sacrament. And to this 68th year of my
age, I never knew one Godfather, or Godmother questioned or refused by any
Minister.

4. If the Parent can get no man to stand, he shall be ruined for it, as not
bringing his Child to be Baptized according to the order of the Church.

5. Rich men will not give up their Children to the Godfather's propriety or
education. Poor men's Children none will take. And is it lawful to Assent and
Consent to such orders of Baptism as cherish this?

If Parents were the undertakers we might urge them to performance. But from
such others who can expect it.


CHAP. XI. Point VIII. Of refusing to Baptize without such Godfathers.
L. YOU have been long on this Point, I pray you be shorter on the next.


M. It needs not many words it is so gross. We dare not Assent and Consent to
deny Baptism to all Children of godly Parents that have not such Godfathers and
Godmothers, while the Parent offers to do his own part, professing his faith,
and dedicating his Child to God, and promising a faithful education.


L. How prove you that you must put away all such.


M. 1. Did you ever know any baptized otherwise in the Church. 2. The words of
the Rubric are [There shall be for every Male Child to be baptized, two
Godfathers, and one Godmother; and for every Female one Godfather and two
Godmothers.] 3. The Godfathers and Godmothers only are to speak and covenant;
without which it is no Baptism: Mere washing without Covenanting is no
Christian Baptism, so that the Church of England does make Godfathers essential
to it. And what it is to add to the Essentials of so great an Ordinance of God
as was instituted by Christ's own mouth, for so high an use as our Espousal to
himself; judge you. 4. The Canon to which all must subscribe, says [that he
himself will use the form in the said Book prescribed in public prayer and
administration of the Sacrament, and no other. 5. The Act of Conventicles
makes it 20 l. the first time and, 40 l. every time after for above four to
meet to worship God otherwise than according to the Liturgy, and practice of
the Church of England. And to baptize without Godfathers is otherwise. 6. And
then the Oxford Act banisheth them five miles from Corporations. Is not here
sufficient proof.


L. And why should any scruple so small a matter?


M. 1. Did I not before tell you why? 2. Suppose they scrupled it through
mistake? shall every mistake or error of Parents deprive the child of Baptism?
I Will tell you why I dare no more Assent and Consent to this, than I dare
consent to cut off a hand or foot of every such child.

1. Baptising is Christening, and dare I causelessly deprive a Soul of visible
Christianity?

2. They themselves make it an Ascertaining means of Salvation, as the
forementioned Rubric shows. And would they have us shut Infants from
Salvation for nothing? yea they seem to confine Salvation only to the baptized,
while they conclude that they are saved as baptized ones, and except the
unbaptized from Christian Burial: The best can be but to leave them as without
any promise of life from Christ: And how can we believe that God will give them
that which he never promised them. And shall I damn souls for want of a humane
unnecessary, if not corrupt invention.

3. It is against the interest of Christ and the Church? shall I make a
Covenant to rob Christ and the Church of visible Members for nothing?
Murdering Infants is death by God's Laws and man's? And Innocents day is one of
the Christmas Holy days. And is it a thing indifferent for me and all the
Ministers of the National Church, to make a solemn bargain that we Assent and
Consent to keep out all from the Church and from the Covenant (and in their
sense the hope) of Salvation on such an account as this.


L. The thing were dismal and unexcusable if it were as you make it: But how
can you say that they shut them out when they force all Parents to bring them
in, and to submit to their way? when did you ever know any child refused on
this account.


M. Many a hundred in my time. The Law refuses them, and it is in vain for the
Parents to send them to a Minister who they know has solemnly covenanted to
reject them. Hundreds have been baptized by Nonconformists, because the Church
refuses them.

2. And as to their compelling men to get Godfathers I answer, 1. Those that
think it a sin will not obey that compulsion, but rather suffer. 2. If any
yield against conscience to escape suffering, such compulsion does but drive
them toward damnation. 3. But those that yield to it by compulsion, do but
seem to do it, and do it not: For they agree before hand with the Godfathers,
to represent them, and speak in their names, and to be themselves no
undertakers. Though all this is very hard shifting.


L. I confess this is a case so distant from things indifferent, that were
there but this one reason, I will no more persuade any to Assent and Consent to
all things contained and prescribed, even to the use.


M. And what think you if the same men that made these Canons and subscribe to
all this, are the sharp condemners of Schism and Anabaptistry. 1. What is
Schism, if this be not, causelessly to keep out so many from the Church? And
have not the Anabaptists a far more excusable pretense to deny the baptizing of
Infants, than this in question is: The case is of great difficulty to them, and
it is Christ's will that they doubt of. But here is no difficulty? And these
men set the will and devise of man against Christ, who said Forbid them not,
and was Angry with those that forbad them to come to him.


CHAP. XII. Point IX. Of the Cross in Baptism.
L. I Have often wondered what any man can say against the use of the Cross in
Baptism, which signifies our resolution to be true to a crucified Christ.


M. I have often thought many things absurd in you Lawyers, to which I have been
reconciled when I was well informed of the reason of them. I ask you.

1. Do you believe that Jesus Christ is the King and only universal Lawgiver to
his Church.


L. Yes, but men under him may make local Laws.


M. 2. Do you believe that he is the Author of the Christian Baptism?


L. Yes, no doubt, I find it, Mat. 20. 19.


M. 3. Do you believe that he did it so defectively that men may amend it.


L. No doubt but he did his own work perfectly.


M. 4. Do you not believe that it is his Prerogative to institute Sacraments of
the covenant of Grace?


L. Yes, no doubt; for our Church holds that there are but two, and disowneth
the five Roman Sacraments. And yet I think most of them may be called
Sacraments, especially Ordination, and Matrimony (and so may the Kings
Coronation) but not Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace.


M. Let us now enquire. 1. What a Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace is. 2.
Whether our crossing be not such.

I. The Romans used the word [Sacraments] for an external obliging covenanting
ceremony: especially for the Act of soldiers ceremony by binding themselves to
military relation and fidelity to their captains. A Sacrament of the covenant
of grace is an outward visible Act or ceremony; by which we oblige our selves
in covenant to Christ as our Savior, promising fidelity and by which we are
told by Christ's ministers, that his Grace is signified which is given by his
Covenant.

The Catechism indeed says [It is an outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace, given to us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we
receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.]

But it is obvious to any man of reason, that the words [Ordained by Christ
himself] signify not a Sacrament as such, but [as Divine] distinct from
humane. Else it were impossible for man to be guilty of making false humane
Sacraments: If they should make more, just such as Baptism and the Lords
Supper, they would be no sinful Sacraments, if none be Sacraments but Christ's.

If there be all these things, there is a Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace
falsely instituted by man. 1. If there be an outward visible sign. 2. If both
the purchased and conveyed Grace of the Covenant of Christ be signified by it.
3. And so signified as to be an instituted means of conveying it. 4. If it be a
sign obliging the covenanting person to his Covenant duty. 5. And if thus it be
a symbol, or badge of the Order professed.

I. The outward visible sign is crossing, or the transient Image of a Cross,
made by one that acts as a Minister of Christ by his pretended Commission,
and received in his forehead by the baptized.

II. The thing signified is both the work of Redemption purchasing grace, and
grace given by that purchase: Both these are fully expressed Can. 30. [The holy
Ghost by the mouths of the Apostle did honor the name of the Cross, so far
that under it he comprehended not only Christ crucified, but the force, effect
and merits of his death and passion, with all the comforts, fruits and promises
which we receive or expect thereby: The Church of England has retained still
the sign of it in baptism, following therein the Primitive and Apostolical
Churches, and accounting it a lawful outward ceremony and honorable badge,
whereby the Infant is dedicated to the Service of him that dyed on the Cross,
as by the words of the Common Prayer book may appear] which words are [we
receive this Child into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, and do sign him
with the Sign of the Cross, in token that he shall not be ashamed to confess,
the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner against
sin, the world and the devil, and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier and
Servant to his life's end. Amen] And in the Preface of Ceremonies [They serve to
a decent order, and godly discipline, and such as be apt to stir up the dull
mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God by some notable and spiritual
signification, whereby he may be edified.]

So that the thing signified is Christ crucified with the benefits of his
Cross, and the Grace of edification by stirring up our dull minds by the moral
causality of the cause, and binding us to constancy to Christ.


L. But moral causing by objects works not on Infants.


M. True, no more does washing in water, and yet this is used for the benefit
of the Parents at present, and of Infants when they are at the use of reason.
Indeed Christ by his own Sacrament gives Right and Relative grace, which he
will not do by men's inventions.

III. But man plainly appoints the Cross to work this grace by way of
exciting signification.

IV. And it is expressly made man's covenanting sign, by which he binds
himself to covenant fidelity; that he will not be ashamed to confess the Faith
of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight, etc. The whole duty of the covenant
on man's part is promised hereby.

V. And the Canon tells you it is a dedicating Sign and Badge of our profession.

So that I see not what is wanting to a Sacrament, as far as man can make one,
by presumption, which we cannot consent to.


L. But it is said that Baptism is perfect without it.


M. So it is without the Lord's Supper; and yet that is justly added: It says
not that man's covenanting with God is perfect without it: For it seems a
Sacrament of man's added to that of Christ, to tie men faster to him.


L. Ancient Christians did use the Cross without scruple.


M. 1. It is not all use of the Cross that we speak against; but using it as a
Sacrament of the Covenant, and badge of Christianity: The King would not take
it well if Subjects presume to make a new Badge of the Order of Knights of the
Garter, and add it to the Garter and the Star. To show by an action as well as
by a word to scorning Heathens that they were not ashamed of a crucified
Savior, might be more excusable that this. And they foresaw not to what abuse
it would be after turned.

2. But suppose we mistook in these our fears of sinning. 1. Do you think that
the case has not difficulty enough to excuse a man for fear of sinning?

2. And do you think that for such fear, and not acting against them we deserve
to be cast out as heinous incapable delinquents?


CHAP. XIII. Point X. Of denying Baptism to them that refuse the Cross.
M. BUT the practice of Crossing is disputable, and I lay not so sharp a
censure on them that differ from us in it: But what excuse can be made by a man
of Christian charity, and consideration for denying Baptism to all that refuse
this crossing, I confess I cannot imagine, nor could ever hear.


L. Their excuse is, that Crossing being lawful, the Refusers are disorderly
Schismatics, and they and their Children (as theirs) incapable of Baptism.
They say it is not they, but you that are the Refusers. They offer to baptize
you or your Child, and you refuse it.


M. 1. They know that it is not Baptism but Crossing that is refused: And if
they will not administer one without the other, they are the refusers. If one
refuse the Papists Exorcism, Salt, Spittle, etc. and they will not baptize
without it, do they not deny to Baptize, unless one will receive all these? If
God will justify them for rejecting all that think it a sin to receive their
Crossing, then it is not them to whom it is to be imputed. But can that be true?

1. Christ that instituted Baptism, ordained the conditions of it, and the
qualifications of such as shall be baptized, Mat. 28. and Mark 16. 16. He that
believed was to be Baptized. Act. 28. If thou believe with all thy heart thou
may: No, says the Canon you shall not, though you repent and believe,
unless also you will take the covenanting Badge of the Cross. Is not this to
alter the terms of Christ's Covenant and Sacrament, and directly to contradict
his very fundamental Law of Christianity? Baptize all that are made disciples,
says Christ, and all that repent and believe: No says our Convocation,
baptize none of them that will not take the transient Image of a Cross, for
their farther obligation.

2. Do you that think it is necessary to Christianity and Salvation know that
this Federal Crossing is lawful? if you affirm it, you must say the same of all
ceremonies of the same importance, and so must make a hundred new Articles of
Faith, even of Ceremonies and such little things, and make them all necessary
to Christianity and Salvation? And is not this to make a new Gospel,
Christianity, and Church, and to turn Christ's easy Yoke into a worse than the
slavery of Pharisaical Traditions? And is not this to shut all, or almost all
men out of Heaven? No one on earth does know that this, and all such
ceremonies, and inventions of men are lawful: And must every one know it that
will be a Christian, or have his child made one? Or must we all (as necessary
to Christianity) believe all such things lawful if the Clergy do but say they
are? And what if the Clergy in one Land say it is, and in another, say it is
not: Must both be believed? Have wise Bishops no fitter penalty to enforce
their usurping Canons by, than denying Christendom and Salvation? One would
think it should be enough for the Preachers of humility to say, [We are so wise
that he that differs practically from us in that which we call an indifferent
ceremony, and he calls a sinful corruption of baptism, shall be punished as
much as Swearers, Drunkards and Fornicators be, or shall be made a slave with
his Children] without denying them Christianity and Salvation. But the best is,
all cannot keep men out of Heaven that boast of the power of the Keys; and
there is one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy.


L. You make a heinous cruelty of it, as if it were oppression and tyranny to
souls, and they say that they impose nothing on you but things indifferent.


M. Must their indifferent things be enforced with so great penalty as
damnation? If every one cannot love every Dish that they love, or get down
every Pill that they give him, but he be famished therefore, or have his through
at cut wider? I had rather live and die a Chimney-sweeper, or a Channel
cleanser, or a Keeper of Swine, than a Bishop that should put Christ's
Disciples and their seed, whom he commands them to baptize, Mat. 28. 19. from
his Covenant and Church, and specially when themselves make Baptism more
necessary and certainly saving, than it is.


L. But you may venture to baptize such if you will.


M. What, when I have covenanted Assent and Consent to all things in their
Book, and subscribed to use no other form in baptizing; and also must be cast
out for it?


CHAP. XIV. Point XI. Of rejecting from Communion all that dare not kneel in
the act of Receiving.
L. I Hear that you receive the Eucharist Kneeling your self, and take it for
lawful: what then have you against the Canon or Liturgy for this?


M. I am my self for the lawfulness of Organs, Railes, and Coming up to them,
and for the lawfulness of Kneeling when we sing Psalms, or read the Scripture,
or hear the Preacher. But I am not for the lawfulness of hanging or damning men
that herein are not of my mind: Nor for turning unnecessary things, because
they are lawful into conditions, sine quibus non, of Church Communion, and
Engines for Satan to divide Christ's Flock by, and persecute men for fearing
sin. Paul was for the lawfulness of using, or not using, the meats and days
mentioned Romans 14. 1, 2. But he was not for either judging or despising one
another about them, much less for casting men from the Church and Heaven for
them; nor for saying, except ye be Circumcised ye cannot be saved.


L. Nor does the Church make Kneeling in Receiving necessary to Salvation, but
enjoyne it as a decent Ceremony.


M. They that make this Kneeling necessary to Church Communion, and avoiding
Schism, and make Church Communion and avoiding Schism necessary to Salvation,
do make the said Kneeling necessary to Salvation. But so do the Canonists here:
Ergo.

How usually do they apply Christ's words to the Sacrament [Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you] If
Communion herein be not necessary, how come all the dreadful Sermons, and
Volumnes to thunder damnation against those that do but stay away through fear
of unpreparedness, and they must be Excommunicated that Communicate not twice a
year with them; yea though they communicate elsewhere with Nonconformists.


L. Wherein lies the sinfulness of Conformity here?


M. I. In subscribing, Assenting and Consenting to this. II. In practicing it
against Godly Believers.


L. I have heard that 1661. at the Savoy they maintained that the Liturgy did
not bind you to put away them that do not Kneel, and so you might subscribe to
it.


M. This quibble served men's turn that were resolved it should be served. The
case was this: They required us to lay by inconveniences, and name only flat
sins which the Liturgy required; we gave them in a Catalogue of eight. This was
the first, Denying the Lord's Supper to all that durst not receive it Kneeling.
They were hereupon divided among themselves: Dr. Pierson, and Dr. Gunning and
Sparrow who were the Disputants, in policy finding that they should be hard put
to it to justify such rejections devised this evasion, that the Liturgy did
only bid them give it Kneeling, but did not forbid them giving it to others.
Dr. Morley and others were against their opinion, and so they were divided: But
they permitted the Disputers to go on (it being the last day) in the way that
served their present turn. But the case is clear.

1. The Canon forbids them on pain of Suspension to give the Sacrament to any
that Kneel not. And they all take the Oath of Canonical obedience: And though
in Licitis and honestis be added, the terms signify that they are to take the
Canons as Licita and honesta: And these Canons, ipso facto, Excommunicate all
professed Nonconformists.

2. They all subscribe to use the form of administrating Sacraments in the
Common Prayer book, and no other.

3. The Church therefore expounds its own meaning in the Liturgy by the Canon,
that [give it to them Kneeling] signifies give it only to such.

4. If any doubt of it let them try, and their Suspension according to the
Canon will expound it to them.


L. If the practice be sinful in rejecting such, Assenting and Consenting and
Subscribing to do it must be sinful.


M. The sin lies in what I before said about refusing Baptism. 1. It makes
new terms of Church Communion.

2. It contradicts Christ's appointed terms, which require all Christians to
receive each other in Love and Concord: And Paul expressly decideth such cases,
Romans 14, and 15. Receive one another as Christ received us to the Glory of God.
Will Christ that receives them to pardon, grace and endless Glory, own these
Rejecters and Condemners? Or will he not say, In as much as ye did it to one
the least of these my brethren, ye did it to me? And who is he that condemns,
when it is Christ that justifies.

3. They shall answer for depriving Christ's Members of their right, as truly
as if they oppressed Widows, and Orphans, and turned them out of their houses,
and inheritance.

4. They shall answer for Schismatical tearing the Church by their Engines.

5. And for usurping a needless and hurtful dominion over men's faith, and
consciences by their Church Legislation.

6. And for using that office which is made for the edifying and comfort of the
Faithful, to drive conscience and obedience to God out of the world, by making
doubtful, ensnaring impositions, and then persecuting and rendering odious all
that dare not obey them for fear of sin, while they bear with the Rabble that
hate serious godliness, and encourage them by preferring them in their
communion.


L. But what pretense have any against Kneeling?


M. 1. It is not a necessary point of Salvation or communion, and therefore if
they err they are not therefore to be Excommunicate, unless you will
Excommunicate all that have error and sin, that is, your selves, and every
living man.

2. They have the pretense of real fearing that it is a sin to differ in the
Gesture from Christ's administration, thinking that a Table gesture was
intended by him to signify his sacrifice-Feast.

3. They fear breaking the Second commandment, which is against corporal
seeming to worship as Idolaters do though the heart mean better; and so against
symbolizing with Idolaters, and against scandalous hardening them in their sin:
Because Papists are known to kneel to the Bread as unto God and worship it. And
these Papists live among us, and are now hoping to set up their Idolatry.
Though for my part I think that the public Doctrine of the Church, takes off
this argument of Scandal, yet it is such as very Learned and holy men think
valid: as you may see in Mr. Rutherford's Letters, and many others.

4. And ad hom^inem, I see not what the Excommunicators can say for themselves,
while they condemn all of Schism that obey not General Councils, especially the
four first, and that differ from the Universal Churches customs: And yet the
very first Nicene Council, and diverse after forbid all Kneeling in adoration on
any Lord's day in the year, and on any weeks day between Easter and Whitsunday.
And all the Ancients assure us that this was one of the chief ceremonys that
the Church then called Universal agreed in. And it was never put down by any
other General Council, but at Rome grew out of custom by degrees, and that not
till a thousand years after Christ as Dr. Heylin confesses. And shall these
same men that cry up the Church and the Laws of Councils Excommunicate those
that obey them as Schismatics, and pass for the followers of the Church
themselves?

In a word, I dare no more cast godly Christians from Christ's Sacrament, for
fearing least Kneeling in Receiving be a symbolizing with Idolaters contrary to
the Second Commandment, than I durst turn Widows and Orphans out of their
inheritance for not speaking the same language, or wearing the same fashions as
I do.


CHAP. XV. Point XII. Of Consenting to the false Rule to find out Easter Day in
the Liturgy.
M. THE next Point is materially a trifle, but formally so palpable an untruth,
that we cannot deliberately declare that we Assent to it, viz. They tell us in
their Calender truly how to find Easter Day, and they add another Rule to find
it always which is frequently false, as every Almanac will tell you: viz. that
[it is always the first Sunday after the first full Moon, which happens next
after the one and twentieth day of March.]


L. It is true for the most part, though not always.


M* And we will Assent that it is true for the most part, but not always.


L. This is but a mere mistake, and can you scruple Conformity for such a
trifle.


M. Is it lawful deliberately to lie in a trifle? In them it was but an
untruth, for they wrote what they thought had been true. But it would be a
wilful lying in me who know it to be false.


L. But you may in your Subscribing, or Declaring except that which you know
the Authors would have excepted, had they known them to be false.


M. Say you so? Then I may except all the rest which I here except against; For
Truth is so naturally the object of the Intellect, that I may suppose that the
Convocation would have put none of them on us, had they known them to be false.

Do you mean that I may except them in words or writing, or only mentally? If
the first, I have offered them to declare my Assent and Consent to all things
in the Book in which the Authors were not mistaken: But that is refused with
derision and is contrary to the Act of Uniformity, which says, [They shall
declare in these words and no other.] If you mean mentally then a man may
Covenant, or swear any falsehood with a mental exception; and so any (...) may
subscribe, or covenant what you will.


L. But you know those two most knowing men, Grotius (de Iure Beili) and Bishop
Jer. Tailor (Duct. Dubit.) maintain that useful Lying which hurts no one, is no
sin: A man's Life may be saved by a lie.


M. And in my Householders Catechism on the ninth Commandment I have fully
confuted it, to which I refer you^ No man's private commodity or life must be
preferred before the common welfare of mankind: Why do Soldiers hazard, their
lives, and Malefactors lose them, but for the common good and safety? But if
men had leave to lie when it is for their safety, or commodity it would utterly
overthrow all humane converse and Societies, by over-throwing all Trust and
Justice: Rulers and Subjects, Preachers and Hearers, Judges, Jurors, Witnesses,
Traders* Contractors, would all find some reason from their commodity to Lie.
Laws are made chiefly for the common safety and profit, and must not allow a
single persons to the common hurt.


L. I confess the reason is weighty: But most men will but laugh at you, to
suffer ruin rather then to Assent to so harmless a Lie as that is.


M. It is to God's judgment that we stand or fall, who has decreed to cast out
of his Kingdom all Liars, Rev. 21, and 22.


L. It Is a wonder to me that all the Bishops, Doctors, and Church of England
should publish and impose such a mistake, and never a man of them examine it,
and detect it: And yet a greater wonder that the Lords and Bishops and Commons
in Parliament should pass and impose it without examination?


M. Neither of them is any wonder to me, considering who the men were, and in
what circumstances, and what moved them? No more than that they would rather
England were in the case it is in, than to have forborne any of their
impositions, called Things indifferent, or than the King's Declaration of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, should have healed us.

But do you think that such men's Volumns are like to be so infallible in
matters of Faith, Doctrine and Right, who no more examine plain Matters of
fact, as that all the Clergy may boldly declare Assent and Consent to all
contained in, and ^^escribed by their book? And that before they ever see it.
And did not Convocation, Parliament, and the whole Declaring Clergy go one way,
and notably Trust some body, And are we not excusable for trying further? Does
this common belief deserve honor and preferment, and our unbelief of such
things deserve silencing and ruin?


L. I marvail what they say to this, who expound their Assent and Consent as to
the Use: If they Use this Rule we must keep two Easters often, one at a right
time, and another at a wrong.


M. It Is enough to justify themselves, to call Refusers Schismatics, Rogues,
and disobedient to Government, as the poor Protestants are called in France


CHAP. XVI. Point XIII. Of Pronouncing all saved that are Buried, except the
Unbaptized, Excommunicate and Self-murtherers.
L. WHat are the words hear that you dislike?


M. I told you before, [For as much as it has pleased Almighty God to take to
himself the Soul of our dear Brother, here deceased.] and [We give thee thanks
for that it has pleased thee to deliver this our Brother out of the miseries
of this sinful world] and [That we may rest in him as our hope is this our
Brother doth]


L. What harm is in these words? must not charity be used in our judging of all
men's final state.


M. We like all the Office, and these words very well, if used over the Corpse
of capable persons; and if true Discipline in the Church did make a just
Separation of the capable and incapable.


L. Then the fault is not in the Liturgy, but the Government.


M. It only follows that the fault is Primarily in the Governors corruption,
and neglect of Discipline; but it is next also in the Liturgy? For the matter of
fact and right is presupposed to the Declaration of it: And it follows not
that because I may speak well of good men, I may do so of bad. Christ will
condemn those that feed not, visit not, harbor not his Servants, Mat. 25. All
men ought to be his Servants and deserve this. Yet multitudes in Scotland
suffer now, for feeding and harboring rebellious subjects: Suppose they say
now that the fault was not in us that fed them; but in them that were Rebels;
we were bound to feed honest men, and they were bound to be honest, and charity
judges the best. I think this will not save some from the gallows.

I think if the Bishops were but to bury Soldiers killed in fighting against
the King, and at the Grave should pronounce them all good Subjects, it would be
ill taken; much more is it to pronounce them saved.

Charity is no excuse for dangerous error and falsehood. It must not follow a
blind understanding. I am sure that the Clergy in their Sermons and Writings,
condemn abundance whom at the Grave they pronounce saved.


L. But what danger is it to judge too charitably?


M. It has all these dangers. 1. The guilt of speaking falsely to God.

2. The contradicting of God's Word, which says, that no Whoremonger,
Drunkard, Railer, Murderer, shall enter into the Kingdom of God, and that the
impenitent shall perish.

3. The hardening of ungodly men against all fear of God, when they hear that
the same men, that in the Pulpit threaten damnation to them, recant it all in
their Application at the Grave, and pronounce them saved. How could they more
dangerously deceive men, who take that in deeper usually that is said at the
Grave, than in the Pulpit.


L. But some say none of those words signify the persons Salvation, but his
removal hence.


M. Read them; If those do not, none do.


L. But some say, that by [Excommunicate] is meant [Excommunicable] or such as
ought to be Excommunicate, and then what more can you desire?


M. Their saying is a presumptuous contradiction to that which they consent to,
what reason have they for it: Is Excommunicate, and Excommunicable all one? Or
may they put what sense they list on Laws? If they do but tell the Bishops this
much, they will make them know that they are not made Judges of who is
Excommunicable: When I have craved but the alteration of that word, they
answered me with contempt, that so every Priest or Curate should have the power
of damning whom he please. But sure Si^encing our judgment of a man, is not
damning him.

But what place is there for any doubt, when the Book names the three sorts
excepted, and exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis. Yea the express
exposition in the Canon ^8. is [If he shall refuse to Christen the one, or bury
the other (that is, Any brought) except the party deceased were Denounced
Excommunicate, Majori Excommunicatione, for some grievous and notorious Crime,
and no man able to testify of his repentance, he shall be Suspended by the
Bishop of the Diocese from his ministry by the space of three months.] And alas
how many thousand Infidels, Hobbists, Sadducees, Heretics, Adulterers,
Thieves, Perjured, Scorners at godliness, etc. are among us unexcommunicated.
If all in England be saved, except the Unbaptized, Excommunicate, and
Self-murtherers (which, de singulis, one by one must be said of all the rest)
either Scripture and Pulpits are much mistaken, or else we that live among men
are in a dream, and our senses are all deceived.


CHAP. XVII. Point XIV. Of Consenting to Read the Apocrypha.
L. WHat harm is there in reading the Apocrypha?


M. I told you that we scruple not reading most of it in the place of Homilies
or other Books; especially the books called Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus.

But, 1. Many Bishops and Doctors of the Church of England have accused the
books of Tobit of down right lies, and the books of Judith, Bell and Dragon,
etc. as being mere fictions. 2. And when we read these, it is to be done in the
same order as we read the Scripture, by the name of Lessons, which is the Title
given to the Chapters read out of the Old and New Testament. 3. And, if we
could yet read all these, that will not serve unless we declare our Assent,
Consent, and Approbation of the Appointment of them in the book, which we
cannot do.


L. But they are for the most part to be read but on week days, or holy days.


M. The Conforming Clergy Consent and Covenant to the Imposition that requires
them to read the Common Prayer every day in the week, unless they be hindered by
sickness or some urgent cause. And so it is still the public Service.

God's Service is all to be done with holy Reverence, and if the Book of Tobit
and some others be guilty of so many gross falsehoods, as Protestants have and
do still accuse them of, I fear both to use them as Lessons in the place of
God's Word, lest it be profanation, and also to subscribe, or declare my
Approbation of the Calender, and that use, lest I be guilty of the sin of all
the Ministers in England that so use it. And it is dangerous to seem to tell the
people that so many books are God's Word that are not such: For they understand
not the Greek word Apocrypha, and every Reader at least that is not Licensed to
Preach, is forbidden by the Canon to expound even that one word to them.


CHAP. XVIII. Point XV. Of Assenting to Mistranslations, and Subscribing that
they are not contrary to the Word of God.
L. ARE not the Epistles and Gospels used according to the last Translation?


M. Yes, in the new Books they are, but the Psalms are not.


L. What great mistranslations are there?


M. Sometimes a whole Verse or more is left out, and sometimes the Translation
is quite contrary to the Text. As Psalm. 105. 28. [They rebelled against his
word] instead of [They rebelled not against his word] And in the Book (which
this justifies) are many in the Epistles and Gospels; I have cited them at
large elsewhere.


L. How comes there to be so many faults in the old Translation?


M. The work was an excellent good work: But the Authors (it seems for want of
skill in the Hebrew) followed the Septuagint Greek translation, which has
these and many such defects.


L. Sure it is lawful to use and follow the Septuagint, for the Apostles did so
in the New Testament.


M. 1. The Apostles some times use it, and sometimes follow the Hebrew against
it, and sometimes neither. 2. But to Use it is one thing, and to Justify it is
another thing. It was in common use in the time of Christ and his Apostles, and
they used that in speaking to the people, which use made intelligible and
acceptable. And we scruple not using it: But all the works of Man are
imperfect, as Man is: And why must we subscribe that there is nothing in it
contrary to the word of God? When as every mistake in it is contrary to it.


L. It seems then you would not subscribe to the Bible, that there is nothing
in it contrary to the Word of God?


M. I will subscribe to the truth of all that is in the true Copies of the
Original, if there by any such: And I will subscribe that the various Lections
in those Copies that we have, are not the failing of the Holy Ghost, or
Apostles, nor are such as leave us in just doubt of any necessary Truth? And I
will subscribe to the Translation so far as it agrees with the Original. But I
will not subscribe that any Translation is perfect or faultless* or to this or
that Hebrew or Greek Copy, as if in every word or Lection it certainly agreed
with the Autographs. And why should men make snares for the Church, by imposing
Professions, that any mere man's works are perfect, when all mortal men are
confessedly imperfect? Is it not enough peaceable to use them, and to profess
that all the word of God is infallible Truth?


L. But I cannot think that an Approbation of all the Translations is intended
in your Assent and Consent.


M. Are they no part of that which is contained in the Book, and prescribed by
it? Or could not the Parliament speak sense.


Chap. XIX. Point XVI. Of Consenting to reject all from Communion, who desire
not our Episcopal Confirmation.
L. ME thinks you that have written a Book for Confirmation should not scruple
consenting to this.


M. I told you that I am so far from scrupling the true use of Confirmation,
that I think it is the want of it that is the greatest corruption of the Church
of any outward thing that I remember. But you must note, 1. That it is the
English way of Confirmation that we speak of. 2. And that it is not the thing
it self, but the denying men Church Communion that neither have it, nor desire
it, which we here dissent from.


L. What mislike you in the English way of Confirmation?


M. I must first tell you how the case stands in matter of fact: 1. When Christ
sent forth Preachers, he endued them, not all, with equal Gifts and Power: Though
most had some extraordinary Gifts and Inspiration, it was made, though not proper
to the Apostles, yet for the most part their privileged above all others, that
the Holy Ghost was given to those on whom they laid hands, for miraculous acts;
especially sudden speaking of Tongues not learnt, and Prophesying; though the
gift of Sanctification necessary to Salvation was given to all true Believers,
by whomsoever converted.

2. When the Apostles were dead, and these miraculous Insprirations grew rare
first, and then ceased (unless in some very rare instance) yet the ordinary
Pastors continued the Custom after Baptism, to lay on their hands as for the
giving of the Holy Ghost. As they did also the Ceremony of Anointing the Sick,
which had been used for miraculous Cures.

3. The dead Ceremonies of laying on of hands for the Holy Ghost, and of
Anointing, being used without the Power and former Effects, somewhat else must
be though on to keep up their reputation. And as to that now in question, first
they added more to the Ceremony of it, and Anointed the Person with Oil, and
made the sign of the Cross on him, thereby to signify his being Anointed with
the Holy Ghost, and fortified thereby to follow a Crucified Christ through
Sufferings. And when it was seen that the Holy Ghost was not thereby given for
Miracles, they thought that he was given in a double degree for Corroboration:
And some thought that he was not given at all in Baptism, (that did but wash
away guilt) but by Confirmation after.

4. Hereby Confirmation got the name of a Sacrament (as Anointing the Sick also
did) and was used presently after Baptism for the most part; and the Ceremonies
of it were made more pompous, and it was appropriated to the Bishop, for the
most part; or if Presbyters did it, they must use no Ointment to Anoint and
Cross them with, but what the Bishop made by mixture, and blessed, to make it
holy: And because he could not go himself to the Sick, the Presbyters must
fetch all their Ointment for this also, ready made and hallowed from the Bishop.

5. When Infants were Baptized, they thus presently Anointed them also, and
called it their Chrysm and Confirmation, till then he was taken but for a half
or imperfect Christian, that was only Baptized and not Confirmed.

6. Popery having turned most of Christ Ordinances into a dead Image, used
these called Sacraments, to keep up a Ceremonious show of Religion, and to keep
up the power of Bishops in that formal way.

7. When Reformation prevailed, the Papists seven Sacraments were examined; and
only Baptism and the Lords Supper found to be Christ's Sacraments of the
Covenant of Grace: Ordination to be the Ministerial Sacrament of Orders, or
Consecration to that Office. Matrimony to be a common Domestic Sacrament of
Marriage: Confirmation and Extreme Unction, to be abusive imitations of Ancient
Miraculous Acts: And Penance to be some expressions of Repentance made more
necessary than indeed they were, and Arbitrarily imposed by man's invention to
keep up the Dominion of Ambitious Priests over the Souls of deluded men: Though
at first only introduced by mere Direction of Ministers to men of troubled
Conscience, showing what restitution and reparations of the hurt they had done
by sin were necessary, and what expression of their Repentance was most fit.

8. Hereupon the Reformers cast away the Sacraments of Penance and Extreme
Unction, and reduced the four first to their Primitive State and Use: and the
abused way of Confirmation they cast off, but some desired to make an advantage
of the name, for another end and duty of great moment, which had been neglected
to the great corruption of the Church. And the Church of England attempted to
do this, reserving as much of the Ancient Form as possibly they could.

The Adult were of old Baptized before Infants, and never without a most solemn
personal Profession of Faith and Repentance, and absolute dedication to Christ.
And that this might be done with the greatest weight and resolution they were
usually taught as Catechumens till they came to understanding and resolution,
before they were admitted to Baptism. Their Infants some brought to Baptism,
and some delayed till they came to Age, all being left at liberty, and neither
Adult nor Infant driven to Baptism, nor accepted till it was desired. But as
Prelacy grew up to Dominion, all were forced to be Baptized in Infancy; and at
last such growing up in ignorance, were all taken for Christians, while few
knew what Christianity was, or what it was to be Baptized, or what was there
promised on their part, or on Christ's. And when these came to have Children
they were Baptized and bred up as their Parents were, and Christianty for the
most part turned into mere Name and Ceremony, the Persons being mostly ignorant
of its Essentials.

This corruption of the Church seemed to many to come only from Infant Baptism;
whereupon they turned Anabaptists, and taught that men should not be Baptized
till they seriously and solemnly professed their own Faith and Repentance.

But wiser men saw that we must not deny Infants their Church state and right
because of men's abuse, and their neglect of other Duties: Baptism is one thing,
and Personal Confession and Covenanting is another. It is the Omission of these
at Age, that has corrupted the Church, and not Infant Baptism, which enters
them but into a Church state suitable to their infancy. They need not repeat
Baptism which they had; but to manifest actual Faith and Repentance which in
Infancy they had not. That which should be done, is to make their Transition
into the Communion of Adult Christians to be a serious, solemn work, and not a
delusory Ceremony. That those Baptized in Infancy may learn what they did, and
what Christianity is, as to our Faith, Duty and Hopes: And when they come to
true resolution, to own the Baptismal Vow, and as solemnly renew it themselves,
as others made it for them.

The English Reformers therefore did retain the Ceremony of Imposition of
Hands, and the appropriation of it to the Bishop, and the name of Confirmation,
and stretched the use of the Sign (Imposition of Hands) to the utmost that they
durst, but instead of applying it to Infants they made it the owning of the
Baptismal Covenant, and appointed Catechizing to go before it, and call for a
solemn performance of it. And were it used as a rational sober owning of the
Baptismal Covenant indeed in an understanding, serious manner, for transition
into the State of Adult Communicants, it would be the greatest means of a true
Reformation, and of Union with the parties that now differ about Church order,
that can be used.

Diverse of the highest Episcopal Divines write as earnestly for this as any of
us: Especially Mr. Elderfield and Dr. Hammond, and yet were it to prevent our
continued division, and our ruin, there is no hope of obtaining it.


L. Why, what hinders if all sides desire it?


M. It is desired as Holiness is desired; seriously by the serious; reservedly,
and by halves by the half Christian, and only the Name, Image and Ceremony by
the gross Hypocrite, who hates it at the Heart, because it is above him, and
against his carnal mind and interest.

And indeed it is here made impossible to be done any otherwise ordinarily than
as a Ceremony. For 1. The Diocesses are so vast that the Bishop cannot do this
and other his Offices for the hundredth part of his undertaken Flock. Suppose
this Diocese have but five or six hundred thousand Souls (for when an hundred
thousand died the last Plague, I hope it was not above the ^ixth part:) Do you
think that the Bishop is able (did he work as hard as any Nonconformist) to
confirm six hundred thousand Persons, or the twentieth part of them, or the
hundredth, in that serious manner as belongs to the binding of a Soul to Christ
in so solemn a Covenant.

It becomes me not to inquire whether Bishops be men that are for so much
seriousness in Christianity themselves, and so much labor to attain it: Some
are far better than others: You know them as well as I. But I must say 1. That
as far as I can learn there is not one of an hundred confirmed at all.

2. All the thousands that are unconfirmed live in the Parishes as reputed
Christians, and may come to the Sacrament when they will.

3. I never knew one Minister of all that Covenanted it, to keep one man from
the Sacrament for not being Confirmed, or not being desirous of it; nor one
Neighbor that ever was examined on this Point, whether he were Confirmed, or
were ready and desired it.

4. Some few elder Votaries to the Bishops perhaps may be serious in it; but
what a mere running Ceremony it is usually made, I need not tell you. I have
formerly said, that I was at 15 years of Age Confirmed my self, by Bishop
Morton (one of the Learned and best Bishops that ever I knew) and we ran
thither from School, without the Minister's knowledge, or one word from our
Master, to tell us what Confirmation is; and in a Church yard in the Pathway,
as the Bishop past by, we kneeled down, and laying his Hands on every Boys
Head, he said a few words, I knew not what; nor did any one of my
School-fellows, as far as I could perceive, know what he said; nor know what
Confirmation is, any more than to have the Bishop's Blessing: nor were we asked
by him, or any, whether we stood to our Baptismal Covenant, save only by saying
by rote the Catechism to our Master: nor did I see any one make any more than a
Ceremony of it.

When the Bishops were down, I saw it made a serious Work by diverse Ministers,
who instructed Young Men till they found them seriously resolved for Christ,
and then taking the best of Confirmation and Penitence, caused them publicly
before the Congregation to profess their Faith and Repentance, and to renew the
Covenant they made in Baptism to Christ. And were it made the work of Godly
Ministers to do it, or to prepare Men personally for it, and not make it a Game
for Boys, much good might be done by it.


L. Well, What have you against it besides Abuse, which no body desires you to
subscribe to.


M. Were I a public Minister, I should be glad of that Rubric to enable me to
keep away the grossly Ignorant, which I know no other Clause that enableth me to
do: But I durst not use it, to turn from Communion all Godly Persons whom it
excludes; nor can I consent so to do.


L. What can make Godly Persons scruple it as sinful?


M. Many things: 1. The words make it seem to some to be yet made a Sacrament,
which are [ Upon whom after the example of thy holy Apostles, we have now laid
our hands to certify them by this sign of thy favor and gracious goodness
toward them.] Here is an outward visible sign of an inward and spiritual Grace
given to them, said to be done in imitation of Christ's Apostles, as a means
whereby they receive the same, and a ^ ledge to assure them thereof; (as the
Collects with it show) which is the Catechisms Definition of a Sacrament.

2. They that are against our Diocesan sort of Prelacy, dare not seem to own
it, by coming to them for Confirmation, appropriated to them.

3. Those that think that a great and holy Duty is made a mere Mockery to
delude Souls, and corrupt the Church (while every one in England that will but
take this Ceremony, is pronounced to God in Prayer to be [Regenerate by the
Holy Ghost, and all their Sins forgiven them;] these dare not join themselves
with the Prophaners in their delusory way.

Be these Scruples just or unjust, while the same Persons are willing to own
their own Baptismal Covenant, understandingly and seriously before the Church
and their own Pastors, and to know those that labor among them, and are over
them in the Lord, and esteem them in Love for their Works sake, and to be at
Peace among themselves, I dare not for scrupling this Diocesan Ceremony, cast
them from the Communion of the Church of Christ. And therefore I dare not
Approve of the Order that requires it, nor Assent and Consent to it, nor
Subscribe that it is not contrary to the Word of God.


Chap. XX. Point XVII. Of Consenting to all the Ornaments of Church and
Ministers that were in use in the Second year of King Edw. 6.
L. What have you against this?


M. The words are, [That such Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers
thereof at all times of their Ministration, shall be retained in use as were in
this Church of England by the Authority of Parliament in the Second year of
King Edw. 6.]

Against this we have these Exceptions.

1. We know not what was then in use, and therefore cannot consent to we know
not what.

2. We are told that the Albe, and many other Ornaments were then in use that
are since put down, and we must not consent to restore them, without more
reason than we hear. And the Canon enumerating the Ornaments now, we suppose
the addition of all those will Contradict it.

3. We meet with few Conformists that know what was then in use. And we see
that all those that Subscribe or Consent to this, yet use them not. And we will
not run for Company into a solemn Covenant-Consent, to the use of those things
that we see no body use. The second year of King Edw. 6. was the minority of
the Reformation, and before we consent to make it our pattern, we must know
what it was, and whether no Act of Parliament have since reversed that which
then was used?


Chap. XXI. Point XVIII. Of giving an Account to the Ordinary of all that we
keep from the Sacrament, that he may Proceed against them according to the
Canons.
L. Why cannot you Approve of, and Consent to this?


M. For many and great Reasons. 1. From the Ordinary. 2. From our Selves and
our Ministry. 3. From the People. 4. From the Church. 5. From the Nature of the
Matter.


L. I. What have you against it from the Ordinary.


M. I told you before that, 1. Some of the Ordinaries are Laymen, sitting in
Corners to Decree Excommunications and Absolutions, proper to the Clergy. And
we ought not to consent to the guilt of this.

2. Other Ordinaries are single Presbyters that have no Power of the Keys from
Christ over their Brethren, and over a multitude of Churches.

3. Other of the Ordinaries are Diocesans over Hundreds of Churches that have
no Bishops of their own under these. And we ought not to own any of all these.


L. II. What Reasons have you from your selves?


M. If we should accuse to the Ordinaries all that we ought to keep away, it
will utterly destroy our Ministry. 1. We are bound to keep away all that desire
not Episcopal Confirmation. 2. All Ignorant Persons that are unready to be
Confirmed. 3. All Atheists, Infidels, Heretics, scandalous Sinners, and that
live in malice to others (much more to the generality of Godly Men.) 4. All the
Nonconformists whom they call Schismatics, that Kneel not, etc. And in a
Parish of 30000 or 40000 in London, it is well if of all these sorts there be
not many Thousands. And 2. The Ordinaries Courts are full of other Work: And in
the Country they are often far from most Ministers. 3. Ministers have usually
much more Work than they can do at home, and less Money than they need: And the
Prosecution of all these, and bringing up Witnesses, will take up all their
time, and leave them none for their Studies, or many other Offices at home: And
it will undo them in their Estates. 4. It will make the People so much to hate
them, that their Preaching will do little good. 5. And when they know all this,
none of the Ministers will practice it, as Experience tells us; and so they
will all live in the breach of the Covenant which they made; and when to get a
living they have falsely professed Consent to all this Accusation and
Prosecution, Self-love will not suffer them to do what they consented to.


L. III. What are your Reasons against it from the People.


M. 1. The Multitude that makes it unpracticable. 2. The greatness of some of
them that will ruin the Ministers. 3. But especially because it will cross the
just end of our Ministry, and make them incapable of receiving any Profit by
us: And our Power is given us for their Edification, and not for their
Destruction: This will but harden them against our Doctrine.


L. Do not you by this Condemn your selves that desire a stricter Discipline,
which would offend them more.


M. No; for 1. We would not turn our Churches into Prisons, nor bring in any
under our Discipline, but consenting Volunteers.

2. We would have no Laymen, or forced Ordinaries to do this, but Pastors of
their own choice, whom they well know.

3. We would have nothing done against any sinner Magisterially and forcibly by
the abuse of the Keys; but only humble Ministerial convincing them by Gods word
of sin, and of Gods wrath, and praying for their repentance, and meek and
patient warning them, and waiting till they prove obstinately impenitent: And
then only an Exclusion of them declaratively from that Communion from which
they exclude themselves, without any force on their Goods or Persons.


L. IV. What are your reasons from the Church?


M. 1. We ought not to consent to so great a corruption of its Discipline. 2.
Nor to a course that will render it odious to men. 3. And deprive it so much of
the true work of a faithful Ministry.


L. 5. What mean you by your reasons from the matter?


M. The ordinary proceeding according to the Canons must cast out a multitude
of truly godly Christians; and then they must be further prosecuted and ruined;
as we shall see anon under the particulars. And we cannot Covenant and Consent
to be prosecutors of such men, before such Judges, for such an end, and to such
direful Effects.


Chap. XXII. Point XIX. Of Publishing the Lay-Chancellors Excommunications and
Absolutions according to the Canons.
L. HOw are you bound to publish their Excommunications?


M. 1. By our Ordination-Covenant to obey the Ordinary. 2. By the Oath of
Canonical Obedience. 3. By this assent and consent to the words last mentioned,
to accuse them, that the Ordinary may proceed against them according to the
Canon. 4. By constant custom: If we do it not, we shall be suspended or cast
our.


L. But the Oath of Canonical Obedience is but in licitis and honestis.


M. I told you before, it implies that all that is Canonical is licitum and
honestum. And they will not allow us to be Judges, but will suspend us if we
refuse their commands as unlawful and dishonest. And the Canon it self ipso
facto Excommunicateth all that say any of their Governing Offices are contrary
to the Word of God, or that the Canons bind not Dissenters. And so far is the
Church from taking this for unlawful or dishonest, as that it expressly
commands it in these words, Can. 65.

[ All Ordinaries shall in their several Jurisdictions carefully see and give
order, that as well those who for obstinate refusing to frequent Divine Service
Established by public Authority within this Realm of England, as those also
(ESPECIALLY OF THE BETTER SORT and Condition) who for notorious contumacy, or
other notable crimes stand lawfully Excommunicated -- be every six Months
ensuing, as well in the Parish Church as in the Cathedral, by the Minister
openly in time of Divine Service, upon some Sunday denounced and declared
Excommunicate, that others may thereby be admonished to refrain their Company,
-- and excited the rather to procure out a Writ de Excommunicato capiendo;] so
that no man can be a Minister that will not practice it.


L. And what have you against the practice of it?


M. 1. To be the Agent of Laymens Excommunicating. 2. And the Instruments of
godly men's Excommunications and Ruins. You may as well ask us why we dare not
oppress and destroy men without cause; the Publishers cannot be Innocent.


Chap. XXIII. Point XX. Of Publishing Excommunications according to the 4th
Canon.
M. THE Fourth Canon says, [ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that the Form of
Gods Worship in the Church of England Established by Law, and contained in the
Book of Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, -- contains ANY THING
in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures, let him be Excommunicated ipso
facto, and not restored but by the Bishop of the place, or Archbishop, after
his Repentance, and public Revocation of such his wicked Error.] And when this
Excommunication is sent from the Ordinary to the Minister, you heard he must
publish it twice a year.


L. And what have you against this?


M. Do I need to tell you? 1. Judge by this with what Face the Prelates call us
Puritanes or Catharists, as if we pretended to perfection, and to be without
sin. And whether it be not they that are far liker to the Catharists. We
confess that the best of our Prayers, Preaching or Works has somewhat in them
repugnant to the Word of God: For Gods Law is perfect, and every sin in matter,
or manner, or end, or degree, is repugnant to it. Far be it from us
Pharisaically to justify any Book that ever we write as if we had no sin in
it. But these men that call themselves the Church of England, do not only
justify a large Volume of Forms, Orders, Rubricks and Kalenders, etc. but also
force all other men to justify it all as sinless; and he shall be no Minister
that will not do it, nor a Christian Member of the Church that denies it: As
if the perfection of their works were an Article of the Creed, and necessary to
Salvation to be believed. Is not this Puritanism, Pharisaical, and
Justification of Works?

2. Judge by all that I have in this Book cited, whether there be nothing at
all in their Books that is repugnant to the Word of God. If I have made it past
all modest denial, then what a dreadful thing is this Renunciation of
Repentance? when Repentance is the condition of the pardon of all our sin, even
that which cleaves to our Worship of God. But they that tell the World that
their Works have no sin, yea and force all the Kingdom to stand to that
justification, do in a very high degree renounce Repentance: Yea they not only
forbid all men to call them to repent, or to amend any sin that is in their
Book, but Excommunicate them as wicked that do it.

3. I told you before, that this Excommunicating ipso facto, is in it self, a
profane subversion of the very nature of true Excommunication, which supposes
due means to convince the Person that his words or deeds are sin, and that of
an intolerable degree, and that he be heard speak for himself, and be
admonished and earnestly persuaded to repent; and not Excommunicated till after
all this he continue impenitent. But here men are Excommunicated for saying
that there is somewhat faulty in men's works, and that before ever they are
heard speak for themselves, or ever told of their sin, or called to repent: I
before referred you to what Spalatensis de Rep. Eccles. has written to prove
the great sinfulness of such Excommunicating. Bishop Ier. Tailor writing
against it, yet feigneth this excuse, that it must be understood but of the
Minor Excommunication. But Excommunication it is; and I do not think that they
can make any good sense of their distinction of Major and Minor
Excommunication; unless it be that the Major declares men to be no Christians,
and the Minor only to be scandalous Christians, not cut off from the Catholic
Church, but only for the present suspended from being owned, while they are
under patient trial whether they will prove impenitent or not, that shame may
drive them to Repentance. But this Suspension is properly called
Excommunication. But both of them require a just trial.

4. It is a heinous injury and injustice to Excommunicate and Ruin men for
Truth and Duty. He that robs them by the Highway, does but take their
Money, and does not also accuse them falsely, and make their duty to be their
sin. Doubtless he that will take all that I have because I do my duty to God in
Praying or Preaching, does me more wrong than he that will take all without
accusing me.

5. It is a public turning Christ's Ordinance against himself, and serving
Satan by it, to make faithful Christians odious in the World, as unworthy to
live in humane Society, out of Jayls, if they do but exhort others to repent.
If a man but know and detect the least sin in their Books of Service, he must
be condemned of wicked Error, and Drunkards, and Whore-mongers; and Perjured
Rogues, do seem to be no worse than he.

6. If it were an Error to say that their Book is not faultless, yet it can
never be proved an Error of that magnitude and wickedness as to deserve
Excommunication ipso facto: For all men on Earth have Errors worse than that;
and so by proportion they virutally or consequentially Excommunicate all men.


L. But all this is their fault, and not yours.


M. It Is mine if I publish their Excommunication.


L. If an Innocent Man be hanged, the Hangman is Innocent: He does but his
Office.


M. Whatever he may be in Cases unknown to him, and which he was not bound to
know, I will not believe you in a known or knowable Case. If I had been
commanded to Crucify Christ, to Stone Stephen, to burn the Martyrs; I do not
believe that I could have done it without the guilt of Murder. Else you may
make a Man's command to Justify the Execution of any Murder or Injustice in
the World.


L. But you may shift off such wicked Excommunications, and leave the
Publishing them to your Curate.


M. 1. I may not draw another into such heinous Guilt, nor connive at his doing
it in my Charge.

2. There are but few Country Ministers that have Curates.

3. If I do it not, I am guilty of it if I declare my Consent to Accuse all
such within fourteen days, that the Ordinary may do it; and to Covenant and
Swear Canonical Obedience to him.

4. What can be more pernicious to the Church of God, than to cast good Men out
of it, and dismember Christ's Body, and lay those in Jayls as unsufferable
wicked Men, whom Christ takes for his Members whom he will save; and all this
for telling Prelates that their Book is faulty, and desiring any amendment of
their work: while Swarms of flagitious Men are endured, and by this encouraged
to scorn at Conscience and fear of Sinning, and to take their wicked lives to
be better than the Godly Conversation of those that are used far worse than
they. Thus Christ foretold his Apostles, that they should be cast out of the
Synagogues. But as he found and saved the healed Man, Ioh. 9. whom the
Pharisees had cast out; so he will own and gather his Flock, and take their
wrong as done to him.


Chap. XXIV. Point XXI. Of Publishing Excommunications according to the Fifth
Canon, about the Articles.
L. WHat is the Fifth Canon, and its Excommunication?


M. [Whosoever shall affirm that Any of the 39 Articles agreed on -- 1562. are
in any part Superstitious or Erroneous, or such as he may not with a good
Conscience subscribe unto, let him be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not
restored but only by the Archbishop after his Repentance and public
Revocation of such his wicked Errors.


L. I hope you that agree with the Church in Doctrine, have nothing against
Publishing such an Excommunication.


M. I Subscribe to the Doctrinal Articles as true, because I judge of them by
what I take to be the Author's meaning: But 1. The words in the obvious sense,
are diverse of them liable to Exceptions. 2. And some of them about Traditions,
Ceremonies, etc. are of small moment and dubious. 3. And every word that is
true, is not an Article of the Creed, nor necessary to Church Communion; so
that all Men must be cast out of the Church that dissent from it. And this
Excommunication extends to Laymen (who are not bound to know as much as
Ministers.


L. What is therein the Articles that any good Man can scruple?


M. Article 3. Learned Men doubt of Christ's going down into Hell.

Art. 4. That Christ's Body in Heaven has Flesh and Bones, is contrary to two
General Councils, that of Nice?. and that before it at Constable. which it
confuteth: And in this they agree.

Art. 8. That Athanasius's Creed ought to be omnino recipiendum and credendum,
wholly received and believed: when the Damning part is scrupled by many
Conformists.

Art. 9. Bishop Jeremy Tailor was against that of Original Sin.

Art. 10 Many, called Arminians, are against that [No Power to do good Works.]

Art. 11. Many Conformists are against the word [We are accounted Righteous
before God only for the merit of Christ] because a subordinate Righteousness is
mentioned many Score or Hundred times in Scripture.

Art. 12. Many think that good Works spring not necessarily from Faith, but
freely.

Art. 13. Many think that merit of Congruity may be held, and that Men by
natural or antecedent Works, may be made meet to receive Grace; which Dr.
Hammond in his Annotations seems much to insist on, under the Name of Probity.

Art. 14. The said Dr. Hammond, and many other, write for good Works over and
above God's Commandments, as only counseled by God, and voluntarily done,
which this Article calls Arrogance and Impiety; And many follow Dr. Hammond,
and yet subscribe this.

Art. 15. Is denied by them, that think Infants sinless when Baptized.

Art. 16. Many deny falling from Grace given.

Art. 17. Dr. Hammond, and his Followers, seem to deny the absolute Election
here described.

Art. 18. Many good Men think some are saved that live up to the Light of
Nature; and yet this Article curses them that say so.

Art. 19. The Description of the Visible Church greatly disagreeth from that
now given by many great Churchmen, not at all mentioning the Bishops or their
Government in it. And some deny that the Church of Rome has Erred De Fide.

Art. 20. The Churches Power to decree Ceremonies, as not limited here, is
doubted of by good Christians. And they see not how that is not made necessary
to Salvation (contrary to this Article) which is made necessary to avoid
Excommunication as for wicked Error.

Art. 21. Too many deny what is said here against gathering Councils witout the
Will of Princes, and that Councils may (...) in things pertaining to God, etc.

Art. 23. Seems defective about calling Ministers to them that are for
uninterrupted Canonical Succession, etc.

Art. 25. Contrary to this Article, some great Churchmen think that
Confirmation, at least, is a Gospel Sacrament, and that it has a visible sign
ordained by God.

I will proceed no further herein. By this it is evident, that many Subscribers
are great Nonconformists, and if they speak their Minds, are Excommunicated
ipso facto.


L. You make our Articles of Religion a doubtful thing; what certainty then is
there of the Protestant Religion?


M. The Protestant Religion is the Holy Scriptures, older than our Form, called
the 39 Articles; which are a laudable sound account how we understand the
Scriptures, but not of such perfection, that all Men must be Excommunicate that
say any word in them is faulty.


Chap. XXV. Point XXII. Of Publishing the Sixth Canons Excommunications.
L. WHat is the Sixth Canons Excommuication?


M. Whosoever shall affirm, that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England by Law Established, are wicked, Antichristian, or Superstitious, or
such as being commanded by lawful Authority, Men who are Zealously and Godly
affected, may not with any good Conscience approve them, use them, or, as
occasion requires, subscribe unto them; Let him be Excommunicate ipso facto,
and not restored till he repent, and publicly revoke such his wicked Errors.


L. I confess it sounds harshly to lay so great stress on every Ceremony of the
Church, as to Excommunicate every one that Calls any one of them unlawful.
What could be said more of the Ten Commandments, or the Creed? If it be a
wicked Error to mistake about a Ceremony, or to account a Cope or a Pair of
Organs unlawful, the Lord have Mercy on us, what a Case are we all in by wicked
Errors! What shall my poor Country Neighbors and Tenants do that few of them
understand one half the Creed?


M. Yet 1. The Articles and our Ordination-Vow oblige us to believe and teach
that nothing is necessary to Salvation, but what is contained in the Scripture,
or certainly proved by it. And that General Councils, and all Men are fallible:
And sure they are very near to Infallibility, who are so Infallible about every
Rite and Ceremony, that they dare bind all the Land to justify, or notblame
them, on pain of ipso facto Excommunication.

2. Yet Grotius, and Bishop Tailor, that justify some Lying, are Men that
deserve Praise, with them (and in truth): And Oh! how many Thousands live
quietly in their Communion, who err in greater Matters than a Ceremony?

3. And judge by what I have said of the Symbolical Crossing in Baptism,
Godfathers, etc. whether it be a wicked Error deserving Excommunication and
Ruin, to charge any one of their Rites with Sin.

4. Was it not enough to cast us out of Ministry and Maintenance for blaming a
Ceremony, but they must cast us out of the Church? what is Pharisaical if this
be not?


Chap. XXV. Point XXIII. Of Publishing the Seventh Canons Excommunications.
M. THe Seventh Canon is [ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that the Government
of the Church of England, under His Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans,
Archdeacons, and THE REST THAT BEAR OFFICE in the same, is Antichristian, or
repugnant to the Word of God; Let him be Excommunicate ipso facto, and so
continue till he repent and publicly revoke such his wicked Errors.


L. Mark here that [And] connexeth all these Offices, it is not [OR]
disjunctively: So that you fall not under this Canon if you condemn every
Church Office save one, if you condemn not all.


M. That Is a mere violent unjust exposition. The Government is the thing named
as consisting of many Offices, as a Body of many Members, or a Chain of many
Links; as we say, Bonum est ex Causis integris. And he that wounds any one
Member, wounds the Man; and he that breaks one Link, breaks the Chain: And
he that accuses any one part of the Government, accuses the Government
thereby: And there is no doubt in the World but they so intended that made this
Canon.


L. And what have you against your Obedience to this.


M. You may easily know what, by what is already said; 1. I have fully proved
as aforesaid in my Treatise of Episcopacy, that if Episcopacy were never so
certainly of Divine Institution, this Form of Diocesan Prelacy deposes quantum
in se, the old Church Form, the old Episcopacy, the old Presbytery, and almost
all true Discipline, and in stead of each, sets up that which is repugnant to
the Word of God. And must we all confederate to maintain this Church
Corruption; and all agree to renounce Reformation, or any Conviction tending to
Repentance?

2. I have told you what it is for Laymen and Courts to arrogate the Decretive
Power of the Church Keys, and for single Priests and Officials to rule all the
Clergy and People as under them; And for our Prelate to undertake to be the
sole Bishop over many Hundred Clergy; And then to Govern per alios, in a
secular manner, even by Laymen, that do that in his Name which he knows not
of, and this in order to Gaols and Ruin. If all this be agreeable to God's
Word, what is contrary to it?

3. I have told you what it is to make every Church Officer so necessary, as
that it should be Excommunication to say Any one of them is sinful, when as
Learned good Men as most the World has, have written to prove almost all of
them sinful corrupt Inventions of Arrogance; and that it is far worse for Men to
presume to make new Forms and Offices of Church Government, than new Ceremonies.

4. The Parliament of England condemned the Oath called the and caetera Oath in
the Canon of 1640. And the late long Parliament of 1662. never restored it, nor
any since. And was it not formed according to this Canon? What Is [etc.] but
[And the rest that bear Office therein] (reliquos ad ejusdem gubernaculum
constitutos) For my part, though I have often read over Cousins Tables, and the
Canons, I do not yet know and remember all the Church Governing Courts and
Offices? How many there be besides the Bishop, the Chancellors Court, the
Arches, the Prerogative Court, the Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials,
Surrogates, I know not. And are every one of these become as necessary to be
taken for lawful as the twelve Apostles, or the Articles of our Creed. For my
part I am far from thinking that those Bishops and Doctors should be
Excommunicated or Damned, who by Faction are drawn to deny the Ministry and
Churches that have not Prelatical Ordination and Government; and shall all be
condemned that think as ill of Civilians Excommunicatings?

5. I have told you what it is for every Lord, Knight and Gentleman that does
but say, that any of these Church Governing Offices are against the Word of
God, to be ipso facto an Excommunicate man. And for the people to be put to
question whether they may choose them for Parliament men? and whether they may
sit in Parliament while Excommunicate?


L. This Canon with the three or four adjoining make me begin to think hardlier
of the Canoneers than I thought I should ever have done, as to their honesty.


M. I would not have you think too hardly of them; but only to think truly of
Nonconformity.


Chap. XXVII. Point XXIV. Of Publishing the 8th Canons Excommunications.
L. What is the Eighth Canon and its Excommunication?


M. Whoever shall hereafter affirm or teach that the Form and Manner of Making
and Consecrating Bishops, Priests or Deacons contains ANY THING in it that is
repugnant to the Word of God, -- Let them be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not
to be restored until he repent, and publicly revoke such his wicked Errors.


L. What have you against the Execution of this?


M. A great deal. In sum, it is unrighteous, oppressing and dividing, to cast
out all Persons from the Church of Christ, who think that nothing is faulty in
the Book of Ordination, or in their Principles or Practice there expressed: And
we dare not curse those that Christ does bless; should we do this for a
Benefice, in what should we differ from the sin of Balaam, who loved the wages
of unrighteousness? whose iniquity and madness his Ass rebuked, says St.
Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 15. Yea, shall we not be far worse than he, that for an House
full of Silver and Gold could not go beyond the Word of the Lord, and did not
curse but bless Gods people? And it is not proud malignant Tongues reviling
Gods Servants, and calling their Opinions wicked Errors that will make Christ
disown his Members, or will warrant Balaam or us to curse them. O how unlike is
this to the Spirit and Ministry of Christ! for Prelates and Priests to curse,
and cast out the Children of God, for saying that they go against his Law.


L. But what is amiss in the Book of Ordination?


M. I am anon to tell you that. But if there were nothing amiss in it, yet the
belief of its innocence is not necessary to Salvation.


L. But if every man have leave to accuse the Orders of the Church, what Order
can be maintained?


M. 1. Leave modestly, to express dissent in a doubtful case may stand with
Order. 2. If men do it disorderly, there be other Penalties besides ipso facto
Excommunication: Every breach of the peace is not Rebellion, nor punished with
Death.

But I Will tell you briefly what may occasion good men to say that their
Ordinations are sinful.

1. In that they thereby obtrude Pastors on the Churches upon the bare choice
of a Patron, without or against the peoples wills.

2. In that they professedly ordain such as their Canon forbids to Preach or
Expound any Doctrine.

3. In that they determine that Bishops, Priests and Deacons are three distinct
Orders, which yet is an undetermined Controversy among even the Learned
Papists. And must we damn, and cut off men for that which the very Papists
leave at liberty?

4. In that they ordain men to an Office which Scripture makes no mention of.
Dr. Hammond says, that it cannot be proved that there were any Presbyters
subject to Bishops in Scripture times, nor any but Bishops: None that had not
power of Ordination and the Keys; nor any Bishops of a multitude of Churches
and Presbyters, both which are here ordained.

5. In that they Swear Obedience to Archbishops and their Sees; and make
Priests Covenant Obedience to their Ordinaries, as aforesaid.

If a godly man do as Bucer did to King Edward the Sixth, as you may see in his
Scripta Anglic. and desire some of these faults to be amended, does he deserve
to be cast out as an impenitent wicked man for this? when they that will say,
all is well that the Bishops do, may live quietly in open vice or ungodliness.
As Dr. Sloughton says, If you strike a Schismatic, and Christ find a Saint
lie bleeding, and you be to answer for it, I would not be in your case for all
your wealth. If you must kill a Fly on the Forehead of a Child of God with a
Beetle, or a Butchers Axe, you shall not use my hand to give the blow. If
Chrysostom would rather have his hand cut off than give the Sacrament to a
wicked man, though a Prince; I will rather have mine cut off than reject a Saint,
or my Tongue cut out than curse Christ's Members, lest he say I cursed him in
them.


Chap. XXVIII. Point XXV. Of Publishing the Excommunications of Canon 9th,
10th, 11th. Of such as call Dissenters a Church.
M. THese Canons made against Schismatics and Conventicles do Excommunicate
all that say such are true Churches that have groaned under the burden of
grievances, etc. And is this a just cause of Excommunication?

I wish they had no such burden laid on them to make them groan. But suppose
them quite mistaken; if a weak mistaken Christian may be a true Christian, though
faulty, why may not a mistaken Congregation be a true Church though faulty? I
hope no man of Protestant Faith and Charity will take the Errors of such as
they describe for worse than the Papists; and yet how many have written (though
confusedly) to prove the very Church of Rome a true Church, though sinful. Yea I
hope few Protestants will say that our Separatists have half so great
Ignorance, Error and Corruption, as the Moscovites, Greeks, Abassines, Copties,
Iacobites, Nestorians, Armenians, who yet are commonly by us confessed to be
true Churches.

If they be no true Churches, it is either because of the greatness of their
Errors, or because they go against the Law or Will of Governors; not the first,
as the foresaid instances show not the latter; for no man ever yet owned that
Principle, that it can be no true (though faulty) Church, that is gathered
against the Rulers wills. For many hundred years the Orthodox did it justly;
and afterward when some did it unjustly, the culpability made it not a nullity.
Else what a case was the Roman Church in, that for many hundred years was kept
up by Rebellion against their Lawful Emperors and Princes? And how often have a
great part of the Greek Churches been guilty of it?

And do not the Condemners hereby imitate the Separatists in the sin, and
reviling as they are reviled. The Separatists falsely say that you are no true
Churches, and you requite them with saying falsely the same by them.


Chap XXIX. Point XXVI. Of Executing Canon 27. rejecting Nonconformists from
Communion.
L. THis is but the same that we heard before.


M. Before I speak against publishing Excommunications: This Canon commands
the Minister executively before they are Excommunicated to give the Sacrament
to no one that receives it not kneeling, or that is guilty of any of the
foresaid Points of Dissent, unless he confess his fault, and promise to do so
no more. So that here the Minister is to be himself the prime Executioner
against such Dissenters, before the Courts or Ordinaries Excommunicate or
meddle with them.


L. But none subscribe to this Canon.


M. I told you they Swear Canonical Obedience; and the Canon suspendeth them if
they do not do it: Therefore it is a necessary part of Conformity.

But of this I spoke before about Assent and Consent.


Chap. XXX Point XXVII. Of refusing Communicants from other Parishes, Canon 28.
L. WHY may not this be obeyed?


M. In some cases it may, when Persons straggle without cause: But there is
frequent need that will justify it as a Duty: Parish Bounds are a humane Order
for convenience; but the benefit of an able faithful Minister, and the choice
and use of such where they may be had, is of Divine Appointment, and a matter
of far greater weight. The Canon supposes Ministers that neither can nor may
be suffered, to Preach or Expound any Doctrine: If a Neighbor Parish have an
able Teacher, must he drive away poor hungry Souls that seek his Consolatory
Communion and Help? If Parishes that are bound to maintain their own Poor,
suffer any of them to be in danger of perishing by cold or hunger, a Neighbor
Parish though forbidden by men, is bound by God to relieve them in distress:
Every Christian is related to all the Catholic Church, and as he has need,
has right to the Communion of Saints, out of his Parish.

In London, where some Churches have excellent men, if a Lord or Gentleman live
in a Parish where a Patron has set over them, one that Preaches not sincerely
but railingly in strife, contention, or gross Error, why may not such a man go
to a Neighbor Church? And why must that Neighbor Minister repel him? When yet
our Antagonists in this case, maintain that the Catholic Church, being but
one, every Christian must Communicate in every place where he has occasion:
And that a Diocese is the lowest sort of Church, of which Parishes are but
parcels: And consequently a man never separateth from his Church, that
separateth not from the Diocesan.


Chap. XXXI. Point XXVIII. Of Canon 38. Excommunicating Ministers that repent
of Subscribing.
M. IF Subscribing prove a Sin, (of which I am past doubt) this Canon
commands the Excommunicating Men for repenting of Sin. Whereas Christ's Law
of Excommunication is to Excommunicate none but for not repenting of Sin. Are
not these two very contrary? And do you think that Christ will stand to such an
Excommunication? or disown them that are thus cast out? Some Men's abuse of
Excommunication is such, as if at last, if all their Canons be executed, they
would tempt Men to doubt whether they live like Christians, because they are
not Excommunicate; and would make it a good argument, [He is cast out of the
Church for Conscience sake: ergo, it is a good sign that he is a Man of
Conscience. Or as if they were but fulfilling [They shall cast out your names
as Evil doers, etc.]


L. Why should you put Cases that may never come to pass? I do not think you
were ever commanded to Publish an Excommunication against any such.


M. But to Promise and Swear Canonical Obedience, is a thing that is required
of us all: And promising to Sin, is Sin, and often worse than a sudden act. Yea,
if a Minister do but omit some Forms or Ceremony by this Canon, he must be
first Suspended, and then Excommunicate, and I must publish it if required.


Chap. XXXII. Point XXIX. Of the Execution of the 57th Canon.
L. What is the 57th Canon, and its Execution?


M. It Suspendeth, and after a Month Excommunicateth all that go for Baptism
for their Children, or Communion themselves from their own Parish, because the
Minister is no Preacher, to another Parish that has a preaching Minister. When
if these be Pastors, and feed the Flock, they had more need to drive such Men
to Preaching Ministers, than from them.


L. But the Validity of the Sacrament depends not on the worthiness or
ability of the Minister.


M. 1. But the Edification, and consequently the Salvation of Souls, has no
small dependence on the Ability and Ministration of skilful faithful Pastors;
as Men's Health and Lives do on skilful Physicians. And no man should deny
himself the benefit of such that can lawfully have it, nor should starve his
Soul in Obedience to Canons. If Preaching, and that soundly and skilfully, be
as needless as such men pretend, why did Christ Preach, and send out Preachers?
and why did Paul so dreadfully charge Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. to Preach the
Word, and be instant in season and out of season, etc. And why does he so urge
the Ephesian Elders, Act. 20. to imitate him that taught them publicly and
from house to house, day and night with tears. And why do the Prelates make
every Priest Covenant in their Ordination to instruct the People out of the
Scripture, and with all faithful diligence to Minister Doctrine, and teach the
People with all diligence to observe God's Commandments, and to use both
public and private Monitions and Exhortations, as well to the sick as the
whole, within their Cures, as need shall require, and occasion shall be given.
Why do they Ordain them all to be faithful Dispensers of the Word of God?] Is
all this done by mere Reading that which a Woman or a Boy of 12 years old can
read as well as they? Do these Men know what Souls are worth? how the Reason
and Will of Man are moved? How strong Sin is, and how blind and bad the Heart
of Man?


L. But it is the Sacraments that they are forbidden to go far from an
unpreaching Minister.


M. 1. Other Canons also forbid them often to Hear in other Parishes. 2. If my
Need and God's Law oblige me to choose a better Pastor than that ignorant
Reader, though in another Parish; is it not fit, and my Duty to Communicate with
him that I justly take for my Pastor?

Moreover, I must tell you, that when an Ignorant Fellow takes on him the
Sacred Office which he is unfit for, and so lives in the constant Sin of
omission, and of Profanation of Holy Things, and of betraying Souls, I take it
to be a Sin to harden and encourage such a bold Presumer in so great Evil, and
to encourage People that need better to be content with such a Pastor; Though I
determine not whether he have the Essentials of the Ministry, and though I doubt
not but the Sacraments are no nullities to them that take him for a true
Minister.

And yet I must add, that there are some Abilities Essential, without which no
Man is truly a Minister of Christ: And this Essential Ability, as certainly
reaches to the work of Teaching, as to Administering Sacraments: He is not
worthy the Name of a Minister that denies this: I would not strain this
Necessity over high: But I say, that he is no Minister that wants Essential
Ability: And if the Papists and their Emissaries would make the People believe
that all not ordained by Prelates are no Ministers, and that such excellent Men
as Blondel, Chamier, Sadeel, Dalle, and all such abroad are none, I think them
more excusable who take him for none that cannot Preach, and must be forbidden
to Expound any Doctrine. If it were for want of Tongue and Voice he could not
read: If it be for want of Knowledge, can that Man be by Office a Teacher of
Christian Doctrine that knows it not, and cannot teach it? and cannot do that
for his Flock that every Parent and Husband should do, whom the Children and
Wives are commanded to learn of.


L. A man may read sound Doctrine that understands it not, and by reading may
teach others.


M. But he is not capable of the Office of a Teacher of Christianity, that
understands it not: no, nor so much as of Christianity it self, or adult
Baptism. A Turk that believes not the Gospel may read it: And you may write it
on a Pillar, and that may teach Men, and yet Pillars and Books are not Pastors.


L. But what is all this to your Conformity?


M. 1. It Is unlawful for me to Swear Obedience to this. 2. Or to publish an
Excommunication against good Christians, for not despising their Souls, and the
Preaching of the Gospel. 3. Or to repel such Persons if they seek to me for any
Pastoral Helps, and Sacramental Communion.


Chap. XXXIII. Point XXX. Of Canon 58. that makes the Surplice necessary to
Ministration.
M. I Am not determining whether it be any Sin to wear a Surplice, nor
censuring any man for it: But when it is known how many learned and excellent
Ministers have been against it, I take it for a greater Sin than I will name,
to eject them from the Ministry for it; and I cannot approve of such a Canon.
But enough of this before.


Chap. XXXIV. Point XXXI. Of Christening all Children without Exception,
according to Canon 68.
M. THe words are [ No Minister shall refuse or delay to Christen any Child
according to the Form of the Book of Common Prayer, that is brought to the
Church to him upon any Sunday or Holy Day to be Christened.

I have said so much of this before, that I here only say briefly,

1. This supposes a false or unproved Doctrine, that the Infants of all
Atheists, Infidels, Jews, Heretics, Blasphemers, etc. are in the Covenant of
Grace, so far as to have right to be put by Baptism into present Possession of
Pardon, and of right to Salvation.

2. When none must be delayed that are brought to Church, the Minister cannot
so much as enquire whether the Godfathers know what Christianity is, or are
Christians, or Jews, or Infidels. Or whether ever they received the Lord's
Supper; which the Canon makes necessary.

3. Till they have given the Church proof from God's Word, that all Infants in
the World have right to Baptism, it is too great Domination over men's Faith to
command Obedience on pain of Suspension. Had we given no better proof for the
Holiness and Baptism of the Seed of the Faithful, than these men bring for the
Seed of Infidels, most good* Christians had turned Anabaptists long ago.


Chap. XXXV. Point XXXII. Of Can. 72. Against Fasts and Prayer.
L. What are the words of that Canon?


M. [ No Minister or Ministers shall without License and Direction of the
Bishop of the Diocese first obtained and had under his Hand and Seal, appoint
or keep any Solemn Fasts, either publicly or in private Houses, other than
such as by Law are, or by Public Authority shall be appointed; Nor shall be
wittingly present at any of them, under pain of Suspension for the first Fault,
of Excommunication for the second, and of Deposition from the Ministry for the
third. Neither shall any Minister (not Licensed as is aforesaid) presume to
appoint or hold any Meetings for Sermons, etc. -- nor attempt by Fasting and
Prayer to cast out any Devil, etc.


L. All this was done to prevent Abuses.


M. It fell out well that they did not forbid Christianity or reading Scripture
in a known Tongue, to prevent abusing it: And next, that they forbad not Law
and the use of Reason, which is most of all abused.

But do not you th^^k that they make very unworthy Men Ministers, or that they
change or maim the Pastoral Office, when no Minister, no not the wisest may be
trusted to fast and pray with his Neighbors? Should a Master of a Family be
forbidden this in his House? the Jews forbad it not to Cornelius. What
jealousies have such a Clergy of one another? And of Preaching, Fasting and
Praying? What if some Neighbors have some great Temptations, some great Guilt,
some great Danger, by a Plague, or the like, or some great Affliction (some
Friends near Death^) or some important Business of great moment, (as Marriage,
Travel, Navigation, etc.) Must the Bishop know all their secrets that their
Pastor at home must know? Or is he a capable Judge for many Hundred Parishes
when they must Fast or Pray? Or did you ever know any go to him for such a
License? Are not those unworthy Ministers that be not fit to be trusted to Fast
and Pray with their People, while the Law is open to punish all abuses of it?
And are not those over-subject to Prelacy that will Swear Obedience in this,
any more than against Preaching the Gospel? Dan. 6. 5. We shall not find any
occasion against this Daniel, except we find it concerning the Law of his God.


Chap. XXXVI. Point XXXIII. Of the Excommunication of the three last Canons.
M. THe quality of the rest of the Canons resolve me, that it is unlawful for
me, if commanded, to publish an Excommunication against any upon the three last.


L. What ^e the three last?


M. The 139th is [ Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Sacred Synod of
this Nation in the Name of Christ, and by the King's Authority assembled, is
not the true Church of England by Representation, let him be Excommunicate, and
not restored till he repent and publicly revoke this his wicked Error.


L. What fault can you find with this?


M. 1. No Man can tell what is the Church representative, till they know which
is the Church real. And this they tell us not, either as to Matter or Form. 1.
Whether the Church real be only the Clergy, or also the Laity? Whether the King
and Parliament, Nobles, Gentry and Commons, be all Represented in the
Convocation? If yea, by what Law or Power? And may we say that King and
Parliament do what these do? What need they then after to confirm their Canons?
And they that hold the Church Laws bind in Conscience as such before King and
Parliament confirm them, will bring King and Parliament under their Obedience,
if not Excommunication. But if they pretend not to represent the King and
Laity, they falsely exclude them from being part of the Church.

2. They are utterly disagreed de Forma what the Church of England is: either
it has an Ecclesiastical constitutive Sovereign Power, or not. If not, it is
not an Ecclesiastic Body Politic. And of late their disputing Doctors,
plainly confess that it has no such specifying Summa Potestas, and so is
formally no Political governed Church. The King's Government of it by the
Sword, which none deny, they say, is but an Accident of it, and not Essential
to the Church. And so in sum, it is but a mere Community, or a voluntary
Confederacy of many Churches, that make no unifying Polity. And that is, to be
a Church only in a loose and not proper sense, as the Assembly at Nimegen was a
Kingdom.

3. I doubt not but Thousands of L^y-Men, and many Dissenting Ministers, are
true Parts of the Church of England; And therefore that the Convocation
represented our part, only of that Church.

4. If they be but a Community, they can make no Laws; but only Contracts: Laws
are only the Acts and Instruments of Rulers. Therefore we owe no Obedience to
them as being no Commands of Rulers, till the Civil Power make them Laws: save
as particular Pastors may make them Laws to their several Flocks.

5. If they make them obligatory Church-Laws as the Acts of the Convocation,
then it seems the Representative Church governs the Real; and the Presbyters
in Convocation exercise a Legislative Power, which is the highest that Bishops
can pretend to.

6. These being left thus in uncertainty in the dark, how comes that Man to
deserve Excommunication, or be wickedly erroneous, that herein declares his
dissent. I dare not publish such an Excommunication if commanded.


L. What is the 140th Canon?


M. Whosoever shall affirm, that no manner of Person, either of the Clergy or
Laity, not being then particularly assembled in the said sacred Synod, are to
be subject to the Decrees thereof in Causes Ecclesiastical (made and ratifyed
by the King's Majesty's Supreme Authority) as not having given their Voice to
them, Let him be Excommunicated, and not restored, etc.

Here craftily in a Parenthesis, they put in the King's Authority, and if they
mean only his Obligation on us, no one of us denies it: But because their
disputing Doctors take that but as an Accident, we may say, that the Papists
themselves are often put to say, that General Councils bind not the absent, till
they receive them; And the French long received not the Council of Trent, nor
many Churches other Councils.


L. What is the last Canon?


M. The 141st (for so many Church-Commandments we have, God's Ten being but a
little part of our Religion) is, Whoever shall affirm that the Sacred Synod
assembled as aforesaid, was a Company of such Persons as did conspire together
against Godly and Religious Professors of the Gospel, and that therefore both
they and their Proceedings in making Canons and Constitutions in Causes
Ecclesiastical by the King's Authority -- Let them be Excommunicated and not
restored, etc.

Here again we doubt not of the King's obligatory Power: But what the Persons
and their Works were, I think a Point that Christians may differ about, and not
deserve Excommunication. It seems they could foresee what Men would judge of
them: and no wonder, though they had not the Gift of Prophecy. I am none of their
Judge, but leave God's Work to himself: But I must say, that this Book of
Canons does no whit increase my esteem of Council, of Prelacy, of Humane Canons
or Clergies Laws, nor of the particular Bishops and Clergy that made them. And
that I will neither publish such Excommunications, nor promise or swear to do
it: Though I know that stretching pretenses satisfy some Men; like theirs that
own the name of Sacred to that Synod, because Sacrum quod sanctum, simul
execrabile signat, A professed and relative Sanctity may be granted them.


Chap. XXXVII. Point XXXIV. Of renouncing all Obligations from the Covenant, as
on me or any other, to endeavor any alteration of Church Government.
L. THis is now ceased at the end of twenty years; what need you mention this?


M. 1. I thought you had desired to know why we conformed not for the twenty
years past. 2. I suppose that the like is still imposed on others, in the
Corporation Act, the Vestry Act, the Militia Act, and the Marrow of it still
imposed on us in the Oxford Oath.


L. And what have you against it?


M. First I Will tell you what we have not against it, because we are commonly
here falsely accused.

1. It is none of our Controversy whether this Oath or Covenant was unlawfully
made and imposed both on the people and the King; we deny none of this.

2. It is none of our Controversy, whether there be not some part of the
Matter of it that is unlawful: We deny not that.

3. It is none of our Controversy, whether it was not unlawfully taken: We
justify not that as to our selves, though we are not judges of the sin of King
and Lords, and others whom we have no Calling to condemn.

4. It is none of our Controversy, whether this, or any other Covenant or Vow
do bind us to Rebellion, Sedition, or any unlawful Act; we renounce all such
Obligation.

5. Yea, we hold that neither this, nor any other Vows of our own, can prevent
any Obligation that the King has Authority to impose upon us, in things great
or small; else men might disable Magistrates to rule them, and exempt
themselves from Obedience by Vowing before hand not to obey.

6. I add for my self, that I hold my self bound by this Covenant to nothing,
which I had not been bound to if I had never taken it. For I never thought that
by Vows we may make new Religions or Laws to our selves, but only bind our
selves to that which God does make our Duty.


L. Where then is the danger or sin that you fear?


M. I. As to the Obligation of the Vow on my self.

II. As to the Obligation of it on all others.

III. As to the Matter of altering Church Government.

1. I am neither so blind, wicked or singular, as to deny the common Doctrine
of Casuists, Protestants and Papists; that though a Vow be both sinfully imposed,
and sinfully taken, yet it binds in materia necessaria and licita: Yea, that
if part of the matter be unlawful, yet it binds to that part which is lawful.
Else a Knave might exempt himself from the performance of all his Vows, by
foisting in some unlawful matter, or by making them in an unlawful manner.

Therefore if there be any thing that is necessary or lawful in that Vow, I
believe that I am thereto bound.


L. So Rebels that think it lawful to rebel, will say that the Covenant binds
them to it.


M. So he that thinks Gods Law does bind him to Murder or Rebellion, will plead
Gods Law for it: But does it follow that Gods Law binds him to that or to
nothing?

It is not men's false sayings that make or prove such Obligation? He that will
say that Gods Laws, or the Kings, or the Covenant, binds him to sin, must be
punished for his Sin and Lie, and yet all just Obligations stand.


L. But you are bound before by other Obligations to all that is good in it,
and not by the Covenant?


M. That Is an inference contrary to Reason and Christianity; Can a Man of any
Reason once dream that a Man may not have many Obligations to one and the same
Duty? or that the second Oath binds not to it because the first did? you vowed
your self to Christ in Baptism, and you renew the same in the Lords Supper: Are
all the latter null, because the first is valid? What if you many times Swear
Allegiance to the King? Do none of these bind you but the first?


L. II. But do you think that endeavors to alter Church Government is any of
your lawful or necessary Matter?


M. You know that there is a Law that makes it a praemunire penalty, to say
that the Covenant binds one to endeavor any alteration of Church Government:
And why then will you put such a question to me? All that I will say is this,
that as I say not that any one is bound to it by this Covenant; so I am not so
good a Casuist as to be able to justify and acquit all other men from all such
Obligations. Let them look to themselves, for my part I will be no voucher or
surety for their indemnity.


L. III. This brings up to the other part of your Reasons; and why may you not
say that none is so bound?


M. 1. Because God never made me a Casuist to determine the case for all men in
three Kingdoms.

2. Because it is a new and monstrous thing for one private man (yea many
thousand private men) to be forced to such an Office and Undertaking: Every man
must answer for himself before God and Man: Noxa caput sequitur. If I were
commanded to be surety for everyman in England, Scotland and Ireland, but for
the Peace or good Behavior, I should think it a piece of as palpable injustice
as most ever the World knew. But if I must undertake to answer for all their
Souls, in a case where thousands of Learned men have been of the contrary mind,
I Will first think how to answer for my own.

Yet as to that part which I am certain of my self, I do not scruple it. I dare
subscribe that the Covenant binds no man to be False or Rebellious against
the King, or to endeavor to alter our Monarchy, or to deprive the King of any
of his Rights; nor to endeavor to change any part of Church Government which
Christ has instituted for continuance in his Church. And is not this enough?

But whether our Diocesan frame, as distinct from that which Archbishop Usher
called the Primitive Government, be changeable; or whether none of their
Courts, and Laymens power of the Keys be changeable, or ought to be changed?
And whether no man may endeavor it in his place and calling? I think a man may
be saved without knowing. And I think, if you ask a man, if King and Parliament
should change the Office of an Official, a Commissary, a Chancellor, etc. or
should set up a Bishop in every Market Town, is it a sin against God? or is it
unlawful to obey them? or if it be lawful to do it, and any of them Swear to
endeavor it in his place, is he bound to perform that Oath? If to all this a
man say, I cannot tell, I am not Learned enough in Law and Divinity to resolve
such cases; but I am resolved my self to live in Loyalty and Peace. I would ask
any man that has not put off humanity, whether that man be fit to determine
the case for all other men in three Kingdoms, and to be a voucher for all their
Souls in a case that he understands not himself.

L* How does this make you a Voucher for their Souls?


M. 1. The case is of exceeding weight: If I should publicly declare that no
man is thus bound by a Vow, and I should prove mistaken. 1. Then I become
guilty of all these men's sin by justifying it as no sin. 2. And I am guilty of
cruelty to their Souls in open telling them that they need not perform their
Vows, nor repent of nonperformance. 3. And Perjury is one of the heinousest
sins on Earth. 4. And the Perjury of Millions or Nations is yet one of the
grievousest degrees of guilt. 5. And I do my worst to make God destroy or
forsake such a Land. And what yet can I do worse? I say, if in justifying them
I should be mistaken, what a guilt should I incur? And does Nature or Scripture
bind me to run so great a hazard for so many thousand others.

Besides, he that will be a Casuist must know all the case: there are hundreds
and thousands put upon these decisions, that being then Children, knew not who
made the Covenant; nor how it was imposed or taken, and many that know not what
it is, and never saw it.

And there are thousands, if not millions, that took it, whose Faces I never
saw, and know not what moved them, nor in what sense they took it; and Casuists
say, that if a man mistake the Imposers sense, he is bound to keep it in the
sense that he understood it when he took it, if a lawful one; especially if the
Imposers had no Authority, or their sense was doubtful.

And it is not uncharitable for me to think that none of the Kings Compounding
Lords or Clergy that after took it, did take it in a sense which they thought
found? And must I tell them all that none of them is bound to keep it in that
sound sense?

I will not run the danger of having thousands in judgment to suffer for
Perjury, and saying, This man declared that it was no sin. If they are all
Innocent, what need they my justification, when they stand or fall by the
judgment of God. If they prove guilty, my declaring it no sin, will not acquit
them, but condemn my own Soul by tempting them to impenitence. I do not say
that they are obliged by this Vow herein, nor I will not say they are not.
There are many matters first to be known, if we agree in point of Doctrine; and
I know that it is an easy thing for confident men to multiply words to prove
all lawful in this Oath, and to Swear that it is rebellious Hearts that cause
our doubtings: (and so say the Papists of the Protestants) But whatever they
say or threat, I will not by their confidence and talk be drawn, to cast my
Soul into so great a hazard. All men are not so bold in such things as some.


Chap. XXXVIII. Point XXXV. Of the Oxford Oath, that we will never endeavor
any alteration of Church Government.
M. THE Oxford Act is not content that we say that we are not bound by the
Covenant to endeavor any alteration of Church Government, but we must say and
Swear that we never will endeavor it, as any other way obliged to it.


L. The meaning is, that you will never endeavor it by Rebellion, Sedition, or
unlawful means.


M. The Parliament knew how to speak their minds. By such Expositions you may
Swear almost any thing in the World, and no Government shall have any security
by your Oaths: The words are contrivedly as universal against all endeavor as
can be spoken.

2. But I Will presently confute you undeniably.

You know Church and State Government are conjoined in the Oath, and the Church
put first. Will you say as to State Government, that the meaning only is, That
I will not endeavor to depose the King, or alter Monarchy by Rebellion, or any
unlawful means, but only by lawful means; if you do, you will soon be told home,
that the Oath does mean, That no means is lawful to such an end, but the work
it self as well as the means is forsnorn.


L. But the meaning is only, that you will not endeavor to alter Episcopacy,
and not all other Offices and Courts.


M. This is as palpable a falsification as the former: For 1. The words are a
most express abjuration of endeavoring any alteration of Government at all.
And if you take the word [Alteration] strictly, it more commonly signifies a
change of Quality or Manner, (...) of Essence. But if you take it largely, it
comprehends both.

2. And I appeal to any man's Conscience whether that was, or is the Bishops
sense: Go ask them, My Lords, If I endeavor but to reduce Diocesans to every
Corporation, and to take down your Lordships, and great Revenues, and your
Chancellors Courts, and all the rest of your Humane Officers, will you take it
for no breach of my Oath? and I warrant you they will soon resolve you.

3. Yet I shall fullier convince you: The Bishops and Parliament are of the
mind of the Church of England: And the Canons do most fully speak the Churches
mind. And the Seventh Canon before cited, when it makes it ipso facto
Excommunication to call the Church Government sinful, tells you, that they
extend this to [Arch-bishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest that
bear Office therein.

4. And I believe if you should say that I take my Oath to bind me from
endeavoring no change of the Government of the State, but only of the Essence
of Monarchy, you would quickly feel the Error of your Exposition.


L. But I can assure you, that many able Conforming Ministers take the
Declaration in the Act of Uniformity, in such senses as aforesaid.


M. Our King is King of Scotland as well as of England, and he has thus
declared his sense in the case of the Earl of Argyle, and the Reasons of it are
considerable. And do you think that it can be the true sense in England, and
deserve preferment as to Loyal and Obedient Ministers, which deserves Death it
self in Scotland? can you wish for a clearer Exposition?


L. And why will you not Swear never to endeavor any alteration, if you be
required so to do?


M. I have read Dr. Stillingfleet's Irenicon, and many such Books, in which I
see how great a number of our greatest Divines, as well Archbishop Cranmer,
took the Form of Church Government to be alterable, and not fixed by Christ:
And if the Doctor have changed his judgment, that changes not the Authority of
those that he cites.

2. I have in my full Treatise of Episcopacy told you why I cannot but wish
more than one thing in our Ecclesiastical Courts and Government changed.

3. I take it for a matter that deserves consideration, whether it be no
change of the State Government, to make all the Church Government unchangeable,
and so to disable the King to change it: And how to reconcile the two parts of
the Oath? And whether if the whole Church Government as fixed, must thus be
Sworn to as Monarchy is, it alter not our Constitution? Or at least be not a
perilous Innovation.

4. If the King and Parliament should command Men to endeavor an Alteration,
e. g. of Laymens Power of the Keys, or the greatness of Dioceses, I am afraid
of being sworn beforehand to disobey them.


L. But the Parliament meant not to bind themselves herein.


M. I grant it. (Though being Church of England men, the 7th Canon aforesaid
makes it doubtful.) But when they have bound all the Subjects in the Land, and
themselves among others, when out of Parliament, and when it is Excommunication
to charge any of the Church-Offices with Sin; I think the Church Government is
fixed as unalterable. I ask you, Did the Parliament bind themselves against
altering Monarchy, or the Succession? If they did, then it seems they did so by
Church Government, when they put it in many Oaths before that of the State. If
they did not, then they have fixed Monarchy no more than Church Government by
this Oath. Therefore when they bind all in the same Oath from endeavoring any
Alteration of Church Government, they show that they intend the fixing of it.
And though some think it leaves room for Petitioning, I do not believe that the
Law or Oath leave any Men at Liberty to Petition against Monarchy; which is
here conjoined.

But my great reason of Nonconformity herein yet remains. If the faults of
Church Government should prove but the tenth part as great as is feared by
many, and said by those that write about it, what a tremendous thing is it to
make a deliberate Solemn Covenant and Oath, never to endeavor any amendment of
it, nor to persuade any man to repent or amend.

If the Germans, who are reported to be addicted to Drunkenness, or other
Nations to Whoredom or Thievery, should take an Oath that they will never
repent or amend, nor persuade any other to it, what a case were this?


L. I confess if the Corruptions of Church Government should prove as great
Evils, as some conceive, it would be a heinous Sin indeed to Swear never to
repent, or to endeavor to amend it.

The old Nonconformists thought that the frame of And Bucer thought so too,
when ^e so earnestly wrote for another sort of Discipl^ne to King Edw. 6.
English Prelatical Government was far worse than all their Ceremonies and
other Corruptions set together. They thought it a Platform fitted to exalt
Pride and Covetousness, and to propagate all ungodliness, and to drive serious
Piety and Conscience out of the Land, upon the accounts before mentioned. 1. By
the largeness of Dioceses making Discipline impossible, and so keeping almost
all the wicked in the bosom of the Church, secure from the Power of the Keys.
2. By putting down all Bishops that should be in all the large Dioceses, save
that one, and restraining all the Parish-Ministers from true use of the Keys,
unless they will be ruined by it. 3. By setting up Secular Courts under the
name of Ecclesiastic, and making it their Employment by 141 Canons, which are
their self-made Contrivances, to hinder and ruin laborious Preachers, and Men
of tender Consciences, and to cherish the contrary sort. 4. By putting the
decretive Power of the Keys into the Power of these Laymen. 5. By setting up
Pastors over all the Land without the consent of the Flock, by the mere Will
and Election of Great Men and Patrons. 6. By driving unfit and unwilling
persons to eat and drink Damnation in the Sacrament. 7. By driving multitudes
of good People from the needful means of their Salvation. 8. By bringing good
Men that grieve for all this, into Odium, for being against it.

And if this prove the case, I had rather lie in Gaol till Death, than Swear or
Promise never to endeavor that I or any should repent and amend it. Do you
think it not contrary to our Baptismal Vow, in which we promise Obedience to
Christ to our lives end?

I read that the Israelites were greatly reproved for Worship in the High
Places, and that they seldom repented: But I read not that ever they took an
Oath or Covenant never to endeavor to amend: I find that when Israel was made
to Sin by the Calves of Dan and Bethel, that they went on and amended not: But
I read not that they Covenanted or Swear never to amend. I find that the
Pharisees were heinous Sinners, that by their Traditions made void the Law of
God: But many of them came to John's Baptism, and professed some Repentance;
and though obstinacy cut off the Nation of the Jews, I read not that they drew
the Nation into an Oath or Covenant never to amend. When Christ came to save
the World, it was by a Covenant of Faith and Repentance. And if I should see
the World once confederate in a Covenant never to believe, repent and amend, I
should call it the Kingdom of Satan, and thence date our Accounts
Chronological, with a Regnante Diabolo, as in France they did a while, with a
Regnante Christo. (of which Vide Blondellum).

I do not say that these old Nonconformists were in the right, nor that Bucer
did no whit overvalue the Discipline which he proposed to King Edward the
Sixth; nor that this Oath contains all the foresaid guilt. But I say, If I
should prove so, and venture on it in uncertainty, when the Judgment of so many
Parliaments, Lawyers, Divines abroad and at home are against such kind of
Swearing: what a case should I bring my Soul into? National Oaths, especially
such as seem to me to fix every Church-Office, from the Archbishop to the
Official, if not the Apparitor, as unalterable in the very Constitution of the
Kingdom; even putting them before the State, are Matters of greater Consequence
than to be rashly ventured on by me: Even the Long Parliament that made the
silencing Acts, restored not the Canon and Et caetera Oath of 1640. which bound
Men never to consent to such Alteration of Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, etc.


Chap. XXXIX. Point XXXVI. Of Subscribing and Swearing against the Position as
Traitorous, of taking Arms ly the King's Authority against those that are
Commissioned by him in Pursuance of such Commission.
L. I Am sure you can have nothing against this, unless by forced Exposition of
the words.


M. I am sure that I abhor all forced Expositions, and all Treason, Rebellion
and Sedition. But here, because you are a Lawyer, I will come to you only as a
Client or Learner, entreating you to resolve all the common Objections, that I
may do what I do in Truth, Judgment and Righteousness.


L. I doubt not but I shall easily resolve them all.


M. 1. Do you not believe that the first Clause, that it is unlawful to take
Arms against the King upon any pretense whatsoever, does extend also to this
taking Arms against any Commissioned by him on any pretense whatsoever?


L. No doubt of it: For this of not taking Arms against those Commissioned by
him, is but Expository of the former, not taking Arms against the King. Else
Men that fight against his Army may say, they fight not against the King. And
can the King make War without an Army.


M. I believe you are in the right. 2. I ask you, what is meant by the King's
Authority? Is it not by his Laws that are the highest Acts of his Authority?


L. There is, no doubt; but what is done by Law, is done by the King's Authority.


M. 3. How are we to know the King's Commission?


L. By his Seal.


M. I never heard of many of the Parliaments Army that ever saw any sealed
Commission of those they fought against: and would that excuse them?


L. No, because it was notorious that the King owned the War.


M. But suppose that any of his Soldiers came to take free Quarter, or Horses,
or Plunder, or to possess any Man's House or Lands, how shall we know that they
had Commission for these? And may they be resisted till they show their
Commissions?


L. No; because it will hinder the King's Service.


M. 4. What Seal must it be that must make a Commission?


L. Either the Great or Little Seal.


M. 5. Is it possible for the Law and a Commission to be contrary?


L. Some say No, because it is no Commission, if it be contrary to the Law. And
some say No, because it must be supposed that the King will grant no Commission
contrary to Law. And some say Yea; But when they are contrary, the Commission
is to be obeyed against the Law. And some say Yea; And that the Law is to be
obeyed against the Commission.


M. But if you are of so many Minds, how are Doubters resolved, what to Swear
and what to do?

1. If you say, It Is no Commission that is contrary to Law, who shall be Judge
when it is contrary to Law? If every Subject be Judge, it is as easy to Rebel,
and say the King's Commission is illegal, as it is to deny all the Authority of
his Commissions?


L. The Judges and Courts must judge what is Legal.


M. If the Judges, yea, or the Parliament shall judge the King's Commissions
illegal, will that make it lawful for the Subjects to resist them.


L. I dare not say so. Therefore we must come to the later Opinion, that the
King himself is Judge, and that it is Legal eo nomine, because it is his
Commission, and that Commissions suspend all contrary Laws. Though I know many
abhor this, that would not have the King's Will to be above all Laws, and Rule
to be Arbitrary.


M. But suppose it be so, the Subjects know the Laws to be the King's by
Promulgation: How shall they be sure that Commissions are not counterfeit if
they be contrary to them? Must every Fellow be believed that produces a
Commission? may it not be counterfeited?


L. The King's Officers that keep his Seals must be trusted by us, seeing the
King trusts them.


M. 1. Then the King's Officers are set above all Laws and Judicatures, as well
as the King. 2. And why then are Judges Sworn not to be moved from Justice by
the Great or Little Seal? 3. But must we trust every Man that shows a Seal,
that he did not counterfeit it?


L. I confess that the Laws are most Public and certain Notifications of the
King's Will. But it is easy to raise more Doubts than the wisest man can answer.


M. Is it not possible for two Commissions to be contrary? what if one Man have
a Patent for Life to be Lord Admiral, or Lieutenant of the Tower, or the like,
and another come with a Commission to put him out and take Possession; which
must be obeyed?


L. He that has the last Commission. The former may not resist him: For the
later nullifieth the former.


M. Is it not then in the Power of the Keeper of the Seals to depose the King
at his pleasure, by sealing new Commissions to Conspirators to seize on his
Garrisons, Guards, Treasure, Magazines, Forts and Navy?


L. It must be taken for granted that the King will give no Commission against
himself.


M. But his former Officers are not himself, and if they must resign to new
Commissioners, how know they but it is the King's Will?


L. I tell you we must trust those that the King trusts.


M. Then the question is, whether it shall be in the Power of a Lord Keeper to
depose the King, or betray the Kingdom to whom he will, because the King
trusts him with the Seal; Or in the Power of a Parliament to judge whether a
Commission be Legal, or whether Laws or Commissions be of greater Authority.


L. There is no end of answering absurd Suppositions: It is not to be supposed
that the King will do wrong, or so far trust untrusty Men.


M 1. We must suppose that a Parliament may do wrong. 2. Izaakson and other
Historians say, That King John made over his Kingdom to the Pope, and offered
it to the Mohammedan King of Morocco, to help him against his Lords. 3. Is it
not possible that a Queen Mary, or a Charles the Ninth of France might do what
they did. 4. Have not many Kings been ruined by trusting Traitors. The Story of
the King of Cappadocia and his Brot^^, that conspired with some Nobles to
depose him, and take his Kingdom, and how the Senate of Rome detected the Plot,
and defeated it by the help of Cicero, then Proconsul there, is worth the
reading in Cicero's Epistles.
Did the King of Portugal's Brother and Lords answer the trust reposed in them,
when they Deposed and imprisoned him? Is not History full of such Examples? Who
deposed the Emperor Ludovicus Pius, but his trusted Clergy and Servants? Who
deposed the Empeperour Henry 4. but his own Son? and his Clergy and Lords?
Abundance of the Greek Emperors were so used, and some English and Scottish
Kings.


L. Some body must be trusted; and if they be Traitors, who can help it?


M. But shall all entrusted Lord-Keepers or Lord Privy-Seals be so far
encouraged to Treason, as to tell them, If you will depose the King, who can
help it? We are all Sworn not to resist you?] How stands this with our Oath of
Allegiance to the King?

And is not the King's life and welfare the interest of the Kingdom? and is he
not an Enemy to the Kingdom who destroys the King? And do you think that one
Lord Keeper is fitter to be trusted with the Safety of the Kingdom, than a
Parliament and all the Courts of Justice? When was there a Lord-Chancellor more
Trusted and Honored than Sir Edward Hyde Earl of Clarendon, who had long been
faithful to the King? And yet neither King nor Parliament thought that he was
more to be trusted with the Safety of the King and Kingdom, than the Parliament
was: Else they had not Banished him.


L. A Fool may ask more Questions, than a Wise man can answer; and find Knots
that no one can untye.


M. And are all we Fools that never Studied the Law, fit to Answer all those
Questions by an Oath, which you that are a Lawyer cannot Answer by Discourse?
will you become abler to Answer them, when we have Sworn them? If you were at a
loss about a Law Case in Westminster Hall, would you set all the Country and
City Householders that are Ignorant, to decide it by Swearing which side is
right? were it not wiser to cast lots to determine it? And have those Men
Humanity and Conscience, and do they believe there is a God, that will Swear
that of such Law Cases, which Lawyers profess to be too hard for them, and
which they are disagreed in as a common Controversy in all Lands.

And I pray you, why are Nations so sollicitous to have Laws for their
Security, if a Chancellor be above them all, and by a Commission may cast them
off at his pleasure?


L. We do not say the Chancellor may do it, but the King.


M. Does not the Chancellor keep the Seal? and must we not take them for the
Kings Commissions which he seals.


L. If you know that the Commission be notoriously against Law, you may suspect
that the King consents not, and may stay till you enquire of him whether it
be his Act and Will?


M. But 1. If one come with a Commission to take possession of the King's
Treasure, Magazines, Garrisons; Navy, etc. and attempt it by force, may he be
resisted by force till the King's Mind be enquired of? If not, he may depose
the King and seize his Strengths before we can come to enquire of the King. All
have not access to the King. If it were the Garrison of New-Castile, Berwick,
Carlisle, etc. it will be too late to send to the King. But if such
Commissioners may so long be resisted, then how can we Swear that upon no
pretense whatsoever his Commissioners may be resisted by his own Authority?

2. And if a Highway-man show a Commission to take my Purse, he will not stay
till I know whether the King consent to his Commission.


L. You stretch the sense of the Subscription and Oath further than the
Parliament intended it. Do you think that if half a Dozen or more Irishmen had
come into the Parliament House, and showed a Commission Real or Counterfeit to
kill them all, Lords and Commons, that they would not have defended their Lives
with their Swords? And do you think then that ever they meant to bind all the
Subjects against that which they would do themselves.


M. And do you think that we should all Swear to that which they never meant to
bind us to? Is there any limitation in the words? Or can any words be devised
more to exclude exceptions than [not on any pretense whatsoever.] But self is
near men, and is not so concerned in other men's cases as their own. For my
part, I believe that they meant plainly and universally as they speak, though
they might forget their own case: My proof is from the express words of the
Militia Act, where they determine that neither the whole Parliament or part,
has any Power of offensive or defensive Arms against the Kings Commissioners:
Much less have any single Persons.


L. Do you think that ever they intended to destroy all men's Property, and
defense of Life or Goods, and to repeal all the Laws that bind Sheriffs by the
Posse Comitatus to suppress Riots, and to execute the decrees of the Courts of
Justice for Possessions or Dis-possessions, though any should show Commissions to
the contrary, and to overthrow the Judges Oaths.


M. I can no way judge what they meant, but by what they did. I find they have
absolutely denied all right of defensive Arms in the Subject or Parliament, and
that is all that I speak of: From whence I must needs suppose, that their sense
was, that all men have Propriety in Estates, Wives, Children and Lives, and
that the King ought to Govern them by Law, and wrong no Man, and that Judges
ought to do right by Sentence, though the King forbid them. And that Sheriffs and
Justices must ordinarily execute the Law: But if the King by force restrain
them, or give Commission to any Subject by force to violate any Law or
Sentence, or to take away any Men's Lives or Estates, it is not lawful by
defensive Arms, for any Sheriff, Justices, or any others to resist. This is
plainly the sense of the Militia Act, and of our Oaths.


L. I pray you let us end this tender Controversy.


M. I have yet a few more doubts to be resolved.

Politics being the Foundation of Iuris-prudentia, I doubt not but you have
studied Politics: I pray you tell me why all Politics placing a Republic in
the predicament of Relation, do make the bonum publicum to be its essential
terminus in the definition.


L. Because it is so indeed; it being no Civitas or Respublica that is not for
the Common good; and therefore they make it the difference between a King and a
Tyrant, that a King rules for the Common good, and a Tyrant for his private
Ends and Interests.


M. But by your leave I think that distinction ill and dangerously uttered: For
every man has some culpable selfishness; and also the Kings Self-interest is
Lawfully intended: For Commonwealths called Kingdoms being at first Constituted
by Contract, no doubt there was necessary the Consent of both the Contracting
Parties: None can be King against his Will. And do you think any Man would take
a Crown only for the good of others, without security for his own just
Interest, Honor and Prerogative, without which he cannot well Govern?
Therefore I think that those Politics too loosly describe Tyranny, by
selfinterest, and can prove no man a proper Tyrant in Exercitio (distinct from
an Usurper) but him that seeks the destruction of the Commonwealth, whose good
he is bound to preserve.

But I further ask you,

Do you think the Law of Man, or a Commission can abrogate the Law of Nature?


L. No Man ever affirmed it: For the Law of Nature is Gods Law; yea his first
and most Fundamental Law.


M. I will not deny it as to the stable Laws of Nature, though I think that
Nature it self has some mutable Laws, where the Nature of the matter is
mutable. But then I would further know, whether to defend the Life of your
self, Wife or Children against injurious Assault be any part of the Law of
Nature.


L. Experience resolves that; what Man will not defend his Life that can? yea
what Beast, or Bird, even the most harmless will not use such weapons as Nature
has given them, Horns, Feet, Teeth, etc.


M. But Man has Reason to rule natural inclinations: And sure a Malefactor if
he could, should not defend his Life against Justice, I think not so much as by
running away: Nor many single innocent Persons defend their Lives by a public
War, because a War is more hurtful to the Commonwealth than his death is: And
the Common good is better than a single Persons, or a fews, and to be preferred.

But I next ask, whether the Body of a Kingdom have by Gods Law of Nature a
self-defending power against its notorious assaulting Foes?


L. Do you think any man doubts of that? May not the King and Kingdom defend
themselves against Invaders? If one man may defend his Purse or Life against
another, a King and Kingdom is more worth than one man: You can hardly name one
principle in the Law of Nature more undoubted, than that Kingdoms have a right
to defend themselves if they can.


M. And may they not defend themselves, against Usurpers and Rebels, and
Traitors at home, as well as against Foreign Foes?


L. To deny that is Treason: How else should we defend the King? Was not Jack
Straw, and many a Rebellion lawfully resisted? and did not the Lord Mayor of
London Lawfully kill Wat. Tyler? and so of any other in his case.


M. But what if the Irish took on them to rise by the Kings Commission, and
showed a Counterfeit of it, was it lawful for the Protestants to have resisted
them to save their Lives and Cities?


L. They should have sent to the King to know whether that Commission was
Counterfeit or not.


M. But before they could do that, Dublin had been lost, and all their Lives
and Estates: And the two hundred thousand that were Murdered were not restored
to Life again, when it was notified that they belied the King, and that they
had not his Commission.


L. It was notorious by the nature of the case that they b^lied the King, and
had none of his Commission, because it was so greatly ogainst his own Interest.


M. Will you allow any Country to resist an Army that show the Kings
Commission, if they are confident, or can prove that it is against his Interest?


L. He is the Judge of his own Interest, when the Case comes before him: Till
then a doubtful, or at least a certain Commission may not be resisted: You
would entangle the Case with difficulties that seldom fall out; but are you
against resisting all known Commissions?


M. You know that the Oaths and Subscriptions extend to all cases, and against
any pretense whatsoever, not excepting rare Cases: What I am for or against
I Will tell you more anon. But I ask further, though I am bound by the Fifth
Commandment to believe that the Irish belied the King, and that the Scots
belied him, who in their Book called Truths Manifest affirm that He
Commissioned the Irish by the Scots broad Seal, which was then in his
possession in Scotland; do you think if the Scots could have proved what they
affirm, that it had been lawful to have resisted the Irish, and defended the
Protestants Lives and Cities in Ireland?


L. I will not answer such dangerous questions.


M. But must all ignorant men then Subscribe and Swear to what you cannot, or
dare not answer.

But I further ask you, about not resisting Commissions on any pretense
whatsoever; what was the sense of the old Greek Philosophers and Orators in
that cas^?


L. You know they were almost all bred up in Aristocratical or Democratical
Republics; and therefore no wonder if they are against us in this and more.


M. What was the sense of the old* Roman Orators, Philosophers and Historians
as to this point?


L. They also were hatched under Popular Government, and though the later sort
magnify such excellent Monarchs as Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Adrian,
Antoninus Pius and Anton. Philos. and Alexander Severus, yet it is no wonder
that they were too much for resisting and deposing such as oppressed the
Commonwealth.


M. What was the sense of the Ancient Bishops and Clergy herein.


L. They were long for patient suffering: But it is no wonder that when they
grew worldly and strong, they not only resisted, but deposed Emperors and
Princes.


M. I pray which way go the Papist Casuists in this case of resistance.


L. You cannot doubt of that when you know their Councels Laws for deposing
Kings on Excommunication. And what wonder when they go on that false
Supposition, that the People give the Prince his Power for their own good, and
may take it from him if he turn it against them to the hurt of the
Commonwealth.


M. I pray what say Politic Writers, Papists and Protestants in this case; I
mean the Eminent ones, such as Bodin, Althusius, Arnisaeus, Tholofanus,
Besoldus, Choquierius, Menochius, Liebenthalius, Contzen, Koningh, Timplerus,
Willius, Berekringer, and such others.


L. They commonly run one way, founding Power in the People, as being the
Majestas Realis, and giving the King's and States a derived Majestatem
Personalem, which being for the Common good, they may resist when it would
destroy it. They took their Politics by Learning from Aristotle, Plato,
Cicero; and such Ancients, and no wonder if they follow them.


M. And I pray you which way go our famous Historians in this Point, such as
Commines, Iovius, Guicciardine, Pontanus, Sleidan, Thuanus, Besoldus, Iohnston,
Fregius, and our English Math. Paris, Henry Huntington, Mat. Westminster,
Malmsbury, Hoveden, etc.


L. You know they lived in times when Civil Wars were so frequent, and Princes
so bad, and one pulling down another, that it is no wonder if they praise some
resisters. But if you read those of our Age that lived in quiet Times and under
good Princes, such as Cambden, Speed and Baker, you will find no such thing.


M. I pray which way go the famous Civilians herein, such as Gothofred,
Hottoman, Cujacius, Wesenbcchius, Pacius, Duarenus, and such others?


L. You know that the Civil Law is fetched from the Romans, and it is no wonder
if it run in their strein.


M. I pray which way go the Canonists?


L. You know they are Papists, and set up the Pope's Laws above the King's: But
our English Canons do not so.


M. I pray which way go our late Protestant Lawyers, such as Cook, and
Littleton, and the like?


L. They are all for Loyalty, and for the Preeminence of the Law; and yet for
the King's Prerogative.


M. I find some of the greatest Lawyers, that have defended Monarchy, such as
William Barclay and Grotius, do name many Cases, in which it is lawful to
resist: What think you of their Writings?


L. I will be no judge of them.


M. I pray what think you of those great Prelatists that write, as Bishop
Bilson, and Ri. Hooker, and Ier. Tailor do, and that joined with Abbot and the
Parliament against Dr. Laud, Sibthorpe and Mainwaring: Which of them think you
was in the right?


L. You put too many Questions. I will answer no more.


M. And must we Ignorant Men swear that all these aforesaid were deceived, and
knew less than we?

Verily Sir, It seems a bold Oath for so great a Number of unlearned Men as are
put upon it, and for us that are unlearned in the English Laws.


L. But I doubt all these hard Questions are but raised as dust to hide some
Principles of Rebellion? What is your own judgment, and how will you give
Security for your Loyalty?


M. They that think my Oath Security, take me for so honest, as that I will not
be Perjured. And if so, I have already taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and an Oath of Fidelity as the King's Chaplain in Ordinary (though
never called to exercise it.) And I have fully in a large Volume, called, A
second Plea for Peace, declared my Political Principles, which after all
thoughts I stand to; And no one has given me a word of Exceptions against them
to this day, after so many years, but some in mere Malice tell me of my
Aphorisms revok't, without taking notice of this.

I here repeat that I am ready to engage to the utmost, that I renounce all
Rebellion, Treason and Sedition, and all Principles tending thereto; that I am
for as much Power of Princes and Obedience of Subjects, as any Text of
Scripture speaks for, or as is given or asserted by any General Council, or the
Confession of any Christian Church that I have seen, except what is ascribed to
the Pope and his Substitutes; And I hold it unlawful to take Arms at all
against the King; that is, against either his Authority, Person, Rights or
Prerogative; or against any lawfully Commissioned by him, yea, or unlawfully,
except in such Cases as God's Law of Nature, or the King himself by Law or
contrary Command shall bind Men to resist.


L. And so you will suppose that God's Law of Nature binds you in some Cases
to resist: And will not all Rebels plead that Law?


M. Dare you say that there is no such Case? King James writes, that a King
may not make War against his whole Kingdom? If Ten Irishmen pretend a
Commission to Kill all the Parliament and Protestants in the Land, or to seize
on the King's Garrisons, or if King John give his Kingdom to the Pope, ask
Hooker, Filson or Parliaments, what the Law of Nature says to these Cases.


Chap. XL. Point XXXVII. Of Assenting and Consenting to the Damnatory Clauses
of Athanasius's Creed.
L. I Hope you will not quarrel with the Creed.


M. I take the Creed called Athanasius's (though the Author is unknown) to be an
excellent Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity: And could wish that it
were more used and learnt of all. But I am not so far to judge other Men, as to
conclude all Men certainly damned for ever that are not so well skilled in that
Mystery, as to believe every word there written.


L. I have heard Learned Men say, That the Assent and Consent is not to be
extended to the Damnatory Clauses, but only the Doctrinal Articles.


M. They that can make Laws and Oaths speak or mean what they list, need not
stick at any thing. Is not the Damnatory part a part of the Book of
Common Prayer, and contained in it?


L. But they prove thus, that it means no such Consent or Approbation. The
Liturgy requires you to read the Apocrypha, and yet not to believe all things
in it to be true; For, say they, diverse things in Tobit are evidently false:
And so though it bind you to use and read Athanasius's Creed, it binds you not to
believe all in it to be true.


M. This Cheat is too gross to deceive a Schoolboy with. Is Athanasius's Creed
a real part of the Common Prayer Book, contained in it, or not?


L. Yes, no doubt; we there find it both contained and prescribed Verbatim.


M. Is the Apocrypha any part of the Common Prayer Book, and contained in it,
or not?


L. If there be any Sentences out of it there inserted, those are part; else
the Apocrypha is no part of the Book: It is only the Order to read it that is a
part.


M. Is not this a palpable Deceit, to argue that we are not bound to Assent and
Consent to that which is contained in the Book, because we are not so bound to
that which is not contained in it?


Chap XLI. Point XXXVIII. Of Saying Common Prayer twice a day every day in the
Year ordinarily.
L. IT is but that you shall every day say the Morning and Evening Service, not
being let by Sickness, or other urgent Cause.] And what have you against this?


M. I think when the Book was made, to help the ignorant Vulgar out of Popery,
every day to use the Common Prayer was a very good help to them. But the Case
is much altered, and People now have more suitable Helps; and Ministers have so
much other Work to do in their Studies, and with their Neighbors every day,
and some Prayers to use more suitable to their Families and Closets, that it
must needs be a sinful Impediment against other Duties, to say Common Prayer
twice a day. If they were commanded to Preach twice a day, every day in the
year, it would cause a sinful Omission of other Duties, how good soever
Preaching be in it self.


L. But then you have urgent Cause of forbearance.


M. We are not for abusive dallying with Covenants about Sacred things: It is
evident by the instance of Sickness, that the Authors of the Imposition, meant
only extraordinary Causes as urgent, and not that we should take our ordinary
Work for such an urgent Cause. As if a Man that is bound to spend most of the
day in his Shop should Covenant to go Thirty Miles every day, if he be not let
by urgent Cause.


L. But you see that almost no Conformists do thus: therefore it is certain that
they do not so understand it.


M. That Is a warning to take heed of promising that which we see so many that
promised it not perform; They are our Monitors to take heed of such a playing
with Sacred Covenants, and deceiving the Law, instead of obeying it.


Chap. XLII. Point XXXIX. Of forcing the unwilling Parishioners to the
Sacrament, and Accusing and Excommunicating the Refusers.
L. HOw are you bound to this by Conformity?


M. 1. We must assent and consent to the Rubric, which commands [That every
Parishioner shall Communicate three times a year at least. 2. The Oath of
Canonical Obedience binds us to obey the 112 Canon, as well as the rest; which
says [The Minister, Churchwardens, Questmen and Assistants of every
Parish Church and Chapel, shall yearly within 40 days after Easter exhibit to
the Bishop or his Chancellor, the Names, and Surnames of All the Parishioners
as well Men as Women, which being at the Age of 16 years, received not the
Communion at Easter before.] And then they are to be Excommunicated if they
refuse, and to lie in Jail till they die, when taken by the Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo.


L. And why should not men be forced to their Duty, and to their own good, if
they are backward to it?


M. The internal part is the first and chief part of their Duty, without which
the external is not their Duty, but their great Sin. It is the Duty of Heathens
to Believe and be baptized, but not to be baptized till they believe. It is the
Duty of Candidates for the Ministry, to get Ability and Ordination and to
officiate. But not to officiate before they get Ability and Ordination. It is
the Duty of every Man to believe the Truth of the Gospel, and to profess that
belief: But to say he believes, when he does not, is Hypocrisy and Lying. It
is a sloathful Man's Duty to rise and dress him, and go to his Work; but not to
work in Bed, or go abroad Naked. Men that need Marriage must Marry, and then
liberis operam dare, but not to do this before they Marry. So Persons that are
unfit for the Sacrament must be fit, and then receive it, but not before they
are fit. Now if you can force them by a Gaol out of Ignorance, unbelief and
ungodliness, it will be a very charitable work: Otherwise you force them upon
Sacrilege and Profanation to their Damnation. Why else does the Common Prayer
Book persuade the Blasphemers and hinderers of God's Word, and the uncharitable
not to come to that Holy Table, lest the Devil enter into them as he did into
Judas, and fill them with all unrighteousness to the destruction of Body and
Soul.


L. But they that are forced to come, will be liker to take preparing Care,
than if they be let alone.


M. Look over the foregoing instances: Will you make a Law among Heathens that
all shall be baptized, that this may draw them to believe? Or will you Command
all Students to Administer the Sacraments, that this may draw them to Study and
be Ordained, etc. We dissuade you not from forcing all to Hear and Learn: But
do you think that it is so easy and small a Matter to bring a Man to Repent
and Believe, and give up his Heart and Life to Christ, and prefer Heaven before
Earth, and a holy Life before a fleshly and worldly Life, as that it is but
say, Do it, or thou shall go to Iail. What need a Savior, a sanctifying
Spirit, a teaching Ministry, etc. if it be so easily done at a Command? Will
the fear of a Jail make Men believe the Gospel, or Love God? Oh how little does
this way savor of any true Knowledge of the State of Man, or what Faith or
Sanctification is?


L. Wherein lies the Sinfulness of such force!


M. 1. It seems to make a New Gospel-Condition, or contradict Christ's.
Christ says, That none can be his Disciple, except he forsake all, and follow
him: This Course says, Thou shall be saved by Christ, if thou had rather
Communicate than lose all and lie in Jail. The Sacrament is an Investing
delivering of Pardon and right to Christ and Salvation; And none but those that
desire them above all the World are capable of these. And to give them to the
forced and unwilling is contrary to the Gospel.

2. It seems to put a Lie on Christ, as if he had ever made any such gift.

3. It tends to deceive poor Souls.

4. It forces them on Sacrilege, Hypocrisy, Profanation and Damnation.

5. It may distract those Persons with terror who are conscious of their
unfitness, or those Melancholy Christians that under Temptation tremble for
fear of taking their own damnation.

6. It polluteth the Church, and confounds the Infidels, Catechumens and
Fideles.

7. It thereby fills the Church with such wicked men as prove worse Enemies
to the godly than those without.

8. In all Elections the Major part of wicked forced Communicants will carry
it, to choose Ministers like themselves, and carry Church Matters according to
their wicked minds.

9. Good men seeing this are ready to be frightened out of the Church to
Separation, as men run out of a ruinous House, lest it fall on their Heads, or
fly from a noisome place with loathing.

10. And then the Crowd that thus get Church possession will revile them as
Schismatics and Sectaries, and Hypocrites, and persecute and destroy them if
they can.

Are not all those sad effects of turning a Church into a Prison, and forcing
men to seem to take that which Christ professes he does not give them? And of
casting holy things to Dogs, and Pearls before Swine; and cramming and
drenching those with the Body and Blood of Christ, who have no right till they
desire and beg it, and can sell all to buy this precious Pearl? We dare not
Assent, Consent or Swear to such a Course as this, nor publish an
Excommunication against such men on this account. It Is an odd thing to cast men
out because they will not come in.

And I pray you how can Ministers in great Cities and Parishes perform this
Canonical Obedience, to give in to the Bishop or Chancellor the names of all
that Communicated not at Easter, when they know not the hundredth part of the
Parishioners in some places? I do believe that in the two Parishes that I last
lived in, there are above fourscore thousand Souls: And is it like that the
Ministers know twenty thousand of these? I have been at their Communion, even
at Easter and Whitsuntide, and I never saw five hundred there. And if they gave
in the names of but twenty or forty thousand Non-communicants though it is like
there are nearer two hundred thousand) in this Diocese, what work would the
Bishop and Chancellor have? Cannot you easily imagine what their Discipline
would be, and how they would exhort each Person one by one to Repentance, and
plead with them for conviction, and resolve their doubts? Does not this one
thing tell you what the English Diocesan Episcopacy is, that gives one man the
Disciplining of many hundred Parishes?


L. You talk as if you would have a Church of Saints, and seem to make Religion
too serious a business: It is well if we could have a Church of Civil Men and
Peaceable Subjects, that will use Religion for the Civil Interest, as far as
will serve the will of Governors, and the Common Peace.


M. I am sure St. Paul wrote to no Church but such as he called Saints; and I
am sure Christ will save none but Saints: An unsanctified Christian, and a
Church not holy, are contradictions in adjecto. Christ came not to set up a
mere worldly Kingdom, and to devise a Religion to serve the Will, Ambition or
Interest of worldly men, nor merely to promote Civility, Wealth and Peace. If
this be all that you would have, go to Aristotle, Plato, Seneca, Plutarch,
Cicero, etc. You need not be Christians for this. But yet we pretend not to
know men's Hearts: It is visible Saints that the visible Church consists of;
and with whom we must have visible Communion. And it is not left to the will of
every Pastor whom he will take for a Saint; for then Churches would be of as
many sorts or degrees, as Ministers strict or loose Opinions are. But Christ
has himself made the Articles Essential to Christian Faith and Practice, and
the Baptismal Covenant, and required us to take those into the Church who
seriously profess Belief, and Consent, till they null that Profession by a
contrary Profession or Conversation; which must be proved against any man
before he is rejected: For the Church is not a Society to be arbitrarily made
or unmade, at every Ministers or Bishops will, but has from Christ the fixed
Laws of its Constitution and necessary Administration (better than our 141
Canons.)

But indeed you have touched our sore: For my part I am past doubt that we
should all live in Peace, and Christian Piety, if all (yea all Bishops and
Priests) were but agreed at the Heart what it is to be a Christian, and whether
the Gospel be certainly true, and whether Christ be the Son of God, or a
deceiver, and whether there be a Life after this, and a Judgment of all
according to their works: Yea, were they but heartily agreed that there is a
God, who is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and a punisher of
the wicked. The dispute seems to me to be, whether we shall be Christians
indeed, or worldly Hypocrites called Christians; and whether we shall use the
Name of God, Christ and Religion for Christ and Holiness, or for the Flesh
against Christ.


L. You are very severe in your Censure.


M. I doubt some will find Christ more severe, and be less able to endure his
Censure than mine, when he shall call some men to account for turning sacred
Names, and Offices, and Ordinances against him, to banish Conscience and
serious Godliness (to say nothing of Veracity, common Honesty and Humanity) out
of the Church, and turn his House of Prayer into a place of Merchandise, and a
Den of Thieves; and tempt Turks and Heathens to hate Christians for their
wickedness, and to fly from the Christian Church, lest they should lose all
Religion, Trustiness and Honesty, or the Reputation of them: But I speak not
now of our Governors, whom I leave to God.


Chap. XLIII. Point XL. Of forsaking our Ministry, and ceasing to Preach the
Gospel, and Banishment Five Miles from Corporations.
M. THE last part of Ministerial Conformity which I named to you, is, that if
we cannot conform to all aforesaid, for fear of Damnation, we must cease our
Ministry, and must not Preach Christ's Gospel to any more than four besides our
Family, nor perform any Worship of God with more, (but in their way) and we
must neither dwell nor come within Five Miles of any (Burgess) Corporation, or
any place wherever we lived or traveled, and preached since the Act of
Oblivion: Otherwise we must lie in the common Goal.


L. Doubtless they that made this Law against you, thought you very wicked
intolerable men, and thought your Preaching very dangerous: And indeed so they
say of you in the Preface of the Oxford Act.


M. They do so; and I am glad to find that falseness, and wickedness as such is
yet disowned in the World, and that men do not glory in the very names of them.
It is a notable evidence that there is a Life of retribution, that naughtiness
is disowned by all Mankind, and the worst would be thought and called honest,
and true, and good; and that the World would not Crucify Christ, nor Persecute
and Murder his Apostles under the name of righteous holy men, but under the
name of Malefactors, Enemies to Caesar, Breakers of the Law, and Pestilent
Fellows that troubled the Peace, and turned the World upside down. The Devil
himself dare not own the name of Lying, Malignity and Murder, nor of
Persecuting Men for Truth and Goodness, and Gods Cause.

And verily it seems the Controversy of many in this Age, whether they that
scarce speak of God but in Swearing and Cursing, nor of Religion, but in
scorning or threatening the serious practisers of it, and that savor little but
Eating and Drinking to the full, and Playing, and getting Riches, and hateing
all that are stricter than they, or those that make Gods Law their rule, and
Obedience to him the work of their Lives, and his serious Worship their
delight, and Heaven their hope, and dare not wilfully sin against God, nor be
Perjured or Lie; I say, which of these be the honester Men?


L. Put you cannot deny that your party has preached the Nation into Rebellion
(for the Parliament against the King) and therefore are justly s^spected till
they repent.


M. 1. What mean you by [our party?] If you mean Nonconformists to the present
Laws of Conformity, you are easily confuted: For the Rebellion was over, and
the King restored before the present Conformity was Enacted: And when there was
no such Law, there were no Nonconformists to it, nor any such Party in being.

If you mean the old Nonconformists, I answer you.

1. They were part for the Parliament, part against their War, and part Neuters.

2. There was a multitude of Conformist Ministers for the Parliament for one
Nonconformist: I have often proved, that there was at the beginning of that
Parliament, not many more Nonconformist Ministers left in England, than were
Counties, if so many. In the Westminster As^e^ly there were but seven or eight
Englishmen: Most of the Sermons before the Parliament, which are now most
blamed, were Preached by Conformists.

3. Such as kept in, and obeyed the Parliament and Usurpers, did most of them
Conform, of 9000 or 10000 Ministers, there were but two thousand that Conformed
not: And did mere turning to Conformity manifest Repentance?

4. But I have often, and often said, if they will silence all that had any hand in
Wars, (except the Conformists) and no more, we will thank them with great joy?
For I do not think there are forty, that I say not twenty, silenced Ministers
alive in all England, that had any hand in the War against the King. And it is
an odd kind of Justice that should eject and accuse so great a number for other
men's Actions.

5. But if our Doctrine be Seditious, why should not we be allowed rather to
Preach openly where Witnesses may convict us, and the Law take hold on us, than
in secret to four, where none can convict us?

6. And how comes it to pass, that whilst so many hundred Ministers are hunted
and ruined for Preaching, we hear of none at all punished for any False or
Seditious Doctrine? Do those that watch, accuse and ruin us, want will to find
out our false or ill Doctrine? while I am writing this, the common talk is, two
poor Fellows accused such a one, and two Beggars, or poor Women that stood at
the doors, took their Oaths against such, and such, and such, many. Warrants
granted to distrain for Forty Pound or Sixty Pound a Sermon, on Ministers and
People; the Citizens Goods seized, and carried away, their Shops made bare,
many laid in Jayls, and thousands waiting for utter ruin of all they have; and
all this on the account of their Preaching and Hearing as without the Common
Prayer; and not a word among all these of any False Doctrine spoken.

7. And Gods great mercy having of late years opened the Press, the
Nonconformists have Printed abundance of their Sermons, that the World may see
what Doctrine they Preached: There are two Volumes of Morning Lectures at one
place, and two at another, and one Volume of Lectures against Popery. There is
a great Volume of Mr. Charnock's Sermons, and a great one, and ma^y lesser of
Dr. Manton's; many Folio^s of Mr. Anth. Burgesses, diverse of Dr. Bates, diverse
of Mr. Richard Alleine's, Dr. Gilpin of Temptations, and abundance more. You
have an account of my own Doctrine in above an hundred Books, of which I leave
Posterity to judge.


L. Yes, we hear what is said against you for your Rebellious Doctrine in
former times.


M. I then gave the World an account in my Book called Political Aphorisms, or
a Holy Commonwealth written for Monarchy by Mr. Harrington's Provocation, what
moved me to be on the Parliaments side; and I know nothing that they have
charged on my Doctrine, but the words of that Book which I revoked long ago,
and some Clauses in my Saints Rest, which I expunged before the King came in:
And if my later writings (as my Second Plea for Peace) written purposely to
satisfy them of my present judgment, be not regardable, why do they call me to
retractations? And if the Act of Indemnity have done nothing against our
former Actions, all General Monk's Army, and the rest, such that restored the
King, must expect the like reward, if death deliver them not from men's wrath.


L But why should you not give over Preaching when you are silenced? Have not
the Bishops power to silence and degrade, as well as to ordain; or the
Parliament at least?


M. We doubt not but the Magistrate has power to hinder Preachers from doing
mischief, and to restrain those that Preach Rebellion, Sedition or Heresy, or
that do more hurt than good: But not on that pretense, to hinder good, and to
forbid Christ's Ministers to Preach his Gospel: Bishops and Senior Pastors are
Investing Ministers of Christ, to ordain fit Men to the Ministry, and judge of
their fitness to that end: And if men prove incapable, by Apostasy or Heresy,
or Perfidiousness, they ought to do as Cyprian did about Martial and Basilides,
require the Congregation in the name of Christ to forsake them. But they have
no power to forbid any faithful Minister to do the Office to which he is
ordained, nor to forbid the people to hear them: And if they do, their Commands
are nullities as to any Obligation to Obedience.


L. But they that give you the Office may take it away.


M. He that gives it as a Donor may, which is Christ, but not he that only as
a Servant delivers that which his Master gives. If you send a Servant to
deliver a Man Possession of House, Land, Horse, Money, etc. That Servant cannot
take it from him at his pleasure. I do not think that the Priest that Marryeth
Men, can unmarry them when he will: If he could, I think he would have more
work. I scarce think the Patron that gives one a Benefice can take it away
when he will; which is more alienable than the Office.

A man cannot renounce it himself when he will, who has some more power of
himself than the Bishop has.

Do you not know that all are agreed that the Office of the Ministry is as
Marriage, during Life, and not for Trial or at Pleasure, except in case of
Adultery? Therefore the Papists say, that Ordination makes an Indelible
Character: Of this all Parties are agreed.


L. But why say you the Ordainers do not give you the Power, but as Investing
Ministers? you are not called immediately by Christ as the Apostles were; who
then does give it you, if not the Ordainers?


M. 1. The Office lies in an Obligation to great labor and great patience as
well as in a gift of power. It is a power to work in a suffering state. And as
the Bishop can oblige no man to this against his will, so neither can he oblige
any man farther than Christ and his own consent oblige him. Therefore it
follows that neither can he give the power farther than Christ gives it; and
the Ordainers and People, and Magistrates have each their part under Christ, in
the conveyance.


L. How does Christ give Ministers their Office?


M. 1. He makes a Law that there shall be a Ministry, and specifieth the
Office by describing their work, and the necessary qualification of the
Persons: So that it is not left to Bishops nor any to alter the Office, nor to
admit any incapable Persons into it.

2. Next Christ blesses Men's Preparatory Studies and endeavors, and by his
gifts and grace does give them all Ministerial Abilities.

3. He makes them desirous and willing of the Office and Work in Love to the
blessed Effects, and so makes them Consenters.

4. His Providence brings them where their Labors are really needful.

5. He moves the minds of the Flock or Electors to desire, choose or accept
them.

6. He commands the Ordainers to Approve and Ordain those that are thus
qualified as aforesaid.

7. He commands Magistrates to protect and encourage them.

8. He commands the Neighbor Church-Pastors to own them in their Neighbourly
Communion. Thus you may see how Ministers are made by Christ, though not without
man's Service.

Do you know how God makes Marriages? 1. He instituteth the State, and by his
Law makes the Husband the Ruler of the Wife. 2. He causes their natural
Capacity and Inclination. 3. His Providence acquainteth them with each other.
And 4. He moves them to Consent. And 5. He makes it the Ministers Duty to do
his part; so that the Husbands power is of God.

Do you know who gives the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London their Power? 1.
The King by Charter determines what, Power, they shall have, and how they
shall be qualified, and how chosen, and how sworn and invested. 2. The Citizens
accordingly choose them. 3. And the Recorder Swears them. Who is it now that
gives them the Power? The King's Charter, though not till they be duly qualified
and chosen. The Recorder cannot depose them again; No, nor the Citizens (who
may do more) unless it be in the Charter.


L. But what Sin fear you by ceasing your ministry?


M. 1. We fear the guilt of Perfidious breaking of our Ordination Vow, by which
we solemnly obliged our selves to diligent performing of our Ministry. The
Bishops put those of us on this whom they ordained, who now would force us to
violate it.

2. Therein we fear the guilt of Sacrilege, as alienating Persons consecrated
to God. And we can judge it to be no better than Pharisaical Hypocrisy, in
them that aggravate the Sacrilege of alienating consecrated Utensils and
Lands, and yet will alienate consecrated Persons, and take it to be well done:
whereas the Lands and Goods are but to serve the Persons who are nearer to God,
while they serve him.

3. We fear the Sin of Cruelty, Unmercifulness, and the guilt of Damning Souls.
As if we were commanded to forbear feeding our Children, or the Poor, we should
expect to be charged with Murdering them, if they died of Famine, by our
Neglect.

4. We fear being charged with fighting against Christ, or as Enemies to his
Kingdom, and to his Saving Work: He was so great an Esteemer of Souls and
Holiness, that by the greatest of Miracles, he came in Flesh to redeem, and
sanctify, and save Men: And if we starve and betray them to Satan by our
neglect, we are Enemies to his saving Work and Office. And he that condemns
them that do not feed, and clothe, and visit them, may condemn us more, if we
betray their Souls.

5. We fear being guilty of serving the Devil, in deserting and betraying Souls
that are our trust: As a Captain that should desert his Station and fly, or
should desert his Garrison and Trust, does let in the Enemy: Or as Christ says,
The hireling flees and leaves the flock to Wolves: God says to the negligent
Watchman, Ezekiel. 33. Their blood will I require at thy hands.

6. We shall be a Temptation to the People to imitate us, and forsake the
truth, and turn from Christ: For if the Captains fly, the Soldiers are like to
follow. And if we may cease Ministerial Piety, they may think they may as well
cease Family and Private Piety.

7. We may look for the doom of the sloathful Servant that hid his Master's
talent, and was sentenced to be cast for it into outer Darkness.

8. We cast away our hopes of Salvation by Christ, if we cast away our Evidence
of our Title to his Love: As he charged Peter, three times, If he loved him to
feed his Sheep and Lambs; so the same extends to us: We tell him that we love
him not, when we wilfully deny to feed his Flock.

9. The charge is dreadful that Paul lays on Timothy, and consequently on us, 2 Timothy 4. 1. I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom; that thou
Preach the Word, be instant, in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort
with all long suffering and doctrine. When we recite Paul^ swords, Necessity is
laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel;] Some are so vain as
to say, that this woe belongs to none but those that Christ called immediately,
as if Men ordinarily called had no such Necessity. But Timothy was not called
immediately by Christ.

10. Christ himself has told us, that he that puts his hand to the Plow, and
looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of God: And that the Servant that will
be blessed, must give the Children their meat in season, and be found so doing.
For these Reasons we dare not forsake our Office and Work.


L. But when you cannot do it, you are blameless.


M. That Is true: But we must do what we can: Christ foretold his Ministers how
they should be used, Hated, Scourged, Killed, and yet will have them go on to
the Death. When they persecute you in one City, flee to another, was his
charge; what we cannot do in one place we may do in another; and if we cannot
Preach to more, we must do it to fewer. No Suffering will excuse us, (much less
bare Prohibitions) which do not disable us.


L. But by this Rule, every silenced Heretic may go on, and make himself the
Judge, that he is unjustly silenced.


M. And by your Rule of holding nothing which Men may abuse, all good may be
put down. Usurpers may pretend that it is them that we must obey: Must not we
therefore obey the King? Liars will claim belief: Must we therefore believe no
body? Reason is pretended for every Error and Wickedness: must we therefore
renounce Reason? so false Teachers may Preach when they are forbidden: must
therefore Christ's Ministers give over, because Men forbid them. Did the Church
do so for 300 years?


L. Then it had no Christian Magistrates?


M. Have Christian Magistrates more right to silence the Preaching of the
Gospel, destroy Souls, and oppose Christ's Work, than Heathens have?

2. Were not Constantius, Valens, Theodosius 2d, Anastasius, Z^no, etc.
Christian Emperors, and yet the Bishops went on when they forbad them: Read
Bishop Bilson of Christian Subjection, and he will tell you that Christian
Princes are to Protect Christ's Ministers in their Work: but if they forbid it
them, they must go on, and suffer patiently what shall be done against them for
it.


L. But what need is there of your Preaching? Have we not Ministers (...)
without you? Has not every Parish one? and some say many Thousands are
Ordained of late that want Benefices.


M. Whether our Ministry be needful is matter of Fact so easily discernable to
Englishmen, that I think him scarce meet for these debates that doubts of it,
if he know the Land.

1. The Supernumeraries that want Benefices, do not help the needy Parishes,
but dwell in the Universities, or as Chaplains in Great Men's Houses, to read
the Common Prayer and say Grace at Meat, till a Benefice fall.

2. The greater sort of Parishes have more Work than many Ministers can do:
They have besides Study and Preaching, Children to Baptize, Godfathers to
Examine whether ever they Communicated, Communicants must beforehand give them
notice, the scandalous and contentious must be admonished* all the Communicants
examined, whether they are Confirmed or ready and desirous to be Confirmed, all
that Communi^ate are not to have their Names taken and sent in to the Bishop;
all that a^e refused the Sacrament to be notified to the Count, and prosecuted,
the Sick to be visited, the ignorant and impe^itent to be t^ught and exhorted;
Marrying, Burying the Poor to be taken care of, and much more. And about London
it is credibly said, that there can be no less in the great Parishes than two
Hundred thousand Persons more than the Parish-Churches will hold: Its th^ught
that Martins, and Giles's in the Fields, and Giles^s C^^pplegate, and Stepney
alone, have near an Hundred and Fourscore, if not Two Hundred Thousand Persons
in them: A tender hearted Man would be loath to Famish, or otherwise Kill two
Hundred Thousand Dogs: It was the greatest Massacre that has been heard of in
any credible History of late (if not at any time) when the Irish in so small a
compass murdered two Hundred Thousand Protestants: But to starve Souls, or by
omission of our Duty to betray them to that Ignorance and Ungodliness which is
the Cause of Damnation, is worse than to Kill the Body. There cannot past 4000
hear in these Churches: Yea, usually, not past 2000 can hear the Preacher's
Voice, intelligently; though 5000 or 6000 may come within the Doors.

And if you suppose that in these 4 Parishes, 16000 may hear one Day, and those
stay at home, and 16000 more hear the next Day (or time) 32000 is but a small
part of Eightscore thousand: And if so far the greatest number must turn
practical Atheists, and not publicly Worship God at all, why should not such
places be denominated Pagan or Atheists from so much the greater part?


L. But what is four Parishes to all the rest, and the Common Case?


M. I pray you enquire in Clement Danes, Westminster, Andrews Holborn,
Sepulchers, Christ-Church, Aldgate, Shoreditch, White-Chappel, Olives and
Magdalenes Southwa^k. etc. and you may hear how many others come near to the
same Case: And must so famous a City as L^ndon be Paganized or made so
Atheistical?


L. You lay heavy Charges on the Parliament and Bishops that have silenced you:
you are best take heed what you say.


M. No honest heed will secure a man in this Age of malignity and perjury. But
you mistake me: I meddle not with the Parliament, Laws, or Bishops, much less
with the King: I leave all men to their righteous Judge, who is at the door: To
his Judgment they* stand or fall: I only tell you what I think it would be in
us that are Vowed to the sacred Ministry, if we desert our Office and Work for
Man's Prohibition.


L. But all these People that you talk of, may find room in other Parish
Churches: Many Churches in London are half empty, or have room enough.


M. Do you not know that the London Churches were burnt down 1666, and to this
day it is but few of them that are built again: but Ministers preach in small
inconvenient Tabernacles: And those that are built, the Seats are commonly all
taken up long ago, and locked up: I heard the last Week an Eminent Esquire say,
that he offered Five Pound for a Seat, and could have none, and he was not able
to stand so long with the Lads in the Alley. People will not let Strangers into
their Seats, when they are Crowded with the Owners: I come into no Church that
has a competent sober Preacher, that is not full; Alleys and Seats. And I pray
you if ten Thousand out of Stepney, or Martins, or Giles would go about the
City to seek for Church-room: 1. How shall they know before hand in what
Churches to find it? 2. When they miss it in three or four, the time will be
over before they find it in a fifth. 3. Few but strong men are able to stand so
long in the Alleys without Seats. 4. And this supposes them to be honest
thirsty Souls that have least need; whereas the worser sort that have no such
appetite are the Multitude, who will stay at home if they have not convenience
near them. 5. And the most willing People will hardly travel far to hear a man
rail at them and slander them, as some do.


L. But what great supply of this defect do your Meetings make? Are not most of
them in the Parishes where there is room? And are not most of your hearers such
as you think have least need?


M. 1. As many Meetings are held in the Greater Parishes as will be endured,
and more would be, could they be suffered at any possible rate.

2. Those that dwell in the greater Parishes, can go further into the less,
when they know beforehand that they have there room and hired Seats. The
Meetings that have been kept up in the City Parishes, were as much for others,
as for the Parishioners, and were there continued, because there was till of
late the least disturbance, and gentlest prosecution.

3. Those that have least need, yet have so great need, as is more regardable
than any bodily want: Souls and Heaven are precious, and all Men have Sins and
Weaknesses and Temptations, and all helps possible are little enough to secure
our Salvation.

4. When godly Persons are at our Assemblies, they take not up that room in the
Parish-Churches which others would have, and so exclude not others.


L. But after all your Meetings, there are still as many thousands as you talk
of that go to no Church.


M. We are unwilling to be found any Cause of that. The more need there is, the
greater is our guilt, if we neglect what we can do for the supply.


L. But what is this to the common Case of Country Parishes?


M. For my part I would have no silenced Minister preach where there is not
evident need. But the Country alas is not without need. 1. Some Parishes are so
great, that part of the Inhabitants have more miles to come to Church, than the
Aged, Women, Weak and Children can Travel. 2. Too many have such Teachers as
the people dare, not take for their Pastors, any more than an Ignorant Quack
for their Physician, or one for their Schoolmaster that cannot read. 3. Some
had able Learned Pastors turned out, and they cannot* prove that their relation
to them as such is dissolved. 4. Some by the ruining Prosecutions of the Clergy
and Bishops Counsils are cast into an overgreat aversness to them, and will
not take such for their Pastors, as they think have the Teeth and Claws of
Wolves. And will not travel far to seek Figs and Grapes on Thorns and Thistles.
And if these err and be to be blamed, they are not therefore to be forsaken,
any more than our Children, if they cannot eat Cheese, are to be famished and
denied all other food.

But I must refer you to a full Treatise which I have written to justify our
Preaching, called, An Apology for it: At least, I pray you Study these Texts of
Scripture, Mat. 5. 13, 14, 15, 16. and 28. 19, 20. Fph. 4. 10, to 17. 1 Timothy 4.
15, 16. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Mat. 24. 45, 46, 47, 48. Act. 4. 19, and 5. 28. 1 Cor.
9. 14, 16. Act. 4. 29. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. 2 Timothy 1. 8, 11,
12, 13. Tit. 2. 15. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 2. 2, 24, 25. Ephesians. 6. 19, 20.
Mat. 10. 7, 8. 16, 17, etc. and 9. 38. Luke 9. 62. and 10. 2.


L. But why may you not keep away five miles from Corporations and places where
you have Preached?


M. Did you not say even now, That small Country Parishes have no need of us?
One Man may serve for two Hundred or a Thousand, better than for many Thousands.

2. The Reasons of our Preaching is Men's real need, and the Churches good:
Therefore we are most obliged, caeteris paribus, where there is most need, and
most probability of doing good.

3. Christ bids us, When they persecute you in one City, fly to another: And
the Apostles first planted their Churches in Cities. If you know the Reasons of
these, you know our Reasons.

To conclude, whose Service is it, think you, to persuade 2000 such Ministers
to give over their Preaching and Ministry? whose interest requires it? Did
Christ or his Apostles ever do or persuade such a thing? But the way to bring
us all to Popery is to disable its chief Adversaries, and to obliterate all
Religion first, that Ignorance and Unconscionableness may be receptive of a new
Form. You must take your Church-Bells, and break and melt them, if you will
cast them anew to bring them to a new sound and use.


Chap. XLIV. Of Lay Conformity. Point I. Whether all Men must trust their Souls
only on the Pastoral Care of such as our Patrons choose, and Bishops institute.
L. I Thought you would have objected only against Forms and Gestures, and you
talk of Matters that affright one at the very stating of the Case: But how are
all Laymen thus obliged?


M. I have before cited the express words of the Canon: They must be presented
and prosecuted if they come not to their Parish-Churches: They must be driven
home from all Neighbour-Churches, if it be one that never Preaches that they
go from, and must be Excommunicate at last; the Minister must be suspended that
admits them.


L. But Bishop Gunning's Chaplain says well, that you may yet privately advise
with other Ministers.


M. I take that from them for a great favor, that they drive us not from all
Christian converse, But give us leave to speak privately with more than the
Parish Priest: But even privately it must be no Nonconformist, for they cannot
be heard at five Miles distance.

But will you seriously tell me, 1. Whether most Parish-Ministers have not so
much Work at home, that they have little time to spare for Strangers?

2. Whether as Men provide first for their own Families before they relieve
Neighbors and the Poor; so Ministers will not think themselves bound to do by
their own Parishes? and scarce afford the scraps to others?

3. Do you think in Conscience that all Souls, and specially the most Ignorant
have not need of a constant Pastor, and the help of his Office, as well as of
an occasional Discourse with a Stranger? If not, what have we Parish Priests
for, and why pay we Tithes to them?


L. But all Places cannot have profound Casuists, and extraordinary Learned
holy Men: Few Churches had an Augustine, a Chrysostom, a Basil, or Nazianzen.


M. All Men cannot have excellent Physicians, nor rich Trades, nor pleasant
Dwellings, nor excellent Wives or Servants, etc. But I think it is lawful to
have the best they can get: Or at least to refuse the intolerable. I had rather
trust Nature for my Physician, than an ignorant Quack or a Knave.


L. But we have many sound and worthy Ministers.


M. And I persuade none to go from such, if their faithful diligence show their
worth. It is not these that we are speaking of. Are there no other?


L. The meanest of them speak sound Doctrine: Even those that the Canon forbids
to Preach or Expound, do read the Scriptures and sound Homilies.


M. So can a good Woman or a Child: And an ignorant Man or Woman can read a
good Physic or Law-Book. Will you therefore take them for your Physicians or
Lawyers? Do you know the case of our Parishes or not? Tell me what you would do
your self in this case.

Suppose a poor Sinner is convinced of his great ignorance and dullness, and
sinful inclinations, and strong temptations, and finds great difference between
a clear Judicious, skilful, serious Minister and others, and yet that the best
does prove too little for his help: This Man dwells in a Parish where in the
Pulpit he hears a young Fellow sometime read a Cento of impertinent shreds,
as Schoolboys make an ignorant Declamation: And sometimes he hears him tell
them what damnable Hypocrites they are, and Schismatics, that scruple any
thing commanded by the Church, and then make long Prayers, and talk religiously
to hide it: And in Company he has not a serious word for a Holy Life, and to
prepare Men for another World, but sometimes reviles Puritans, and at best
talks of worldly things, or Opinions or Factions in Religion; and perhaps will
be Drunk and Rant it with the most Profane. His Parishioner in Doubts and
Trouble of Conscience comes to him for Satisfaction; And the best Answer he can
get is, [What Puritan put these Fears or Scruples in your head? If you trouble
your mind about such matters you will shortly turn Schismatic or go mad: Trust
God, and follow your Business, and be merry. The Scripture is for Divines, and
not for such as you; It is above your Capacity.] The Parishioner having no
better Answer, goes no more: And perhaps an hundred or a thousand in the
Parish have more need of Pastoral help, than this Man: And in the Pulpit he
Preaches them asleep, or into Laughter, or into hatred of Puritans; and out of
the Pulpit does drink, and talk, and live as they.

2. Suppose these Men hear the Clergy tell why they Silence and Banish, and
render odious such Men as we are: And they think with themselves, we perceive
by this that it is not indifferent what pastors we have: And if these reviled
Men be so bad, is our Priest any better, or wise or honester, or more to be
trusted?

3. Suppose these poor people had a Teacher 20 or 10 years that is now cast
out, whose preaching they found to be clear and edifying, and quickening; that
preached all for Faith, and Hope, and Love, and Holiness, and Peace, and Heaven;
and lived in exemplary Charity, Piety, and Righteously and Soberly, and
unweariedly taught them with tenderness publicly and from House to House. And
the sense and experience of their Souls tells them how great the change of
their condition is?

4. Suppose these Men hear the Teacher called Arminian, deriding Infusions of
the Spirit and Grace, and proving that God works on Souls morally by the
aptitude of means, and teaches and changes Men as rational Creatures?

Can you blame this Man if he conclude [My Soul is more to me than my Life: my
Necessity is unquestionable: my Experience what edifieth me is not to be born
down by the scorn of a derider. I am dark and dull, and too bad under the best
helps, but alas profit little by an insipid, sleepy or deriding Speech. As no
man has power to tie me to marry an ugly-Scold, or to trust a Fool, or Knave,
or Enemy for my Physician; so no man has power to deprive me of the needful
helps to my Salvation, when I can have them.


L. But they all Preach the same Word of God.


M. Do you think the mysterious Invisible things of Faith, and the multitude of
hard Cases in Obedience, and the many dangerous Distempers of a carnal,
worldly, dead Heart, have not need of as skilful a Helper, as the Profession of
Law and Physic has? How vast a difference is there between an ignorant
Prater, and a skilful Lawyer or Physician? And as I have more care of my Soul
than of my Body, so men's Laws have less power over it.


L. I do not think the World has a better Clergy than the Church of England.


M. I do challenge often any to name that Nation under Heaven out of the Kings
Dominions that has two thousand worthier Ministers than those that were here
silenced, and reviled, and hunted like Rogues. But I pray you tell me,

1. Do you know how many, and what sort of men the Patrons in England are that
choose them? The Conformists often say that many of them are Simonists: It Is well
known that many of them are taken for the famousest Papists in the Country.
Though they have the wit and faculty to keep off Legal Conviction, or else to
manage their Advowsons by Trustees. And O how well were it with England if none
or few of them were Worldlings, Gluttons, Drunkards, Whoremongers, or Haters,
or Prosecutors of serious godly men? Is there any Body doubts whether there be
such? And though good and sober Lords and Gentlemen will promote good and sober
men, the propagation of the species is the most natural Appetite; and an evil
Tree will bring forth evil Fruit, and a Hater of Godliness is unlike to choose a
godly Pastor. And any man that has Money, be he never so bad or erroneous may
buy an Advowson or Presentation. And must all p^or Souls have no other Pastors
than these men will choose?

And quo jure? how came they by a right to choose Pastors for all the ^and? Did
God ever give it them?

The People at first sinfully gave it them, in blind gratitude, for Building
and Endowing Temples. But Men's Grant many hundred years ago, being sinful, has
no power to bind our Consciences: Our Fore fathers might give their Lands from
their Posterit^; but they could not give away Gods Ordinances, nor the means of
our Salvation. If Patrons might ill dispose of Temples and Tithes, that is
nothing to prove that they may choose Pastors for all men against their wills.


L. But the Bishops have the power of Institution, and they will keep out
unworthy Men.


M. 1. Do they de facto keep them out? I told you truly what a company of
ignorant drunken Readers I was bred up under till I was thirteen years of Age,
or fourteen, and what a sort, were round about us: And yet the Bishops were as
good men as any I know now. Bishop Morton was our Bishop. If we are so hardly
agreed in a notorious matter of Fact, viz. what Pastors multitudes of Parishes
now have, it is in vain to dispute of any thing else.

2. When we have told the Conformists what men are Instituted, their common
answer is, that it is long of the Patrons, and the Law, that enableth not the
Bishop to keep them out: And that if the Bishop deny Institution to any one
that can but say some account of his Faith in Latin, a quare impedit will force
him to Institute him. But whether you will lay it on the Bishops want of Power,
or their Will, it is no relief to the miserable People.

And that which the Bishop requires more to Ordination, is but a Certificate
of a good Conversation; which I never knew man so Heretical or wicked in all my
Life, that could not get from three Ministers.


L. Would you have Patrons turned out of their right?


M. No, it is no right of Gods giving to be the sole Choosers of Pastors for
men Souls. There is a threefold part in Ministers admittance. 1. To judge who
is fit to be by them Ordained: And this is the Ordainers part.

2. To Choose or Consent who shall be the Pastor of Men's Souls: And this is the
Peoples part.

3. To judge and choose who shall have the public Places, Maintenance,
Countenance and Toleration: And this is the Magistrates and Patrons part.


L. But these three may differ, and it is like will do so; how then shall ever
the Churches be provided?


M. There is nothing in this World without difficulties and inconveniences: But
on so great a Treasure a threefold Lock is good security; and has less
inconvenience than the way that we are against. It Is like necessity will at
last make all consent, (as the Cities in Belgium do in their Government.) But
if they should not; 1. None can choose who shall be the Pastor of this or that
Church, till the Ordainers consent that he be in general a Minister in the
Church Universal: So that their Consent so far is previous.

2. If the Patron offer an unfit Man, and the People refuse him, he may offer
others: If they continue to disagree, it is but let the Patron choose who shall
have the Place and Tithes, and the People choose who shall be their Pastor.


L. What confusion will this bring in? Shall one that is no Pastor have the
Benefice? and whom shall the People choose, and where shall they Assemble?


M. If great Men that should keep Gods Order, will obstinately break it, it is
they that cause the confusion, and inferiors cannot remedy it. But if you will
lay by prejudice and have patience I shall open the case to you.

I. The Magistrate as the Patron of the Church, must see that every place have
competent Teaching: And over the mere Catechumens or Auditors, he may appoint
who shall choose these Parish Teachers, and to them as such he may give the
public Place and Maintenance (if Original Dedication to Pastors as such make
it not Sacrilege to alienate it.) And these Teachers are bound to Preach,
Catechize, and do all that is due to Catechumens.

II. If these men be tolerable, no doubt the generality of the People will
choose them for their Pastors, prudence requiring it; rather than lose the
advantage of the Place, and of a countenanced maintained Ministry.

III. If intolerable Men get in, or such as the Flock of Communicants cannot
submit to, it is most like that the People will for the advantage of the public
Place and Countenance, take some Neighbor Pastor for theirs, and there
Communicate, paying their Tithes at home.

IV. If most choose the Parish Teacher for their Pastor, and a few Dissenters go
to the next Parish Church, the inconvenience will be comparatively small.

V. If any number can consent to no Parish Minister near them, it is but to
tolerate their Communion in a place of their own preparing, if the Magistrate
find their Principles and Conversation tolerable, and this under Laws of Peace
and good Behavior; and what harm is in all this?


L. It seems then you take it for unlawful Conformity to take the Parish
Ministers for our Pastors.


M. No Sir; though any Patron choose them, and obtrude them, to whom God has
given no such right, yet if they be fit or tolerable Men, the convenience of
Place, Countenance, Maintenance, and Parish Order, will teach Men, as I said,
finis gratia, in prudence to consent to them. But if such be unfit and
intolerable, I will have better, if I can. And I take it for unlawful
Conformity to take all, or any that are intolerable for our Pastors, because
such Patrons choose them; who I should be loath should choose my Servants, my
Cook, or my Physician. And it is unlawful to give away to a Patron, the Churches
right of Election or Consent, if we can keep it.


Chap. XLV. Point II. Whether Parents have not more right than our Patrons to
choose Pastors and Church Communion for their Children.
M. II. THE next fault of Lay-Conformity is, That they are deprived of due
Family-government, while a Stranger called Patron, and not the Parents, must
choose who shall be Pastor to their Children when they are at Age; and to what
Church their Family shall go.


L. Did not you say before that the King may settle Teachers in all the
Parishes, and force Men to hear them? why then may he not force you and your
Children, and Servants to hear them, as Catechumens?


M. I told you that he ought to take care that no Parish want a fit Teacher,
whom the willing may hear. 2. And that the negligent and unwilling be forced to
hear either them or some other allowed, or justly tolerated Teacher. But I
never said that 1. Because the Catechumens may be forced to hear their Parish
Teacher, who are Freemen, therefore those that are Wives, Children and
Servants may be forced to go to one Church, when the Husband, Parent or Master
commands them to go with him to another. 2. Nor yet that those Masters that are
Communicants, and not Catechumens, may be forced from hearing their own
Pastors, approved or tolerated. It Is enough that they be forced to hear either.
And Men ought not to be deprived of the due Government of their Families.


L. Is not the Patron as fit to choose a Teacher or Pastor for your Wives,
Children and Servants as you are?


M. No; 1. A Man's Interest in, and power over his Wife and Children is earlier
and greater than a Patrons is. It is natural, and by a Law, which no Men have
power to abrogate: Self-government and Family-government are antecedent to
Princes or States Government, and they have no right to dissolve it.

2. I shall gain or lose more by the welfare or misery of my Family than the
Patron will.

3. Nature has given me a greater Love to Wife and Children, and bound me to a
greater care for them, than it has done a Patron.

4. I know them better, and therefore know what they need, and what Teacher and
Communion is fit for them, better than a Patron that never saw them or me.

5. Supposing that I am allowed to choose my own Pastor and Communion, it will
be inconsistent with Family-government, that my Wife, Children and Servants be
forced to go to another place, where I can have no account of them what they
do, and how they behave themselves.

6. If no Man may justly choose for my Children a Tutor, a Trade, a Physician,
or Diet, or Clothing, rather than my self, (much less a worse when I choose a
better;) nor may impose Husbands or Wives on them, much less may any choose for
them against my will and choice, an Office on which their Salvation is so
specially concerned.


L. But if you may force your Wife and Children to what Pastor you choose for
them, it seems then a Man may be forced to one Pastor, rather than another: And
then why may not the Magistrate force you, as well as you may force your Family?


M. You mistake me; I do not say I may force my Family to any Pastor: I say, if
they that are not Communicants but Catechumens, may be forced to one Teacher,
it^s meeter for me to force them, than for a Patron or any other.

2. But as to Communion I will not force them to it at all; nor to this or that
Pastor: But because different Places and Pastors for Communion, signifies
different minds, and will be a great distracting inconvenience to a Family, I
will use all my reason and loving interest in them to bring them all to one
place for Communion: And its very strange if I prevail not; having better
advantage to satisfy their reason, and to persuade them, than a stranger has;
so that such Breaches will be very rare.

But if I be as injurious to them as some Patrons are, and would draw them to
choose an intolerable Pastor, or false Teacher, it is their Interest and Duty
not to be persuaded by me to their hurt.


L. What confusion will this make in the World, when all people, even Wives and
Servants may choose on what Pastor they will depend, and where they will
Communicate.


M. It were a happy World if you, or any did deliver it from differences, yea,
or confusion. But perfect concord is no where but where is perfect knowledge,
holiness, righteousness and love. If it breed confusions in the World that
every Man choose his own Dwelling, Trade, Diet, Clothing, Wife, Servants,
Travels, Company, Physician, Counselor, Tutor, Master, Books, etc. And so that
their Life, Death and Souls be more in their own power than another, there is
no remedy: If you would devise any other Chuser for them of all these, you
would cure that disorder with madness and destruction; who is it that should
choose all these for all other Men? He that chooses for them must answer for
them, and must be accordingly saved or damned for them. If God had appointed
some Pope that he would always make wise and good, to choose for the Kingdoms of
China, Pegu, Tartary, Iapan, Sumatra, and all the rest of the World, what
Religion they should be of, and what they should love and hate, speak and do,
it would have brought the World to a happy state, if all would stand to that
Man's choice: But who can teach God how to Rule the World, and say, Thou
should have made Man otherwise.

Will you mark this: Either it is only to command Men what to choose, or else to
make them choose by efficient determination of their wills; or else to move them
by force without or against their wills, that you would have the World saved
from sin and confusion. There is but these three ways.

And I. To move them against or without their wills, is natural motion or
violent, and will make none of their actions good or bad in a Moral sense: Nil
nisi voluntarium est morale: Thus a Horse, a Watch, a Ship is governed: And you
may lay them in what order you will, when they are dead.

II. To make them good by Physical efficient determination of Men's wills, God
can do it and does not, at least, with most. Man cannot do it: It Is madness to
pretend to it. And I hope you will not accuse God, who only can do it, for not
cureing the sin and confusions of the World this way.

III. It is therefore only the Moral way of Cure that remains, by Laws,
Rewards and Punishments: And has not God made better Laws for Religion than
Man can make? More infallible and perfect, with more aweful Power, and with ten
thousand fold greater Rewards and Punishments? And now what mean you by saying
that every Man must not be left to choose what Religion he list? 1. Every Man is
a rational voluntary Agent, and not a Stone or Brute. 2. Every bad Man is left
undetermined by efficiency of God or Man in all the evil that he does. 3. Every
one in the World is left by God and Man to choose Salvation or Damnation in the
means, and to speed as he chooses. 4. No Man is left Lawless to choose what he
will without the Obligation of a perfect Divine Law.


L. But Men that believe not a God, and a Life to come, must be moved by
temporal punishment which they can feel. Let them stay till death, and they
will deride Religion, and live in wickedness.


M. You are too confused while you talk against confusion.

1. Do you think Men that believe not a God and a Life to come are fit for
Church Communion, and may be forced to it? No nor any that do not desire
Christ, Grace and Glory before all the Baits of sin.

2. Did you think I had pleaded that Men may without punishment do what they
list, and live in wickedness? It Is one thing to restrain them from sin, and
another to constrain them to sin under the name of Religion.

3. Nor did I speak against constraining Atheists and Infidels and Malignant
Enemies to hear the Gospel.

4. But your force cannot constrain them to believe. And

5. You ought not constrain them to Lie and say they believe.

6. And you ought not profanely to Lie in Christ's Name, by telling an
unwilling Communicant that all his sins are pardoned, and that you Seal it to
him.

Do as much good by force as you can, but do no mischief.


L. But has not the King more power over your Family than you have? Sure the
highest power is the greatest, and contains all the lower in it.

The last words are a great mistake: Political Power does not contain Natural,
Personal and Oeconomical, and Ecclesiastical in it; but supposes them all
unalterable and pre-existent, and only uses them to Political ends, that is,
the safety and good of the Commonwealth: And as far as this end requires, the
King has more power of my Wife, Children, Estate, Life, than I have: That is,
He may see that I use my Personal and Family Government so, as may not hurt the
Common^wealth, and do more harm than good.

But that Politic Power does neither contain nor abrogate the other is
evident. 1. The King does not eat and drink for me, nor digest my Meat, nor
rejoice or grieve for me. 2. The King does not sin by my sinning, nor shall be
judged, saved or damned for me. 3. The King may not choose my Wife, Diet, etc.
As aforesaid: Nor has he right to lie with your Wife as you have, nor to
dispose of your Children or Propriety. 4. The King that rules Priests may not
do what the Priest does, administer Sacraments, use the Church Keys, etc. So
that all that he can do, is to overruled Personal, Family and Church Governors,
to the common good, without destroying them.


L. It is for the Common good that all be forced to Communion.


M. Yes, if you can first force them to Faith and Holiness, else it is for the
common Church-confusion, Corruption, and Men's deceit and damnation, and not the
common good.


Chap. XLVI. Point III. Of forcing Men to Schism, by renouncing Communion with
true Churches and Members of Christ.
M. III. THe Third unlawful part of Lay-Conformity is, that they must be forced
from Local Communion with all the Nonconformists that Assemble any where save
in the Parish-Churches or Chapels, and so under pretense of driving them from
Schism, they are driven into notorious Schism.


L. How prove you that it is their Duty to have any such Communion with
Nonconformists Conventicles? If you are Scismaticks, it is a Sin to Communicate
with you.


M. 1. I prove Communion with us a Duty; (Though it be not every Man's Duty to be
Locally present with us, it is every Man's Duty not to avoid it as an unlawful
thing, but to be willing of it as he has occasion).

2. It is a Duty for all Christians to own Communion with all true Members of
the Body of Christ. But Nonconformists and their Assemblies for Worship, are
true Members of the Body of Christ. Ergo --

The major is most fully proved by Christ, Ioh. 17. 24. and Paul 1 Cor. 12.
throughout, and Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, to the 17. and Romans 14. and 15. and many other
Scriptures.

The minor I prove. All those are true Members of the Body of Christ, who have
all the Essentials necessary to the Constitution of such Members. But so have
the Nonconformists and their Church Assemblies (as before described:) Ergo.

The major none but the ignorant of Logic will deny.

As to the minor, They that have true Christian Faith, Hope, and Love, have all
that is Essential to personal Members: And the Churches that have Pastors and
People communicating in that Faith, Hope and Love, in Doctrine, Worship,
Sacraments and tolerable Discipline, are true Churches, parts of the Universal
Church. But such are many Persons and Churches of Nonconformists. Ergo.

The major all sound and knowing Christians grant.

For the minor no proof is necessary but our Profession, till it be disproved.
And let the Accusers of the Brethren, as they love themselves, take this
warning before they undertake to disprove it: Do it by no Argument that will
ten times more condemn your selves and your Church, than such Nonconformists.

2. The second Argument is this: It is a Sin of Schism to refuse Communion with
those that Christ receives, so we own not any of their sin: Romans 15. 6. etc.
But Christ receives (into his Communion) the foresaid Nonconformists and their
Worshipping Assemblies. Proved as before.

3. It is a Sin to deny the lawfulness of Communion with Christians and their
Assemblies, for lesser faults than those Persons and Assemblies had, whose
Communion Christ and his Apostles were for: But so must they that will deny the
lawfulness of Communion with the said Nonconformists and their Assemblies. --

The major none will deny that take Christ and his Apostles for their Teachers.

The minor is easily proved: The Church of the Jews had Priests unlawfully
introduced, and corrupt Teachers, and Worship, and yet Christ disowned not
Communion with them in Synagogues, and Temple and Houses, save only that he
Conformed not to their sinful Traditions and Corruptions. The Church of the
Corinthians had men guilty of Schism, and Faction, and quarrelling with the
Apostle, wronging each other, sinful Law Suits, Scandalous Persons, denying the
Resurrection, grossly abusing the Sacrament and Communion, etc. The Churches of
Galatia, Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatira, Sardis, etc. had such faults as I need not
tell you of. Yet no Man is bid or allowed to disown Communion with them. You
can truly prove no such by those in question.

Arg. 3. Ad hominem: It is lawful to communicate with the Churches of England,
that have more Faults than the Nonconformists: Ergo it is lawful to communicate
with them that have fewer.

We challenge any to prove so many and such Faults by us as I have here before
proved by your Church. And if for ours, Separation from us be a Duty from
yours, it proves a Duty much more.

Arg. 4. It is a Schismatical Doctrine which would teach Men by parity of
Reason to renounce communion with all Churches and Christians on Earth, or near
all.

But such is that which would teach Men to renounce communion with all the
Nonconformists and their Worshipping Assemblies.

The major is unquestionable.

The minor is proved, In that all or near all the Christians on Earth have as
great Faults as the Nonconformists and their Assemblie^. O that God would so
bless the World, as to make all the Churches of the Armenians, Abassians,
Syrians, Georgians, Circassians, Greeks, Moscovites, Papists, Lutherans, and
all other Protestants, etc. but as knowing, sincere, faithful, obedient, etc.
as those in England that you revile, cast out and prosecute.


L. But Communion in Schism is unlawful: But you are accused of Schism, and so
are your Assemblies.


M. And the Church of England is as loudly accused of Schism and Heresy by the
Papists: and too much by the Greeks, if the Patriarch Jeremy spoke their Sense.
Art they therefore Schismatics indeed? None forwarder to accuse than the
Ignorant or Guilty! Judge by what I have said of our Judgment in my Search for
the Schismatic. We abhor Schism, and have labored to have healed the Wounds
of the Church with all our power these 22 years and more; And who be they that
have resisted it, and hate the only healing Balsam?

2. It is not true that we must have Communion with no Church that is guilty of
Schism, though we must not be guilty of Schism it self. If the Schism be Apostasy
that cuts them off from Christ and the Church universal, we must not have
Christian communion with such, that are no Christians. But if they are only
guilty of Schism from some particular Church, and of Schism in the Universal
Church, and not from it, wounding and not dismembring, we must not renounce
communion with such, save only as with any other scandalous Sins, so far as
impenitence proves ungodliness. The Church of Corinth was much guilty of
Schism, and so was that of Galatia; and yet none were therefore to renounce
their Communion. Was not Peter guilty of some Schism? Gal. 2. I doubt there are
few Churches on Earth that are not herein guilty, either in East, South, West
or North. And must we renounce communion with them all? That is, to commit
tenfold greater Schism for fear of Schism.

3. Read impartially my Search for the Schismatic, and if the Prelates thus
mentioned be not far more guilty of Schism, than we are, I despair of ever
understanding what Schism is. This would be the strongest Argument for
separation from them: and is so used by many Separatists.


Chap. XLVII. Point IV. Of obliging the Laity to live without any more benefit
of Disciplin^ than is in the Public Churches.
M. IV. THe next part of Lay-Conformity is this: Christ, who instituted
Ministry, Word and Sacraments, has also instituted a certain determinate
Discipline in his Church, of great use to the Church, and to particular Souls:
And this is considerable, 1. As a Duty. 2. As a Benefit. And no Man has
authority, 1. To disoblige us from a Duty of Christ's imposing; 2. Or to
deprive us of a Benefit of Christ's giving. But Conformity does both these to
the Laity in a great degree.


L. What mean you by that Discipline? I thought our Church had rather too sharp
Discipline? I hope you mean not the Geneva Discipline, or the Scots
Presbyteries and Stool of Repentance.


M. I mean nothing but what as to the Matter, the Episcopal Party write for as
the Ordinance of Christ: The true exercise of the Keys, and the previous Acts.
That is, That God has made the Church to be as it were the Porch of Heaven, a
Society gathered out of the Infidel World, sanctified to God, and prepared for
Glory; and therefore he would have none in his Church, but such as profess
Faith, Love and Holiness, and renounce a fleshly, sensual, worldly and profane
Life: And the Pastors bear the Keys of Trust and Government to judge of such;
that is, who are to be taken in, and who to be cast out, and who to be
admonished and cured of scandalous Sins: And all the Members are bound to
preserve the Purity of themselves, and the Society in their places; And
therefore if a Brother live scandalously, contrary to his Profession, his
Neighbor that has notice of it, is to tell him of his fault, and if he hear
not, and repent not, to warn and admonish him before witnesses: and if yet he
repent not, to tell the Church; and if yet he repent not, and hear not the
Church, he is to be avoided, as one that is none of their Communion. But if
warning, persuasion, Prayers and Patience, bring him to Repentance, the Church
is gladly to pronounce his forgiveness by God, and to receive him. This is the
Discipline which Christ has instituted, and the Christian Churches have
Professed.


L. This calling Men to Repentance personally will but disturb and distract the
Parishes: Men will never endure it: And that is no Duty that will do harm.


M. They are not fit to be Communicants or Members of a Christian Church that
will not endure it. It is the Crime of the Church Governors that they receive,
yea, drive such into the Church, as will not endure the Laws of Christ, and
Church-Duties, and then cast by such Duties, because Men will not endure them.

As if you took Scholars into a School that will not endure Government and
Correction, or Soldiers into an Army that will not endure Command and
Discipline; and then omit it, and leave them to their wills, because they will
not endure it. Or, as if you would take Servants that will not be commanded,
nor endure Labor, and then let them be masterless and idle, because they will
not endure service. Who allowed you to take and keep such in Christ's Church,
that will not endure either to live obediently, or be called to Repentance?

I confess that to let all Men alone in their sin, is the way to some kind of
Peace in the Parish: But it is not Christ's Peace, but the Devils, by which he
keeps possession of Souls and Countries, till Christ break his peace, and cast
him out; such peace will end in endless sorrow.


L. What Reasons can you give for the necessity of such a sort of Discipline,
and why it may not be f^rborn?


M. 1. It is Christ's Law and Institution, and that is the same reason that we
give for our Christianity it self.


L. But I have read in Erastus, Seldom, Ludov. Moulin and Prin, that Christ did
but tell his Disciples how they should carry themselves under the Jewish
Government, and use their Sanedrims or Iudicatures, and did not institute any
new sort of Church Discipline.


M. Christ's taking occasion from the Jewish Judicatures to institute his
Discipline, does no more prove that he did not obligatorily institute it, than
his calling twelve Apostles according to the number of the Tribes, and his
taking occasion from former practice, for Baptism, Ministry, Elders, etc. does
prove that he ordained no such things.

2. What need Christ command his Disciples to use that Jewish Government which
was in use before, and they could not avoid?

3. Christ knew that the Jewish Government was presently going down, and tells
his Disciples that they should be judged and scourged as Malefactors in those
Synagogues. And is it like then that he is calling them to exercise their
discipline in those Synagogues.

4. If it were so, it will hold a fortiore, that if Christ during the Jewish
Policy command them to use such a Discipline, much more in his own Churches.


L. What are your other Reasons for it?


M. 2. The very Nature of Christ's Church required it, which is a Society
separated from the World under special Laws of Holiness and Love, and for
special heavenly Ends: If therefore it shall be confounded with the World, and
not separated to Christ, it is no Church.

3. Christ did it for the Honor of himself, and his Kingdom: If he be no more
for Holiness than the Infidel and Heathen World is, what is he better than
they, or how is he a Savior, or what is the Church better than Infidels?

4. It is needful to save Heathens from deceit that would come into the Church,
and to convince them that their impure Communion is insufficient.

5. It is needful to save Christians from damning deceit, that they may not
think that a dead, barren, unholy Faith and Name of Christianity will save
them, without a holy, obedient Heart and Life.

6. It is needful to keep Christ's Ordinances from falsifying Profanation: If a
sealed Pardon and Gift of Life shall in the Sacraments be given, as commonly to
Dogs as Children, it is a taking God's Name in vain, and profane belying Jesus
Christ.

7. It is needful to bring Sinners to Repentance, that they may be Pardoned and
Saved.

8. And it is needful to the comforting absolution of Penitents.

9. Accordingly God's Church in all Ages has owned it as their Law of Christ's
institution, to this day.


L. But some learned Men say, This was but because there was at first no
Christian Magistrate: But when there was such the Discipline fell into their
hands.


M. The first Christian Magistrates finding the Church in Possession of it,
confirmed it, and too much accumulated and added to it; but took it not away.

Of this see a small Book which I wrote of the Magistrates Power in Religion,
to Dr. Lud. Moulin, which may end all this dispute. Briefly, I ask you,

Qu. 1. Would you have all Infidels and Pagans baptized, and Communicate
without any Profession of the Christian Religion first?


L. God forbid: That Is a Contradiction.


M. Shall any words go for a Profession, or what must that Profession be?


L. It must be a Profession of Christian Faith and Obedience.


M. Who must try and judge of that Profession, whether it be Christianity or
not: Is it Magistrates or Pastors?


L. Magistrates have somewhat else to do: Else they must study and exercise
that work alone; for they will have no time for Civil Government, if they
undertake this.


M. Did not Christ institute an Office for it, and give them this Power of the
Keys? And if one half that Office cease as soon as Magistrates were
Christians, why not the other half, and so Magistrates must Preach, Baptize,
and celebrate the Sacrament.


L. It must be no doubt the Ministerial Office, to judge who is fit to be in
Church Communion: Else they were Slaves, if they must be forced to take all
incapable Men to their Charge and Communion against their Consciences and
Wills: No Physician, Tutor or Schoolmaster, will be forced to take such
Patients, Pupils or Scholars, as will not be ruled by him, and will make make
him do what they list, against his Will.


M. You must confess the use of discipline, or else openly disown the Word of
God, the very Being of the Church, and the Judgment of the Universal Church to
this day. And do you think then that to deprive the Church of this is a lawful
part of Conformity?


L. How prove you that the Laity is deprived of it?


M. 1. In our Great Parishes, the People are few of them known to the Priest or
to one another. Of the two Parishes of my last abode, I do not think but there
are Fifty Thousand unknown to the Minister and to each other. And how can these
admonish the Offenders, or the Minister exercise this discipline upon unknown
Persons?

2. The People know that it is in vain to begin where there can be no progress.
To what purpose is it to tell the Church, when it is sure to do more harm than
good. 1. The swarm of the Vicious is so great, that they cannot be Prosecuted.
2. The Minister himself forbeareth it as unpracticable. 3. The accused must be
Prosecuted at rates which Men cannot bear. 4. And before Bishops, that cannot
possibly do this work to one of a Thousand, any more than one Schoolmaster can
Try and Correct all the faulty Scholars in a Diocese. 5. And Men must be Judges
that will never call Sinners to Repentance with Ministerial Evidence, and Love,
and Patience, but like Secular Courts, bid them Recant or be Excommunicate. 6.
And the Cause must be decided by Laymen that profanely usurp the Power of the
Keys. And how is Christ's discipline here possible? Polluted, common Churches
frighten away the Religious conscionable People.


L. Do you not before complain of too much exercise of Discipline by
Excommunications?


M. Yes, of Discipline against Christ: It is not enough for your Churches to be
common and unclean without true Discipline, but when you should drive out the
Dogs and Swine, you turn out the Children: Witness all the forementioned
Canons. As I said, you first force in all the ignorant ungodly multitude that
are unfit; then these are the strength and major part: Then they cannot come
under due Discipline; then this grieveth Religious People, and they find fault
with it. And then they must be taken for Schismatics, and condemned and ruined
for finding fault.

In short, what need there disputing: Is it not notorious matter of fact that
this Discipline is not exercised against one Drunkard, Swearer, Fornicator,
etc. of a multitude? and are not Men then deprived of the use of it? And when
it is known that they cannot have it in most or many Parishes, how are they
bound to live and die without the benefit of it?


L. Do you think Men are bound to separate from all Churches that have not this
Discipline? Sure it is not Essential to the Church.


M. I do not think that Preaching, as distinct from reading, is essential to a
Church; but that it may be at least for a time a sorry Church without it, as
those in Moscovy are. But I would not continue in such a Church that is without
it, if I can have a better. It Is one thing what a Man should endure that can
have no better without more hurt than good; and another thing what Men should
choose in obedience to Christ, and for their own and the Churches good that can
attain it. Do you think it is lawful to omit all Duty that is not essential to
the Church? surely your many humane Offices, your Forms and Ceremonies, your
Declarations and Subscriptions to them, are further from being essential than
true Discipline is, and yet you think that the omission of these is
unsufferable: Is man's accidental inventions more necessary than Christ's
Ordinance and Church Government?


L. The Presbyterians call their Discipline the Kingdom of Christ, and feign
their Government to be Christ's.


M. I speak for nothing proper to Presbyterians: For no Lay Elders, nor Synods
that by Vote govern all the Churches of the Land, but only for that substance
of Parish Discipline which all acknowledge, not resisting Appeals from abusive
Ministers to Bishops or Magistrates. Bucer was no Adversary to moderate
Episcopacy Yet if you will read him de Regno Dei, de Confirmat. etc. to King
Edward 6. for Parish Discipline, I shall need to say no more to you this
subject.


Chap. XLVIII. Point V. The discountenancing the fear of sin, and the practice
of serious godliness.
M. V. I will add next this aggravation which comprehends many parts of
Conformity.

No true Christian doubts, but seriousness and diligence in serving God, and
making our Calling and Election sure, and Obedience to Gods Law, and fear of
sinning, are of absolute necessity to Salvation. And how greatly the Laity is
discouraged and frightened from all this by the course of Conformity is
notorious.


L. Who does discourage them? Do not all our Ministers Preach for Obedience and
Godliness? Does not our Liturgy pray that the rest of our lives hereafter may
be pure and holy, that we may attain Eternal Life?


M. Yes, and more than so, you read the Scripture which is all for holiness:
The deeper is the guilt of Hypocrisy and Malignity in them that seek to root
it out: Out of their own mouths will they be judged, and beaten with many
stripes. Judge by these instances.

1. How Children are Baptized with Godfathers, and how Confirmed after, and
Admitted to Communion, and forced to it, I showed before.

2. So many humane Institutions are imposed on Men as necessary to Communion,
that he must be a Man of more Learning and Understanding than I have, or with
all the study of my Life could obtain, who can discern them all to be Lawful:
And he that calls any of them sinful is Excommunicate ipso jure.

3. It is certain that a great part of the Laity understand not the Creed, and
those few that set themselves to seek for saving knowledge, attain so little in
their secular course of Life, as that we must be glad if they understand all
the Catechism, the Creed, Lords Prayer and Ten Commandments, and take such for
extraordinarily wife: And yet if one of these think a Form, a Ceremony, a Lay
Chancellors Discipline, etc. to be repugnant to the Word of God, and say it, he
is Excommunicate.

4. By this it is absolutely necessary that the generality of men, even all
England that know not more than I do, must blindly believe as the Canon and
Priest bids them, barely on their Word, or else they must falsely pretend to
believe them, or be all liable to Excommunication. And so an implicit Faith in
the Canon-Makers and Bishops is become the necessary Religion of the Land. And
then if the Bishops turn we must all turn with them.

5. By this means wilful ignorance is made necessary. For it is a dangerous
thing (as I have found it) to study for knowledge in Gods Word, lest it should
lead us to differ from something in the Canons, Liturgy or Bishops, and then we
are liable to ruin. And so they that will be Church Members must take heed of
studying Gods Word, or searching after Truth.

5. If for thinking and saying any of the Impositions are amiss, they be once
Excommunicated, or but noted as Dissenters, they are rendered odious to the
Church-Courts and Priests, and by them to the credulous Obsequious Herd; and
it is likely that in the Pulpit they will be proclaimed Hypocrites,
Schismatics, unquiet Spirits, Phanaticks, and in as much danger of Damnation
as Murderers or Adulterers, who are as safe as they.

6. By this means fear of sinning, and the danger of dissenting being so
usually conjunct, the avoiding of sin is made Puritanism, and a suspicious
sign, if not a common scorn.

7. By this means ignorant Youth is quite discouraged from serious piety and
fear of sin, lest they fall under common scorn; and it is well if they follow
not the multitude and be scorners of Obedience to God themselves. And the very
plea of Conscience (which is but obeying God) is made a disgrace or mockery,
and a tender Conscience, made equivalent with a self-conceited Schismatic.

8. It is no danger to meet by hundreds at a Playhouse; or by great numbers at
Taverns, Alehouses, Coffee-houses, Horseraces, etc. But if a few Neighbors
meet to Pray or Excite each other in the Love of God and Heaven, you know what
the danger is.

9. If any Minister will but leave Preaching the Gospel of Christ, and turn
Physician, he may be quiet; though hebe of the same judgment that he was before;
the forbearing of his Ministry may preserve his peace. There are now in this
City ejected Ministers who have forsaken their Function, and are Doctors of
Physic, and they live in great wealth and acceptance: There are Physicians and
Ministers of the same judgment, and perhaps dwell together in the same House
(it was the case of Dr. Micklethwait and me.) The Physician is honored, and
the Minister called and used as a Rogue, though they were of the same mind.
There are some Nonconforming Ministers, that though they are Doctors of Physic,
yet dare not cease their Ministry, but practice both: These are welcomed to the
Sick, but the Healthful banish them or hunt them away, notwithstanding their
acceptance as Physicians, the hatred of their Preaching being more prevalent.


L. Sure they Preach some dangerous Doctrine.


M. Not a word of such is charged on them, though malicious Persons come to hear
them, and inform against them. Their writings tell the World their Doctrine.
Dr. Clifford was one of them who has written of the Covenants: Dr. Gilpin is
one of them who has written of Temptations, driven from Newcastle.

Some ejected Ministers Educate their Sons to Physic, and though they be of
their Fathers mind, the Sons are highly esteemed and honored, and the Aged
Fathers laid in Jayl: This last Week old Dr. Grew that is about 80 or 79 years
of Age, and almost Blind, and has lived there 36 years and more, (known by
some writings) a Man of a calm, quiet, sober, peaceable Temper, was sent to the
common Jayl at Coventry for dwelling there, and sometimes exhorting his old
Hearers to fear God; and he has here a Son, and a Son-in-Law, Doctors of
Physic, deservedly honored, who if they did but Preach the Gospel might speed
as ill as he.

10. If an ejected Minister would but teach the Children of the Laity, though it
were but to read, and though there be no other Schoolmaster near, the people
must rather have their Children untaught, and must not be suffered to have so
needful a help.

11. If a Minister would give over Preaching, yet if his old Hearers desire his
Neighborhood, that they may have the benefit of his Conference, they must not
enjoy it, lest he whisper Nonconformity to them, but he must be Banished five
Miles not only from Corporations, but from every place wherever he Preached
these twenty years. I know some such who have traveled much abroad, who can
hardly find a place in that part of England that is not within five Miles of a
Corporation or some place where they have Preached: And those few places have
seldom any untenanted Houses: And if rarely such a House be found, it is like
enough that the Landlord will have no such Tenant: Or if he would, it is ten to
one the Minister is not able to take it and pay his Rent; besides his undoing
in removal, and putting off his former House and Goods.

12. If any one that fears sinning by Conformity, be never so falsely accused,
he usually accounts it his Wisdom to suffer patiently whatever Men will say
or do, without Self-defence: I saw two Warrants against a Layman this Week,
which expressed his Hearing two Ministers as Sworn by two poor Beggarly Women;
when I can witness that both their Oaths were false, and that neither of those
Ministers Preached at the time and place that they Swore they Preached: For my
House being at the next Door, I heard that it was not they that then Preached.
But I suppose its all one: They dare not question it.

I heard of one that said he woulp Swear Treason against a Nonconformist: and
being asked, What he said, and whether ever he heard him speak? He said, No;
but he heard him whistle Treason: And being asked, How whistling could be
Treason? He said, That he whistled the same Tune that a Ballad was Sung in,
that they said had Treasonable words in it.

13. In the mean time, let but Men be utterly void of Conscience and Fear of
Sinning, and what can hinder them from Saying, Covenanting, Swearing, Doing,
any thing that is required of them in order to a Benefice, or to the Estimation
of an obedient Son of the Church. And then he can Preach down Nonconformists as
intolerable Rogues.

And thus the Laity that will fear Sin, and search the Scriptures, and have a
Faith of their own, must go through all these Discouragements, if they be not
so unhappily happy, as to attain to assurance or belief that all the
Impositions in Conformity are lawful.


Chap. XLIX. Point VI. The Laity denied Baptism, who refuse the foresaid way of
Godfathers, as it excludes the Parents as unlawful.
M. VI. I Hope you will not say it is lawful to be unchristened, or to have
their Children unbaptized: And you cannot say it is lawful to obey the Canon
and Rubric about Godfathers, against ones Conscience.


L. An erroneous Conscience must be rectified.


M. Is it merely at Command? Can you do it? Or can any do it when they will?
There is no Man without Error: why do not all the Clergy rectify their own
judgment, and presently free themselves from Error? If you can teach them this
Art of rectifying Conscience, it is best do it before they go to the University,
or before they spend much time and labor in study. How many years study, and
reading might this Art save them? Presently rectify all your erroneous
opinions, and save the labor.


L. But when men have sufficient help, they are unexcusable if they go on in
Error.


M. Then either no Man living has sufficient help, or else all Men are
unexcusable: For it is most certain that all Men go on in a multitude of Errors.


L. But every Error hinders not Men's right to Baptism.


M. And do you think this does? will you try now and prove to me that I may be
unexcuseable, 1. That Children have right to Baptism merely upon the
presentation of a Neighbor or Stranger that never owned them.

2. That it is not the Parents Duty to dedicate them solemnly to Christ, and to
be the Person (as having power of them) that must Covenant for them.

3. That it is lawful for Neighbors or Strangers, to undertake and Vow that
for the Child's Education, which they are neither able to perform, nor ever
intended it?

4. That it is lawful for Parents either to give up their Children to such
Sponsors for to Educate them, or to seek or accept such to Vow and Covenant,
that which the Parents know they never meant to do, and which if asked, [Do you
seriously intend to do all this for my Child?] they will say, No: Is it lawful
thus to Suborn Men, and put them on so great a Sin? Cure these Errors in me if
you can.


L. I told you before that they may agree to speak as in your Name.


M. And I told you, so many do: but that is nothing to Conformity, it being none
of the sense of the Church, as I proved.

Was this any of the conditions of Baptism of Christ's making? was this
necessary when Philip said to the Eunuch, If thou believe with all thy heart,
thou may be baptized? Or when Paul said, Else were your Children unclean, but
now are they holy? 1 Cor. 7. 14.


L. But your Child shall not be unbaptized for this: The Church will constrain
the Baptizing of it.


M. Whom will they constrain? 1. Not the Minister: He is not to Baptize it
unless it be brought and desired. 2. Not the Godfathers: For none can compel
any to be a Godfather, nor ever do. 3. But it is the Parent that is compelled?
How? Those that hold it lawful will do it without Compulsion, the Baptizing of
their Child being desirable to them. But those that think it a Sin, will rather
be Excommunicate and lie in Jail; and so they cannot compel them. And the
Anabaptists Children are mostly unbaptized for all their Compulsion. But the
usual way of Nonconformists is to elude the Canon, and to agree privately with
the Godfathers to be but Witnesses or Seconds, and that the Parent himself will
be there present, and when the Questions are put to the Godfathers, will show
his consent by bowing, though he may not speak.

But such shifts to avoid the Evil of Conformity, is no Justification of
Conformity or the Canon, nor of any that will deny Baptism for an unnecessary
if not an ungodly device of Man; and that when themselves seem to make Baptism
necessary to Salvation; and do clearly make it a means that ascertaineth
Salvation to Infants.


Chap. L. Point VII. Of Denying Baptism to them that dare not submit to the use
of the English Crossing.
M. VII. What is said against our way of Crossing, as a dedicating Sign, and
Badge of Christianity, if not a Humane Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace, I
have said before, and must not repeat: And also what it is for Ministers to
Assent and Consent to reject all from Baptism that are not submitted to it.

I am now only to tell you that this Submission is a part of the Lay-conformit,
for want of which they are punished with the denial of Baptism.


L. But they that are against it may yet let the Minister use it on their
Children: That Is his act, and not theirs: and they cannot hinder him: They send
their Children to be Baptized, and not to be Crossed.


M. But we have many Antipadobaptists, and converted Jews to be Baptized at Age.

2. And though I am much of your mind in this, yet all wiser Men are not; and the
case is very difficult as to Infants: If one knew beforehand that the Priest
would use Oil, and Spittle, and Exorcism, and invocate Saints and Angels over
the baptized Child, it were hard to say, I send him only to be Baptized] when
he knew how sinfully it will be done. The truth is, I can justify no Man that
will submit his Child to such a crossing at Baptism, that can caeteris paribus
have it by another better done, though Prohibited by Man: We must not be guilty
of other Men's Sins, nor of Church Corruptions.


L. Christ that will have mercy and not sacrifice, would not have men refuse
Christendom for fear of a Cross.


M. Christ who would have Teachers learn that Lesson, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, would have no Minister deny Christendom to such as think their
crossing sinful: And yet he would have no Man commit any Sin, to gain Baptism:
but will save the unbaptized that desired it, so they might have had it
without; and will himself show Mercy to such as consent not to a polluted
Sacrifice. And would have us prefer a lawful way when we can have it. Baptism
is our Renunciation of Sin.


CHAP. LI. POINT VIII. Of Rejecting not-Kneelers from Communion.
L. AND well they deserve it that will not reverently receive so great a Gift
upon their knees from God.


M. Do you think it is for want of humble Reverence? Do they not kneel after
and longer to God in Prayers publicly, and in their Families and Chambers,
than most that blame them? Were Christ's Apostles unreverent that did not kneel
at receiving it in his own visible presence? Was all the universal Church
unreverent, that for 600 Years, if not 1000 after Christ forbad strictly all
Adoration by kneeling every Lords Day, because they would use a Laudatory
Gesture, denoting their belief of Christ's Resurrection? Do those men show more
Reverence to God and Religion, that will kneel at the Altar, and scarce ever
kneel to God at home, and seldom use his Name but with profanation? It is not
unreverence that causes their dissent.


L. I know no just cause they have of this dissent.


M. I confess, nor I, while the open Doctrine of the Church renounceth all
Bread-worship and Idolatry: But were it among Papists, where the Doctrine
expounds the action, I durst not do it.

But I told you before what moves them, which I must not again repeat. But I
will repeat it, that it is a heinous injury to the Church, and the particular
Persons, that on the account of so small and doubtful a circumstance, wherein
all antiquity is against the imposers; they should deny Communion with Christ
and his Church as much as in them lies to faithful Christians; and should turn
the Sacrament of Love for no just cause, into an occasion of hatred and
persecution; and the Sacrament of Unity, into an Engine of division, by their
own needless impositions to perplex men's Consciences, and set people one
against another: O what a snare and instrument of wrath and discord, and
inhumane usage of other men, do many turn that blessed Sacrament into, which is
instituted for the Communion of Saints in unfeigned Love. The more such magnify
the Sacrament as the very Flesh and Blood of Christ, the more do they condemn
themselves.


CHAP. LII. POINT IX. Of denying Laymen Communion in a Neighbor Parish
Church, when they dare not Communicate in their own Parish, for the Reasons
aforesaid.
M. IX DO you think it is a sin deserving exclusion from Christian Communion,
for a man to think it unlawful for him to own and encourage the Ministry of an
ignorant, insufficient, or grossly scandalous, or hurtful Teacher. A poor
Christian that is unwilling to be damned, and reads that he should love his
Neighbor as himself; perhaps, hears the Priest tell the People what
hypocrites and odious persons Non-conformists are, and exhorts them to avoid
such, and to prosecute them, and root them out as the intolerable enemies of
Church and State, and as unfit to be Members of any Society: He is acquainted
with diverse Non-conformists, their Lives, and their Books and Doctrines, and
finds the clean contrary. He reads in Scripture, [See that ye love one another
with a pure heart fervently,] He hears from the Pulpit, [See that ye hate one
another, and seek the destruction of one another,] Christ says, [Love your
enemies] the Priest exhorts them [to root out their friends] Christ says [He
that receives you, receives me: and shake off the dust of your Feet against
them that receive you not: It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah than for
such] the Priest says [He that receives such Ministers, sins against
Christ, and he that has any communion with them is a Schismatic,] The man
reads, [Beware of false Prophets; and thinks it a sin to encourage the
teachers of lies and wickedness] and he reads [He that hates his Brother is
a Murderer, and has not eternal Life: and if I have not charity, I am but as
sounding Brass, etc.] He thinks him a false teacher, that contradicts Christ;
and that seeks to damn the hearers. And he thinks that no tongue can more
contradict Christ, than that which Preaches down Love, and Preaches for
hating godly Men, though on slanderous pretenses, and that no man can do more to
damn the People, than he that draws them from love, to such hatred.

Another lives in a Parish where a dry ignorant fellow affords him no such
help as he is conscious his soul needs, and where the Common Prayer is so
much better, than the Sermon, that were it not for that, he might better stay
at home. And where the Priests Conversation encourages the Drunkards and
Profane, and vilifieth godly Men.

This man is for the Church Way, but for a better Minister: The question is,
whether for this he be so great a sinner that all neighboring Ministers must
drive him away, and deny him Communion.

Another honest Christian takes it for a sin to kneel at the Railes, or to
join with the Organs, or to receive or desire the Diocesan manner of
Confirmation, or to forbear Communion with all Christians whom the Churchmen
here condemn or cast out. The question is, whether it be no wrong to any of
these to be denied Communion at a neighbor Parish, where his doubts are
removed?

I prove that he has right to such neighbor Communion.

1. Because he is a Member of Christ's Body, the Catholic Church, and therefore
has right to the Communion of Saints. And to believe that in the Creed, and
condemn it in Practice, is to believe to condemnation.

2. They themselves teach that a true Christian has right to Communion with
all Churches, where he has just occasion to seek it.

3. They say that there is no Church without a Bishop, and that the
Diocesan-Church is the least true political Church: And if so, he separateth
not from any Church that separateth not from the Diocesan.

4. These foresaid persons do nothing to forfeit the Communion of neighbor
Churches; therefore it is a sin and wrong to deny it them. If it were proved an
error to avoid that as a sin which they avoid, all mankind has errors; and
to be overfearful of Fire, or Water, or Plague, or Poison, is a tolerable safe
weakness, and not like the sins that swarm in multitudes of tolerated
Parishioners.


L. That which is not so immoral, as Fornication, Drunkenness, Cursing and
Swearing, may be more hurtful to the Church, and so deserve greater severity
from Governors.


M. The Church-Keys are to be used with due relation to Heaven, and those are
to be taken in, or cast out, that Christ will take in, or cast out from Heaven:
And if you think he will damn an obedient godly Christian for fearing to
partake of the sin of wicked Priests, or for fearing to be poisoned with
love-killing Doctrine, or for fearing the vain Worship of men's traditions,
rather than a profane derider of Conscience, and a filthy Fornicator, Drunkard
or Blasphemer; I shall not think it worth my labor to dispute with you.

But men that take the Churches welfare to lie in the wealth and domination of
such as they, more than in the Holy Obedience, Conscience, and Piety of the
People, will object the same that you now do.


CHAP. LIII. POINT X. Of Swearing never to endeavor any alteration of
Government in the Church.
M. HOW far this extends objectively I before proved X. by. 1. The words of
the Oaths. 2. The consent of the Bishops. 3. And the words of the seven Canons;
and the Et Caetera Canon in 1640. so that there is no doubt of it.

2. How far it extends as to the persons obliged, I before told you, and you
may read; 1. In the Corporation Act, which imposes it on all Corporations. 2.
In the Vestry Act, which imposes it on all Church-Vestries. 3. In the Act of
Uniformity, which imposes the subscription on all the Clergy. 4. In the Oxford
Act of Banishment, which imposes the Oath on Non-conformists, and more. 5. In
the Militia Act, which imposes it on all the Military Commanders, and
Soldiers in the Land; so that you may well say, that is a National Covenant or
Oath.

3. What is amiss in the Church Government that needs an amending alteration,
I have so often told you, that I will not repeat it. Judge then what this Oath
imports.


L. It could never be the meaning of the Parliament, that no man shall
endeavor to amend the faults of any Officers, Courts or Actions; for they
often amend their own Acts of Parliament; and they reserve a Power in King and
Parliament, to make alterations even in Church Governments: But that belongs
not to the People, nor should they endeavor it.


M. 1. I hope you will not confound Stated Offices, and Men's Exercise of them
in Practice. I grant that they do not bind us by Oath never to endeavor that
Bishops, and all the Officers of their Courts may be honest men, and slander,
and injure no man against Law, etc. But it is the Offices, as here stated, that
are made thus far unalterable, named in the Canon [Arch-Bishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear Office therein.]

2. I grant, that the Law is made to bind none but Subjects; and that an
altering power is reserved to King and Parliament: But it does not follow, that
all the Subjects be not bound by it: Though They may change Laws, yet We may
not: And as you say, They suppose that it belongs not to the People to
endeavor it: Which We grant, as to any Rebellious, Seditious, or otherwise
unlawful Endeavor: But whether God bind not all men in their own Place and
Calling, by Prayer, Conference, Elections of Officers, Petition, etc. to
endeavor to amend all Crying, Dangerous, Common Sins, is a farther Question.


L. They cannot mean to exclude Petitioning, for that is the Subjects Right,
and is by them allowed with Restraints.


M. 1. It is meant in opposition to the Scots Covenant, which tied men to
oppose Popery, Prelacy, and Schism, only in their several Places and Callings.

2. It is expres'd in the most universal terms, without the least Exception, by
men that knew how to speak.

3. Reasons were given in Parliament against any Limitation, and those Reasons
carried it.

4. They were Men that were wholly for the Church of England, whose Canon had
before Excommunicated themselves, and all men, that accused any Office in the
Church Government as sinful. And they knew, that should any of them, when the
Parliament is risen (yea, or there) so say, he is an Excommunicate Man.

5. It is most certain that they intended to bind all Subjects on whom these
Oaths are imposed, even from petitioning, or any other Endeavor of Alteration;
though they allow petitioning in other Cases; for they intended to fix and
secure the Church Government against all Alterations.

6. Therefore (as I said before) they joined it with, yea, and set it before
State-Government in all their Oaths and Covenants; And do you think in
Conscience, they left men at liberty to petition against Monarchy, or against
the Life, or Power, or Honor of the King: Far be it from us to think so ill of
them.

I must profess to you that I do not think half so ill of well-ordered
Monasteries of Men or Women, as I do of our large Diocesses, or our
Lay-Excommunicators, according to the Canons. And yet even in the Times of
Popery, the Nation was not Sworn never to endeavor any alteration of
Monasteries.

If you would have all Corporations, Soldiers, Vestries, Ministers sworn never
to endeavor to cure the Sick, to relieve the Poor, to seek more Wealth, to
reform all Play Houses, Alehouses and Taverns, to Catechize their Families,
etc. I would not join with you.

National Oaths and Covenants are Matters of great moment: We have deeply
suffered by rashness in such already: And should any of them prove false and
wicked, and the Nation be stigmatized with Perjury, you might more sadly write,
Lord have Mercy on us, on the Land, than on the Doors where the most dreadful
Plague prevails.


CHAP. LIVE. POINT XI. Of Swearing an Abhorrence of taking Arms against any
Commissionated by the KING.
M. THis also I have said enough of in the Case of the XI. Ministers, and told
you that we are far from scrupling it in Disloyalty; but in Loyalty, only, 1.
Lest the Keepers of the Seals may by Commissions depose the King, or deliver up
the Kingdom to whom they please. 2. Because the Authority of a Commission, as
above, and against the King's own Law, is not a matter that Lawyers and Judges
themselves are agreed of, and therefore unfit for the unskilful Vulgar to
determine by their Oath.


L. The end is but to secure your Loyalty.


M. The End is one thing, and the Means another: We are ready to give better
security of our Loyalty than this, which I before intimated to you.

Do you think in your Conscience that all the Soldiers in England, and all the
Corporation-Officers, and entrusted Persons, and all the Vestry-men, and all
the Ministers are so well skilled in Politics and Law, above Bishop Bilson,
Grotius, Barclay, and all the Tribes of Learned Lawyers, Casuists, Canonists,
Philosophers, etc. before named, as that they can take such an Oath in Truth,
Judgment, and Righteousness? Swearing Allegiance, and renouncing Rebellion, is
easily known to be every Subjects Duty. But to unty knotty Controversies in
Law, is sure above every vulgar Brain.

Why was not this way found out to prevent all the Civil Wars in the days of
the two Williams, of Stephen, of Henry the 1st. and 3d. of K. John, of Edward
2d. of Richard 2d. of Henry 4th. and Edward 4th. and Henry 6th. and Richard 3d.
and to prevent the Insurrections in the days of Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth? Why
do they not this way decide all the Controversies at Liege, Colen, etc. to make
the People determine them by Oath?

All Politics agree that the Difference between near Subjects and Slaves, is,
that the former have propriety which none can take from them, but by their
Consent, at least in their Wives, Children, and Lives; and that Slaves have
none such, nor may resist a Commission to take them away, though causlesly, and
Laws are there but the Will of the Lord, who may cross them at his pleasure;
and that a Ruler of Subjects, and an Owner of Slaves thus differ. Now if it be
a Controversy, Whether the English be mere Subjects or Slaves, the ignorant
Vulgar are no fit Judges to decide it, and that by Oath?


CHAP. LV. POINT XII. Whether all Trusted in Corporations may declare, That
there is NO OBLIGATION* on them or any other Person from the Oath called, The
League and Covenant.
M. I Spoke to this before but a little on the by; it being no XII. part of the
Ministerial Conformity. Ministers are only to subscribe, or swear, that the
said Oath binds no man to endeavor any Alteration of Government; but the
Corporations are to declare, That there is no Obligation at all, from that Oath
on them, or any other. I have read much of the History of Heathens, Mahometans,
and Christians; and I confess, I remember not that ever I read the like to
this. The likest to it that I remember, was in the long Wars and Contentions
between the Pope and the German Emperor, when they swear and unsware, and
swear again, as either Party got advantage: And that Popes and Councils have
Decreed the dissolving of Oaths of Fidelity to those Kings whom the Pope
Excommunicates, is commonly known; but Protestants know no such power.


L. This Declaration is to be expounded by the many following Acts, which only
say, there is no obligation to Change the Government.


M. That Is gratis dictum without proof; that several Acts have the same meaning
when the words so much differ, is not to be presumed. One of them is an
Universal Negative without the least exception, and the other a particular
Negative only. 2. And the Acts were made at several times, to several men, and
the Parliament in the latter, never pretended to limit or explain the former,
which sure they would have done if they repented of the Terms. 3. And
Parliament Men tell us. That it was mentioned that the Non-Obligation of the
Covenant should be limited, and it was pleaded against it, That if men believe
that they are bound by it to any thing, some will think that they are bound to
all that is lawful, and that it is lawful to take Arms against the King, and so
there is no securing them from Rebellion, as by that Covenant, but by
renouncing all its Obligation: And this carried the Cause. 4. It is not lawful
for Subjects to put a particular Sense on Universal Words imposed, unless the
imposers first so expound the Terms; which they have refused to do after twenty
years complaint of the Dissenters, and do justify the universal sense to this
day. Therefore such forced Expositions of our Rulers words in so tremendous a
matter, are not to be feigned without good proof.


L. We say Bonum est ex Causis integris: There is Evil in that Covenant,
therefore it is an Evil Covenant.


M. That Is none of the Question; it may be Evil in that part that is Evil, and
the thing it self may thence be denominated Faulty or Evil, and yet not all
that is in it be Evil, nor it Evil simpliciter but scundum quid. Do you think
all is Evil that is there Vowed?


L. If it be Evil, no one is bound to keep it.


M. No, not in the Evil part: But do you think that the conjunction of some Ill
things in a Vow or Covenant, does disoblige a man from all that is good in it?
If so, mark what will follow.

1. Man is so ignorant, and imperfect, and faulty, that he does nothing that is
good without a mixture of some evil, how can sinless perfection come from
sinful Imperfection? And so we should be bound by no Vow, or Oath, or Contract
at all.

2. If Knaves once learn this Lesson, they will be sure to foist in some ill
clause into their Vows to GOD, and their Covenants with Man; that so they may
be bound by none.

3. The Oath of Allegiance or Fedelity to the King, and the King's own Oath at
his Coronation, in the time of Popery, had ill clauses in it for the Papal
interest; does it follow that neither of them did bind?

4. If an Irish Tory should, on the highway, meet an English Lord, and take
his Purse, pretend that he is against the King, and should force him at once to
take an Oath to be true to the King, and to give him his Estate, and conceal
his theft: The latter is evil, and yet even that Oath binds to be true to the
King.

5. If the Clergy in their Ordination, in time of Popery, had diverse sinful
clauses and promises, does it follow that their Ordination was null, and
obliged them to no Ministerial Duty?

6. If the Clergy in former ages, or in France or Spain, be sworn to the King
and the Pope, does it follow that this binds them not to the King, because it
binds them not to the Pope?

7. If men were Married in time of Popery, with unlawful Words and Clauses, or
lately in England by Justices in new terms, was such marriage null?

8. If a Papist make to you a Testament, or Deed of Sale of his Estate, and put
in some unlawful clauses appealing to Angels, or wishing you to pray for the
Souls in Purgatory; I do not think you would take that Will or Deed for a
nullity.

9. If in Popery or here, some Clauses at Baptism prove bad, it does not
nullify the Baptismal Vow.

10. If the King's Soldiers at once swear to fight for the King, and to
destroy or plunder some innocent men; or the Papist Soldier should swear to be
true to the King, and to pull down the Protestant Ministry and Bishops; the
former Part binds them, though the latter does not.


L. An Oath unlawfully imposed binds no man.


M. That Is only the Doctrine of Perjury, contrary to all sober Christian
Casuists. An unlawful imposition that is made by an Usurper without true power,
binds no man to take the Oath imposed; but if he take it without being bound to
take it, the Oath binds him to the lawful part of the matter.

1. If a Highway Robber make me swear to be true to the King, that Oath binds,
though he had no Authority to impose it on me.

2. If an Usurping Minister Baptize a man, and make him Vow himself to Christ,
his Vow binds him, though the Usurper had no authority.

3. If a man make many voluntary Vows, which no man bound him to make, he is
bound to keep them if the matter be lawful. And the want of authority in the
imposer does but leave you as a volunteer, unobliged to take it.

4. And I would not have a Popish Clergy tempted to say, The King and
Parliament had no authority to impose the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy on
us without the Pope; therefore we be not bound to keep them.


L. But the Covenant was forced, and no man is bound by a Promise or Oath which
he was forced to make.


M. That Is a Doctrine of gross Perjury: It Is true, that no man that without
authority forces another to promise any thing to him, can lay any just clame
to that which he forced a man to promise: For no man's own Crime can give him
right to a Commodity; Nemini debetur Commodum ex propria culpa, and the
promiser is not bound to give it him, because he has no right to receive it;
but if you be injuriously forced to promise or vow your Duty to GOD, or the
King, or your Neighbor, that vow and promise does bind you to perform it.

1. If it be done without right by Prince or Prelates that force men to be
Baptized, yet that forced Vow does bind them.

2. If Bishops unjustly force unfit men to the LORD's Supper, their Vow there
made obliges them.

3. As I said, if a Highway Robber force you to swear to be true to the King,
or to restore ill gotten goods, or to recant a slander, that Oath does bind you.

4. If the King should unjustly force you to Marry a Woman, the Covenant binds
you.

The Reason is, because man has free will, and does all that he does by that
choice, which is true freedom. It Is no proper force of his will that moves
him, though we call it force from another act, who does his best to force him;
a man may refuse though he die for it. He that casts his goods into the Sea
to save the Ship, is urged to it, but may choose. He that gives a Thief his
purse to save his life, might have chosen. Do not the Martyrs freely lay down
their lives? and if any deny Christ or his Cause to save his life, and say I
was forced, that will not save his Soul.

5. And your Doctrine will set up all unfaithfulness and rebellion. All men
that under Penalties are commanded to swear Allegiance, or to take this
Corporation-Oath, or the Militia-Oath, or the Oath to the Bishops, are hereby
taught to say, We were forced to it by the King and Prelates, and did it all
against our wills, and therefore are not bound by it. Such principles loose the
bonds of all Societies, Loyalty and humane Converse; and married men will put
away their Wives when they are weary of them, and say, I was forced against my
will by my Parents, or by Poverty, etc.


L. But this Covenant was unlawfully taken, as well as unlawfully imposed, and
therefore binds not.


M. This also is Pernicious Doctrine against all sober Casuists. If the matter
be good, the causeless and unlawful act of taking it, does not nullify the
obligation to perform it. He that voweth an indifferent act, should not have
done it; for a vow must not be causeless; but he must keep it when it is made.

He that sinned in marriage when he ought not, yet must perform his marriage
Covenant.

He that in mere hypocrisy makes the Baptismal vow, did sin and yet is bound
to keep it.

The truth is, wicked men have so much of ill principles, and ill ends, that
they do all sinfully that they do often as to the substance, and ever as to the
manner: But they are not disobliged from all their Contracts and Vows, because
they sinfully made them. Else they will purposely do all sinfully, that they
may, not be obliged.

So that, 1. If the Act of Imposition. 2. The Act of Swearing. 3. And part of
the matter Sworn, be all unlawful; yet a man is obliged to that part of the
matter that is lawful. But part of the Vow in question was good.


L. What part of it was good as to the matter?


M. 1. The renouncing of Popery. 2. And of Schism. 3. And of Profaneness* 4.
The Obligation to defend the King. 5. The Profession to Repent of sin, etc.


L. But all this we are bound to otherwise before.


M. Then you confess that it is good; and then the Vow in question binds us to
it. I hope you are not so ignorant as to think that 2 Vow binds not a man to do
that which he is bound to before. I told you before, though a man be bound by his
Vow in Baptism to Christ, his renewing it at every Sacrament lays more and
more Obligation on him. If a man have taken the Oath of Allegiance, every time
he takes it, he is again bound to the same thing. One may have a thousand
Obligations to one and the same Duty.


L. But one thing is unanswerable: No man is bound by a Vow that had not a
self-obliging power: But the Subjects of England and Scotland, had no
self-obliging power to take that Covenant, because the King was against it. The
30. of Levit proves this at large.


M. Indeed if the Act of Vowing were not only sinful but a mere nullity, that
Vow being no Vow, could not bind: But that Levit. 30. does no whit prove this,
I have fully manifested in my Christian Directory in the chap. of Vows, to
which I referr you part. 3. cap. 5. Where the whole case of Vows is so largely
opened, that I will here only say this little.

The text of Levit. 30. does expressly speak only of Women, that are in a
Parents or Husbands house, and only of Vows made freely to God of doing or
offering something to him: Yea it seems limited to them, of which many
reasons may be given. And many reasons I have there mentioned page 33. why it
does not extend to Princes and Magistrates for releasing their Subjects from
their Vows, though some pretend a parity of reason. But these things are certain.

1. That even the Parents make not the Vow null at its first making, but only
relax it after, and stop the Confirmation of it, verse. 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12.

2. That this Power is about vows to God, as good or hurtful to the inferiors;
and that some Vows are so certainly necessary to the inferiors good, that the
Father or Husband (whose Power is only for their good, and not their hurt)
cannot dispense with it. As Dr. Sanderson, says Praelect. 4.. 5. p. 104, 105.
it belongs only to that matter in which one is under another Government,
which has. 6. a double limitation, One in the person of the Swearer, viz.
There is scarce any one that has the use of reason, that is so fully under
another Power, but that in some things he is fui Juris. And there every man
may do as pleases himself, without consulting his Superior, so at that by his
own Act; without his Superiors License, he may bind himself. 2. As to the
consent of a Superior -- a tacit consent antecedent or consequent suffices --
Quasi diceret, si dissensum suum vel uno die dissimulet votum in perpetuum
stabilivit.

And it is certain that to oppose Profaneness, Schism, and Popery, and to
Repent of Sin, are things so necessary, and so much for every persons good,
that no Parent or Husband can either forbid or nullify such a Vow: No man can
hinder any from Vowing in Baptism to be a Christian, and to forbear Murder,
Adultery, Theft, Idolatry, etc. nor can disoblige them after.

It is certain that if a superior dissent, and after consent, or he die, and
the next superior (e.g. a Husband) do consent, when a Woman makes the same Vow,
it remains obligatory.

And it is certain that if a Parent or Husband make the same Vow himself, he
cannot disoblige himself. And if once he consent, he can never after nullify it.

And as to our case de Facto it is agreed, 1. That Parliament Men took and
imposed this Oath, when they were neither constrained, nor acknowledged the
Kings Power to dissolve it.

2. That thousands in the Nation knew not of the Kings published Profession
against it.

3. That thousands, yea the far greatest number in England, took it after the
death of the King.

4. That they thought the present King took it himself, and owned it by a
Declarantion; In which, though for my part I doubt not but the Scots sinfully
abused Him and the Kingdom; yet that alters not the case of the Subjects
obligation by that Vow.

5. That multitudes of Lords, Knights, and others took it that had adhered to
the King in his Wars: All which undoubtedly puts it out of the case of
dissolution in Levit. 30.

Besides, the common Protestant Doctrine is, that neither Popes, Princes or
Prelates, can dispense with Vows made in re necessaria. Could Kings disoblige
all their Subjects from their Oaths and Vows, it would make a great change in
the Religion, Morality, and Commerce of the World: So that hitherto we have no
satisfaction.


L. But this was a League and Covenant between man and man, who are dead or
changed, and not a Vow to God; as you pretend; on which you lay the stress of
the Obligation.


M. I have nothing to do with it as a League of Men, to do any action toward
each other; but only as a Vow to God, and Covenant of Duty to God: And though the
name of a Vow be not in it, I think him not worth the disputing with that on
deliberation denies it to be a Vow to God. Whom think you else do men make
these promises to, of Repentance and Reformation, and opposing Profaneness,
etc. The words signify as solemn a Vowing, as can well be made by words.


L. You would make all the Corporations of England constituted by the grossest
Perjury that men can be guilty of, even by disobliging or justifying
themselves, and all others in three Kingdoms whom they never saw, in the
violating of a Vow against Heresy, Schism, Popery, and Profaneness, and
Impenitence: When as you know that our Clergy cry down Schism every day.


M. I leave all Men to answer for their own actions: I only tell you why the
Dissenters dare not take these Oaths: I meddle not with other Men. And you know
a man that says, This Vow binds not, may yet hold that something else binds us
against the same thing. But if I were for Schism, and should argue from this
topic of the non-obligation of the Vow, I know not how you could answer me.


L. Let us try, What is your Argument?


M. That which is no sin, is not to be avoided as sin. Schism is no sin. Ergo
Schism is not to be avoided as sin.


Remember that I do but plead their principles.


L. I deny the Minor.


M. That which a man Vowing to avoid it, is not by that Vow bound to avoid, is
no sin: But Schism (and so Profaneness, and Popery) is that which a man vowing
to avoid it, is not bound by that Vow to avoid; Ergo Schism is no sin.



L. I deny both Major and Minor, and first the Major.


M. A Vow to avoid sin always binds.

Ergo that is no sin which a man vowing to avoid is not thereby bound to avoid:
est and non est are contradictory Terms.


L. I deny the Major, and distinguish, a lawful Vow to avoid sin ever binds,
an unlawful one does not.


M. Unlawfulness is, 1. In the Act of Swearing. 2. In the Act of Imposing. 3.
In the Matter Sworn. An Oath unlawfully Imposed and Taken, binds to a Lawful
Matter. But for an Oath against sin to be Materially unlawful is a
contradiction: For to be Sin and to be Unlawful is all one.


L. I deny that a Vow against Schism binds not.


M. The Vow called the Covenant binds no man. The Vow called the Covenant, is
a Vow against Schism (Propaneness, and Popery;) Ergo a Vow against Schism,
(Profaneness and Popery) binds not.



L. You argue a particulari: Though this Vow do not, another may.


M. I argue ab essentia particularis ad communem essentiam. If this Vow have
all that is essential to a Vow and yet binds not, then no Vow as such
essentially does bind. If the anima hujus bovis vel ovis, be not anima
rationalis, and yet have all that is essential to the anima brutorum, then it
is not essential to any anima bruti to be rational: And it cannot be
accidentally so here. If the Vow against Schism and Profaneness have all
essential to a Vow and yet bind not, then no Vow binds qua talis as a Vow.
And if Vows bind only by accident, or by something else that is an adjunct,
that is nothing for their own essential obligation.

And so much of the Corporation-Declaration.


CHAP. LVI. Of many agreed Tremendous Circumstances and Principles which
affright many from Conformity.
M. THere are also many general and collateral and circumstantial
considerations that make men fear the guilt of Conformity the more.


L. What are those? I believe you will find as many of that sort of reasons on
the other side to move you to Conform, if you consider them.


M. I will tell you what I mean, and then I will hear all that you have to say
for it.

I. We are all agreed that no sin must be done for any commodity, or on any
pretense of good.

II. We are agreed that to pretend Gods Service, or Name for our sin is a
heinous aggravation: To say, I must do evil to please God, to Preach and to win
souls, is Profaneness and Hypocrisy.

III. We are agreed that it is worse in a Minister of Christ than in others;
because he is bound to be an example to the flock, who are apt to imitate him.

IV. It is granted that God is jealous about his worship, and that the
profaning of Holy things, and sinning openly in the Sacred Assemblies is,
caecris paribus, worse than mere miscarriages in our Conversation.

V. Lying is by most acknowledged a great sin, as overthrowing humane credit
and converse: But especially in a Preacher, because it will tempt men never to
believe him: And to say that we assent and consent, and that ex animo when we
do not, is heinous lying.

VI. It is granted that man has not a despotical power of his own
understanding, to believe what he will: And that if any of his errors be
vicious, vice and error must have better cure than mere commands: And if men
could know and believe what they will, they should will to believe nothing but
what has credible evidence, without a carnal biass.

VII. It is agreed that all men have error, and therefore that erring men or
no men must be tolerated in our Communion; and he that thinks otherwise
condemns himself, and teaches all men to condemn him.

VIII. It is granted that it is a very low degree of knowledge that the
universality of vulgar Christians do attain, who hardly learn the common
Catechism, much less can it be expected that they should all be able to
understand all indifferent things to be indifferent, and to be judges of the
minutissima.

IX. If any errors be tolerable, it is like to be the errors about things
indifferent and small.

X. St. Paul has expressly determined the Controversy about loving and
receiving such, Romans 14. and 15.

XI. To encourage by compliance a generation and design of men that overthrow
Christ's and his Apostles rule of Communion, and by invented impositions of
their own, would make Church-Concord impossible, and would propagate this way
of certain Schism, and stablish it in the World, is to confederate for tearing
the Church of Christ, and making Schism common and uncureable.

XII. It is granted that he that after his greatest study is persuaded that
unnecessary Oaths, Subscriptions, Covenants, Ceremonies are sinful; is
condemned if he go against his Conscience, though he should mistake.

XIII. Those therefore that make such snares for Souls, and then tell us [If
you go against your Consciences you are damned for that, and if you do not you
are damned as Schismatics, for disobeying us] are far unlike the Ministers of
Christ, or Men that help to save our Souls.

XIV. We Non-Conformists offer cur solemn Oaths that we have by Prayer and
earnest search and study, labored to know the truth herein: And as our worldly
interest would persuade us to conform, so we would readily do it, did we not
believe that it is sin against God: Yea we take it (as to us) to be no small
but heinous sin, by the aggravations which I am mentioning.

XV. Seeing then the way of our Condemners is either to cast all Christians out
of the Church, that have not a greater degree of Knowledge herein, than I have,
and all men of my Rank, or else to bring all men implicitly to believe all to
be lawful that is commanded them, we cannot consent to either of these two
Measures for the Church.

XVI. It is agreed that Perjury is so heinous a Sin, as that few are greater:
It so takes God's Name in vain, as to engage his Justice in a special Revenge.
It depriveth Kings of due Security for their Lives and Crowns, by the Oath of
Fidelity. It destroys all Trust, and consequently all Commerce among Men; as
well as all Hope of public Justice: It exposes the Estates and Lives of all
men to the will of Perjured men; so that he that dare be perjured, may be
supposed liable to any other Wickedness how great soever. Therefore if we
Ministers should be perjured; we should make our selves utterly unmeet for our
Office.

XVII. It is agreed that to sin deliberately by a Covenant under our Hands, is
one of the most heinous sorts of sinning; and if it be done knowingly, shows
the person to be a wilful Servant of sin. To sin by the sudden surprise of a
Passion is too bad; but to study it, resolve it, and covenant it, is most
dangerous: To engage a Man's self by Covenant to be once a Month drunk, or
steal, or commit Fornication, is far worse than the bare Act.

XVIII. It is granted that Repentance is the condition of Forgiveness, and for
a man to swear or covenant that he will never repent, or endeavor to amend, or
alter any thing that is amiss, is to renounce Forgiveness.

XIX. It is granted that public, common, national Sins, are far worse than
private and personal, in few; and if heinous, they are Prognostics of the
sorest Judgments; and to promote them, is to be the Enemy of the Land.

XX. It is granted that if that prove Perjury, which some Dissenters fear is
such, and the Kingdom should be stigmatized by it, there could scarce be any
greater Shame and Danger befall the Land, to make it odious to GOD and Men, and
Recorded as such to all Generations. As I said, The Oaths and Covenants to
endeavor no Alteration in Church Government, is imposed on all Corporations,
all Soldiers in the Militia, all Vesteries, all Nonconformist Ministers that
will take it, and all Ministers as to covenant in the Act of Uniformity: And he
that (without accusing others) only studieth to be innocent of so mortal a
(feared) Guilt, sure is therein excusable, if the fear of God, and the love of
our Souls, and of the Church and State, be not an unexcusable Crime. Apply this
no farther than I apply it.

XXI. There is so much written for a foreign Jurisdiction over England, in
Church Affairs, by Archbishop Laud, Archbishop Bromhall, Dr. Heylin, Mr.
Thorndike, Dr. Saywell, Bishop Gunning 's Chaplain (and many others) whose
Words I am ready to produce) as may assure us that it is in the same Men's
thoughts to introduce it as the only way to Concord, and that they therefore
desire the Ejection and Ruin of such as we, because we are against it. And how
far, and how soon God will let these men prevail, we know not: But we are past
doubt, that to subject a Nation to a foreign Jurisdiction, is to stigmatize it
with the most odious Perjury: Seeing as the Oath of Supremacy swears all
expressly against it, so the foresaid Corporation Oath, Vestery Oath, Militia
Oath, Oxford Oath, and Uniformity Subscription, have sworn or engaged the
Nation never to endeavor any Alteration of Government, in Church or State: And
if a foreign Jurisdiction be no Alteration, we know nothing capable of that
Name. And when we see some of the same men at once endeavor to make us take
such Oaths on pain of Ruin, and to design to bring all under the Guilt of
breaking them, when we have done, men think it best to take no more of them
than is necessary, till they see whether they must be kept or broken.

XXII. Plagues, Flames, Poverty, Convulsions that have befaln Corporations of
late years, makes us the more afraid of the sins which are like to be the
Cause: And the Earl of Argyle 's Case makes us afraid of stretching Expositions
of Oaths: And the Londoners have sped so ill by such stretching Expositions as
confirms us in our Purpose to avoid them.

XXIII. If we wilfully sin on pretense of Liberty to preach the Gospel, we
cannot expect God's Blessing on our Labors: And then what is our preaching
worth?

XXIV. We read how joyfully many Martyrs in Queen Mary's days endured the
Flames, rather than grant the real Presence in the Mass: And we that fear far
greater sin, must rather suffer than commit them.

XXV. As we dare not Conform against Conscience, so to lay by our Ministry
while we can exercise it, we take to be Sacrilege, Covenant Breaking with God,
and Treachery and Cruelty to the Souls of Men.

XXVI. We are sure if all the Ministers should conform, it would be so far from
healing the Church, that it would widen the Breach: For the Dissenting People
would be tempted to go the further from us all, and think that none of us were
to be trusted; as many have turned further already on some such Accounts.

XXVII. We are Commonly agreed that no men have right from God to Silence all
the Ministers in the Land: And we are fully satisfied that Conformity to the
things aforesaid being a Sin, all the Ministers in England ought to have been
Non-Conformists, and then the Act of Uniformity had silenced them all.

XXVIII. Lastly, the dreadful effects of Canonical, and the like Impositions,
the sufferings of Godly Minsters, Congregations, Cities, Countries, and Persons
thereupon; our doleful divisions, especially among Ministers, the evil Spirit
that possesses multitudes to cry down Love and call for Vengeance, and the
prospect of what is going on, do affright us from approving, consenting to, or
using the Engines that thus divide us, and the Canons that are battering down
our Peace, and consequently to be guilty of all the Atheism, Profaneness,
Malignity, Popery, Persecution and Calamity to this Land, which are like to
come in at the breach of our Walls, which the battery of those Canons and
Engines make. A Jayl, and a Fire, or a Gallows is an easier place, than a bed,
where Conscience shall charge such Evils home upon us; much more then the
Judgments which the True and Righteous Judge of the World will shortly execute
on Liars, Malignants, or Persecutors of his Flock; yea, of the least of those
that Christ will call Brethren at that day.

I have often said, if any Church History of one man be credible, St. Martin
wrought many Miracles; and when the Bishops about him being bad men, to get
down the Priscillian Gnostics (worse than our Quakers) did, 1. Seek help of
the Magistrate's Sword; 2. And bring strict Godly persons under suspicion of
being Priscillianists; Martin renounced their Communion by resolved separation
to his death; save that once at the Emperor's desire, he Communicated with
them on condition the Emperor would spare the lives of some condemned as
Priscillianists; and even for this was rebuked and chastized by an Angel, if
his Scholar and Companion Sulpitius Severus, a Learned Godly man, be to be
believed.


CHAP. LVII. Of the Reasons for Conformity.
L. NOW I will tell you what I hear said against your Nonconformity, and I
will give you leave to answer the Objections as we go on.

Obj. I. It Is commonly said, that you are Fanatic persons that build all your
dissent on your own private Spirits, and pretended Impulses and In spirations.


M. Have I pleaded with you any such Impulses or Inspirations, as the Reasons
of our Dissent? Is there any such thing in above 100 Books that I have written?
Did we use any such Argument in our Dispute with the Bishops? but the Papists
call every man's Faith that is his Own, and not taken merely on trust as the
Churches Faith, by the Name of a Private Spirit.


L. Obj. II. They say you make a Schism and Stir for mere tristes and things
indifferent, viz. Ceremonies and Liturgy; confessing that they are not unlawful.


M. 1. And what if they say that we are Turks or Heathens, or have Horns and
are Brutes, what remedy have we? To their honor be it spoken, we would not
hope to confute them.

2. Do you not know that so far are we from this, that even under the old
easier Impositions, we protested to the Bishops in our Petitions for Peace,
That we would yield to any thing but Sin against God, and we endeavored to
prove Conformity sinful? And do they well agree with themselves, when Dr.
Stilling fleet says, that I would represent Conformity such as should make
them seem a company of Perjured Villains?

3. I pray you tell me, whether the 52. Points now opened by me, be nothing but
Liturgy and Ceremonies, and whether you take them all to be things indifferent.
Is it not an odd sort of Accusers that we have, that sometimes say we suspect
the Nation of common Perjury, and the Church of Subverting, Corruption, and
overthrow of Discipline, and Excommunicating Christ's Faithful Servants; and
shortly after say, We Dissent only about things Indifferent? God have mercy on
those miserably Souls that take such things for Indifferent.

4. Who is it troubles the Land with their things Indifferent? Is it we? Did we
devise them? Do we impose them on any, and say, Use our things indifferent, or
we will Silence you, or Excommunicate you, and lay you in Iayl with Rogues? Be
such things imposed as Indifferent?


L. III. They say you hold your Opinions in obstinate wilfulness, and have no
Reason to give for them, and therefore are not to be born with as weak Brethren.


M. So said the Arians of the Orthodox, and the Heathens of the Christians.
It Is a fine World when ignorant ungodly Lads are heard tell such men as were
Dr. Reignolds, John Fox, Amesius, Blondel, Dailee, Chamier, etc. We cannot allow
you so much as the esteem of weak Brethren: I do not think but some of their
School boys might soon be taught by a Bishop to say thus to their Masters.

2. But do all the young Clergy that can talk thus, show us by any good
evidence, that in other things they are so much Wiser and Learneder than the
Dissenters? Are they all of greater Learning than John Reignolds, or better
Hebricians than Hugh Broughton, or better Logicians than Sadeel, or Ramus, or
Sohnius, or of greater Reading than Blondel, etc.

3. Do they know us better than we our selves? We offer our Oaths that we hold
what we do by the Cogency of appearing Evidence, and are willing to know the
truth.

4. Have I here and elsewhere given no Reasons for our Dissent? Have they
answered my Treatise of Episcopacy, my First and Second Plea for Peace, my
Apology, my Treatise of the Terms of Church-Concord, or any one thing that I
have written for our Cause, save two or three by disputes, which when I have
vindicated, they have let fall the Disceptation? What front have these men then
that say we Dissent without giving Reason for it? But you know how long the
Press was shut against our Writings; and yet then they that would not endure us
to Speak, accused us for being Silent.


L. Obj. IV. They say you are Non-Conformists merely to make good your former
Errors, because you will not confess that you did amiss, but will make the
People justify you.


M. 1. What are those Errors? If it be our dislike of any of the things before
described, I confess it is because we will not renounce them: If it be an
error to be against their Church-corruptions, and cruel Excommunications, and
denying Christendom to the Seed of the Faithful, and Communion to faithful
Christians, I confess we will not recant these errors, till they have better
proved them such. The Papists that swarm with Errors, as a Beggar does with
Lice, yet burn the Protestants as for Error.

2. I pray you wish those infallible men, that in the ditch of dirt are
delivered from all the uncleanness of error, to send only those those that are
without error to cast the first stone at us, or those that have no worse
error than ours to silence, excommunicate and destroy us.

3. Have we given them no reasons of our dissent?

4. Do they not know that the argument that has brought us all into the case
that we are in, was thus given us 1664. and often since in Print? Read the Lord
St. Alban's Considerations of Reconciling and Edification of the Church of
England, and his Advertisement on the present Church-Controversies, and see
whether he thought there was no need of Reformation: And Judge Hales Papers of
Religion.
[If we abate them any thing, they will say that our Church was faulty, and
needed that Reformation] who then is it that has divided us to avoid
confession of any former faultiness? Though good Bishop Hall pronounces a heavy
Sentence on them that will justify the miscarriages of the Prelates.


L. Obj. V. They say that you took part with the Parliament against the King,
and involved the Land in Blood, and have still the same rebellious principles.


M. 1. I confess there were some among us that were of the mind of Hooker,
Bilson, Grotius, Barclay, and the common sort of Casuists, Politics, etc. and
that thought that as in a doubt about Physic, the College of Physicians were
most to be trusted, so in a doubt about Law, the Parliament had been most
credible: And when the Irish had murdered two hundred thousand Protestants
falsely pretending that they had the Kings Commission, and threatening to finish
their works in England, there were many formerly tempted to fly in fear to the
Parliament for safety; being ignorant that the Kings bare word, notwithstanding
the Papists strength and interest, was more to be trusted with our Laws, Lives
and Religion, than all the Lawyers, Courts and Pariament; and that if all the
Protestants in England had been used as those in Ireland, they ought to have
died patiently, unless the killers would have given them time to send to the
King to know whether he would have them live or die: They were ignorant that a
Lord Proprietor may do with his own as he list. Who accuses the owner for
killing his own Sheep? But the times of this ignorance are past: The Long
Parliament that made the Act of Uniformity cured it: And shall not the Act of
Oblivion be permitted to reconcile us, and continue our peace?

2. But, Sir, Who be they that were thus deceived? I told you, 1. That of near
ten thousand that had Churches under the Parliament and Cromwell, there was but
two thousand that refused to Conform: And is not seven thousand Conformists
more than two thousand Dissenters. 2. Many that were in the Parliament's Army
Conformed; and some that were for the Kings Death, when the generality of those
called Presbyterians abhorred it, and the Engagement; and brought in the King
on reasons of mere Conscience.

3. I have told you that we will take it thankfully, if only those were
silenced that had any hand in that War, believing that it will not now be
twenty Ministers in England. And why are the rest that were Boys at School,
accused for other Men's opinions or actions? For the time to come, you need not
fear them. I heard some tell the Members of the Long Parliament that called
them Rebels for saying, that a Parliament may use defensive Arms against the
Kings Commissioned Soldiers; that if that would serve, they would promise,
that if the King would but send a dozen Irish-men to kill them all in the
house, they would never be guilty of taking Arms to defend them, nor persuading
any else to do it.


L. Obj. VI. But they say that these Non-Conformists, though they had no hand in
the late War, yet have the same Principles that caused it, and that is,
Nonconformity.


M. This is an argument a baculo ad angulum: A man is against the Cross in
Baptism, or a Lay-Chancellor's excommunicating Men for a Ceremony, etc. ergo he
is against the King, and for Rebellion. The other side say, that the Irish
Principles and the Popish were the cause; and must we therefore conclude all
Irish or Papists to be against the King? They were Papists that raised the Wars
on both sides, in the aforesaid days of King William, K. Stephen, H. 1. and H.
3. and Ed. 2. and Rich. 2. and H. 6. and Rich. 3. and Ed. 4. etc. Does it
follow that all rapists are rebels?

2. But I have elsewhere fully proved that the Parliament when that War began,
were of the Church of England, and Conformists; and it is strange that any
should have the face to deny it, while so many are yet living that know them:
Whitlocke tells us in his Memorials, that they voted, that every County should
have a Bishop and his Presbytery: And were those then against Episcopacy? One
would think that a County should be big enough to keep Episcopacy from
dwindling to nothing; every Bishop of old had but one City: Many Counties have
ten, or near twenty Towns that were then called Cities. But when Papists dare
say that all are against Kings that are against the Pope, who is the ruler and
deposer of Kings; it is no wonder if every Bishop, or Chancellor, or Official,
etc. will say, If you be not for us you are against the King; since all are
sworn against altering the Church Government before that of the State.

Mr. Martin that lost an arm in the Kings service in the War, lay in Gaol at
Warwick, for preaching when silenced; and Mr. Francis Bampfield that was
against the Parliament's War, lay seven years in Gaol for preaching as a
Nonconformist, and died in Newgate. Non-Conformists that have been, and are
most for the King, do suffer as much as others.

3. Read my second Plea for Peace, in which I declare our political Principles;
and tell us what you there dislike.


L. Obj. VII. But why do you refuse to renounce all the Obligation of the
Covenant, if you are not disloyal?


M. If you reduce your objection to an argument, it must run thus; (All those
are disloyal to the King who think that this vow binds them to be against
Profaneness, Popery or Schism, or to endeavor any amending or alteration of
the prelatical way of Church Government: But, etc. I deny the Major. Is he an
honourer of the King that dare affirm this?)

We are ready to renounce all Obligation from that or any other Covenant, to
any disloyalty what ever.


L. Obj. VIII. They say that your Preaching is unnecessary, there being
Ministers enough without you, and therefore that you Praech but to keep up a
party, and your own Reputation and Interest in them.


M. And I think that Priest fitter for tears than for disputes, that so little
knows England, or the work of the Office they undertake: If I know the Church
that has such a Pastor, I shall be past doubt that they have need of help. I
would as soon believe him if he undertook to build a Castle alone, and said he
had no need of help; or that forty thousand of the poor of London have no need
of relief, and that it is rebellion to relieve them; as that the forementioned
two hundred thousand have no need of teaching or Ministerial help for their
souls.


L. Obj. IX. There are some that have written that it is Pride and Covetousness
that makes you Non-Conformists to seem godly, and to get livings for your Sons.


M. Satan is so impudent a disputant, that I am aweary of answering him, though
in self-defence: If it be pride to be scorned and tossed about as Rogues, why
will these humble Lord Bishops and Masters so be-rogue us to make us proud? Men
use to take down that which feeds their enemies pride; I pray get them to
restore us from poverty, and prisons, and scorns, and slanders, to take down
our pride.

And for covetousness get them one year to take our turns, to have all their
Goods and Books taken away, on the penalty of 40 l. for every Sermon, and that
to be levied on their hearers which they cannot pay, and in this case to ly in
Gaol, and tell us when they have tried it whether it gratified their
covetousness.

As to men's Charity to our selves or Sons; 1. I have said heretofore that the
2000 that were ejected were fit for Bedlam, if they would go out and suffer,
that so forty Men's Sons that conform against their Fathers wills, might get
benefices. 2. They will take it for a disgrace to their Church, if we should
not grant that the Lords, Knights, Rich Men and Patrons, are far more of their
Church, than of Dissenters; and therefore liker to prefer Conformists Sons,
than others: And a Living for the Father, another for the Son, is more than a
possibility for one. But brazen-faced impudence cannot be confuted.


L. Obj. X. They say you are mere Hypocrites, that have learnt a show of
Holiness and Justice, but have false, proud, self-conceited, rebellious Hearts.


M. And truly we cannot confute them any otherwise than by an appeal to the
Judge of Hearts: We cannot show them our Hearts: And if they say that they see
and know them, let Men believe them as they see cause. They did not craftily so
much to praise our outside; for those that take them not for Gods will hardly
believe that they see any deeper.

But as far as I understand, their meaning is, That no man on earth is truly
honest and godly; and therefore all are Hypocrites that profess it. And so they
confess themselves Hypocrites in professing Christianity, if Professing be the
mark of Hypocrites.


L. Obj. XI. They say that you are Rebels and Schismatics against the Church,
and that is as bad as Murder, or Adultery; and so you are more vicious than they.


M. It Is well they made their Chancellours, Officials, Commissaries, etc. the
Church first: I confess I am not unapt to believe that they take it for worse
than Adultery, Murder, Persecution or Perjury, to cross their wills and worldly
interest. And if calling themselves (the Church) would make any needy or
ambitious pack of men, the masters of all men's consciences, and persons, and
estates, I should not wonder if more than Papists and Prelatists strove to be
called, The Church.


L. Obj. XII. But they say all antiquity condemns Schism, and you are they
that will not suffer the Church to have Unity and Peace, in disobeying the
Bishops; and Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and disobedience as
Idolatery.


M. The sense of this last Clause is [God calls it like Witchcraft and Idolatry
to Obey Him, and Rebel against His Laws: Ergo it is like Witchcraft and
Idolatry not to Rebel and Disobey Him if Bishops command us.] Prove the
consequence.

2. Do not Papists call them Schismatics and Heretics too, as long and as
loud as they call us so? And will this prove them such indeed? We appeal to the
common reason of mankind, whether they that make a multitude of sinful Canons,
to persecute Christ's Church and Servants, and add to his Laws an hundred forty
one of their own with inhumane penalties, casting out those that obey them not,
be not rather Schismatics than they that say, We will hold Concord in all that
Christ commands or his Apostles practiced, but we dare not obey you against
God. Read my Search for the Schismatics, and The English Schismatic Detected
and Confuted, and then blame the Schismatic and spare not.


L. Obj. XIII. But they say that it is but a company of self-conceited, bad,
rebellious People that befriend or fellow you, and the sober People are for
them.


M. These things are unfit matter for a controversy with any Englishmen of
this age, but only with Foreigners and Strangers. I thought once it would never
have been so hard to know good Men from bad, as these would make it. But I
remember how bad Christ and his Apostles were thought by their persecutors.
Wherein does such men's badness lie? In not coming to their Churches? Thousands
do, and the rest go to other Churches: But thousands of our adversaries go to
none, but very rarely.

Is it in any other Vice? Why do they then charge them with avoiding Vice in
Hypocrisy? And what is that Vice? Here are, some say, many hundreds that
practice Physic in London: The Posts, Walls, and Gates are stickt with
Physicians offers to cure the Lecherous pox: To day I read Kirleu's Bill, that
says he has cured eight hundred of that disease. I dare bet with you all the
Money I have, that if you enquire, not eight, or perhaps two of that eight
hundred were Puritans, or such as you now cast out for Non-Conformists, (unless
you call Papists or such other, Non-Conformists) except any of them were Wives
that caught it of Husbands that are of your Church or Parishes and not of us,
or Husbands that caught it of such conformable (or Papist) Wives. But of these
things we need no defense.

3. But if our hearers be bad, they have the more need of teaching; and whether
more are converted from ignorance, sensuality, worldliness and profaneness, by
their teaching or ours, ask others and not us.


L. Obj. XIV. But they say that it is by you that we are in danger of Popery,
because you keep up their hopes of a toleration by your divisions weakening us.


M. They may of the two say more probably it is we that bring in Prelacy, Lay
Excommunicators, Ceremonies, Liturgies: For of the two, we have done less
against these than against Popery, and stand not at so great a distance from
them: The impudency of some men is the shame of depraved humane nature. They
know that it is for being more against Popery than they are, that our ruin is
so implacably endeavored. They know that the Papists are our chiefest
prosecutors, thinking that if they could destroy us as their greatest
adversaries, they should bring the Church of England to their will, and that it
is but appropriating the name of Popery to the Italian Faction that set the
Pope above Councils, and calling the rest by a better Name, and cutting off a
few shreds named by Heylin in the Life of Archbishop Laud, and it is done. They
know that it is for drawing so near to Popery that the Non-Conformists Dissent
from them; and take it for granted that those men that are laboring to bring
in Popery, are the forwardest to make this putid accusation of us; and that it
has been their labor these two and twenty years to have forced us to yield to
an universal toleration, and to petition for it, that they might bring in
Popery, and then say it is we that did it, and that for denying this and being
unreconcileable to Popery, the Papists are so unreconcileable to us, as that
nothing will satisfy them but our utter extirpation, of which they would make
blind, sensual, debauched, malignant men that call themselves Protestants the
instruments. And how many of their pillars have written for a foreign
Jurisdiction and defend Grotius, I have told you before. And to this day that
Priest that is nearest to Popery, is the bitterest enemy to the
Non-Conformists, and most preaches for their destruction: And these
brazen-faced men cannot endure an honest Conformist that does but prefer
Protestants that dissent from their fetters before the Papists: And those
Bishops and Archbishops and the very Church of England in their times, that
were most against Popery, are their scorn and hatred, as you may see in
Heylin's reproach of Archbishop Abbot, and the Bishops and Convocation, except
six Bishops in his days: And by the base scorns that they now pour out against
good Archbishop Grindal, calling such men as would strengthen us against
Popery by reconciliation, by the names of Grindalizers and Trimmers, and such
as would betray the Church: And how they reproach and use Dr. Whitby for his
Protestant Reconciler, and Mr. Bold for his Sermon, and the Author of the four
Pleas of the Conformists for the Non-Conformists, and such others, you know:
The Author of the Reflections, and the Samaritan they have not yet found out.
Mr. Tho. Beverley fears them not: The Bishop of Hereford, Dr. Crofts, (the
first man that ever I saw go forth with a Troop raised by his Brother for the
King, and his Sermon in my Pulpit the first that ever I heard against the
Parliament, when the King was in Yorkshire, and he himself had been a Papist,
and is still zealous for their Church cause) because he wrote the Book called
Naked Truth, to heal us and strengthen us against Popery, they gnash the Teeth
at him; and so they do at Dr. Barlow Bishop of Lincoln, that wrote of the
treasonable principles of Papists, though these Bishops are too big for them yet
to vilify, and openly oppose.


L. You may be more against Popery than they, and yet bring it in imprudently
by dividing us.


M. Who do you think in your Conscience is liker to bring it in, we or they?
Who has done and suffered more to keep it out? We lay down all that we have to
that end: They will not part with a Ceremony, or one Oath, or a Reordination,
or an Excommunication of Christ's Members to keep it out; but plainly tell us,
that they had rather Popery came in than abate a jott of their Self-made
Religion or Impositions, or than such as I should Preach the Gospel.

But I confess I am not able to deny it, that the Non-Conformists may be the
occasion of bringing in Popery, by way of Antiperistasis; some men hate us and
all serious Godliness so much, that they are like enough to be for Popery,
because godly men are against it: And I fear lest they that see the
Non-Conformists would reform their Prelacy and Church-Courts, and reduce them
to the Primitive Episcopacy, described by Bishop Usher, will be so much afraid,
lest they lose some of their Wealth and Domination by it, that some of them
will hearken to the Papists, that will promise them an Increase of that which
they so esteem. And indeed it is already no strange thing to hear them say,
They had rather the Papists came in with Popery, than the Dissenters with their
Reformation.

I think ere long you are like to be convinced more effectually than by
Writing, which Party is liker to bring in Popery, and to turn Papists. In the
mean time I begin to praise Stephen Gardener, and such others, for their
Modesty, that when they burnt Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Philpot, Rogers, and the
rest, that they did not charge them with bringing in Popery, and say we burn
you for that.


L. XV. They say that you stretch the Words of the Oaths, Declarations,
Subscriptions, Liturgy and Canons, to an ill sense, by a rigorous
Interpretation, which was never the Meaning of the Authors; and on that you
ground your Dissent.


M. 1. I hope you will grant, that when the things that men fear (whether
justly or mistakingly) no less than deliberate Lying, Perjury, and Contracting
by Justification the Guilt of many hundred thousand Perjuries, and Swearing or
Covenanting never to repent or endeavor that the Nation should repent of
heinous Church-Corruptions, or amend them, and the nullifying of the Ordination
and Ministry of thousands, and Unchurching almost all the Protestant Churches,
and more such like, a man should not play with Matters of this moment, nor take
God's dreadful Name in vain, nor sport with the Consuming Fire. And I hope you
grant, that Words in Caths and Impositions, are to be taken in the properest
usual sense, unless the Authors otherwise expound them. And you know that they
have been so far from expounding them otherwise, as that these twenty years
they have refused it, and in Scotland sentenced the Earl of Argyle to die for
expounding them as some would have us do. And what do Oaths or Covenants
signify, if the Takers may put what sense they will on them, and if the most
express Universals, yea, the express Exclusions of all Exceptions, may be taken
in a particular sense with Exceptions, such Swearers and Subscribers give their
Rules no security. Is it not enough to tell you we will willingly stand to
Bishop Sanderson's own Rules in his Excellent Prelections de Iuramento, for
expounding Oaths and Promises?

Such as these Expositions of stretchers, make Oaths to be none, viz. [It's
unlawful] that is, against the King's Law but not against God's [to take Arms
against the King] viz. As King, but say the Papists, when the Pope
excommunicates and deposes him, he is no King, [on any pretense whatsoever,]
that is, any unjust pretense, [by his Authority against his Person] viz. It is
to be done by Gods Authority and not by his, [or against any Commissioned by
him,] viz. Lawfully Commissioned, of which we are discerning Judges. The same I
may say of all the rest: As Assenting and Consenting to all things, except many
things: Swearing Canonical Obedience in Licitis and Honestis, when we judge ten
or twenty Canons, if not the very frame to be Illicita and Inhonesta, etc.


L. But as you have said that those Great Men, Grotius, and Bishop Jeremy
Tailor were for profitable Lying, so you know that Worthy Latitudinarian Dr.
who was wont to say, That if false Knaves would turn him out of his Ministry
and Living, by ensnaring Impositions, he would take the Words in the best sense
he could subdue them to, whatever the Authors meant; and it was as Lawful for
him to defend himself against Knaves with his Tongue, as with his Hands and
Sword.


M. He is newly gone to his Judge: Nobis non licet -- I told you that in my
Catechism on the Ninth Commandment, I have given unanswerable Reasons against
Lying, for any Benefit whatever.

Some say that all our Articles of Religion, are but Articles of Peace, and we
subscribe not to believe them true, but not to preach against them. At this
rate men need not stick at any Oath, and may shake off the Oath of Allegiance,
or any other when they have taken it. And if we are thought worthy to be hated,
and ruined as Rogues, for refusing self-saving, prudential, deliberate Lying,
and Perjury, when Oaths and Veracity are so much of the security of the
Estates, Names, and Lives, of Kings and Subjects, and so necessary to all
humane Converse, we patiently commit our Cause to Him that shortly and
righteously will determine all.


CHAP. LVIII. Whether Communion with so Faulty a Church be Lawful.
L. I Showed what you said against Conformity to a Friend, and when he had read
it, he said, What a Self-contradictor is this Man, to lay all this Charge on
the Church of England, and yet himself to hold Communion with it, and persuade
others so to do? Can we touch Pitch and not be defiled? And indeed if all this
be as bad as you fear, I cannot see how any Separatists are to be blamed, or
how any may Communicate with so bad a Church.


M. Sic stulti vitia vitant, drunken men reel from side to side; to keep one
right tract, or to cut by a thread, seems impossible to them.

I. You must distinguish between the Diocesan Churchs as constituted by their
Courts of Government and Canons, and the Parish Churches.

II. Between those Parish-Churches which have godly or tolerable Pastors, and
those that have not.

III. Between Ministry and Lay-Communion.

IV. Between stated and occasional Communion.

V. Between preferring their Churches before better, and not avoiding them as
null, or as unlawful to be Communicated with.

Understand these five distinctions well, and I shall satisfy you.


L. Apply them, and let us hear your judgment.


M. I. The Diocesan Churches, as they depose all inferior Bishops and
Churches, and Rule by their Lay-Civilians, Church Censures, I disown and hold
no Communion with in those errors, but only in their Christianity. But I
peaceably submit to them, and would live quietly under them, if I might.

II. Those Parishes that have notoriously incapable Priests, either through
utter insufficiency, heresy or hurtfulness, doing more harm than good, I own
not to be Organized Churches, nor have Commmunion with their Ministers as
Ministers, not owning them for such.

III. I hold it utterly unlawful to be Ministers with them, on the terms now
required of us; and therefore I have no such Ministerial Communion with them.

IV. I prefer them not before better.

V. I hold not fixed Communion as a fixed Member of their Churches, with all
that I hold occasional Communion with.


L. What Communion is it then that you hold with them?


M. I. With the Diocesans and their Officers, I hold mental Communion as a
Christian and a Protestant in all the essentials of Christianity, and that
Reformation which they own.

II. With the Parish-Churches that have true Ministers, I hold mental
Communion, as true particular Churches of Christ, (though faulty) and local
Communion on just occasions.

III. With the Parish-Assemblies that have intolerable Ministers, I hold mental
Communion with the People as Christians, and will not refuse on just occasion
to join with them in any good exercise as Laymen.

IV. With those Churches that have Ministers and Liturgy as ours that need
reformation, I profess to join with them as Christians and Protestants that own
all the Scriptures, and that promise to preach nothing as necessary to
Salvation but what is contained in it, or may be proved by it: And when I
Communicate with that Church it is as a Society so professing: But if their
Sermons, Liturgy, or Lives have any faults, being not Idolatry, Heresy,
Blasphemy, or such as renders their whole Worship, and assembling unacceptable
to God, I disown Communion in any of those faults, though I be present.

V. When I can have better, caeteris paribus, without greater hurt than good, I
prefer it; and only use occasional local Communion, with the Liturgy-Churches,
as I would do with strangers were I in foreign lands.

VI. Where I can have no better, without more hurt than good, I Communicate
constantly and only with the Parish Church where I live, as to Local-Communion.


L. But how can you do either of these without guilt, when they are as bad as
you have described?


M. 1. I have not charged the Parish-Churches with that which I have charged
the Diocesans and their Courts with; many honest Ministers, never troubled nor
excommunicated a true Servant of Christ, nor ever owned intentionally the doing
it by others. They lament the impositions, and would be glad we were united by
their removal: They would fain have good men restored; and they do their best
to promote godliness. And the Ordinary Lord's Day part of the Liturgy though not
faultless, contains things true and good, and it was a very great and
excellent degree of Reformation, to make that Book: And the most of all its
faults are in the By-Offices, Baptism, Confirmation, and Burial, and the
Rubricks, which the Lord's Day common Worship is not concerned in, nor do the
Congregation approve.

2. Sin has brought woeful faultiness into all the Churches on Earth: And
there are very few on Earth that have not worse Doctrine and a worse Liturgy
than ours: What then? Must we either own or hide all their faults, or else
disown and renounce them all? No neither, but disown what is evil, and own what
is good; and separate from none of them further than they separate from Christ.

3. But I pray you answer me a few questions:

1. Do you think any Church on Earth to be faultless?


L. No: For all men are faulty, but the difference is great.


M. No doubt it is great: But, 2. Do you think that you are guilty of all the
faults of the Church that you join with?


L. They say, no, not of the secret Faults: But of the open they say we are
partakers by our presence.


M. Do you think there is any Church on Earth that has no open Faults? And
will you join with none?


L. But they say, It is not Faults of Conversation that they mean, but in
Ministry, Doctrine, and Worship.


M. I am sure Conversation Faults are often alleged for separation: But is there
any Minister or Church that has no open Faults in Ministry and Worship?


L. They mean not small Infirmities, such as weak, faulty expressions, methods,
disorders, dullness, etc. but gross, intolerable Faults.


M. So then you are come to what I hold, I profess that if I see or hear any
such Blasphemy, Idolatry, Heresy, or Malignity, as renders the Worship abhorred
of God, I will abhor it and avoid it.


L. Is none of all that such which you have described?


M. Nothing in the ordinary Lord's Day Worship, which the Congregation must join
in: Yea I dare not say that their By-offices, viz. Baptism it self,
notwithstanding their kind of Godfathers and Crossing, does frustrate the
Sacrament to the capable. And the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is very Piously
Administered in the words of the Liturgy: And if they force men thither or admit
them that are unfit, that makes not the words of the Liturgy unfit for the
Faithful, and their faults in Discipline are none of mine.


L. But Faults known before hand become mine if I join with such a faulty
Worship.


M. Then you must join with none on Earth: You know before hand your own
faults, that you will be guilty of in prayer: Must you therefore forbear to
pray? Suppose I have a teacher that is an Anabaptist, an Antinomian, or has
some known tolerable Error, which I know before hand he holds, and uses to
vend in his Praying and Preaching. Is it unlawful to join with such? Then
Presbyterians, Independants, and all that differ in judgment, must still run
away from one another.


L. But to commit a Fault themselves makes it but their own, but if they impose
it on me, it is mine if I be present.


M. You should have said only, It Is mine if I commit it. If you were commanded
to burn a Martyr, your presence makes you not guilty if you do it not, nor
consent to the doing of it.

2. It Is one thing to impose on you the committing of a fault, and another
thing to impose on you to hear another man commit it.

3. And it is one thing to impose that which you can refuse, and another to
force you to do it.

When an Anabaptist, or an Antinomian, or a Preacher of undecent Expressions or
Disorder, teaches in the Assembly, he imposes on them all to hear his Faults,
but not to approve them or do the like: Or if he command them to believe his
Errors, it is a refuseable imposition, and they may choose.


L. But in the Congregation I must do as they do.


M. What must you do that is sin? Must you say all that the Priest will say?
Must you believe all his mistakes? Must you put up any unlawful request to God?


L. Yes, say they; we must pray for Bishops.


M. I think verily they have need of prayer: But they seem to be very humble
petitioners themselves when they bid you pray for them, but as to a God that
works great Marvels. But mu^^ you needs own every petition in the Assembly?
By what Obligation? Do you undertake to own every petition that your own
Preacher will put up, before you know what he will say? Yea, or if you knew he
would speak amiss? I have elsewhere told you that one of the zealousest
Non-Conformists against Prelacy, was old Mr. Humphrey F^n of Coventry, and he
was wont after every Collect in the Common Prayer to say Amen aloud, except the
Prayer for the Bishops: And he thought his silence was sufficient notice of his
Dissent.


L. But the broken Responses are ludicrous and intolerable.


M. Prejudice may make any thing seem so. But, 1. The Jews Church used such as
the Scriptures tell us. 2. They are the oldest part of all the Liturgy, used by
the Church, when Holy fervency would not endure to be silenced or restrained to
a bare Amen. 3. And if it were not that profane Men use them unreverently and
so bring them into disgrace, but they were again used fervently by zealous
Christians, they would seem quite another thing. 4. And we do the same thing in
effect, when all the people sing the Psalm, save that the tune keeps them
better in time and order, and avoideth the confusion.


L. But my Friend says that the Apostle says, with such no not to Eat, and
from such turn away: And you seem to suspect them (though you only say what you
avoid your self) of Lying, Perjury, Persecution, etc. And is it not a sin to
Communicate with such?


M. 1. I never told you that I took all the Parish-Ministers or People for
persecutors. No, nor for Liars: For when they say that ex animo they hold that
nothing in the Liturgy or Ceremonies, etc. is contrary to the Word of God, they
speak as they think. But it would be a lie in me who am otherwise persuaded.

And for Perjury; it is one thing gros^y to be perjured; I charged them not with
that: And it is another thing to say or do somewhat that may make a man some way
guilty of other men's perjury: This is it which affrights me from Conformity;
but as to them, they understand the words of Oaths, and Promises and
Impositions otherwise than I do (as I told you the Earl of Ar^yle did) and I
doubt not but many worthy men, such as Mr. Gurnal, and others known to us, were
drawn in, by having leave to declare that they took the impositions in such a
sense as they thought Lawful (as the Arians at the Council of Seleuci^, and the
Acacians drew many in to them by giving them all leave to subscribe in their
own sense): And though I can justify none of this; yet what ever their words
were, and though they were not faultless, their hearts abhorred Perjury.

But I pray you ask your friend these Questions. 1. Did none that are for
separation from the Church of England take the Corporation-Oath and
Declaration? You know that many of them did.

2. Do they ever since avoid Communion with all those men? You know they do
not. And yet none of the Ministers Subscriptions to me seem half so frightful
as the Corporation Declaration. Do they not then here show Partiality, and
themselves justify our Communion with the Conformists?

Yea when Mr. Eaton, and some other Independants wrote against the obligation
of the Covenant, and of the Oath of Allegiance, and many called the Covenant an
Almanac out of date; did the rest avoid communion with these?


L. But briefly tell me why you Communicate in the Parish Churches.


M. Briefly, 1. Because Christ has Commanded us to live in the utmost Love,
Union and Concord with all his Church on Earth, that we possibly can.

2. Because they hold all the essentials of Christianity, which constituteth
them Members of Christ's Church, and no error that nullifieth their
Christianity, or makes their Communion unlawful to me.

3. Because my own edification has required it: I have long lived where I
could have no better Communion; and after I found Communion with both sorts
most profitable to me; I found the Liturgy in the main, fit for my serious
desires and praises to God, and the Preachers that I heard were profitable
Preachers, and if some words were amiss, I past them by; and the very Concord
and Presence of Christians (though faulty) is pleasant to me.

4. I lived where and when these Parish Churches were slandered by mistakes, to
be such whose Communion was unlawful; and my constant avoiding them, would have
made me seem a consenter to the slanders, and so to be guilty of scandal.

5. I lived in a time and place, where the Rulers and Laws Commanded Parish
Communion; and to forbear it against such commands and penalties, seems
plainly to tell the world that I hold it unlawful, which is an untruth.

6. I had seen whither this extreme of separation had brought this Nation,
formerly, and of late; and what a hopeful Reformation it shamed and destroyed,
and that by such Rebellious and mad actions, as made them, and accidentally
others, the scorn and hatred of the World, and have occasioned all our
sufferings.

7. I lived where men that I thought guilty of our sinful persecution and the
danger of the land, did discern the mistake of them that overcharged the
Liturgy and Parish Communion, and thereupon took them for a proud Fanatic sort
of People, worthy of all that does befall them, and think they do God service in
ruining us all, as if we were such: And I durst not thus scandalize and harden
men in grievous persecutions.

8. I was loath to misguide others by my example; and I doubted not but when
necessity drove them to it, many would see cause to Communicate with the Parish
Churches. And I was willing that they should sooner see these Reasons, and not
seem to do it only to save themselves.

9. I had read the writings of those excellent men of God against Brownists, or
Separation heretofore; who then were the Non-Conformists that did suffer so
much for Reformation: He that will read what is written by Mr. John Paget, Mr.
William Bradshaw, Mr. Gifford, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Brightman, Mr. John Ball,
Mr. Rathband, Dr. Ames First and Second Manuduction, etc. and lately Mr. John
Tombs, the Pillar of the Anabaptists; and for hearing by Mr. Philip Nigh, may
see enough for just satisfaction; especially in Mr. Ball's Trial of Separation.
And though the case of Conformity be since made much harder to the Ministers,
to the Laity the change is not so great as herein alters the case of Lawfulness
or Duty.

10. I found that St. Paul charged the Church of Corinth, as having among them
men Carnal, guilty of Schism, slandering the Apostles; guilty of sinful
Lawsuits, and defrauding each other, bearing with incest, disordered, profane
and drunk at Sacramental Communions; some decryed the Resurrection, etc. The
Galatians seem more to be accused than they, as depraving the Christian
Doctrine. The Colossians faulty; almost all the Seven Churches of Asia charged
with grievous corruption. And yet in all these, no man is commanded to separate
from any one of these Churches, nor blamed for not doing it.

11. And, which is most of all, I find that Christ himself, who was certainly
sinless, held open Communion with the Jewish Church in Synagogues and Temples,
and Commanded the people their duty even to the falsely obtruded Priests, and to
hear the Pharisees while they delivered Moses's Law; though he condemned and
separated from their false Doctrine, and superstitious traditions and
corruptions.

These are my Reasons for Lay-Parish-Communion.


L. But you did not answer [from such turn away, and with such not to Eat, etc.]


M. The answer is obvious; 1. It is the duty of the Church to cast out wicked
impenitent men; and this Christ commands them; but he never bids particular
Christians to separate from the Church where some such are, because the Church
omits its duty: For then you should separate from duty, from Gods Worship and
holy Communion, on pretense of separating from sinners.

2. But for Family and Private Converse, every Christian is judge himself, and
must refuse all familiarity with scandalous Christians which encourages them
in sin or seems to own it.

God Commands no man to do that which is not in his power; to put a
scandalous impenitent man from the Church, is in the Churches power, and so
that command belongs to them; it is not in your power, and therefore belongs
not to you, save to admonish men, and tell the Church; but to put men from your
table and familiarity, is in your power and belongs to you.

Suppose the King write to the City of London to put all Rebels out of their
Company and Converse; its easy to understand, that every one must do it only
in his own place. Every single man cannot turn such out of the Common Council:
The City Rulers must do that, and till it be done, single men may not deny
obedience to the Governors: But all may turn them out of their houses, shops
and familiarity.


L. But they say it is a receding from our former Reformation, and pulling down
what we built.


M. The Separators pulled it down with a witness; but it is no such thing: Did
the Covenant or our Profession ever bind us to take the Liturgy, to be worse
than it is, or the Parish Churches to be no Churches, or their Communion
utterly unlawful? Or did it bind us to prefer a desertion of all public
Communion before it? No, it did not; but if it had, it had been sinful, and to
be repented of. But, 1. We were bound by God's word (and no Covenant, or
Practices bind us to any more than Scripture binds us to) to avoid all that is
sin. 2. And when we have our choice to prefer the best; he that does either
turn to Sin, or prefer a less good, when it is so, before a greater, goes
back; but he that prefers no Public Worship, before the Parish Worship,
goes back indeed, and breaks the Covenant, by profaneness and Schism. God's
word is a clearer and surer Test of our Duty and Controversies, than any humane
Covenants.

When Ministers were changed, 1647. many places got out some tolerable weak
Ministers to get in abler men in great Towns. When the Bishops returned, their
abler Ministers being dead or ejected, they took the old ones again. Did these
go back from Covenant Reformation or Duty, when they could have no better? Had
not those been the revolters that would rather have had none?


L. But why go you to the Parish-Churches when you might have better?


M. 1. All Non-Conformists Preach not better than many of them; yea, the
Liturgy is better words of Prayer, than some weak or faulty Non-Conformists often
use.

2. A brown loaf and a white one both, may be better than a white one alone; I
found both best; and I knew it sin to renounce Communion with any Church for
weakness, because they are not as good as others.

3. That is best at one time and place, that is not so at another; Praying in
it self, is better than working, and eating, sleeping. And yet in their proper
time, your servants working, and your eating and sleeping is better than
praying at that time. One that is a Son, a Servant, a Wife, who is commanded by
ahe Master of the Family to hear a tolerable Parish-Minister, may then find it
better than disorderly and disobediently to hear an abler Man; that may by
variety of conditions be one man's Duty, which is another sin.

But alas! I fear that Communion with a Non-Conformist-Church will quickly in
England be so rare, as will end the controversy which you should prefer, and
you must have Parish Church Communion or none: As it was before 1638, when
there was scarce more than one Nonconformist that held any Church Communion
but Parochial, in each County. I think, God's Judgments will soon silence this
dispute with all that will not renounce all Local-Church Communion.

I will conclude with another reason of my practice. Almost every Church on
Earth has a worse Liturgy (as I said) and People than ours: But I dare not
separate from almost every Church on Earth: And therefore not from one for a
reason that is common to almost all.


CHAP. LIX. A Draught of ten Articles containing that which the Nonconforming
Reconcilers desire, to unite us, and heal the Church, when GOD sees this Land
meet for so great a Mercy.
L. I Have one thing more to desire of you, That you will so far answer the
common question, What would you have? As to tell it us punctually, as to those
things which you take to be necessary to our agreement: It may be hereafter
they may be regarded and used, though not in our days.


M. Do you mean as to the ends and things desired of us or a form of Words to
be the containing means? As to the former; 1. We desire nothing but the
promoting God's Glory, Kingdom and Will, according to the three first Petitions
in the Lord's Prayer, for the Information, Sanctification, and Salvation of the
People; by the Pure, Plentiful, and Powerful pre^ching of the Gospel, the True
and Spiritual Worshipping of GOD, and the due Exercise of Church Discipline
according to Christ's Laws. And that herein all Christians may live in Love,
and Peace, and as much Concord as they can: And to that end that they may take
God's Word which they are all agreed in as the Test of their Concord, and as
sufficient for all things necessary to Salvation, and the only universal Law:
And that the Churches may not be torn by the imposition of Men's Canonical
Engines as necessary to Liberty or Communion, in which all never did nor can
unite. And that such course may be taken for the Choice of Church-Pastors, that
the Flocks may be guided and fed by Truth and Love, and not famished nor
oppressed by Malignants that hate the serious practice of what they Preach.

It is not Wealth nor Honor, nor any thing but this, that we desire; but see
small hopes of attaining by Men.


L. The desires are honest, but you all profess just desires in general, and de
fine: But I desire you to leave to the World in writing the ipsissima Verba,
which you would wish in a healing Law, with as little change as may be.


M. I shall do it, premising, 1. That such a yielding form must contain but
what is of necessity to our Concord, and not all that our well-being requires.
2. That the words must not be too many, lest they seem too tedious, nor too
few, lest they be not intelligible. 3. That they that will defeat them will
pretend but to change the words, and thereby cross our sense and necessities;
but take them, though men give us no present hopes.


A Breviate of the Ten Articles desired by such Non-Conformists as treated for
Concord, 1660. and 1661. for such a Reformation of the Parish-Churches as is
needful to our Union.
I. THat the Profession of the Christian Faith, and consent to the Baptismal
Covenant, by Parents, or Pro-parents or Adopters for Infants, and by the Adult
for themselves, be the Terms of Church-Entrace by Baptism.

II. That the Terms of the Communion and Privileges of the Adult, be, That they
have personally owned and renewed solemnly the said Christian Covenant, and are
not proved to have nulled that Profession by Apostasy, Heresy, or an
inconsistent wicked Life; And that they understandingly desire the said
Communion.

III. For the necessary notification of such understanding, consent and desire,
the Pastors that know them, after due Catechizing shall try them; and upon
Approbation admit them to the Communion of the Adult, or upon a just
Certificate that they have been so approved and received by any other Orthodox
Pastor.

IV. Such as are proved to violate the Baptismal Covenant, by Apostasy,
Heresy, or a wicked Life, the Pastor must (wisely and compassionately)
admonish to repent and amend. And if after private and open Admonition such
remain obstinately impenitent, the Pastor shall publicly declare them Persons
unfit for Communion with the Church; or where so much is not permitted, shall
at least forbear to give them the Sacrament; but shall receive them when they
credibly profess Repentance.

V. No unnecessary Oath, Covenant, Subscription, Profession or Promise, shall
be made necessary to Communion or Ministry; such being Engines of Division and
Persecution; (what promises are necessary, is further to be opened) nor is
Reordination or Re-baptizing to be forced on the truly Ordained and Baptized.

VI. The just Ordainers must needs be the discerning Judges whom they shall
Ordain to the Ministry as such: And the Magistrate is Judge whom he shall
approve and maintain as public Teachers; and whom to tolerate, as tolerable:
And every man is a discerning Judge to whom he shall trust the Pastoral care of
his own-Soul, as he does what Physician he shall use for his Life; to which
Self-love and Self-government, do Authorize, and Oblige him; and no erring
judgment of Superiors can disoblige him; much less every Patrons Choice.

VII. Truly Ordained and Called Ministers, must Preach to their Flocks, though
they have no other License; and are by Office Authorized to choose their
Subject, due Method, and Word: And if a Form of Liturgy in Prayers, Praise,
Psalms, be imposed by Agreement or Authority, (that all the Church be not left
at utter uncertainty what worship they meet to offer to God, till it be passed
out of the Minister's mouth) let it be agreeable to Scripture-direction in
Matter, Method, and Words; blameless, orderly, and without just cause of
suspicion or offense; and let it not be made a snare for Contention and
Division, by the rigorous urging of needless things; nor worthy men be silenced
and cast out, that cannot Declare, Assent, and Consent to all things contained
in it, and prescribed by it, by fallible men; nor for every omission or
abbreviation, through scruple or necessitated have; or for not officiating in a
Surplice: And let the Canons 6. 7. 8. 9. and others that unjustly fetter the
Ministers and Flock, be Altered or Repealed.

VIII. Let no Minister be Silenced, Suspended, or Ejected for not publishing
Excommunications passed by Bishops or Laymen, against any of his Flock (best
known to the present Pastor) whom be judges not guilty, or for scrupleing a
Ceremony, especially upon such Canons as the 6. 7. 8. etc. that Excommunicate,
ipso facto, every man (not excepting Parliament-ment, Lords, Judges or
Justices, Parents, or Wives, or Children,) that do but affirm, That any thing
is unlawful or repugnant to the word of God, in the Liturgy, or Ceremonies, or
Ordination, or in the Government of the Church, by Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, and the Rest that bear Office therein;] seeing Wise and Godly
Ministers judge such things too light to deserve an Excommunication, and dare
not so dishonor those Superiors, whom God has commanded us to honor; yea,
and think all Excommunicating, ipso facto, sine sententia Judicis, to be
sinful, and contrary to the use of Excommunication, which supposes
Impenitence: And let no Minister or People be forced to publish or execute any
Excommunication Arbitrarily Decreed, or against their Consciences: And let none
be forbidden to Preach the Gospel, who do not more hurt than good, while
Justice may be done by other Penalties.

IX. As Christianity, Baptism, and Sacramental Communion are gifts from God, of
unspeabahle value; so none at age but willing Consenters to the Covenant of
God, can have any right to them: Therefore no unwilling person should be forced
to Baptism or the Lord's Supper, and so to profane Gods holy Ordinance, and
corrupt the Church: But in each Parish the mere Auditors or Catechized, must be
distinguished from the Communicants; as mere Catechizing and Teaching is from
Pastoral Oversight, and Church-Conduct.

X. The Kingdom consists of Ministers and People Approvable, Tolerable and
Intolerable; though the public Temples and Maintenance be at the Dispose of
the Sovereign Power and Magistrates, yet are not all Laymen that can but Buy or
Inherit a Patronage, Advowson, or Presentation, either Authorized by God, or
Qualifyed with sufficient Wisdom and Piety, to choose such as Pastors, to whom
(though Ordained by a Bishop) all men are bound to commit the Pastoral care and
conduct of their Souls (as is aforesaid). Therefore to this Relation, the
Peoples Choice or Consent is necessary: And because Parish Churches are by
fixed Neighborhood, the most convenient Order, the Rulers should either make
those the Public Teachers, whom the People can take for their Pastors, or the
People after take those for their Pastors who are truly Capable, whom the
Rulers first choose for the Public Teachers: But in case they cannot so agree,
each man must be Tolerated to choose and join with some other (Parochial or
more private) Minister for his Pastor; so be it, 1. They fess the essentials of
Christianity, and Church Communion. 2. And live peaceably and loyally, in their
Preaching and Practice. 3. And pay the public Teachers and Magistrates their
dues; renouncing Heresy and Popery, and all Foreign Jurisdiction and Treason.

The TEST, or Profession of the Maintained Ministers (supposing the amendments
of Discipline.)
I Do sincerly, as before God, Profess, that I believe the Canonical Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament, to be the True word of God, and (supposing the
Light and Law of Nature) the Divine sufficient Rule of Faith and Holy Living,
according to which we shall be Judged, which no humane Laws or Power can
Abrogate or Suspend, being all but subordinate thereto. And I will Preach
nothing as necessary to Salvation, which cannot be proved or warranted thereby.

And more particularly, I believe all the Articles of the Creed, called the
Apostles, as a summary of our Faith, and Consent to the Lord's Prayer as the
summary of our Desires, and to the Decalogue, as expounded by Christ, as the
summary of our obedient practice; and I resolvedly Consent to the
Gospel Covenant, with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which these
summaries explain, and which is celebrated in Baptism, and the Lord's Supper.

And I do own, and honor the Church of England; that is, This Christian
Reformed Kingdom, containing the Approved Pastors and their Flocks; both the
Publicly Maintained, and the Duly Licensed and United under one Christian
Reformed Sovereign, and Renouncing all Foreign Jurisdiction. And I do honor,
with thankfulness to God, the Reformation and Concord of this Church, in
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, and will labor to preserve its Unity and
Peace, renouncing all Treasons, Seditions, Popery, Foreign Jurisdiction,
Heresy, Schism and Profaneness: And I do promise to Exercise my Ministry with
diligence for the edification of the Church, and the saving of men's Souls.

The Ministers being of three sorts. 1. The Maintained or Promoted. 2. The
Licensed to Preach as Candidates, or Lecturers without the public maintenance,
or Helpers to Incumbents who desire them, or occasionally (such as sound
Protestants continuing Non-conformists should be.) 3. The Tolerated that have
only a Grant of Protection and Peace, without either Mainterance or Approving
License. I leave it to Superiors how much of the aforesaid Profession shall be
required of the two latter.

This would much reduce the Kingdom to a Holy, and Happy Unity and Peace, which
yet contains nothing that Protestants have any just cause to reject: And we
are not forward to meddle with more public Church* matters without our
Superiors invitation or consent; but we may say that it is our judgment that
these additions following would greatly strengthen the Interest of Religion,
Church and Concord.

I. That the Parish Churches be acknowledged True Churches, and their Ministers
such Overseers as are necessary to Essentiate True Churches; that is, That all
Presbyters be Episcopi Gregis, Overseers of the Flock, and the Incumbent the
President among his Curate Presbyters, where there be such: And that the
Diocesan is not the sole Essentiating Church Pastors; and the Diocesan Church,
the lowest particular Church; and the Parish Assemblies, but his Chapels or
Parts of the lowest Church; and the Parish Ministers, his Curates, and no true
Pastors.

II. That no Lay-Elder, Chancellor or Civilian, have or use the Decretive
Power of Excommunication, or Absolution, called the Keys.

III. That New, and more Peaceable Canons be made (instead of that Book, which
now obtains) according to the Scripture Canons: Or that there be no Canons
but Scripture, besides Statute Laws.

IV. That Bishops have no Forcing Power, nor the Writ de Excommunicato
Capiendo, or any Force by the Sword, be Annexed to Excommunication as such; but
that the Magistrates hear and judge before they punish; and Obedience to
Bishops be unconstrained and voluntary.

V. That Bishops judge Church-Causes in Session with their Presbyters, and not
alone, nor with some few of their own Choice, or with Laymen, but in regular
Synods; and Ordain there by their consent, and after sufficient trial of them
that seek Ordination; (And so of Institution.)

VI. That Diocesses be not greater than the Diocesan is able to Oversee; and
that he forbid not the Parish Pastors their particular works, but only use his
general overcight and power on Appeals.

VII. That Bishops often visit the inferior Pastors and Churches, and instruct
the Juniors, by direction and Example how to Preach, and guide the Flock, and
rebuke the Erroneous, Scandalous, Unpeaceable, and Negligent.

VIII. That the Bishops be Chosen by the Diocesan Synod, and Consented to
freely without force, by their City flocks, where they reside, and Invested by
the King, who has the power of Temporal Privileges.

IX. That the City, and neighbor Pastors be the Cathedral Dean and Prebends;
at least where City Churches want maintenance; or that they ambulatorily Preach
abroad where there is most need.

X. If Archbishop Usher's Form or Reduction of Government to the Primitive
state, or else King Charles the Second his Declaration about Ecclesiastical
Affairs be but settled by Law, it will be a Healing and Great Reformation;
inferior Synods not hurtfully fettered being allowed under the Diocesan Synods:
And whether the Diocesans be Called Bishops or Archbishops as Successors to
the Apostles and Evangelists, in the ordinary parts of their Office (a general
care of many Churches) the name is to be left to each man's free judgment.

As to the ignorant clamors for a real or seeming Reordination; 1. I have said
so much against it in my Treatise of Episcopacy, and my Disputation of
Ordination; in my Dispute of Church Government, and my Christian Concord, that
while the objectors by contempt refuse to read and answer them, it will be no
cure of their pride and partiality to repeat the same again.

But I say, that I have fully proved (unanswered) that they that were Ordained
by Synods of Incumbent Pastors, and specially those also then approved by the
Westminster Assembly, had a better Ordination, and that by true Bishops, than
either Papists or mere English Diocesans that are not Archbishops can give:
And yet they Re-ordain not Papists.

1. Either they take the Parish-Churches (that is, the Pastor and Communicants
distinct from the mere Auditors and Catechumens, and from the Aliens) to be
true proper Churches in political Sense or not: If yea, Then those Churches
have Bishops; For Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo adunata, and ubi Episcopus ibi
Ecclesia: Their own Principle is, That it is no proper political Church without
a Bishop. There are three degrees of Bishops. 1. All Presbyters are Episcopi
Gregis (by the consent of Papists and Protestants.) 2. The chief Incumbents
that have Curates or may have, are Episcopi Praesides: The Ordination without
Diocesans was by these two sorts of Bishops. 3. True Diocesans are
Archbishops, Episcopi generales plurium Ecclesiarum; We refuse not their
Ordination; but Men have true Episcopal Ordination without it.

But if they say that the Diocesan is the lowest Bishop of a particular Church,
and that the Parish-Incumbent Rectors are no true Bishops, and their Assemblies
no true political Churches formed of Bishops, but only parts of one Diocesan
Church infimi Ordinis, we abhor such Tyrannical, Schismatical Diocesans, and
their pretense of proper power to Ordain; and the Primitive Church had never
any such Ordaniers or Bishops: And I advise all Ministers neither to be
Re-ordained by such, nor to yield to the appearance of such an evil, by coming
under their equivocating imposition of hands; lest they take God's Name in
vain, and harden Papists and Church-Tyrants in their false condemnation of the
Reformed Churches. If it be want of a legal right in England that they pretend,
let the Magistrate give you a License or Legal right. I write not this for my
own interest, for I was Ordained by a Diocesan, and am past all hopes or fears
of Man.

CHAP. LX. The Reasons of these ten Articles.
L. YOU must give me leave to tell you what objections are like to be raised
against your proposed Articles of Reconciliation. And first your own party will
be unsatisfied in them, and so they will do no good, because here is not a word
against Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear
office in their Courts, which yet is the thing that you your self seem most to
dissent from, and which the Covenant did renounce.


M. 1. We have so much swearing and unswearing and forswearing, that I will
meddle as little as I can in things that look like Perjury. You know that as
the last Generation was sworn against Prelacy, this new Generation is sworn to
it: Yea in a manner the whole Land is sworn or covenanted never to endeavor
any alteration of it: And how much soever I am against that Oath, yet I will
meddle as little as I can in urging men to that which they take for Perjury.

And I have elsewhere told you that the Covenant renounced not all Episcopacy;
many of the Assembly of Divines declared their dissent from any such
renunciation, and had entered their protestation against it (as Dr. Cornel.
Burges told me) had not the Explication been added, which confineth the
Renunciation to the English frame. And that the present Non-Conformists would
have thankfully received the Primitive Episcopacy, they showed by their motion,
1660.

2. We offer this form on supposition that we may not have what we think best,
but what we can joyfully submit to, for our Concord and the Churches safety.

3. I have inserted those restraints of the hurt and abuse of the Diocesan form
and their Courts, as may do much to secure Religion: And if they be kept from
doing harm, we have most of our end. Their faults are not ours who cannot
remedy them.

4. And you are mistaken in thinking that this form of Reconciliation will
cause no Concord: Less was accepted with published thanks to the King for his
Declaration, 1660. And I believe that the Dissenters would be so few, as that
the Concord of Consenters would render them inconsiderable, or incapable of
being dangerous to our peace.


L. But, 1. what makes you put in so much that no body denies? Do you not seem
hereby to intimate unjustly that all this is denied you?


M. 1. I have no hope of Concord, but by disputing ex concessis, and improving
men's own principles: Do you think I am so foolish as to expect that Adversaries
so fierce should change their judgments by any thing that I can say, if their
own interest or their own principles by inference change them not?

2. We want nothing more in reality and practice than that which is most
granted us in shadow and general words; who grant not that we must obey God
before man? And must love God above all, our neighbors as our selves, and must
do as we would be done by? And must bear with the receive the weak, and
persecute none, etc. And if this were done, we were all agreed. O happy England
if all were granted practically and indeed, which men in general words approve!
But if they grant this, and yet will not grant it, but seek to ruin them that
seek it, are they not unexcuseable?


L. Why begin you with the qualifications requisite to Baptism, as if you spoke
to Infidels?


M. Because I cannot build without a foundation: This is the chief thing
necessary to our Reformation, that the Church may consist of capable persons.


L. Why name you Parents and Pro-parents instead of Godfathers and Godmothers?


M. Because it belongs to him to covenant in the Child's name or behalf, whose
will may justly go as for the Child's will; and that is they whose* he is, and
who have the power of him, and whom God has commanded and authorized to this
office, and who are obliged to educate him and seek his welfare: By
Proparents, I mean such as by Adoption or otherwise justly take the child for
theirs; which when Parents leave them Orphans is usual. I say nothing against
Godfathers as seconds, presupposing this much.


L. But I pray you who shall be judge whether the profession be Understanding
which must be made by the Adult, or by the Parent? By this trick you will make
the Priest the chief Governor of the Church; and he shall keep out whom he
pleases, as for want of understanding the words of the Covenant.


M. 1. I confess that this is the first and most momentous part of the power of
the Keys. But it tells us that it is not only Bishops that have that power: But
either somebody or no body must have this power or trust.

1. If Nobody; Turks, Heathens, Sadducees, any may be baptized though in scorn;
and may be members of the Church at pleasure, and the Church shall indeed be no
Church, being confounded with the World. A Parrot may be taught to say those
words. A man of about 80 Years of age in the Parish where I taught, being asked
who Jesus Christ was, pointed to the Sun and said, That was he; and asked, Wh
was the Holy Ghost? Said, he thought the Moon. What wiseman will be the Pastor
of such a Church?

2. Christ has instituted an Office for this judgment, and given them the
Keys: Therefore there must be some such judge*

2. If Somebody, who must it be? 1. If it be every expectant for himself, it
will be as before; and there will be no Church. Any Heathen may come in. 2. If
it must be the Magistrate, you call him to attend this Service, and to teach
and try all that are baptized at age, and all Parents for their Children: And
if you lay on him the Pastors Office, you make him Pastor. 3. If it must be the
Bishop, it is impossible, and no Bishop will do it; when he does not so much as
know or see one of an hundred in his Diocese: It must then be the
Parish-Minister, or Nobody.

3. Those must be trusted with it whom Christ has appointed for such trust:
But that is the Ministers: To them he has committed the Keys of his Church or
Kingdom.

4. Those must be trusted with it, that must Execute it: It is the Minister
that must Baptize: And therefore he must judge whom to baptize, or else he is
but an Executioner, like one that washes any one that is foul; and not a judge
of what he does, nor must answer for it.

5. The Universal Church ever since Christ's days has agreed in this: And
shall we now overthrow it?

And as to the exception against the Power of the Pastor. 1. All power may be
abused; shall we have no King, no Judge, or Justice, or Bishops, because they
may abuse their power?

2. It is so natural to men to consult their own carnal Interest, which will
here most lie in pleasing the people, and sloathfully to omit so costly and
troublesome a duty, that it is enough to foretell that a hundred will sin in
making the door too wide, for one that makes it too narrow; and doleful
experience tells us this: We are confounded by the contrary extreme.

2. He that is refused wrongfully by one Minister, may find enough that will
receive him.

3. We grant appeals to Rulers in case of Maladministration.

4. The setting open the Church-doors without an examiner, will be an hundred
fold worse: And you must be like the Woman that would never have her house
swept, lest her servant should chance to sweep out a pin.

What think you of all the ancient Churches that taught the Adult long as
Catechumens before they would baptize even them that begged it?


L. 2. In your second Article again you give the Minister a power to judge of
men's Understanding: But I need no further answer to that.

But do you not thus make Examination by Ministers necessary to the Sacrament?


M. I make it needful to Confirmation or Adult-Communion; but that is but once
in a Man's life.


L. But is it not enough that Children own their baptismal Covenant by coming
to Church, and not denying it, without any Confirmation or other Profession?


M. Many come to hear that are no Christians; Children are born in Nescience,
and when they come to age must be made knowing Christians, and believe and obey
for themselves if they will be saved; and they cannot consent to their
baptismal Covenant if they understand it not: This is the thing that has
corrupted the Church: Those that were Infant-Christians, and at age were no
Christians, have filled many Congregations. Yet I confess that where
Confirmation and Personal Trial is by the sin of Pastors omitted, the peoples
ordinary attendance at Church and desiring the Sacrament, is an obscure
profession, and may serve to the being of a Church, though not to the well-being.


L. But some of your Non-conformists will as much blame you for requiring too
little to Communion, in that you demand not an account of Men's Conversation.


M. 1. He that truly consents to the Covenant of Baptism, is Converted or
Sanctified; and he owes the Church no account of that consent but his own
Profession, not nulled by word or deed. And if you forsake this rule, you will
never know what terms to take up with.

2. And as to the time or circumstances, whether God Sanctified him in Infancy
and he grew up in grace, or when, or how God wrought upon him, he owes no
account to others.


L. 3. In your third Article again the chief exception will be against this
trying men by the Minister for Communion.


M. I have proved to you the necessity of it, ad been esse. And may I not hope
that the Bishops will be for it? When, 1. They order that the Minister
catechize and send to the Bishop such as are to be confirmed. 2. That he give
the Sacrament to none but those that are Confirmed, or are ready and willing to
be Confirmed: And how can they know this without trial? 3. When they know that
the Bishops are not able to do it for all, or the hundredth part themselves.
Why then should they be against it?


L. If all the Bishops in England be for it, the Parish Priests will some be
unfit for it, and few will be at so much labor and self-denial as it will cost
them.


M. If the Bishops put or take in bad untrusty men, I cannot help that: Let
them be encouraged to do well that will.


L. But why must they make their profession before others?


M. Not but that the Pastors word may satisfy the Church, but it is much fitter
that he that is to have Communion with all, should be known to some besides the
Minister to be a professed Christian. I should have desired that it might be
done as Baptism in the Congregation, as best, but that of these men we must ask
as little as may be.


L. But many ignorant people have not words to express their own belief or
thoughts.


M. It is not ornamental unnecessary knowledge that must be demanded of them:
They that want other words, may by Yea, and Nay make known their mind, when the
Minister expresses the matter in his question. And the Church requires that
they can answer as catechized.


L. Some other will say that you are too lax in admitting all confirmed
formerly by Bishops, or by other Pastors.


M. If we crave that each Minister may try his Flocks, we cannot in modesty
refuse those tried and received by the Bishop or other Pastors. All Churches
should live in such Communion with each other, as to receive each others
Members on just occasion, without trying them all again. And if Bishops or any
do it superficially, that is their own fault.


L. Why do you impose the Registring of Communicants?


M. I impose it not, but only commend it as a help to memory. He that has no
more Communicants than he can remember, needs it not. But Bishop Ier. Tailor in
his Pref. to Treatise of Repentance, says, That a Man cannot take a Pastoral
charge, or give an account of them that he knows not.


L. 4. Your fourth Article sets Ministers on such work as few can well do, and
few will ever faithfully do. And yet for every young, raw Priest to have such
power will never be granted by the Bishops or the Laity.


M. You may as well speak out and say, that Christ has appointed such a
Ministerial office as the World will never endure. Why then do they call
themselves Christians? This is the proper work of a Pastor, as it is of a
Physician, to look particularly to the sick, and not only to read a Physic
Lecture to them. If Bishops will put in ignorant lads or unfit men, I say again
we cannot help it; nor must we for that deny the Ministerial office, any more
than we must put down Preaching and Praying because some are unfit. The weight
of this work should rather make all careful to get only fit men into the
Ministry.


L. But shall every Priest have power to put men from the Sacrament?


M. If every Priest must administer it, he must judge to whom: It is not a
common food for all, but the Childrens Bread. If every Priest must judge whom
to baptize, so he must whom to give this Sacrament to. 2. The Canons allow this
as to the scandalous, so we do but present them to the Bishop or Chancellor;
and it is less offensive to suspend them without such prosecution. If he wrong
any, they have their remedy.


L. But why do you mention no more solemn Excommunication, but this Declarative
one and Suspension?


M. Because I would ask no more than needs of men that will not grant so much.
And I know no just Excommunication but a Ministerial declaring according to
God's word, that a man has made himself incapable of Church Communion and of
the benefits of Gods Covenant, and binding him over to answer his Impenitence
at the bar of God, and requiring the Church accordingly to avoid him.


L. 5. The main charge will be against your fifth Article, that cuts off so
many Oaths, Subscriptions and Professions.


M. It Is pity that these will not serve the turn, whenas they are more than
Christ, or his Apostles, or the Church for 300 years imposed. See the Lord
Bacon about Subscription in his foresaid Considerations Dedicated to King James.
And yet must we have more, even as necessary to Ministry? Will not the
experience of 1300 years yet teach us to forbear tearing the Church by
unnecessary snares? Yet I deny not but the Ordainers may try the ability of
Ministers, in more than the words that they must subscribe to: And if any will
draw up such Articles as none shall Preach against, I oppose them not: The
greater Concord the better: But we must not cause perpetual discord, by
unskilful, and impossible terms of Concord.


L. But for ought I see you will let in Papists if they will but take the Oath
of Supremacy, and renounce all in general that is contrary to the Scripture and
their Profession.


M. And all Churches will let in Heart-Papists that renounce Popery: Who knows
the heart? But, 1. The Oath of Supremacy is a most express abjuring of the
Essence of Popery; especially as extended against the Ecclesiastical as well as
Civil Power of the Pope. 2. And is not God's Word a sufficient Rule of
Religion? Deny this and you will turn Papists to keep out Papists. 3. If it be,
if Popery be against Scripture, it is here renounced: If not, why should we be
against it?


L. But should they not distinctly renounce Transubstantiation, P^rgatory,
Image Worship, Merit, and the rest of their Errors?


M. There is no end of enumerating Errors: They are numerous like Maggots in a
Carcass. A thousand will be unnamed when you have done your best at it. But the
Rule must not name every Error against it: The contrariety will be
discernable. It is enough that men profess a perfect Rule, and renounce all
contrary, and be responsible to the Church and their Rulers when they corrupt
Religion contrary to the Rule and their own Profession. An Error not
manifested hurts not others, and none is punishable till proved. If Heresy be
kept secret, the Church must not make new Laws and Tests to make men confess
it; but punish it when it is vented.


L. But shall Ministers make no profession but what a Papist or a Heretic will
make?


M. No, if a Papist or Heretic will profess all that is necessary, else we
must make more. Must we make new Creeds or new Scriptures as often as dissemblers
will falsely profess that already made? This was the temptation to those
multitudes of Creeds, by which Councils distracted the Churches, which Hilary
decryeth.


L. But the Bishops will never take down the Oath of Canonical Obedience, and
all the other Oaths and Subscriptions that are formed to their Interest.


M. I cannot help that: Over-doing is un-doing: If ever Episcopacy be cast out,
it will be by such over-doing, which will not let men live in Peace that would
not molest them.


L. 6. Why do you seem to grant the Bishops and Patrons votes in the choice of
Pastors, when before you seem to have much against them?


M. I have nothing against the Ordainers judging of the fitness of the
Ordained, nor of Magistrate or Patrons disposal of Temples and Tithes: And
because nothing but necessity will weigh down the great inconvenience of
maintaining distinct Pastors, while ^ settled Lecturer has the Temple and
Tithes, therefore I suppose that the Bishop and Patron will have their Votes:
And I suppose you know that it is vain to motion to Patrons to resign this
power, were it worse than it is; else Advowsons would not be sold at such rates
as they are by many Patrons: And my silence where speaking will do no good, is
no sign of my approbation.


L. But do you think that the Communicants shall have a negative Vote in
choosing Pastors.


M. I think they will not, till God raise up better men, than many Patrons are.
But I am past doubt that God's Law of Nature and Scripture, and the whole
consent of ancient Churches, Fathers and Councils, are for it: And methinks
were not carnal Interest stronger with them than Religion, men that are
professedly for God's Law, and Church-Canons and Customs, should not
obstinately oppose them all: Yea, the highest Episcopal Men are in this against
them. Mr. Thorndike says, that till the Clergy and People again choose their
own Bishops, there needs no other reason be given of the contempt of
Episcopacy. Yea, I have proved past denial often, that no Non-consenter can be a
member of any Pastoral Church, nor any man be a man's Pastor that does not
consent. It Is reason then to speak for the Flocks Consenting Vote.


L. But they may be forced to consent.


M. I shall give you a reason against that anon.


L. Do you think the ignorant vulgar are fit to choose themselves a Pastor? The
most are usually the worst.


M. If the Churchmen will make the incapable rabble Communicants, and then
deny them Church-privileges, because they are incapable, they condemn
themselves for taking (yea forcing) in such incapable men: Even as the Bishops
that Ordain Ministers that cannot Preach, and then by their Canon forbid them
to Preach.

2. And yet I will say, That never knew any places, in City or Country, that
have often had better Pastors, for Learning and all Worth, than where the
Communicants were the choosers: Yea, even the ignorant usually have a gust,
that discerns and valueth good and able men.

3. And yet, I speak not so high as for their Power of first Choice, but only
of Consent; nor yet to choose who shall be a Minister, but who shall be their
Pastor. The Bishop asks not their consent at Ordination.


L. But you know that if there must three Consents go to it; The Ordainers, the
Patrons, and the Communicants, they may never agree* and frustrate all.


M. Humane faultiness puts inconveniences into all actions: But we must not
cure it with a worse: If you would take no Physic till three Physicians agree,
it is a less mischief than to give any man that can buy that Power, a right to
impose what ignorant fellow or enemy he will, to be your sole Physician. Three
Locks and Keys in three hands, to so great a Trust, may be better than one in
an untrusty hand. Shall every Papist or Atheist choose me a Physician as fitter
than I?

2. But if they should never agree, it is but every one stopping at his own
part. The Ordainers have done their part; and the Patron has chosen a Teacher
for Auditors, and a Pastor for such as will accept him; and the People that
trust him not may go to one that they can trust; and this is better than worse.


L. But the Patron will prevail against them, as long as he must nominate,
though the Bishop and People had a Negative Vote: for if they refuse one, he
will still name another of his own complexion.


M. Uncurable evils I cannot help. I can but wish that no Patron had ever built
Churches, or given Glebes at so dear a rate, as thereby to buy from the Church
its Privileges.


L. But can you think that the Bishops will ever abate Reordination of thsoe
ordained by Presbyters?


M. I think not; and therefore I have no hope of concord by their Concession:
But I know that former Bishops would have done it, and the Church of England
still owned such since the Reformation; and God may send England such again;
and for such an age I write, and not for this with any great hope.

And if you would not have the Land confounded with doubts, whether they be
Baptized, or whether they had any valid Sacraments, This was written 1683.
and whether the Papists or Protestants be the true Church, etc. it concerns
you all to regard the decision of this Case.


L. But you speak only against Re-Ordaining those that are already Ordained,
and nothing for the time to come.


M. 1. You know it is hopeless to move for that. 2. And it is meet that
Ordination should be well regulated. 3. And when all the unjust impositions are
removed, as is here desired, few moderate men will scruple Ordination.


L. VII. Your 7th. has so much reason that I can say nothing against it, but
that I doubt the Bishops will never abate^ their Ceremonies, or any part of
their Liturgy, so far, to endure any to disuse it, though they meddle not
against it.


M. I know what is necessary and just, but I know not what men will grant; I am
of your mind of those in possession, except some few: But if any man will make
and keep up any instruments of division and hurt, on pretense of concord or
decency in God's service, we can but wish and speak for better.


L. But they say if nothing unlawful be imposed, it is disobedience to refuse
it: And if disobedience be endured no Government can stand.


M. 1. Judge by what is said whether no Sin be imposed.

2. Obedience to God being more necessary than to man, all just Rulers should
encourage a due fear of sin, and do nothing that tempts men from obeying God.

3. God himself does not silence, eject, or condemn men for all disobedience,
else none could be saved: All sin is disobedience to God. There is disobedience
in small things as well as in great; and of ignorance and infirmity, as well as
of malicious wilfulness: And what smaller matter can there be than Humane Forms
and Ceremonies? and where is ignorance more excuseable than in things so
minute, and so uncertain and hard, that they must all be wiser than you and I
that know them to be lawful? and what Unity will be in that Church and Kingdom,
that will endure none but such as are wiser than you and I?


L. 8. Your 8th. Article preventeth all the objections against Ministers power
and liberty, while all are under Law responsible; But what if the Rulers be
Bishops or men that distaste your desired discipline?


M. We are not choosing Rulers (by the sword) but only Pastors to guide us by
God's word; and if we shall have bad ones, we must patiently suffer; we cannot
remedy such infelicities.


L. But both Papists and many others say, That the Judgment of Ministers
Doctrine and Ministry, belongs not to the Magistrate, but to the Church.


M. Judgment is as various as Execution, e. g. If one be a Heretic or
turbulent in Schism; 1. The Magistrate is judge whether and how he shall be
Corporally Punished. 2. The neighbor Churches are Judges whether they will
own his Communion as approved. 3. His own Flock are discerning Judges, whether
he be fit to be trusted and owned as their Pastor, or to be forsaken by them.

We must not imitate Papists in exempting Ministers from the Magistrates
Government.


L. 9. I confess your Reasons against Constraining Infidels to Profess
Christianity are undeniable, and agree with the sense of the Ancient Church and
Fathers; But the Papists, and many Protestants hold that when once men are
Baptized, they may be forced to Communion and all other Christian Duty.


M. What if they openly apostatize and turn Infidels, Jews, or Mahometans; will
they yet force them to Communicate in the Lord's Supper?


L. No, but they will put them to Death as they Burn Heretics.


M. That Is their way, but not Christ's way. Why should they put Apostates or
Heretics to death, any more than Infidels that never believed?


L. Because they break their Covenant; and because they sin against the Laws
which they consented to.


M. And does not sinning against God's Law, In neither Consenting to nor
Obeying it, deserve as bad? If God, by many years Preaching, call one man to
Christianity, and he derides it to the last; and another took it up but by
Education and the Law of the Land, and never heard and understood the Reasons
of it, and turns from it, being taken prisoner by the Turks, which of these
is the greater sinner? God binds them to Believe and Consent that do not; and
they sin against God's Law, which is more than to break their own Covenant as
such: But both these deserve death and worse from God: But if it were Christ's
way, to have men put one of them to death, I see not but why they should do so
by the other. Torment or Death is no fitter way to make an Apostate believe
than other Infidels.

It Is known that all the ancient Churches abhorred this forcing and punishing
way. I have wondered at the Impudence of Baronius, Binnius, and other Papists
and justify Martin for separating from the Communion of the Bishops that were
for punishing the Priscillianists by the sword, and Canonize him as a Saint,
and condemn these Bishops for it, and yet are for for more cruelties
themselves, to far better men than the Priscillianists. But where Fleshly
interest is a man's Religion, no wonder if it have neither consistency with
Reason nor Modesty.


L. But if none but Volunteers be Christians or Communicants most will despise
the Church and it will be empty.


M. All that are fit to be there will come in: And those few will give the
Pastors more comfort and lesser trouble than the multitude of the incapable. If
your purse be not quite full of Gold, will you fill it up with dung or stones?
The incapable will do better for themselves, and the Church among the Audientes
or Catechumens. It is their forcing in the incapable, that has corrupted the
Church, and deprived the Flock of their due privileges (choosing their Pastors,
etc.) because it is made up of men unworthy of them. And doubtless if you but
countenance and prefer the Communicants before the rest, it will draw in more
than are capable, without force.


L. If the Excommunicate be no further punished, nor forced to repent, the
Church censures will be despised: How little will men care for an
Excommunication?


M. This is commonly said, and much of it is true: But, 1. Can you force men to
Repent, or rather Lie? You make him Repent that he brought himself into your
hands and into suffering: But that is not to Repent of Sin. Will you tell a man
before hand, If thou will but say thou repentest rather than lie in Gaol till
death, we will pronounce thee absolved and forgiven in Christ's Name? Who can
think ill enough of such an Absolution?

2. Do not they scorn Christ that say he has advanced his Church to the
Dignity of Government, by putting into their hands a Reed for a Scepter, and a
Leaden Sword that will do nothing without the Magistrate's Sword of Steel? Has
he set up an useless mock-power in the Church?

3. Did the Primitive-Churches for 300 years use any Sword but Spiritual? Or
did they find it so uneffectual and vain?

4. Yea for some hundred years after there were Christian Magistrates, did not
the Church abhor such a thing as forcing the Excommunicate to repent by
imprisonment or the Sword?

5. No man is meet to be a just Member that cares not for a just
Excommunication? And still this shows what a wickedness it is to force in the
unmeet, that despise God's Ordinance and the Church that they are in: And then
God's Ordinance must be debauched for their unfitness.

6. The Sword does the Keys much more hindrance than help, when it is thus
annexed to them; for then it cannot be discerned whether Excommunication do any
Good or none; or whether it be only the Sword that does the cure: And do not
they that profess Excommunication to be vain without the Sword, teach men to
call them as Church Governors Vain, and to despise them? And is it not all
one, as to say, if any good be done by Church Government, it is by the
Magistrate's Sword, and not by ours by the Keys?

7. And is it not then ridiculous contradiction to dispute so hard about
Church Power, and against the Presbyters claim, when you confess that it is an
useless shadow that you dispute for, and it is not it, but the Sword that does
the deed.

8. Is it not an odious defacing of Princes and Magistrates, to say, That they
are bound to Imprison and Ruin a man as a mere Lictor or Executioner of the
Judgment of the Clergy, or of a Chancellor, without ever hearing or trying his
Cause; and to punish him again because they punished him before, or because he
has not got their pardon?

9. If Excommunication be grossly unjust (as against Christ's Members, for doing
their duty, or for common humane infirmity) they do well that set by it no more
than it deserves, and pretend not to repent when they do not, nor cannot, nor
ought to repent.


L. Though you call it no Punishment, to keep all the Non-Communicants from
public power and trust, I think it will pass for a notable Penalty.


M. I grant them as much as I can, as knowing how little they will yield to;
and indeed it is my opinion that to deny all Non-Communicants Magistracy and
public Trust, would be to Reform the Commonwealth in the Foundation, if the
Keys were but justly exercised: But then by this I exclude none but the
Intolerable, that Neither Communicate with the Approved or the Tolerated
Churches.


L. But Rulers will turn this against you, and shut out the Tolerated with the
Intolerable.


M. I cannot help that: Must I not tell men what is Right, because they will do
Wrong?


L. But you are for having all the Subjects forced to be Catechized, and to be
Auditors: And do you think that this will not force Non-Conformists to hear
against their Consciences?


M. I say not that they should be forced to hear in the Parish Church; but
either in a Parish Approved, or a Tolerated Church: How have they a Toleration,
that may not hear their Tolerated Pastors? And he that is not for hearing at
all, is not to be Tolerated: And indeed, if those that are no Members in
Communion of any Church, but mere Catechumens or Auditors, should be forced to
hear in their own Parishes ordinarily, if there be meet Teaching; I oppose it
not.


L. But is it no^ as injurious, to force men against their Consciences to Hear
as to Communicate?


M. No, the Case is greatly different. Nature binds all men to learn, that
they may know what is good or evil to themselves. Learning and Knowledge is the
common Duty and Interest of mankind; and though no man can be forced to Believe
and Repent; he that is forced to Hear, may hear that which may make him
Voluntarily Believe and Repent: You must force your Children to Learn, but not
to Communicate. I told you that to give a man the Sacrament, is to give him a
sealed Pardon and Gift of Christ and Life, which no unwilling man is capable
of, but he may be capable to Hear and Learn.

And this being only to those that are refusers of all Church Communion, or are
incapable, and are in none, either Approved or Tolerated, what Conscience can
such pretend against hearing, or against being restrained from crimes and
profaning holy things, or reproaching Religion, though they be not constrained
to what they are incapable of?


L. I am fully satisfied, that your way of dividing all the Subjects into the
Approved, the Tolerated and the Intolerable, is of absolute necessity. And to
conclude, I am satisfied, that you Non-Conformists have a Cause so good, that
you do well to suffer for it; but were I in your case, I know not what I should
do my self. The Flesh and World are strong; and it is easier to be convinced
that one should be a Martyr, than to submit to Martyrdom: God be merciful to
our weakness.


M. He trusts not Christ that thinks he shall be a loser by him; and he that
will save his life from him by sin, shall lose it; and he that loses it for
him, shall save it.


L. X. Your 10th. for some Toleration, will never be endured, though the truth
is, your Reasons for it are unanswerable, and your Limitations so strict, as
prevent most of the Objections that might be made against it.


M. God's Law requires forbearing and forgiving one another, and receiving the
weak in Faith. And they that cannot Tolerate the Tolerable, methinks should
fear the thoughts of death, lest then God will not Tolerate them, but cast them
out as they cast out his Children.


L. I confess you convince me, that know what most Patrons in England are, that
it is unfit that all the Peoples Souls should be so far at the mercy of those
Patrons, that seem to care but little for their own, as that no man must have
any other or better Pastor than they will choose for him; and that all man's
duty, to care for his Salvation, and all the judgment of the Church of Christ,
from the Apostles days, till a few hundred years ago, should wholly give
place to the pretended right of any fellow that can buy an Advowso^ or
Presentation: And it were to be wished that it were wholly taken from them, and
left to the Clergy and People alone; the Magistrate being Judge whom he will
Approve or Tolerate. But there is no hope that Patrons will let go their
supposed right, if an Angel from Heaven should speak against it; but in all
reason they should grant the Communicants that small consequent Vote of Consent
or Dissent, that you pleaded for; but if they will not do that, they should
give them leave to go to another Parish, or to choose a Tolerated Pastor whom
they will maintain. But men are so set on their own ways, that they banish all
sense of others case, and of what conduces to the common good.


M. We can but bring the truth to light, and show a self-wounding people the
Balsam that must heal them, and stay till God will give them a heart to use it.


L. But you are so careful, not to offend them by ^otioning (...) wide a
Toleration, that I doubt it will do little good. For, 1. some will scruple some
of the Subscriptions, or Oaths, which, you grant, shall be imposed on them. 2.
If all the Tolerated must be responsible for their Doctrine and Ministration,
it is two to one, but the Rulers to whom they must give account, will be so
contrary to them, that they will have no peace or safety.


M. How would you have these dangers and inconveniences be avoided? An
unlimitted Toleration of the Intolerable, is it self Intolerable; and you can
devise no safer limitation. The engagements which they are to take, tell you
the Terms of Toleration; and if men will-Preach against those Terms, that is,
against the Christian Faith, or the Holy Scripture, or their Allegiance to the
King; or if they use their Meetings, to destroy Love and Peace, they ought to
be restrained; and there are lower punishments than depriving them of their
Toleration, which are for lower faults. 2. But if Rulers will oppress, we
cannot help that, and must not therefore be ungoverned.


CHAP. LXI. Whether the Extirpation of the Non-Conformists, be not rather to be
attempted, than an Union with them by these means.
L. It Is long since our former Conference; and now there is discovered a
Treasonable Plot against the King and his Brother; This was ^ritten when ^he
Duke of Monmouth's Treason was most noised, and the Dissenters cried down.
and a multitude of Addresses tell us, that it was the Plot of the Dissenters,
and the Product of Conventicles, and therefore ^^ave the extripation of them
all; and that they may no more be trusted, as having Principles were
concileable to Monarchy and Subjection; and the loudest cry now runs that way.


M. What is the Treasonable Plot?


L. To Kill the King and Duke, and raise an Army, and to Change the Government,
or Governors at least.


M. Who do they mean by Dissenters or Conventiclers?


L. All that Conform not to the Church of England as it is now settled by the
Law.


M. The Law setleth the Essentials, Integrals, and Accidents of the Church: Do
you mean every one that disliketh any one Office, (as Lay-Chancellors use of
the Keys) or any Ceremony or Form? If so, I do doubt most that come to Church
and Communicate with it, dissent from some such Circumstances.


L. Well, suppose it be those that separate from it.


M. There are now these following sorts of known Dissenters, called by many,
Conventiclers.

I. Those that like the way of Episcopacy and Liturgy best, as here settled; but
yet will also, occasionally join with other Churches, as the French, Dutch,
Lutheran, or some Non-Conformists.

II. The Pacifick Non-conformists, who at the King's Return, Petitioned for
Archbishop Usher's Model of the Primitive Episcopal Government, and thankfully
accepted the King's Declaration.

III. The Presbyterians, who are for Government only by Synods of equal
Presbyters Teaching joined with mere Ruling ones.

IV. The Independants and Separatists.

V. The Anabaptists (who are half Arminians, and half not).

VI. The Fifth-Monarchy Party (most of which are Anabaptists also).

VII. The Quakers.

VIII. The Papists.

IX. The Infidels, Jews, Hobbists, and Atheists.

Is the meaning, that all these are the guilty Rebels to be destroyed, or which
of them is it?


L. If all, I doubt the King would lose no small part of his Subjects: But you
know the Papists are not numbered with the Dissenters or Conventiclers.


M. Say you so? Do those that differ but about a Ceremony, or Lay-mans use of
the Keys, or the largeness and paucity of Bishops Churches, dissent more from
you than the Papists, that would bring King and Kingdom under a foreign
Jurisdiction, and introduce all the Mass and doctrinal corruptions of their
Church. Read Bishop Downham's Catalogue of Popish Errors de Anti-Christo, or
Dr. Willet's, Chamier's, Iewell's, or any such, and judge.

And do you think that the Mass is no Conventicle, or more lawful than the
forbidden assemblies of Protestants?


L. Well, But it is Protestant-Dissenters that. I mean.


M. So then; You would have Protestant-Dissenters rooted out, and not Papists
or Infidels?


L. We would have those rooted out that were in the Plot, which the Papists
were not.


M. No doubt but such a Plot as you describe deserves the extirpation of those
that were guilty of it: But I pray you compare not the innocence of Papists in
their Principles, with the Protestants: Or read Bishop Barlow's and Hen.
Fowlis's Books, and Prin's History of Bishops Treasons, and judge as you see
cause. But it is none of my business now to accuse the Papists. Do but grant
that the innocent should not suffer for the crimes of the guilty, and we are
agreed.


L. But is it not justly supposed that the whole Party is guilty of those
Principles which have caused particular men's rebellions; and that it is their
Preachers and Conventiclers that have caused all?


M. You that are a Lawyer should know somewhat of the Rules of Justice, or
Humanity at least. Come on, and let you and I consider soberly of the case.

And first, to your face I challenge you to name and prove any the least
difference between the Non-conformists who sought for Concord at the King's
Restoration, or the party of mere Non-Conformists, and the Protestants of the
Church of England, in their Principles about the Power of Princes, and the
Subjection and Patience of the People. Name any difference if you can?


L. You would make one believe that great Numbers are inhumanely impudent, that
charge them with such heinous difference, if there be none.


M. Why do you not name the difference, if there be any? Contrarily, 1. We all
take the same Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.

2. We Subscribe all the same Articles of Religion about the Power of
Magistrates.

3. We have often professed our consent to all that is written for Magistracy
and Subjection in all the Scripture, in any General Council (save what is for
the Papal Tyranny over Princes and People) or in any Confession of any
Christian Church, Greek, Papist, or Protestant, that ever we saw; and for all
that (for the Power of Kings, but not all against it) which the generality of
Fathers, Historians, Philosophers, Politick-writers, Lawyers, Canonists, or
Divines, are for. And is not all this yet enough?

4. I have often told you where; e.g. Bishop Andrews in Tortura Torti, Sir Fran.
Bacon, Lord St. Albans, and many others, have vindicated the principles of the
English Non-conformists, as the same with the Church's in point of Loyalty
against the Papists accusations.


L. But do not you know who wrote the Political Aphorisms, or Holy
Commonwealth, condemned lately by the Oxford Convocation?


M. And do not you know, 1. That the Author had never leave to confute his
accusers about it?

2. Do you not know that he has diverse years ago written a large Book called
his Second Plea for Peace, fully opening the Principles which he and his
Consenters hold; and no man has written one word against any of them, that I
hear of, to this day? Is this fair dealing then to silence what at large he
owneth, and name only a writing 29 years ago, which he never was heard about?

3. Do you not know that the Famously Learned Tho. White a Papist, wrote at the
same time the like Doctrine, and will you charge that on the Party of Papist^*

4. The Historians Rule is Distingue de temporibus, Do you know in what times
that was written? And know you not that few men then living wrote and spoke
more plainly against the Usurpation than he did?

5. And you see that the Oxford Convocation condemn the writings and principles
of the Doctors of the Church of England as well as others? And as for Knox and
Buchanan we are no more guilty of their words than of Iewell's, Bilson's,
Hooker's, Laud's, or any such.


L. But if you differ not from the Church of England in Principles of Loyalty,
why do you not take the Oxford-Oath in the Act of Confinement, and the
Subscription in the Act of Uniformity?


M. I have told you fully before: Not because we differ in Doctrine, but in
expounding the words of that Oath and Subscription.

2. Were neither Archbishop Abbot, nor his Clergy, nor the Parliaments of
those times of the Church of England, as well as S^bthorp and Mainwaring? Were
not the Laws made by those Parliaments, made by the Members, if not
Representatives of the Church of England? You know that our late great
Defenders of the Church, describe the Church of England to be those that
Worship God according to the Law: And were the Parliaments that made those Laws
none of the Church themselves?

Chillingworth would not Subscribe without a limitting Profession: Was he
therefore none of the Church?

Was Bishop Bilson none of the Church? Was R. Hooker none of the Church? The
first dedicated his Book to Queen Elizabeth, and the latter is Dedicated to our
King Charles the second, and Praised by his Father. And yet the Author of the
Holy Commonwealth has larglier than any man confuted Hooker's Popular
Principles.

When William Barclay a Lawyer defended the King of France his Temporal Power,
against the Popes Usurpation of a Power to depose and restrain him, he is fain
to profess that the contrary opinion was so common that he was taken to speak
some strange and singular thing. And yet none doubts but he was of the same
Church of Rome.

I again challenge you to name that point in which we differ in this Doctrine
from the true Church of England.


L. You hold that Kings may be resisted by Arms.


M. Not so much as the aforesaid Bishop and Doctors of the Church of England
did, or the Parliaments that made Church-Laws. Again, See our second Plea for
Peace; how far we disclaim it. I profess that I am acquainted with no mere
Nonconformist Ministers, that hold it at all lawful for Subjects to resist the
King, or any Supreme Power by a War; except in case that he notoriously
declares that he will if he can destroy the Commonwealth, or deliver it up to
a foreigner or destroyer that has no right.


L. Sure the cry would never be for Extirpating the Dissenters, for this Plot
and their disloyalty, if they were not guilty?


M. Nay, if that be your argument [Strangers to them say they are disloyal and
guilty; ergo they are so] I leave you to God's answer, for I will not undertake
to answer you.

But will you use Sobriety a little further?

1. It is now twenty seven years since they were ejected and cast out of
maintenance and countenance, and left to beg or crave their bread: Long have
they been laid in Gaols, and fined deeply, the Law laying on them twenty and
forty pound a Sermon: Their Goods, Beds, Books taken from them and they left
destitute: How many in all these years have ever been accused and proved guilty
of one disloyal or seditious Sermon or Word? I know of none: Certainly it was
not for want of will in the Accusers. Those that by Oaths have brought them
under Convictions and Warrants for distress of five, ten, and much more
forfeitures, even diverse hundred pounds at once, before they were ever summoned
to speak for themselves; would sure have sworn some disloyal Words against
them, had they been able. And can many hundred Ministers have a fuller proof of
their innocence, than that they had no such prosecution twenty seven years from
such a sort of Adversaries, in so great Sufferings?

2. And now this Plot is detected, It is diverse Months since, and many
Countries and Corporations have accused the Dissenters of it, and cry them down
to Extirpation: And to this day I cannot hear of any one English Minister (or
at most not of two) that is either an Episcopal or Presbyterian Nonconformist,
so much as accused, or named as guilty.

The French and Dutch Churches in London are Dissenting Presbyterians. Yet no
man accuses any of them for being in Plots; and yet must they also be
destroyed?

But, Sir, if any one or more of the Episcopal or Presbyterian Non-Conformists,
Ministers or People, had been found guilty, would you condemn thousands (or
any) of the guiltless for their sakes? On what account: Is it for their
Relation to them? They are mostly strangers to one another. Come, and let us
try your rule of Justice.

I. Is there any Relation nearer than that of Father and Son? And can any
Minister be supposed to have more interest in, or influence on his Hearers,
than a Father has on his Son? And you know that the chief man accused is the
Kings eldest Son: I hope you will not for this, charge the King, as if he
principled him for Treason against himself: Nor as if he were to suffer for his
Sons faults.

II. The Judges have often declared that many Jesuits and Papists were Plotters
and Traitors, and they died for it. I hope you will not make all Papists guilty
of their crime, nor extirpate them for it. And yet the Papists are
Conventicling Dissenters too.

III. The Lords and great Men accused of this Plot and Treason (how justly God
knows) were of the Church of England; and shall all the Church of England be
destroyed for their sakes?

Dr. Whitby, and others now blamed by the Oxford-Convocation; and Bishop
Bilson, Mr. Hocker, etc. were of the Church of England; and shall all the
English Clergy be accused of their words?

IV. Many of the accused were Hobbists and Infidels, and some common ill-living
Protestants: Shall all the Hobbists, and Infidels, and ill-living Protestants
be extirpated for their faults?

V. Many Gentlemen of some late Parliaments are accused (not yet tried, and
proved guilty): Shall all the Parliament Men therefore be extirpated as guilty?

VI. Some Lawyers and Students at Law are accused: Shall all Lawyers and
Students therefore be extirpated?

VII. Diverse of the Nobility are accused: Must all Noblemen be therefore
reproached?

VIII. Some that have been of the Kings Privy Council were accused* Is his
Council therefore to be disgraced or destroyed?

IX. Formerly many Judges have been guilty: Are Judges therefore to be
dishonored?

X. By this justice you may next conclude, They were Englishmen that were
accused, therefore let all Englishmen be rooted out: Or they were Protestants
and Christians; therefore away with all Protestants and Christians: Whereas I
think it an unjust conclusion, that because they were Irish-men and Papists
that murdered two hundred thousand in Ireland, therefore root out all Irish-men
and Papists; unless you will infer, They are men that commit all sin;
therefore root out mankind.

If it had been men that hate serious Godliness, and are the seed of the
Serpent and of Cain, that are at deadly enmity to the true fear of God, and
thirst for the blood of the innocent, that are accused of this Plot; and if
People had petitioned to have all this sort of men rooted out for it, it would
have fallen on more than you and I are willing to name, or to have destroyed.

But can you bear with me if I tell you truly and plainly what this Extirpating
motion of all called Dissenters and Conventiclers signifies, and what it
tends to?


L. I have had so much reason from you, as obliges me to hear what you can
further say.


M. 1. The motion is so apparently from Satan, that it will tempt those that
are Christians indeed, and know the devil's will and works, to take you for no
other than his listed soldiers against Christ, if you set your selves to do
this work. Truth, Love, and doing Good, are the Christian State and Life.
Lying, Hatred, and Hurtfulness, are Diabolism, or Satan's work and image. All
the Art of prating and deceit of Clergy or Laity in the World, will never so
far blind true Christians, but that by your Fruits they will know you. The
pricks of Thorns and Thistles will be known from Grapes and Figs, in despite
of all the craft of Diabolists. And if Children know not a Wolf in
Sheeps-cloathing, they will know him that see him tear the Flock; yea, or that
see his bloody jaws.

And are you willing to renounce Justice, Humanity and Christianity, and openly
to profess Diabolism?

Men will see how malignity greedily picks quarrels with honest innocent men,
while it bears or cherishes the debauched, ungodly, unconscionable rabble,
whose God is their belly, or the world.

And methinks men, so proud that they cannot bear with any that differ from
their ignorant dictates, should scarce be willing that History should list them
among the Cainites or Diabolists. any more than among man-eating Cannibals.

II. You cannot extirpate or destroy all Dissenters, if you do your worst. 1.
So great a number will be true to their Consciences, and suffer what ever you
inflict on them, as will take you up much time and trouble, and render you more
odious to the rest.

2. The common People that were indifferent, will enquire what these men have
done, and will be turned from those that afflict so many of the innocent;
especially their neighbors, who know them better by experience, than by your
reports.

3. Those that fill not Prisons, or die not as Martyrs, will but Conceal their
minds, and not change them. And they will then be out of the reach of your
hurting power: When they communicate with you, and give you no outward matter
of accusation, what can you do to them? Or what pretense can you find to
extirpate them? The heart you know not: Their actions they will keep out of the
reach of the Law: If you try them by Oaths or unjust Professions, by increasing
the number of Sufferers, you will increase your infamy and odium: And they that
for fear do swear against their Judgments, will hate you the more when they
feel their wounded Conscience smart.

4. And if you force them into secrecy, they will there speak more freely, and
will Educate their Children into a hatred of your ways. And if you could
destroy them, two for one will spring up as their successors.

Who would have thought that the great French Massacre should have rather
increased than diminished the Protestants? Or that Queen Mary's bone-fire
should have extinguished Popery? Or that the two hundred thousand murdered by
the Irish should but have hastened the overthrow and ruin of the murderers? In
short, you cannot extirpate them.

III. The more you attempt it, and the more you succeed, the more you will do
against your selves.

1. Is not the King more safe, and strong, and honorable, and easy when he
has the Hearts of all his Subjects, than if he rule a People by divisions and
persecutions shattered like a broken Glass, or living in prosecution or fear,
and hatred of one another, as if they were still in a state of hostility, and
lived among their dangerous enemies? If either Christ or Satan be to be
believed, a divided Kingdom in enmity cannot stand.


L. Methinks you argue against your self: For therefore it is that we would
have all Dissenters rooted out, because of the danger of division by tolerated
Dissenters.


M. Had you read a Book called, The Samaritan, and another called, The True and
only Terms of Church-Concord, you would need no further answer to that
objection. If you would have all of one mind and way, it must be in that which
it is necessary and possible for all men to agree in, and to make things
unnecessary or impossible your terms, is the certain way of pernicious
division. Will you extirpate all that dissent in Controversies of Law, of
Philosophy, Astronomy, Physic, Grammar; or that differ in Reason,
Constitution, Statute? etc. Do you think that all will consent in all the
Mysteries of Divinity, while knowledge is so low and rare? Yea, do you think
that even in circumstances and things doubtful, all good Christians will ever
be so much of one measure of knowledge as to agree? How happy are we if we all
agree in great, plain, necessary things? But to understand also all little
circumstances, and humane Orders and Phrases; which be lawful, and which not,
supposes all Plow-men, Tradesmen and Workmen, to be far more perfect in the
knowledge of Divinity, than the most learned Philosophers are in Physics, who
agree in little but a few principles, and things within the reach of sense:
When yet alas, we can scarce teach half the vulgar, the meaning of the Creed,
or Baptismal Covenant.

If the King would extirpate all Lawyers, Physicians, or Philosophers, who in a
multitude of little and controverted points, cannot tell which side is in the
right; he may have so much the more success in it, by how much the more men
will be bold to dissemble their opinions in matters of such a nature. But about
the matters of God and Salvation, Consciences will be more afraid to stretch
and dissemble. It Is far less wise to take this way, than for Schoolmasters and
Tutors to destroy or cast out all Scholars and Pupils, that have not just the
same degree of knowledge.

And at what age must this perfect knowledge begin, which must extend to the
most minute things that men will command? At sixteen years of age you compel
them, volentes, nolentes, to receive the Lords Supper; and do you think then
that all at sixteen years old, in England, should be presumed to know more of
the Lawfulness of all your impositions on them, than I can reach to know at 68
(now near 74) after the long and hard Study of my life? If you compel no more
Men, Lads or Women to Communicate, but such as really understand the Lawfulness
of all such Impositions, which I judge unlawful, sure it will make a great
change in your Communion and Courts.


L. By this talk you seem to intimate, that the people must not be constrained
to obey in Circumstantials or Little things, because they may to them be
doubtful; and what worship of God can you perform without such little
Circumstances?


M. Little or Great, God in mercy has made all Necessary things intelligible
and plain: It is the Unnecessary things that are most controvertible and
doubtful. There are many Circumstances that are so Necessary to actions, that
they cannot without them be performed; e. g. He that will Preach, must open his
mouth; he must speak audibly, he must use a Language understood, he must have
some capable Place, and convenient Time; Psalms must be sung in some Tune, etc.
some Clothing, some posture of Body must be used; and all men know that to
choose these according to the general Rules of Charity, Edification, Order, and
Decency, belongs to the Guides of the Assemblies. And where do you see any
great division about any such things as these; except in cases of accidental
scandal?

And if any should be so childish or ignorant, as to think it unlawful; e. g.
to be Uncovered, or to Kneel at Prayer; due Instruction, and gentle Rebuke may
easily cure such weakness, and is meeter than an extirpation. If any were so
silly that they scrupled; e. g. singing our Meter or Tunes of David's Psalms,
but are only for the Cathedral singing of the Prose; it is fitter to let them be
silent, or let them go only to Cathedrals, than to Excommunicate or Destroy
them; and if any be so weak, that they think a Lawful Form or Gesture unlawful,
it is fitter, if they cannot be convinced, to let them be silent, or Worship God
among themselves in another Form or Gesture, than to Excommunicate or Extirpate
them.

But what are these easy intelligible Circumstances to all the Ceremonies
unnecessary even in genere? What are they to the Vows of Godfathers without
the Parents, or to the dedicating Symbol of the Cross, or to adhering to a bare
Reader, when the next Parish has an able Teacher whom the ignorant have great
need to be instructed by; to say no more now of all the Oaths, Declarations,
Subscriptions, Covenants, and Professions required of Ministers? I again say
therefore, if you extirpate all Subjects that cannot unite with you in all
things required by the Rubricks and Canons, you will wrong the King by weakening
his Kingdom, and robbing him of more of his Subjects, than He or the Welfare of
the Land can spare.

And you will keep the Kingdom in a state of division (and like Antioch, that
was so often and terribly shaken by Earthquakes, that it was in continual danger
of ruin) and even honest ^rajan lodging there, did hardly escape through a
window, while the falling houses killed his Soldiers.

And the Dissenters are not all of one mind and temper. All that are wise and
good, will suffer patiently and peaceably; for I incline to think, that the
expositors mistake, who apply Soloman's words to Sufferers [Oppression makes
Wise men mad]; and that as some Critics tell us, it rather means Rulers
[that an affectation of an oppressing power, and the exercise of it, makes
wise Rulers forget the very obvious Reasons of Morality and Interest, and to
act as men distracted.] But there be Dissenters of dangerous Principles, which
are fitter to be restrained, than by d^speration to be enraged; as hap is, the
Behmenists and Quakers are against War, and the old Anabaptists were so
reported; but some of them have showed a contrary judgment; but it is known past
doubt, that the Papists are a sort of Dissenting Conventiclers, who have so
strong a back beyond Sea to encourage them, and are so instructed by multitudes
of learned Clergymen and Friars, and so taught by General Councils, which are
their very Religion, that many of them will think it merits Heaven to kill such
Kings as would extirpate them.

King James is deeply censured by some, for doing so much as he did toward a
Toleration, and for what the French Bishop of Ambrun writes of him. But for my
part I verily believe that he did it in fear to secure his life: when Queen
Eliza^eth's death had been so often attempted, and when two great Papist Kings of
France, had been murdered, because they were not zealous enough for the Pope,
and that so desperately by single men, that did it to merit Heaven; and when he
had so narrowly escaped the horrid Gun-powd^r Plot, and when they still told
him that he should not escape; what wonder if he were afraid?

And so great confidence have the Papal Clergy, in this terrifying of Kings as
in constant danger of death, if they be against their Church, that the Pope and
his close Adherents could never to this day be procured to disown the Decree of
Lateran, and other Councils for Deposing Excommunicate Heretic Princes; no,
nor to deny the lawfulness of killing such; yea, even in France, Perron
himself, their Learned Cardinal, so defends the Pope's power of Deposing Kings
that deserve it, that (in his Oration to the States) he professes, That, if it
be not true, the Pope is Antichrist, and the Church Antichristian that has
so long owned and practiced it.


L. You seem to intimate in all this that you would have the Papists Tolerated,
for fear least they should kill the King; and so the worse that Men and their
Principles are, the more they must be Tolerated for fear of them: But who lived
in greater safety than Queen Elizabeth who suppressed them, even when the Pope
had Excommunicated her?


M. I would have the King and Kingdom (Church and State) secured from a Foreign
Jurisdiction, of Pope or Prelates; and to that end, I would have Papists kept
out of Government, Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastic; and I would wish that the
King. 1. By the Unity of his Subjects; 2. By Navies and Military provision; 3.
And by just Confederacies abroad, be still so strong as not to fear the force
of Foreigners; and these things being secured, without fear of any men's
censure, I say,

1. That I would have all Men used as Men, and all Peaceable-men as Peaceable,
be they what they will.

2. I would have no hurt done to any Papist for his Religion, but Defensive;
that is, such as is necessary to the forsaid Ends, viz. to save King and
Kingdom from a foreign Jurisdiction, and from Invasion, and to save the Souls
of the People, from subversion by unreasonable liberty of Seducers.

3. I would not have punishments excessive, that shall drive multitudes into
desperation: Lest undone desperate men be carried to Revenge, or to think
Treason lawful, when they can no otherwise be saved from death and ruin.

Man has not a despotical power over all passion: And some passions do almost
necessitate error of Judgment, or else sudden Action against Judgment. Take
the most meek conscientious man, that knows the evil of Revenge, and try his
patience by buffetting him, and it is two to one, but passion will make him
strike you again. Much more if you buffet him twenty year every day, patience
may be overcome at last: There is scarce any Creature, Beast, Bird, or Venmin,
but will use all the resistance it can in case of hurt and fear of death. The
Devil could say, Skin for skin, and all that a Man has will he give for his
Life. And can you think that Prince or Kingdom is in safety, that shall
destinate to destruction so great a number and of such quality, as are all the
Papists, Infidels, Jews, Anabaptists, Separatists, Independants, Presbyterians,
and Episcopal Non-conformists, as are in England? Though I think the latter
sort would suffer death rather than be disloyal; I am sure Rulers and
Adversaries think not so, who accuse them of intolerable disloyalty. And they
that think so ill of them will expect ill at their hands.

It Is true, that the worse men are and their principles, the more need there is
of suppressing them. But destroying them is the chief means that I know to
increase their principles of resistance. It Is ordinary with men that never
suffered, to detest resisting Governors; and to change their opinions when
they think they are implacably h^mted to destruction without desert or any
remedy. Draw your Sword upon them, even on a Quaker, and it is two to one you
will change his judgment, and make him think that self-defence is lawful. Yea,
if you could kill all that think resistance lawful, (if it be half the Kingdom)
it is the likliest way to make all the rest that survive of the same mind,
because of the inhumanity of the Execution. I have met with few that thought
that resistance at the French Massacre on Bartholomew-day, or at the greater in
Ireland, had been unlawful, whoever commanded them.

Yea, the Lord Bacon, Chancellor of England, in his Discourses of a Holy War
against the Turks, and of a War with Spain; thought that their barbarous
Cruelties (though the Turks give Liberty of Conscience) allow other Princes to
War upon them to vindicate mankind, the World being one Kingdom of God in which
every man owes charity and due help to others; which is honored in Tamerlane,
when he relieved the Greek Emperor of another Religion against Bajazet that
was of his own, and this in mere Humanity and Charity.

I meddle not with the case of the lawfulness of such actions. But I say, All
the World cannot devise a more effectual way, to make all men think that
Self-defence is Lawful, than by great cruelty against multitudes to make it
seem necessary.

And if you will cure it by forced Oaths, I heartily wish the King better
security for his Life, and the Kingdom for its Peace, than men's conscientious
keeping of those Oaths will be, unless conscience and patience were more
universal and powerful than they are, and would make all sorts of Dissenters
choose Martyrdom, rather than defensive resistance.

And as for Queen Elizabeth's Case, her Dangers were many, her Advantages were
great, her Executions for Religion were so few, that the Lord Bacon and many
other say, none suffered for any thing but Treasons or such crimes: And God did
wonderfully preserve her.

But to say no more of the Papists whose case quite differs from all the rest,
if you will make many Laws about doubtful words, and forms and ceremonies, and
then extirpate all sober, godly, peaceable Subjects, that for fear of sinning
against God dare not obey them, what do you but mince and pulverize the Nation,
and dissolve its consisting and strength, and make it a Cockpit, or a Prey to
the cloven-footed deceiver and divider.

The Non-conformists in England lived quietly till the Canons were made for
their prosecution. The great Counselors of State, (Sir Nic. Bacon,
Throgmorton, Sir Amias Paulet, the Earl of Leicester, Sir Francis Knowles, Sir
Francis Walsingham, Secretary Beale, etc. except Hatton and Whitgift, were for
lenity; yea for such abatements as might have caused Unity: And Sir William
Cecil, Lord Burleigh (though for Episcopacy) almost fell out with Arch bishop
Whitgift for his hard usage of the Non-conformists. And were all these fools,
and you only the wise men? But when Bancroft, lest they should increase, would
ruin them, and the Canons were made, which ipso facto Excommunicated all
People in the Land, high or low, that did but affirm that any thing in their
Liturgy, Articles, Ceremonies, Ordination, or Church offices (from the
Archbishop to the Apparitor) was repugnant to the Word of God, the Church and
Kingdom presently felt that solutionem continui which these tearing racks had
made: And when all must be ejected and silenced that durst not subscribe that
[There is nothing in the Liturgy contrary to the Word of God] (which I would
not say of the Bible it self as in any one translation) then our over-zealous
Uniters tore all to pieces, and the shreds could never to this day be well set
together to make one piece.

Yea all the Parliaments of England have still been striving to restore the
Concord of Protestants by laying bye some of these dividing, tearing Engines:
But Whitgift (though too great an Anti-Arminian) and Hatton, etc. prevailed
still with the Queen to prohibit them; and they were loath to displease her,
having had so great a deliverance from Popery and Persecution by her Reign. The
Lord Verulam (Bacon) tells us of a Reforming Act in which himself had a hand,
prepared in the Parliament, but prohibited by the Queen.

And if any Kings (who should no more divide from their Kingdom Real or
Representative, than the Husband from the Wife, that I say not, Than the Head
from the Body) should so far misunderstand their own and Peoples interest, as
to be jealous of Parliaments as their enemies; and if wise Kings desire to keep
the Nobility from being (as Henry 4th. Richard Nevill and others have been) too
strong for their Sovereigns, they cannot more cross their own ends, and serve
the ambitious designs of these men, than by afflicting a great, a sober, and a
religious part of the Kingdom, whom these seditious men will be still serving
themselves upon, by pretending to head them for their deliverance; as many
factious Nobles did in France. It Is a great encouragement to rebellious great
ones when they have always hope that a great body of distressed men, will be
ready, as necessitated for self-defence, to accept of their offers for
insurrections or at least to strengthen faction.


L. It is for all these very reasons that we would destroy or extirpate all
Dissenters, that they may not be the serviceable instruments in such designs.


M. For all these reasons, you should unite on the terms that Christ and his
Apostles instituted as sufficient for Christian Love, Communion and Concord,
that there may be no distressed, exasperated Dissenters among us; or only so
few and culpable by the grossness of their errors, as that their shame and
paucity may reader them no way dangerous. You should not take such men of
extraordinary wisdom, as Queen Elizabeth 's Councillors and Parliaments, the
Lord Bacon, Judge Hale, and such pacificators as Davenant, Hall, Chillingworth,
Abbot, Grindal, Amycald, and most of the French, Dutch, German Protestants, to
be all fools, and you to be wise Men. A Council in Bedlam could scarce advise a
madder way to root out faction, than to make Canons or Laws, that all the Kings
Subjects shall be extirpated, that will not subscribe, There is not one word in
all the Statute Book, or the most Learned Law Books contrary to the Word of
God; and that the London Dispensatory has no error in Medicine; and that no
Licensed Book has any error in Divinity: Verily, if the Bishops and Clergy of
England cannot give us better proofs of their infallibility, or that their
public imposed Books are as free from errors as Adam was before his fall,
than by making all subscribe, or swear, or declare in the Church that it is so,
cowards may say, your Lordships and Reverences have never an erroneous word,
but few men will believe it ever the more; yea it will be the less believed,
that needs such a proof as this: Even as men would take him to be never the
more an unerring Philosopher, Lawyer or Physician, who could force all the
apprentice boys and women in the Town, to swear that he is such.

Try first to make all the Kings Subjects of one opinion in all points of
Learning, Law or Trading, and of one degree of wit, and of stature and
complexion, and then hope to make them all of one measure of understanding, not
only in the substance of Religion, but in all the little things that Bishops
call indifferent, and do or may impose.


L. But you run upon the Error that all must have so great knowledge according
to our rules, as to know the Lawfulness of all Lawful things: We know no
Churchmen reach so high: But the way to Concord must be by obeying the Church
in all cases that are doubtful to the Subjects.


M. 1. It Is well that you limit it to doubtful cases: But what if I am past all
doubt (e. g.) that it is a sin to make our sort of Godfathers the vowing
Covenanters in Baptism, excluding the Parents, to cast out all from Christian
Communion that scruple kneeling in the reception, to deny Christendom to all
that refuse our Godfathers and Crossings, to pronounce all in England at
Burial saved, except the unbaptized, excommunicate and self-murderers, to
profess that [It is certain by the word of God that Infants (excepting none)
baptized and dying before actual sin, are undoubtedly saved; To assent to a
false rule to know Easterday] with many such: What must I do in such undoubted
cases?

2. Tell us plainly, Is it all doubted cases or some only, in which you say we
must obey? If not all, till you tell us which, and how to know them, you talk
in vain. If all, what if men doubt whether Polygamy, Lying, Fornication, etc.
be lawful? Or what if a Papist doubt whether King-killing be lawful, and the
Clergy command it, must it therefore needs be done?

3. And I pray you tell us where and when it is that men must obey this rule?
Was it a duty in England in the days of Thomas Becket, Anselm, Dunstan, etc. or
in the Reign of all the Kings that were Papists? Is it a duty now in France,
Spain, Italy, Bavaria, Austria, etc. or in the Dominion of the Turks, Persians,
Tartarians, China, etc? Must all Subjects every where do all commanded them? If
they have but ignorance enough to be in doubt themselves, sure they are bound
to receive God's Light to overcome those doubts, and in error it is not
obedience in Evil, but seeking truth till they find it, that is their duty.

But If you limit this Rule to Christians, is it to all Christians? If to
Orthodox Rulers, are the Subjects any fitter to judge whether their Kings and
Bishops are Orthodox or not, than whether the things imposed be good or bad? If
you dare say, That all Subjects are bound to be of the Religion which their
Kings or Bishops say is right, speak out and you will need no confutation.

It Is granted by all sober men, that as Rulers have the judgment of public
decision, so every reasonable man must judge by private discerning whether his
Actions be agreeable to God's Commands or not. It is not Brutes and Infants,
but Men that have the use of reason, that Kings and Bishops rule.

4. But if you are stiff in the contrary opinion, that all men must implicitly
believe the King and Prelates, in all that ignorance can but make them doubtful
of, I hope you have more brains than once to dream, that ever you shall bring
all the Kingdom to unite in this opinion, and to lay by their reason, and
confess themselves Idiots or Brutes, that must not labor to know whether they
keep or break God's Supreme Law; or if you must rule men on these terms, you
must keep them in fetters, and not at liberty.

And I pray you dishonor not the King so much, as to make him a King of Beasts
and Idiots, and not of Men or Christians; or at least expose him not so much to
the Power of Usurpers, as to say that his Subjects are not the Discerning
Judges, who is their True and Lawful Sovereign, and who not; and if they must
judge whether all their actions be agreeable to the Kings Laws or not, lest
they be hanged or punished; allow them also to judge whether or no they be
agreeable to God's Law, lest they be damned.

If men once believe that God is not their Supreme Governor, no wonder if they
believe that Kings have no Governing right, nor any are bound in conscience to
obey them; for who can give Governing Authority, or who can bind Conscience to
obey it, but the absolute Sovereign, the Almighty God?


L. Experience confuteth all that you have said; what Countries live in greater
Unity, than those that have procured and kept it by violence, and do endure no
Dissenters; as Spain and Italy?


M. It seems you know not what you say. 1. The Pope, and Spaniards, and
Italians allow greater differences, by many degrees than those that you condemn
Dissenters for; their Jesuits, and Dominicans, Thomists, Scotists, Nominals,
Durandists, etc. differ so much from each others in Doctrinals, about God, and
Grace, and Free Will, and Providence, and the Cause of Sin, and many other
Points, that the Volumes they have written for their several Opinions, make up
huge Libraries, which employ the hard studies of the most Learned men in the
World, and are as far as ever from being ended.

2. The Iansenists and Jesuits differ, not only in such Doctrines, about
Predestination, Redemption, Grace, Free Will, Perseverance, etc. but also about
abundance of Doctrines, commonly called Moral; as about Murder, Perjury,
Fornication, Stealing, etc. as you may see in the Books lately published by the
Iansenists against the Jesuits.

And though approved general Councils, have made the doctrine of Deposing
Excommunicated Princes, and Absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance, and
giving their Dominions to others, to be a very part of their Religion, yet are
not the Papists agreed in it; but the Germans in the days of the Emperors,
Frederick, Otho, Henry 4th, and 5th, etc. and the French to this day are much
against it. And what Learned men wrote against it, read but Mich. Goldastus his
many Volumes of Collections, and you may see.

Yea, the Papists are not agreed of the very essential Form and Constitution of
their Church, and therefore are indeed of several Churches: One Party thinks
that the supremacy is in the Pope, another that it is in a General-Council, and
a third that it is in the Pope and General-Council agreeing; and yet all these
so far bear with one another, as to cover over the difference with the Name of
one Church, and to repute each other as True Roman Catholics.

Yea more, it is, by an Allowance of Dissenters, or different ways of Worship,
that the Pope does chiefly keep up (...) Kingdom. When any Religious people
have fallen into a dissatisfaction with the loose Discipline and Conversation
of the Bishops and their Churches, the Pope allows them to set up by
themselves, and exercise a stricter Discipline, Worship, and Conversation of
their own devising, which he allows, and no Bishop shall have power to
impeach. And thus he keeps them in dependence on himself, as the only
Defender of their humors, inventions and liberties of different ways.

On such accounts, there are multitudes of Sects among them under the name of
Friars, and Fathers, and Sisters, etc. The Benedictines, Augustinians,
Dominicans, Franciscans, Jesuits, Carthusians, etc. And all have their several
ways of Discipline; but it suffices, that all depend upon one Pope.

In Rome it self, Philip Nerius being a Serious Religious man, was unsatisfied
with the dead formal way of the Bishops and Mass-priests; and to bring men to
knowledge and seriousness in Religion he borrowed a Church, and set up a
Lecture or Course of Serious Extemporate Worship, almost like the exercise
called Prophesying, that Archbishop Grindal was for, and the Lord St. Albans
(Bacon) writes for. Four Zealous men spent the whole day, one in Extemporate
praying, and one in Preaching and Expounding Scripture, and one in telling the
people the History of the Church, and the Lives and Miracles of Saints, and one
in Praying again, just like those here hated as extemporate Puritans. The
Bishops said they were proud hypocrites that drew crowds of people after them
for reputation of sanctity; and they persecuted Nerius, and accused them to the
Pope, and silenced him: The silencing Bishop was presently struck with death,
and Nerius went on, Baronius being his second. The crafty Pope, instead of
calling them Fanatic Rognes and Rebels, thinks it policy to turn this stream
of Pious Zeal into his own channel, to drive his own Mill; and he rescueth them
from the Prelates, and allows their Exercises, and calls them by the name
of the Oratorians, and honors the leaders, so that he drew them to depend on
him, and Baronius to write those many great Volumes of Ecclesiastical History,
which have done Rome greater service than any one Writer that I know of in the
world; and to this day the Oratorians are the most sober Puritan Papists.

Thus did he make use of the Sectarian singularity of Ignatius Loyola, a
Soldier turned to Superstition, allowing them (as others) to set up by
themselves from under the power of the Bishops, in dependence on the Pope
alone, whereby he has mastered Emperors, and Kings, and Kingdoms, and made
great attempts on Abbassines, Greeks, yea on Congo, Iapan, China, and the
Heathen World.

And I have credibly heard that Dr. Tho. Goodwin, Philip Nigh, and Dr. Owen the
Leaders of our Independants, did tell the King, that as the Pope allowed these
orders of Religious parties in mere dependence on himself, without subjection
to the Bishops, all that they desired was (not to be the masters of others,)
but to hold their own liberty of Worship and Discipline, in sole dependence on
the King, as the Dutch and French Churches do, so they may be saved from the
Bishops and Ecclesiastical Courts.

2. But further, Do you forget that the Spaniards by their sacred Cruelty and
Inquisition have lost the Low, Countries, and had almost lost the seventeen
Provinces?

3. And do you not know that ever since the days that the Arrian Goths
possessed Spain, they have been like Ireland, a blind superstitious People,
whose Ignorance most fitteth them for such a kind of Concord? And is there not
a Concord in their way among the enslaved ignorant Muscovites, and among the
Turks, and many Heathens? Satan himself is against the dividing of his Kingdom.

4. And do you think that the effect of Spanish and Italian Tyranny and
Concord, does answer the cost? The Cruelty of their Inquisition has made their
names as odious as of Cannibals or Wolves, insomuch that the Lord Bacon thought
that an Invasive War against them as the enemies of mankind, that violate the
Laws of Nature and Nations, was just.

And the many millions that they most cruelly murdered, and tormented in
Mexico, Peru, Hispaniola, etc. (among whom were diverse Kings) do tell the World
what are the fruits of their Catholic fury, and Arbitrary Government: Their
Archbishop Barth. de Casa and their Jesuit Joseph. Acosta, eye witnesses of
undoubted credit, report that which renders them liker devils than men. And
Gage that lived there among them, seconds it.

And it was no small infamy to their King Philip that he put to death his Son
and Heir Charles. Are these the patterns that you would have us imitate?

And as for Italy, 1. Read of all their Histories, and then name that Country
on earth, if you can, that for many Generations, has been infested with so
much Civil War and Blood, as Italy has been, yea Rome it self. 2. And since
policy has settled it of late in Peace, what a Peace is it, and of what effect?
It is said by travelers that no Country more abounds with Atheists and
Infidels, that are indeed of no Religion. And truly, if it be God and
Conscience that you would have banished out of England, and Infidelity,
Sadduceism, Hobbists, Malignity, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Perjury, that you would
have take the place, I dare say that the Devil will not fight against such
Concord, but will promote it withal his policy and power, by himself and all
his agents Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military.

4. Yet further, Why look you not on all the rest of the World, as well as
Spain and Italy? Indeed Iapan restored Concord, but it was by so devilish and
cruel Torments of Christians and those that would not accuse them, as renders
their names odious to mankind (of which Varenius will satisfy you.)

But what France, what Ireland and others have got by cruelty, I have told you
before.

And though I am far from justifying the Hungarians (men that I know not or
their case) for flying to the Turks for help, do you think that the Countries
now ruined by War, and the many thousands in Austria, Silesia, Moravia, and
Hungary, killed and taken Captives, and the thousands killed in Fight, and the
Famine that the next year is like to come on the ruined Countries, where Corn
and Hay are all destroyed, and the bloody War that is yet like to follow before
the end; I say, do you think that all these are not a dear price to be paid,
for hindering men to Worship God only according to the Scripture? Would leave
to serve God only as Christ and his Apostles appointed and did themselves, have
cost the Emperor and People, dearer than all this amounts to?

5. And the World knows that (as Cromwell got his strength and usurpation in
England by his Liberty of Conscience, so) the Turks won Constantinople and the
Eastern Empire, much by this. For when their Emperors were become dissolute or
cruel, killing and deposing one another, putting out their eyes, and thrusting
them into Monasteries (forced Saints); and when ambitious ungodly Bishops were
still striving for superiority, and persecuting Dissenters as not Orthodox, and
mutinous Soldiers pulling down Emperors, and setting up others, the poor
Christians thought that to defend such a Government against the Turks that gave
all men the Liberty of their own Religion, would cost them dearer than it was
worth; and so were the more remiss in their resistance, and the easilier
yielded to the Conquerours: Whereas had the Turks done as the Papists, who make
our extermination by our own Rulers, a very part of their Religion, the Greeks
would have more resolutely resisted them, in necessary self-defence.

And did not the Turks still give Liberty to Christians (only restraining them
from speaking against Mahometism) do you think that the Greeks in all their
Dominions would no more strive for their deliverance? And that Transylvania,
Hungary, Walachia, Maldavia, Croates, and Cossacks, Armenians, Georgians,
Circassians, Mengrelians, Nestorians, and Iacobites, in so vast numbers, would
live so long quietly and patiently under them as they do?

All the great Conquerours of the World that are famous in History, ever
observed that sober policy, to let Conquered Provinces enjoy their own
Religion, and mostly their own ancient Laws and inferior Magistrates: And then
the People find the change so tolerable in the Supremacy, as they the more
easily yield, with less resistance, and continue their subjection with the
greater quietness and peace.

The Jews in Christ's time, (and till they rebelled afterward under Vespasian,
Titus and Adrian) had so much of their own Religion and Law allowed them, as
was no small cause of their Crucifying Christ, lest the name of a King sent
from God (such as they expected the Messiah to be) should draw the People to
such Insurrections, as should provoke the Romans to deprive them of their
Temples, Religion and Laws, and to destroy their place and nation.

And I hear by travelers that where the Turks yet allow their Provinces (as in
Transylvania) their own Magistrates and Laws, Religion prospers almost as
well as under Christian Sovereigns, and far better than under the extirpating
zeal, or rather fury of persecuting Papist Princes. I desire you therefore
before you plead experience for your desolating way of Concord, to study
History better, and be better informed of the case of the World.

When I think but what men Bishop Wilkins and Judge Hale were, that on my
knowledge drew up an Act for the total cure of our English Church differences,
(to which those called to it by the Lord Keeper Bridgman, did on both sides
consent) I have thought it some defect of humility in some Clergymen, that
took themselves to be so much wiser than these rare and excellent men, as to
judge that all our distractions, sufferings, and dangers by divisions, are not
so bad as the effect of these men's counsil would have been.

But I do with greater confidence ask you, Whether those men seem to be serious
and understanding Christians, who think all the bloody Wars, and tormenting
Inquisition, and the destruction of Love and Justice, and good Works, which are
caused by Church-divisions in the World, to be a less Mischief than it would be
to ENDVRE CHRISTIANS TO SERVE GOD JUST AS CHRIST PRESCRIBED BY HIMSELF AND HIS
APOSTLES, AND TO UNITE ON THE TERMS ONLY WHICH HE AND THEY DID ORDAIN AND
PRACTICE? Shall we tell Turks and Heathens that it is no Wiser a Savior that
we trust in, and no Wiser a Heavenly King that we obey? And no Wiser Law and
Gospel that He has left us? And is it any wonder then if they scorn both Him
and us?


L. You are too hard for me, I will talk with you no more.


M. It is Truth and Light that is too hard for you; and woe to the foolish
Enemies that are too hard for it, and overcome themselves, and their own
happiness and hopes in overcoming it. And woe to the World, to Churches and
Nations where such prevail.


L. But I advise you, that you never think that all your Truth and Reason will
do any great good on those that are against you: For you cannot have while to
say all this to many that you have said to me; and if you should Print all
this, the contrary minded will scarcely Read the Title page or Contents, but
scorn it before they know what you have said; and if they read it, it will be
all the way, with a militant spirit of prejudice and hatred, and only study
what to say against it; and Ignorance, Passion, Interest and Prejudice, will
answer all with Rage and confidence, and only conclude that the Author is a
Fool, or Rogue, or Rebel; and, it is like enough, answer you with an
Excommunication, or Iail, where among Malefactors you shall lie and die. If you
speak for, and not against their pr^conceived Opinion and Interest, they will
h^ar you; but if you speak against any of their worldly Wealth, or Honor, or
Grande^r, you may almost as hopefully dispute an hungry Dog from his Carrion;
and you must not wonder if they snarl, or fly upon you and tear you. And though
I confess, that all your Proposals seem very consistent with your A^tagonists
wealth and greatness, yet remember the truth of Seneca's words, That Men that
have a sore, do not only start and complain when they are touched, but even when
they think that they are touched, though it be not so. There is no expectation
of justice from suspicious Jealousy; much less if it be animated by Interest
and Malice.


M. My expectations are not much higher than your description. But when my own
life is so constantly a painful burden, and I am so near the Grave, I am
utterly unexcusable, if I think so short and painful a life too good to
sacrifice by way of Obedience to the will of God, who has long and wonderfully
preserved it; and if I do not live and die with St. Paul's resolution, Acts 20.
23, 24. Bonds and Afflictions abide me, but none of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my Course
with Joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the Grace of God.

And indeed, if all our bad Laws and Ceremonies were reformed, and all granted
therein which I have proposed, alas there is so much to be done for the
Reformation of the Persons that must execute good Laws, (Lords, Bishops,
Patrons, Priests, etc.) without whom Laws are but a dead letter, and against
whose enmity and oppositions, they are unlikely to prevail, that I die the more
willingly, because I see no appearance of any such Golden Age, or amiable
Reformation, and general Concord, as might tempt me to desire to live much
longer on Earth. The Reformation of our Universities, Clergy, Nobility, Gentry,
and licencious Youth, and malignant Haters of Serious Godliness, is a work for
Omnipotency, and would afford me matter for a Volume, were I to write on such a
Text as Ezekiel 37. 3. Son of man! can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord
God, thou know. In the mean time it gives me matter for Groans, Tears and
Prayer, but no belief of that good man's Prophecy, who confidently foretells
us of that Blessed Age, about eight years hence. If the Second Part of my Moral
Prognostication (written with more doubt than hope) should prove as true as the
First Part did (of this Progress of Malice and Divisions) I doubt it is but
some small Rudiments or Preparations for such a Blessed Change, that the men of
the present times must see* I should rejoice if They (I mean God by them)
confute my fears.


CHAP. LXII. Fifty Questions to unjust Silencers.
GOD IS LOVE, AND HE THAT DWELLS IN LOVE DWELLS IN GOD, AND GOD IN HIM,
John 4. 16. The most fundamental and comprehensive Article of Natural and
Evangelical Religion.

How Angels fell from Love and became Devils, malignant Spirits, is not
revealed fully to us; but that such there are, both Scripture and too great
Experience certify us. But how Man fell, is told us in the Scripture. It
pleased God to make a rank of intellectual Animals left to their understanding,
self-determining free will, between the Brutes which are determined to things
Sensible, and the confirmed. Angels who are determined to things Spiritual. It
pleased him to oblige and allure Man by his Blessings, to live still in the
love of God; but withal to permit the malignant Tempter, to try whether by his
allurement and deceit, he could win him from this Holy Love: As if a man should
leave his Daughter to be his Wife, who could win her own consent. The malignant
Spirit prevailed and turned man from the Reigning Love of God, to the Love of
SELF, Self-pleasing, Self-ruling, and Self-trusting; and having won man's Will,
he is by just permission become his Prince, as long as he can keep the Will
which he has won. But Infinite LOVE, first promised, and then gave his SON to
be the PRINCE OF LOVE, and so the Captain of our Salvation; His Incarnation,
Doctrine, Life, and Suffering; his Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession and
Government, are but the works of LOVE for Man's Salvation, which is, to recover
the Will of Man to the Reigning Love of God, from the Carnal Sensual self-love.
A war is thus commenced between Christ and Satan; Christ's warfare is to
Conquer malignant Enmity, and set up a Kingdom of Love. The Devils work is to
assimilate man to himself, and to make him a Liar, Malicious, and a Destroyer.
Thus two Kingdoms are set up in this World, which are in continual war against
each other. The Subjects of each are discernible by their works: TRVTH, LOVE,
and DOING GOOD are the works and marks of the one; and LYING, HATRED and
HVRTFVLNESS, are the works and marks of the other; and HOLINESS and DEVILISM
constitute this world. Cain and Abel were the leading instances: Heb. 11. 4. By
faith Abel offered a more excellent Sacrifice unto God than Cain, by which he
obtained witness that he was Righteous, God testifying of his gifts; and by it,
he being dead, yet speaks. He conquered, but died, as did our Savior, 1 Ioh.
3. 12, 14. Cain was of that wicked one, and slew his Brother; And why slew he
him? Because his own works were Evil, and his brothers Righteous: In this
warfare we must live and die. Marvel not my Brethren if the world hate you;
though we die as Abel, we know that we have passed from Death to Life, because
we Love the Brethren: He that loves not his brother, abides in death, though
as Cain, he kill and seem to conquer. All that believe not a better life, which
will abundantly make up the loss of this, are his subjects who is called the
GOD OF THIS WORLD, who blinds the minds of unbelievers, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Devils
are called, The Rulers of the Darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6. 12. The Princes
who set up a Worldly interest, against or above the Heavenly interest, are
called, The Princes of this world, that come to naught, 1 Cor. 2. 6. And to be
Wise only for an interest, is, The Wisdom of the world, which is Foolishness
with God, 3. 18, 10. Thus Christ fights by Love, to win Souls to Love for the
Glorious World of Love; and the Devil by Malice to destroy Love and separate
them from the God and World of Love, by fighting as Dogs about their Carrion,
for their fleshly interest in this deceitful world; but the time is short, and
the War will be short, but the Victory sweet, and the Crown everlasting.

And it is greatly to be considered, that as Christ's Cause and Subjects are
contrary to the Devils, so also is his manner of Fight and Conquest. Christ and
Christians fight not by Wrath and Hatred against their Haters, but by loving
them as Men (and praying for them, even when they suffer by them:) And in this
course it is, that they are more than Conquerours, Romans 8. 37. And heap Coals
of Fire on their Heads, which will burn them for ever that would not on Earth
be melted by them.

It seems a strange thing to us to see the poor. Frenchmen come hither from
their own pleasant Land, in Rags and Bodily Distress: And who expels them?
And for what? Who caused all the blood and banishments that have been exercised
on Christians, since the Heathen Persecutions? And for what? Who destroyed
those many thousands of Christians called Albigenses, and Waldenses, and
Bohemians, in History mentioned? And for what? Who set up the Inquisition as
against Protestants, and Tormented and Burnt so many? And for what? Who caused
the French and Irish, and other Massacres and Murders? And for what? Who keep
out Truth and Reformation from all Kingdoms subject to the Pope? It is men in
the Sacred Offices, Ecclesiastical and Civil. We all own Reverence to
Magistrates and Pastors. Satan is not so foolish as to do his work in his own
name, nor to put its proper name upon his work. Did you ever hear or read of
Persecutors, who openly said, [We are the Servants of the Devil, and come
against you for his Interest and in his Name, to persuade or persecute you from
Christ and your obedience to God, and your Salvation?] No, It is as for
wickedness, that wicked men destroy the just; and as for sinning that they
persecute them that will not sin: It is for Religion that Religion is impugned;
and for the Church that the true Children of the Church are Persecuted: And is
it for the Gospel that the Preachers of it are silenced and destroyed? Without
the Church a false Religion is set up against Christianity. But within it, an
Image of Christ, and of the Church, and of Concord, and Religion, is set up
against Christ, Church, Concord, and Religion; and men in the Garb of
Magistrates and Pastors, do prosecute the War as by Christ's Commission, and in
his Name: And sin is defended and propagated, by false, pretended opposition.

If the Jews had known him, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory.
Heathens would not for Idols fight against God, nor Mahometans for a Deceiver
against Christ, if they knew what it is that they are doing. Christ who was
Crucified as a Blasphemer and Rebel, foretold his Disciples, that they should
be killed as an act of service to God. Where the Gospel is believed, it is a
crime so horrid to silence and destroy Christ's faithful Ministers, and forbid
his public Worship, and render his most conscionable Servants odious, and plot
their extirpation and ruin, that none dare do it but those that know not what
they do. When Christians as a Sect were every where spoken against, Paul was
exceeding mad against them, and persecuted them to strange Cities, and verily
thought that he ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus, Act. 26. But
when he heard from Heaven, Why persecutest thou me? it stopped his rage, and
changed his judgment.

But alas! How slender a means will serve to deceive the wicked? A mere
nickname, or malicious slander; yea the avoiding of a sin which they think to
be no sin, is enough with them to make the best men seem the worst; while
Perjuries, Adulteries, Blasphemies, Profaneness, Cruelty and Persecution, are
tolerable motes in the eyes of their Companions. All the Holiness, Wisdom and
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, would not serve to make them pass for
good, yea or tolerable men; while Sadducees who denied Spirits and the
Resurrection; and Ceremonious, hypocritical, blood-thirty Pharisees, went for
meet Rulers of the Flock. And how can it be expected that he who thinks not
Holiness desirable to himself, should think it any excellency in others? Or
that he that thinks his own sin but a tolerable frailty, should much abhor it
in the World?

Satan then has his Army not only among Infidels, but nominal Christians: And
it is commanded by Honorable and Venerable Names, and he pretends a good and
righteous Cause, wherever he fights against Christ, and Holiness. But by the
fruits he may be known in the greatest pretenders, whatever names he call them
by. It is the most profitable Preaching which he labors to suppress, and the
most faithful Pastors that he would silence; the most conscionable Christians
whom he striveth to make hateful, and the more Spiritual Worship of God which
he would hinders. And therefore even among Christians we have great cause to
warn men to fear least they be enticed into Satan's service, against Christ and
their own Profession and Salvation. And especially in an age; 1. Where worldly
and cross Interests are set up against the Interest of Christ and Conscience.
2. Where these worldly and cross Interests have already wasted Christian Love,
and Contentions have begun a Mental War. 3. When these have prevailed by scorns
and slanders to make Conscionable Christians pass for some contemptible,
criminal, or erroneous Sect; and this Reproach is fortified by Honorable and
Reverend Names. Lest therefore such Causes, too visible in the World, should
draw the ignorant and rash into the dreadful Sin of fighting against the
Interest of Christ, and Souls, by hindering Christ's Ministers from their
necessary Work, and faithful Christians from worshipping God, I will humbly
beseech all that are in danger of such Temptations, but seriously to exercise
their own Reasons in the present Consideration of these following Questions,
and to take up with no other Answer to them, which will not bear weight at
Death and Judgment, when worldly Pomp and Pleasures leave them; and not worldly
Interest, Wit, or Grandeur, but the Righteous Lord, the Lover of Holiness, and
Holy Souls, will be the dreadful and final Judge.

The Questions to be well Considered.
Quest. 1. ARe we not on all sides agreed that we are Mortals posting to the
Grave? Does any Man think he shall not die? And is striving or mutual Love and
Quietness, a fitter Passage to the dust? Do not all Men, constrained by natural
Conscience, at a dying Hour, repent of hurting others, and ask Forgiveness of
all the World? Yea, if you are not worse than most Heathens, Are we not agreed,
That Man's Soul is immortal, and that we shall all be shortly in another World;
and that it shall be with us there, as we live on Earth? If any doubt of this,
should not the least probability of such an everlasting Life, of Joy or Misery,
prevail against the certain Vanity of such a shadow as this World? Or if yet
they believe not another Life, Why should they not let those live in quietness
that do believe it, and dare not hazard their everlasting Hopes for nothing, as
long as they do no hurt to others?

Q. 2. Do not all Christians believe, That the Knowledge of God, our Creator
and Redeemer, and a holy Heart, and Life are of necessity to our Salvation? Do
we not see, That Children are not born with Knowledge, nor free from fleshly
and worldly Inclinations? Does not the World's Experience tell us, how hard,
and how long a Work it is, to make the Ignorant understand the very Articles of
Faith, and necessary Duty to God and man; and as hard to persuade their Carnal
Minds to the hearty Love and Practice of them, and to save them from the
damning Love of sinful Lust, and worldly Vanities; and how woefully the best
Teaching is frustrate with the most?

Q. 3. Are we not all Vowed to God in our Baptism, renouncing the Seduction of
the World, the Flesh and the Devil? And do all understand and keep this Vow?
And is not the perfidious Violation of it, a most damning Sin? And when
Thousands of full Age are yet to learn what Baptism is, and what they Vowed,
Have they not great need to be plainly taught it?

Q. 4. Is a Baptized Infidel, or ungodly Person, any better or safer than the
Turks or the Salvages in America? Will the Name of Christians save perfidious
Hypocrites? Or, Will it not be easier for Sodom than for such?

Q. 5. If Christian Knowledge and Practice be not necessary, Why pray we for
Conversion of Heathens and Infidels? And, Why does the Article of the Church of
England condemn those that hold, That all may be saved in their several
Religions? And what are we better than Turks and Heathens?

Q. 6. Are not all Men on Earth bound solemnly to worship the God that made
them? And do not all the Idolatrous Heathens, and the Mahometans, offer their
God some public Worship? And must not Christians publicly worship Christ? Are
not holy Assemblies for Doctrine, Prayer, Praise and Communion, Commanded to
that end; and the Lord's day separated thereto, and all forbid to forsake such
Assembling?

Q. 7. Let the Bills of Mortality, and the knowing Inhabitants tell you,
Whether there be not some Hundred Thousands in the great Parishes, in and near
this City, more than can come into their Parish-Churches, and hear. If they
would all but show their willingness to come in, if they could, and Twenty
Thousand stood at St. Martin's in the Churchyard, and Streets, and as many at
Stepney, and at St. Giles Cripplegate, and Ten Thousand at Giles in the Fields,
and so of the rest, and should say, We are here desirous to come in, and
cannot, What would you say to them? Are they not more miserable that are
content to stay at home?

Q. 8. What would you have all these Thousands do? Multitudes of them are
hardened already by this seeming necessity into self-excusing, and a custom of
neglecting all public Worship: And how think you do they spend their time at
home? Is it not the time for sinful Practices, or Idleness at the best? And
would you have all these Thousands turn Atheists, or live more impiously than
Mahometans? And are not these to pay to the Church, that cannot come in it; and
the Weak that cannot stand and can get no Seats? And are not the Churchwardens
bound to present all these Thousands, that have no Room? And shall all these
suffer as Recusants, while the Rich that can pay for Seats, escape? If you say
they should seek room in other Parish Churches, do you know what it is for a
man to wander into the City, with his Family, to seek room, he knows not
where? The Tabernacles where Churches stood are small* and we see the Church
full already, where is profitable Preaching, and the Seats at least possessed;
and the worse men are, the more need they have, but the less they feel it, and
are unlikely to seek help at such a rate, who would come in, if it were near
them.

Q. 9. Are all these many Thousands that stay at home (or worse) hunted and
prosecuted, fined, and imprisoned for it, as seditious, and Enemies to the
King, or to the Peace, as some are that worship God as wisely as they can? And
do you believe that such a Worship of God, as has nothing in it contrary to
the Holy Scripture, or contrary to the Practice of the Apostles of Christ, is
worse than none at all, or than meeting at Plays and Taverns, and deserves
scorn, imprisonment, and ruin?

Q. 10. Suppose it be Ignorance and Error in such Ministers, as take it to be
a sin against God (yea, a heinous sin) to take all the Oaths, Declarations,
Subscriptions, and Covenants imposed for Conformity (while they willingly take
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy); and suppose it be an Error in those
People, who think their Souls need better Pastoral Helps than they can have in
many Parishes; shall this Error be punished with keeping them from all God's
public Worship, unless they will sin against their Consciences, or change
their Judgments which they cannot change? Yea, suppose some Communion or
Ceremony be indifferent, which they mistake for sin, will you forbid all men to
worship God, till they have no Sin or Error? Is there any one such a man on
earth? Are you such your selves? And shall all the World be driven therefore
from worshipping God? Little do men know how great a part of the daily
Thoughts, even of Orthodox Learned men, are Errors.

Q. 11. Can there be a more horrid thing in the world, than either to condemn
or excommunicate all men who dare not do that which after their best search,
they think to be more heinous Sin than they dare name, lest the very naming of
it offend, and are desirous to have their Reasons heard; and to make it
necessary to Communion, or to their Liberty to worship God, that all Men and
Women must know even all indifferent things, to be indifferent or lawful in
God's Worship, which men may impose on them? Have not all sober Peaceable
Divines agreed, that things necessary for* all to know, are few; and that
Christian Concord can never be expected on any other terms, than by agreeing in
those few, plain, necessary things? And who knows not that indifferent things
are numberless, as well as small; no mortal man knows them all? And if a poor
Christian that fears the Justice of God, do take that Oath, that Covenant,
that Declaration or Subscription; yea, or that humane Symbolical Badge of
Christianity, or other Ceremony to be a heinous Sin, which others say is a
thing indifferent; Must all as Atheists be kept from worshipping God, till they
know all these things to be indifferent?

Q. 12. Did not the Lord Jesus himself make it his prime Gospel Law, That all
that profess Repentance and Faith in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, should
by Baptism be made visible Christians; and all Christians live in Love to one
another, and Holy Communion, and jointly worship God?

Q. 13. Was it not the Nature of all the Old Heresies to depart from this
Universal Christian Love and Unity, and that on pretense of some singular
Opinion of their own, in which they thought they were wiser than others, and
would have had all to be of their mind; and should those that cry down Heresy,
go the way of Heretics, if they can but get Number and Power to pretend
Catholicism?

Q. 14. Did not the Holy Ghost by St. Paul, as plain as the Pen of Man can
write, determine, Romans 14. and 15. and Ephesians. 4. 6, 7, etc. and 1 Cor. 12. that
Christians should receive each other into Communion, and live in Love and
Peace, notwithstanding differences about Meats, Days, and such indifferent
things; yea, or Weaknesses in Faith and Holiness? And did not Christ mind the
Ceremonious Pharisees, That God will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice; and that
they worshipped God in vain, while they preferred their Ceremonies and
Traditions to his Word?

Q. 15. Had it been Reason, or Impudency rather, in the Pharisees, if they had
cried out against Christ and his Apostles, for not Conforming to their
Traditions, [You are Schismatics, and disturb the Church's and the Nation's
Peace, and cast all into Confusion]? And was it not Turbulent Arrogance that
made the Jewish Christians so urgent with all the Gentiles, to be Circumcised,
when they were left to their own Ceremonies, and no body meddled with them, or
hindered them? If men love that Diet, let them use it: But must none live that
cannot love the same?

Q. 16. Will you give men leave to open all the real Faults they can find in
the Diocesan or Parish Churches? And if they prove far more than they can prove
in theirs, Will you therefore silence all your Teachers, and shut up all your
Church-doors, and give over worshipping God? Do you think that your Priests and
your Worship are without Fault; yea, or the Constitution of your Churches? We
are not able well to know what a Parish Church is, by its Materials; that is,
who are of the Churches, and who not. 1. If it be all the Baptized
Parishioners, the Papists and Separatists are your Members. If it be all such
as are of no other Church, then the Atheists, Infidels, Seducers, and others
that are of no Church indeed are of it. 3. If it be only those that dwell and
communicate there, how small a part of your great Parishes are of the Church?
Yet are not these many Thousands declared to be out, but are permitted without
Censure, and may come if they will: Not only the Members, but the Minister
himself knows not who are of his Church, for the far greater part, till he
see them come to the Altar, and then most, if they come, must be utter
strangers to him whom he never saw before. How great a Number of Hobbists,
Infidels, Papists, and wicked Livers are amongst us, your own Pens proclaim.
And may not these come to the Altar when they please? This is spoken only to
convince you, that if all this may be born, the supposed sin of fearing sin in
a thing called indifferent, deserves not Excommunication or Destruction.

Q. 17. Is not the Fear of God the beginning of Wisdom? And does not this
contain a Fear of sinning? And is not this commendable, and to be cherished? Is
not God above man, and first to be obeyed, and most feared? Has man any Power
but what God has given him, and has God given any against himself, or his own
Laws, or for destruction of his Fear? If Conscience toward God be once driven
away, is any man to be trusted? Will not the unconscionable do any thing for
worldly Interest?

Q 18. Is it not an unmanly sort of impudence in them, that many years persuade
the world, that those same men make Schisms, by forbearing only such things as
they confess to be no sin, who have twenty years ago Protested, that nothing
but sinning is refused by them, and did then give in a Catalogue of several
sins which they undertook to prove such? And should those same men that have
read, or may do The King's Gracious Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs,
1660. and the London Ministers printed Thanksgiving for it, and the many late
Books, in which we have told men what it is which we dare not conform to; I
say, should these still take on them, that they cannot know it, and call out
still, [What is it that you stick at? And what is it that would satisfy you?]
Yea, those that cannot bear that we should tell them.

Q. 19. Do you think that the King who then past that Declaration (in which the
Non-Conformists who sought it with thankfulness acquiesc't, as in terms of
happy Concord) and the House of Commons who gave him thanks, or the Bishops and
Clergy who after rejected it, and procured the new Act of Uniformity and such
other, did take the way to have United Protestants, and to have prevented our
present sad divisions?

Q. 20. Has not Dr. Burnet in his History of the Regale fully proved that the
choice of Bishops and Pastors for many hundred years was in the People and the
Clergy: And do you think in your Consciences, that if a good Gentleman build
and endow a Church, all men must ever after trust the Pastoral conduct of their
Souls with such Priests only as his Posterity, or any man that will buy the
Advowson shall present? Will not Drunkards, Fornicators, malignant haters of
Holy Life choose men as fit for their turn as will be admitted? And do you
think in your Consciences that all the Patrons now in England, are either fit,
or by Christ allowed, to be choosers of all those Pastors that all men in
England must take up with: Do you not know that Preaching converteth not like a
Charm, nor is the Devil cast out of Souls as by the words of an Exorcist? It
requires great skill and care to convince sinners, and instruct, resolve,
confirm and comfort Souls: There is as great difference of Teachers as of
Physicians: And Souls are unspeakably more precious than Bodies. And it is said
of (too many) rash and unskillful Physicians, that the difference between them
and Soldiers is that they kill their Friends who pay them for it, when
Soldiers kill but their enemies. What Power Princes and Patrons have of things
Dedicated to God, as Temples and Tithes, Lands; we presume not to dispute. But
these are not to inseparable from the Pastoral-office that the People must
trust their Souls only on their Pastoral care, to whom the Patron will give the
Tithes and Temples. Had men so settled maintenance on Physicians for every
Parish, we would not therefore trust our lives on the unskillful or negligent,
because either Prince or Patron choose him. And if you would not say to such,
You shall have the Physician which the Patron chooses or none; Why should you
say so of the Pastor?

Q. 21. Are we not of the same Religion with the Magistrates and Bishops? In
what one Article of Faith do we differ (except the new one of the undoubted
Salvation of all dying Baptized Infants, not excepting those of Atheists or
Infidels, and this as certain by God's Word,) almost all parts of the Christian
World, Greeks, Papists, Protestants, Nestorians, Iacobites, Arminians, etc. do
charge one another with Heresy or false Doctrine, while Conformists charge no
such thing on the Non-conformists, but only dissenting from the modes of
worship and discipline which they impose. And would you have all the Christian
World, forbid one another to Worship God, till they all agree? If not, where
yet their differences are so great, why must they be forbidden it, who differ
not in points of Faith from the Churches Articles at all?

Q. 22. It is forbidden that more than four meet to Worship God [in other
manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England.] If
by [other manner] be meant [with any other positive manner of Worship] I see
none that do it otherwise. For Reading of Scripture, Praying, Preaching,
Singing Psalms, are all done in the Parish-Churches. But if [o^her manner
extend to every omission of any appointed part of the Liturgy, all
Parish-Churches where I come do it in other manner.] And shall all the Lords,
Gentlemen and People be therefore punished as Conventiclers? The
Non-conformists where I come, use most of the Liturgy, (that is) The Psalms,
two Chapters, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Commandments, the Singing
Psalms, and some of them more. Must all go out of the Church, if the Curate
omit part? If by [otherwise] be meant [with any other accidents or
circumstances] the Church of England agrees not in all such, and can be no
rule therein to the Non-conformists: Cathedral and Parish-Churches differ: Some
Parishes have org^ns, Altars, Rails, etc. and some none: Some Worship in
Tabernacles, and some in unconsecrated Places, (as some Chapels, the Spittle,
the Prison, Sturbridge-Fair, etc.) And almost all the Christian Sects on Earth
(before-named) differ in far greater matters than our difference from the
Liturgy is: And even in the time when the Christian Emperors and Prelates were
of greatest Power and Zeal for Concord, they never appointed one Liturgy for
all the Churches in the Empire. Nor did any Bishops in Councilor out, so
magnify themselves, as to write down for all other Bishops and Priests the
words which they must speak to God in all their Prayers, as if none that are
fit for the Sacred Office, knew what to say to God but they, or they only had
the Spirit of prayer?

Q. 23. Are there not some sorts of Government antecedent in order of nature to
public Government, and such as no Prince or Prelate can abrogate, viz. 1.
Self-Government. 2. The Husbands-Government of the Wife. 3. And the
Parents-Government of his Children, in order to personal and family welfare?
If Princes or Patrons on what pretense soever, would take on them to choose for
all men, what Food they shall eat, what Physic they shall take and when, what
Trade they shall choose, what Wives or Husbands they shall have, as to
individuals, and what Food, Raiment, Physic or Calling, they shall give their
Children, etc. No Prince can deprive men of Self-governing, maternal or
paternal Power. And is this power more concerned in any thing than in the
saving of our Souls? Has God laid our Salvation on Princes, and Patrons
choice, or on our own? If we miscarry by their choice, will they be damned for
us, and not we? Is it not our own Salvation that lies on our actions? And if
another say, you are unfit to judge, what Food to eat, what Physic to take,
what Wife to choose, and so what Pastor to choose for the conduct of your
Souls; will any man, not distracted, therefore make a Prince or Patron the
absolute chooser, and trustee for his Soul? Or does it follow that I need not,
or may not choose a skillfuller Pastor than many thousand Parishes in England
have, because the Patron is by Law enabled to choose the Parish Priest? Let him
choose who shall have his Tithes and Temple, but he shall not make me trust an
unfit man with the pastoral care of my Soul.

Q. 24. If a Wife or Son say, My Husband, or my Father commands me to take
this man and not that for my Pastor. And you, say (The Prince or Patron
chooses you another, and will imprison you if you submit not to his choice,)
which do you think the Law of Nature, and the fifth Commandment will justify?
Has God made the King of France, Spain, Portugal, etc. the chooser of a Pastor
for all their Subjects? And consequently the chooser whether they shall be
saved or damned, according to God's ordinary course of VVorking by the aptitude
of means. If this power extend not to Infidels, Heathens, Papists, Heretics,
etc. how shall the Subjects know to whom it extends? Must all Subjects be
made Judges whether Princes and Patrons are Orthodox and fit to choose? Is not
this more arrogance, than to judge who is fit to be my Pastor or Physician? Is
it not sufficient that the Prince and Patrons so provide for Teachers (and
Physicians) that none may want, nor neglect instruction in the essentials of
Religion; but as many as need and are able may use better than the unskilful at
their own charges?

Q. 25. Whereas some pretend that we ought to be silenced for preaching
without the Bishops License, is that the true cause, when such are silenced and
excommunicated that have Licenses? Mr. Tho. Gouge was excommunicated for
preaching even in Wales, where he labored in such eminent works of charity,
notwithstanding his University License not-forfeited: For though he conformed
not, he never refused Conformity, and so fell not under the Canon which makes
void the Licenses of Refusers. And I that have the Bishop of London's
(Sheldon's) License, am hindered with the first. The same I say of Episcopal
Ordination, which was no protection to him or me, or many others.

Q. 26. As to the common cry that we are justly silenced for our being for the
Parliament in the late Wars, 1. Is that the meaning of the Act of Ob^ivion?
Are they friends to King or Kingdom that will not suffer our sores to heal; but
when all are returned to the Love of Peace, still fill men's ears with the noise
and fears of War? 2. Did the King so judge of General Monk and his Army who
restored him, who yet were hotly fighting in Scotland against the King, while
we were preaching against the Usurpers? 3. Do not our long requests yet silence
these incendiaries, while we offer and crave but that those may have leave to
Preach Christ's Gospel and Worship God, who never had to do with any War
against the King, and that they silence only all the rest, (which we suppose
are a number not very considerable)?

Q. 27. As to any other charge, is it not that which we crave our selves, that
if any Non-conformists be proved guilty of drunkenness, fornication, lying,
perjury, oppression, or other immorality or Rebellion or Sedition, they may be
punished as the crime deserves?

Q. 27. Do you believe that the great Parish Ministers need no help? Can any
man think so, who believes the worth of a Soul, and understands but one half
a Pastors work, and why it was that the Primitive Church had so many Presbyters
and Deacons with a Bishop, to Churches of smaller number by far than our great
Parishes? And do not all Ministers of sense and forbriety, confess their need
of many to help them, and say that it is the want of Maintenance that hinders
it? and if that be it, why may not we be endured to help them for nothing,
while we Preach the same Gospel, and submit to beg our Bread? Does helping them
freely deserve our destruction?

Q. 28. Whom did Christ or any of his Apostles ever Silence, who Preached only
sound Doctrine, for any difference about Circumstantials of man's invention? Or
where did they ever command or authorize any others so to do? When some would
have Christ restrain some from useing his name who followed him not, he rebuked
the motion, saying, he that is not against us, is for us. When some preached
not sincerely, but enviously, and contentiously, to add affliction to his
bonds, St. Paul was glad yet that Christ was Preached, and professed that he
did and would rejoice therein, Phil. 1. 18.

Q. 29. Do you think that any would Silence, Imprison or Prosecute Religious
Christians, for things which they themselves call Indifferent, and others think
to be great sin, if they loved their neighbors as themselves, and did by
others as they would have others do by them?

Q. 30. Is not the Office of the Ministry to be Stewards of the house, and
mysteries of God, and to give the Children their meat in season, Luke 12. 42.
and to teach men publicly from house to house, Act. 20. And is it not a
calling fixed during life and ability, not to be cast off at pleasure? And this
in those that are called by men? As a Priest that has married Persons cannot
unmarry them, and the Archbishop who may Anoint or Crown a King, may not
Depose him, because he was not the Donor or Lord, but a Ministerial Invester;
so he that Ordains a Minister may not depose him, till he become incapable of
the Office, and if he do, it does not disoblige the Minister.

Q. 31. Did not the Church for 300 years, worship God against the will of
Princes, and afterward, when Arrian, or other erroneous Princes forbid them?
And has a Christian Prince any more power to hinder the Gospel and Worship of
Christ, and the saving of Souls, than Heathens had? or rather far greater
obligations, as nursing Fathers to promote them, which I ask only in answer to
such as pretend Law and human Authority, to forbid what God Commands; in
which case says Bishop Bilson, we must go on with our work, and patiently
suffer.

Q. 32. Is it not a dreadful charge that is laid on Timothy (one called by men)
2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, that thou Preach
the word; be instant in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with
all long Suffering and Doctrine. Have you so little mercy on our souls, as to
drive us on such a Flaming Sword, and wish us to be condemned by Christ, for
disobeying such a charge, and to bid us obey any contrary charge of mortal
worms?

Q. 33. Is the Conformists Ministry necessary or not? If not, why is all this
stir made about it, and all the Church Lands and Tithes to maintain it? If yea,
why then is not our Labor in Preaching the same Gospel as necessary as theirs,
to such persons as cannot hear them for want of room, and to such who say that
their true necessity commands them to use better Pastors than many Parishes
have? And if any of them have a scrupulous error about a Pastor, must they
therefore be Ruined, Excommunicated or Forsaken?

Q. 34. Is not the silencing of faithful Ministers, a far greater loss and hurt
to the people that need their Ministry than to them? What if it prove my
fault, that all my most impartial Studies and Prayers did not serve to make me
know, that all the imposed Subscriptions, Declarations, Covenants, Oaths and
Practices are lawful? Shall hundreds or thousands of Innocent people suffer for
my fault, and that in their Souls? Should you for this have deprived all
persons of any help, which they have had by all my Preaching and VVritings this
Twenty or Forty years? And is it just to wish it had been all undone, and the
like of many hundred others? If we preach false Doctrine, accuse and punish us;
If the Physicians were drunkards or fornicators you would not for that forbid
them to help to save the sick. If the Country Farmers scrupled Conformity, you
would not therefore forbid the Market to them, and let the poor famish.

Q. 35. If our not Swearing, not Subscribing, etc. be our fault, as long as we
preach Necessary Truth, could not Lovers of the Gospel find some penalty for
us, that did not hinder it? Is it worse than Drunkenness or Fornication? Twelve
pence an Oath, is thought enough for Profane Swearers, and is there one in
many hundreds pay it? We had far rather be any otherwise punished, so we be
not hindered from serving Christ in the work to which we are devoted.

Q. 36. Do you think there is any such sin as Sacrilege in the world? If there
be, is it not greater Sacrilege for me, that am Ordained and Devoted to the
Ministry, to alienate my self, than to alienate Church Utensils, Goods or
Lands? These are devoted but for the Pastor, who is Consecrated to nearer and
more holy service. What think you of them that cry out against the alienation
of large Church Revenues as Sacrilege, and use them for worldly pomp, and
fleshly fullness to their own pleasure, which are devoted to God's service; but
with a few confident words will prove it no sacrilege, for many thousand
faithful Ministers, to forsake their Calling, if Bishops forbid it them? (For
what it is in the forbidders, we leave to God and them.)

Q. 37. Dare you undertake to justify at the Bar of God, the many hundred
Ministers forbidden to Preach, if they obey you and cease their Ministry? Or
will you answer for all the People whom some drive away from their worship of
God, if they thereupon give over worshipping him, and as thousands others idle
it at home, when all these say [We Preach no Doctrine, nor offer God any
Worship, contrary to any Word of God, or in any other manner than Christ and
his Apostles did or allowed]? Dare you give it under your hands that you will
bear the punishment if we be condemned for obeying you and ceasing our work? If
you would, were that man well in his Wits, who should trust his Soul on your
undertaking, who are so unable to save your selves?

Q. 38. Should things Indifferent exclude things Necessary, when Christ says,
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice? And is neither our Preaching, nor the
Concord of the Churches here Necessary?

Q. 39. Have you thought what Christ meant, when after his Resurrection he
thrice says to Peter (and to others in him) Love thou me, feed my Lambs and
Flock? As if he had said, As ever you loved me, feed those whom I loved to the
Death: Would you unmercifully wish us to renounce our love to Christ? and when
Paul says, Necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the
Gospel: Would you wish us to run upon such a Woe, upon the mere chat of such as
do but tell us, that we are not called as the Apostles; and that we are under
Bishops? As if none but men called the Apostles, were liable to that Necessity
or Woe; or God had allowed us to forsake His Work when Bishops please, and will
forbid us.

Q. 40. God has encouraged us in our work by his undeniable blessing on many
Souls. If you take it for nothing, for men to be turned from ignorance,
worldliness, deceiving, lying, sensuality and fleshly lusts, to the serious
belief of a life to come, and to the Love of God and Man, and to the joyful
hopes of Glory, and the obedience of Christ, and confidence in his salvation;
we take this to be worth our labor and our lives. And would you have us so
unthankful to God, who has blessed us, as to cast away our Callings? Can you
expect that all the threatenings of Men, or the weekly reproach of
Pamphlet-writers, should make us wish all the Sermons unpreach'd which we have
preached, and all the Books unwritten which we have written, and all the Souls
unconverted who have repented?

Q. 42. When Jonas overran an unpleasing Ministry, did not God overtake him
with his Judgment? And if we prove Ionasses, may we not expect to meet with
Storms more terrible than Jails?

Q. 43. Can all this said and done against such in the world, ever make the
sober that knew them, believe, that such a man as Anthony Burges, Mr. Porter,
Mr. Hildersham (the Son) Mr. Hughes, Mr. Richard Allen, and hundreds much like
them, were worthy Silencing, Imprisonment and Shame, while such as fill some
thousand Churches are worthy of maintenance and honor? Or will sober Posterity
who read the Lives and VVritings of such men as John Corbet, Joseph Allen,
James and John Ianeway, and abundance such others, believe that they were as
bad as their accusers make them? There is but one way to bring them under the
Infamy and Odium of Posterity; and that is the Papists way to kill all that are
of another mind, and to drive Truth and Conscience out of the world, and then
who would stay behind?

Q. 44. Who did Christ mean by the Hypocrite that sees a mote in his brothers
eye, and could not see the beam in his own? Was it not the Pharisee that
blamed Christ's Disciples for crossing their Ceremonies and Traditions, and saw
not all the crimes in themselves recited Mat. 23. And is not the scrupling of a
thing called by others Indifferent, a mote in the eye of many truly godly
persons? I will not offend you by describing the beams.

Q. 45. Have we not often offered, that as soon as any true reason can tell us,
that our Labors are here needless, by the sufficient number, and quality, and
labors of others, we will joy fully be silent, and seek for work where there
is need: Till then, to starve souls is to be guilty of their damnation. And if
Meeting-Chapels be wanting, why do not the great and rich Conformists build
them?

Q. 46. Is it not a pleasing advantage to Papists, if they can see two thousand
of those Minister, who are most against them, silenced, and driven from Cities
and Corporations, and made a hunting game and scorn, and the Kingdom cracked by
general divisions, as turned into Guelphs and Gibelines, weekly reviling and
deriding each other as Whiggs and Tories? Is it not their design to banish
Conscience and absolute Obedience to God? And you know who rules where God and
Conscience does not rule. And what is it that the unconscionable will not do,
for worldly interest? And did not the Papists always know that our Love and
Concord would be our strength, and their terror?

Q. 47. Who is it that was, or is able to cure all these our divisions? It
never was in our power, nor yet is, unless damning our souls by willful sin
must be the cure: For we have often offered our Oaths that nothing but fear of
sin shall hinder us from conforming. If our fear come from ignorance, do the
Churches suffer none more ignorant than we? But how easy were it with others,
without sin, or cost to cure all?

Q. 48. Is it not God's great Mercy to our Land, that we have had twenty years
peace, while other Lands have been miserable by Wars? And if it be the
Preachers of the Gospel that yet will give the Land no peace, but cry out,
execute, prosecute, suffer not, strike home, and their judgment be the
executioners encouragment, who say, The Clergy tells us it is our duty; I had
rather answer them with tears than words.

Q. 49. Should not the long and universal experience of the Christian World be
some warning to us, which these thousand years has been broken into shreds, by
the contentions of the Clergy, and their Magisterial needless impositions, and
by forsaking the Primitive purity and simplicity?

Q. 50. Are not these words in the Liturgy before the Sacrament very terrible:
If any of you be a hinderer or slanderer of God's Word -- or be in malice or
envy -- Repent of your sin, and come not to this Holy Table, lest after the
taking of the Sacrament, the Devil enter into you as he did into Judas, and
fill you full of iniquities, and bring you to destruction of Body and Soul? And
are not the Words of our Judge more terrible: Mat. 25. Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For I was hungry,
-- thirsty, -- a stranger, -- naked, -- in prison, etc. In as much as ye did it
not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me: And these shall go away
into everlasting punishment; but the Righteous into Life eternal? O let me
never be one of those, who for nothing shall run on such a doom!

Q. 50. If yet objections or the misunderstanding of our cause do frustrate
all these reasons, I have answered so many objections, and so far opened the
cause already, as here is not to be repeated, viz. In the First and Second
Pleas for Peace, In the Apology for our Preaching, and in the Treatise of
Episcopacy.

And against the judgment of those Reverend Fathers who still cry [Abate
nothing, and suffer them not; do Execution] I set the judgment,

I. Of the King, 1. In his Declaration from Breda. 2. His healing Gracious
Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, 1660. 3. And that of 1662.

II. The Judgment of the late House of Commons, Ian. 10. 1680. Resolved that it
is the Opinion of this House, that the prosecution of prot^stant. Dissenters
upon the Penal-Laws, is at this time grievous to the Subjects, a weakening the
Protestant Interest, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

III. Christ's Canon Law, 1 John 4. 8, 16. He that Loves not knows not God,
for God is Love: God is love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God,
and God in him.

Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have
Love one to another.

Romans 14. 17, 18. The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness,
and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: For he that in these serves Christ is
acceptable to God and approved of Men. verse. 1. Him that is weak in the Faith,
Receive we, but not to doubtful disputations, etc.

1 These. 5. 12, 13. We beseech you Brethren to know them which LABOUR AMONG you
and are over you in the Lord, and to esteem them very highly in Love for their
WORK sake, and be at Peace among your selves.

1 Samuel 2. 30. Them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise-me
shall be lightly esteemed.

ENGLANDS SLAVERY.
Q. 1. IS not Silencing taking all we have, and lying in Jaile among Rogues
from six Months to six Months till we die, greater Slavery than the Turks
inflict on Christians?

Q. 2. What is this for? And on what sort of Men?

Q. 3. Who be they that have caused and continued it after 27 Years Experience
of the effects?

Q. 4. What is Diabolism if this be not?

Q. 5. Why is not public Repentance of it proclaimed?


