Learn OF A TVRK, OR Instructions and Advise sent from the Turkish Army at
Constantinople, to the English Army at London.

Faithfully and Impartially communicated by M.B. one of the Attendants of the
English Agent there.

Eccles. 1.9. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be, that which
is done, is that which shall he done: and there is no new thing under the Sun.

LONDON, Printed in the first month of the great Platonic year, Called
anciently by some in English, As you were. 1660.

To the READER.
REader, Although thou have not much skill in foreign Names, yet if thou have
any little skill in Domestic affairs, thou may out of this discourse pick
some knowledge of our Miseries past: of our Miseries present, with the root and
spring of them, and of the most probable means of redeeming them for the
future. God make our Grandees in the Army, and out of the Army, wise by the
harms of others (they that build much upon the confidence of an Army, build
upon a quicksand) And God make them honest after the Example of others, or else
the men of Niniveh shall rise up in judgment against this Government, Matthew.
12.41. And the Turks Circumcision shall judge and condenm these men's Baptism,
yea, though it be Anabaptisme.

The meaning of several Names mentioned in the following discourse.
Janissaries. The Turks foot soldiers. Spahies. The Troopers or Horsemen.
Seraglio. The great Turks Palace. Divan. The public Council. Sanrack. A
Colonel. Beg. A petty Lord or Governor of a small Province. Beglerbeg. A great
Lord that has many beys under him. Segmen Bassa. The Lieutenant General of the
foot. Imbrahir Bassa. The Master of the Horse. Bostangi Bassa. The chief
Gardener, who is ordinarily the Turks Executioner. Aga of Janissaries. Captain
General of the foot. Bassa. The greatest Commander and Governor the Turk has
abroad. Vizier a Bassa. Called from abroad, and made of the Council at home.
Grand Vizier. The Lieutenant General of the Empire, Viceroy, the second man in
the Kingdom. Chimacham. The third man in the Kingdom, Deputy to the grand
Vizier. Teftardar. The Treasurer. Cadelescher. The chief justice. Cassiaraga.
The Governor of the women. Capi Aga. The Emperors mouth by whom he speaks in
public. Hoia. The Emperors Confessor. Mufti. The High Priest of the
Mahumetans. Their Popo.
AChmat, eighth Emperor of the Turks suddenly dying, November. 15, 1617. Left
behind him three sons, but all under age; wherefore by the advice, especially
of his mother Flatua, who was mother both to him and Mustapha, he appointed his
brother Mustapha his success out in the Empire, who by a special providence had
been (contrary to the manner of the Turks, whose Emperors slay all their
brethren as soon as they ascend the Emperial Throne) reserved thus for the
Scepter. This Mustapha had not long reigned, but that growing cruel and odious,
the Grand Vizier came with an Army out of Persia and deposed him, forcing him
to return to his Cell (where he had lived like a relgious man all the Reign of
Achmat his Brother) and fetching Osman, the heir of Achmat, out of prison, set
him in the Imperial Th^one, with the general applause of all the Bassaes and
whole Army, and this in the year 1618. The Army upon an apprehension of a
design to disband them
Sed fourtuna vitrea est, cum splendet maxim frangitur. This young Prince was
scarce well warm in his fathers Seat: But taking discontent at his soldiery,
especially the Janissaries, he had a design upon them to disband and disarme
them, if not wholly destroy them, and erect another Militia in their room. To
cover which design of his the better, he gave out a pretension of a Voyage to
Mecha, to visit the Sepulcher of their great Prophet, from which uundertaking
no Reasons, Advises, Petitions could dissuade him, although the soldiery
passed so far, as to threaten publicly, and to protest they would not follow,
but rather set up another King in his absence. On Wednesday they seventh of May
in the year 1622. while his Tents and other accommodations for his journey were
passing over unto Asia-side, the Janissaries and Spahies suddenly met at the
Hyppodrome in the City, Mutiny.
upon a word given, and from thence ran to the Seraglio, which is the great
Turks Palace, in tumult, and there cried out for the King, who appeared to
them, asked what this insoleney meant, and what they pretended? They then by
the mouth of the multitude (for they had no head but that of the Monster)
demanded, First, that he should not proceed in his purpose to go to Mecah, nor
to Asia. Demand some chief Officers of State to justice,
Secondly, to have delivered to their fury the great Vizier Delevir Bassa, the
Hoia, or the Cassiaraga, the Teftardar, the Cadelescher, and some others as
Enemies to the State. The first after a little dispute, the King granted to
them, promising to give over his journey; but they not content with words,
exacted it in writing. To the second he replied, that it was dishonor to him
to have his servants so used without order of Justice, but persuaded them to
have patience to stay till Saturday the Divan or public Council, where they
should appear; and if they were found culpable, they should receive punishment
(not meaning to perform any of this, which the King denying,
but to get time and allay their present fury.) These fellows not content with
that moderate answer, undertook to know that they were guilty, and therefore
they needed no other Witness, Trial, or Judge but themselves, and with
extreme clamor called to have them rendered. But the King refusing to give
them any other satisfaction, and they unprepared for force, returned into the
City, which now was all in fear; every house and shop being shut up, expecting
a general sack. But they followed the way of their own hatred, and first went
to the house of the Hoja, which they brake and pillaged; But not finding him,
they proceeded to the great Viziers, who made some defense, and they being
unarmed, beat them off: and so they separated, being now evening, yet kept a
guard in some parts of the Town.

That night the King made an attempt to fortify and defend the Seraglio, which
was strongly walled about, They assemble in Arms next morning.
and had always in it of household servants, above three thousand; but it seems
no man would arm in his cause: So the next morning the mutiniers assembled
again, and taking their arms, went first to the Mufti, or Archpriest among
them, and enforced him and diverse others to accompany them to the Court, where
they anew demanded these men, but with more instance and fury; in the mean time
the Hoia Cadelescher and Tofterdar fled; and were not in long time discovered;
the Vizier retired to the King, and persuaded him earnestly to go over in
person in his own boats to Asia, and there to take horse, and he would secure
him from all peril; but the King would not move, bidding him stay, confident
and assured that he would punish these rebels.

The wise old man seeing this constancy (or obstinacy) desired leave to shift
for himself, which he took or obtained, and so got away to the Hermitage of a
Saint renowned amongst them, who (like himself) betrayed him; yet did him the
favor, as not to deliver him to the multitude, but persuaded and carried him
back to the Kings house. At this time it was disputed in the Seraglio about the
delivery of those Officers, the Emperor refusing; the rebels clamouring and
threatening, insomuch as he began to fear they would break in, and in their
rage do worse then they yet pretended. Whereupon (whither by the Kings order,
or by his own consent willing to be the peace offering) the brave Vizier went
out to them, and with a good assuredness demanded what they sought of him, and
wherein he had offended? At first they were amazed, Cut the Vizier in pieces.
but one insolent villain breaking the general modesty, they answered him with
their swords, and suddenly cut him in pieces.

The Emperor seeing their fury so outrageous, had more cause to doubt, and
retired himself then too late, Force the Emperor to hide himself.
when he had lost his faithful Counselor, and would have fled into Asia, but
could not; yet he conveyed himself into a private place prepared by his
Bostangi Bassa, or chief Gardener. The Rebels continued without in their
madness, asking for their King, and for more sacrifices. But the Servants
protesting they knew not where he was, they resolved to enter the Palace ( but
first took a general Oath not to sack the Imperial Throne, which they called
their house and their honor) and there seeking for the King, but not able to
find him, they extorted it by confession from the Cassiaraga, and slew him; and
then they demanded for the deposed Mustapha, Uncle to Osman, a man esteemed
rather holy (that is frantic) then wise, and indeed fitter for a Cell then a
Scepter. The mutiniers (...)g him et up ^^ mock-King.
The King the first day of this tumult had put Mustapha into a V^ult with two
Negro women, without bread or drink, in which estate these new Electors found
him almost naked and half pined. At first sight he thought they had been the
Messengers of death, but that fear passed over; his first request was a cup of
water, whom they took up and instantly proclaimed him their Emperor, which he
was loath to accept, in a manner ashamed to be raised to that dignity. How
unstable are the states of the greatest Princes? For he that was even now in
the jaws of death, naked, starved, and dying for thirst, is become a great
Monarch, may drink gold, or the innocent blood.

They as yet not knowing what was become of Osman, and loath to trust Mustapha
in the Palace, carried him in triumph to the old Seraglio, and there left him,
departing to the sack of the Viziers house, and so in the evening to their
Rendevous, where they kept both good guard, and good order in the City from
fire and other insolences. Sultan Osman amazed with these news, as soon as
they had left the Court, came out, and called to Counsel in the night Hurein
Bassa, late Vizier in the Polish Wars, and the Aga of the Janissaries, both
faithful to him, and demanded their advice; first having sent to the old
Seraglio to practice the women there to strangle Mustapha; but some of them
taking his part, a new uproare began in the house between that sex; and the
Soldiers that kept watch, hearing the noise, entered in, and rescued him; and
from thence removed him to the Chambers of the Janissaries, where they kept him
for that night in an ill lodging.

All this while Osman is consulting what course to take; The true King
addresseth himself to the soldiers.
these two his friends and some others tell him, that the case was desperate,
and could not be cured but by a desperate remedy, and therefore they agreed
that the Aga should go and persuade with the Mufti; and that the King in the
morning should suddenly present himself to the soldiers at their own doors,
and make experience what his presence, his submission and his benevolence
promised, would work, to move them to loyalty or compassion: which counsel
early in the morning they put in practice. The King accompanied with the Mufti
(who never consented to his deposing, though he favored the soldiers against
the Vizier with Huzein Bassa) and about twelve horsemen went directly to the
Janissaries College, where Must^pha was kept, and there in tears made them an
Oration, offering great recompense, repenting of his errors, and finally
invoked them by the merits of his father, and all his Ancestors to have some
pity upon their true Master. They begin to relent,
The multitude (as prone to pity as they were before to hatred) now knew not
what to do; a silent murmr now ran among them, and they were half converted.
But the Aga of the Janissaries thinking to merit of the King, But being anew
enraged by the rashness of one of his attendants, they
and beginning to plead unseasonably for him, with some harsh words of
upbraidure, anew moved their fury, so that they cried out TREASON, and fall
upon him and Huzein Bassa, and cut them in pieces; every man taking a piece of
their flesh to satiate their revenge. The Mufti would have spoken, but was
withdrawn by some, out of respect to his place, and with difficulty was
conveyed away. Now the poor Osman saw his friends slain, and knew not which way
to turn himself; but binding up his eyes with a napkin, Attach him,
expected death as the last of their fury. But that they might seem to proceed
in a course of JUSTICE, they carried him first before Mustapha, and accused him
as the disturber of the peace of the Empire, and demanded sentence against him.
Arraign him as a disturber of the peace.
More vulgi, suum quisque flagitium aliis objectans. The forsaken Prince
pleaded for life, and the new King knew not how to condemn, but nodded and
agreed to all that was propounded. At last they consulted with themselves, and
put him upon a horse, an insolent Spahi, changing Turbants with him, Commit him
to prison,
and sent him away prisoner to the seven Towers under good guard (in his
passage begging a draught of water at a fountain) and them returned to their
new Master, and placed him in the Seraglio and Imperial Throne, where he had
need have good broths and analepticks to restore his decayed body.

The soldiers now thought all was done, and only sacking the houses of Hurein
Bassa, and some others, returned in quiet to their several lodgings, and had no
further malice. But the new Vizier Daout Bassa made by Mustapha, knew well if
Osman lived, that this storm might pass over, and he would as easily by the
same means, return to his estate as he fell from it; therefore he consulted
with some few interessed in Mustapha's preferment, and thereby obnoxious to
Osman, to search how many of the Royal Blood were left alive; and resolved, if
there remained two, to make an end of Osman. Two of his brothers were found,
the one about twelve, the other about seven years of age; and thereupon the
Vizier went himself to the prison with a pack of hangmen, Where he is murdered.
and gave order to stragle the unfortunate Prince, who now having had no rest
in two nights, and thinking himself secure for a season, was newly fallen
asleep, but awakened by the coming of these Messengers, asked what News?
saying, he did not like their sudden intrusion. They at first stood amazed, and
the King made show to defend himself. But a strong knave struck him on the head
with a Battle-axe, and the rest leaping upon him, strangled him with much ado.
Thus one of the greatest Monarchs in the world was first affronted by his
mutined Troops, his own slaves, almost unarmed, and few in number, no man
taking up sword to defend him; and they who first began this madness, not
meaning to hurt him, by the increase of their own fury, which had no bounds,
deposed him against their own purpose; and at last exposed his life, against
their will, to the Counsels of other men, whom they equally hated. And now they
mourned for their dead King as freshly as they raged (while he lived)
unreasonably, knowing that they had slained their honor; this being the first
of their Emperors that they ever betrayed, and having set up another, that in
all likelihood they must change for disability.

Some observations upon this occasion will not be impertinent to these that
desire to know, as well the disposition and use as the things themselves.

First, in the purpose of the soldier not at all to violate the King, much
less to depose or murder him, but only to take away these about him, whom
they looked upon as enemies; yet the fury once on foot, they proceeded by
unsensible steps to the utmost of outrage, against the Throne and life of their
own Emperor, ubi furor invaluit innocents and noxios juxta tollit, where rage
and fury has got the upper hand, there the Innocent and nocent fare both alike.

Secondly, observe how this Monarch fell by degrees; he had never fallen thus
low, if he had not first lost the awe and Reverence which always attends
upon Majesty (if it be kept up) by unseemly offices done by him; and now in
this last act, if his own obstinacy had not plunged him into destruction, a
seasonable yielding to time, had softened them, and saved him.

Thirdly, in the order, that these Mutiniers having no head nor direction, kept
such Regiment, that in their fury, in their hot blood, in the Kings yard they
took an Oath not to sack nor dishonor the Imperial Throne; neither committed
nor suffered any violence in the City to the Naturals, but rather proclaimed
peace and justice.

Fourthly, in the consequents, that at the third days end all was quiet, and
all men in their trade, as if no such thing had happened; only the Janissaries
suffered no Divan or Counsel, until they had received a Donative as a reward of
their iniquity. And now these fellows having tasted the sweet of prosperous
Mutinies ( haud ignari summa scelera incipi cum periculo perseci cum praemio)
knowing that the greatest wickednesses are begun with hazard, but perfected
with reward, took such an head as could not safely be suffered on, nor securely
taken off.

On Saturday morning, the 1. of June following, the Capi Aga, or Major Domo
having received an Order to remove the brethren of Osman from their Lodgings,
and in the night to strangle them, as he was performing his command, the poor
Princes cried out, the Pages running to the noise, and encouraged by the
Cassiaraga, who had some suspicion, without further examination, killed the
Capiaga. That night they sent secretly to the Janissaries and Spahies to inform
them what they had done, The Army mutinies a second time;
and in the morning early hanged his body in the Hippodrome for a public
spectacle. The soldiers returned in fury to the Court in favor of the Pages,
and demanded justice of those that had consented to the wicked order, which had
made and end of all the Ottoman race; only this Mustapha being left alive, who
was such a Saint, that he would not people the world with sinners, nor endure
any woman near him. The innocent King protested, he knew nothing of the plot,
and if such command were procured, it was gotten by subreption; and he was
easily believed. But his mother and the new Vizier Daout Bassa, who had her
daughter to wife, were vehemently suspected. It was a day of Divan, but the
soldiers would suffer none, till they had an account of this Treason. The
Vizier denied all: the mother was a woman, and hid in the house. But now
somewhat must be done to appease the people; therefore Daout Bassa was degraded
from his Office, Occasions the Creation of a new Vizier,
and one Hurein Bassa, new arrived from the Government of Cairo, put in his
place, with promise of further examination. But the fury once over, there was
no great search nor discovery made.

The new Vizier audax ferox, and prout animum intendit, pravus aut industrius
eadem vi, upon some spleen toward the Aga of the Janissaries, took occasion to
cashier him, and sent him to the Islands to be strangled, and gave order to
murder some other Bassaes and Officers, that so he might make way to depose
Emperor Mustapha, and set up Morat the child, Against whom they also rise in
mutiny.
the brother of Osman, many being of his party; whereupon the soldiers rose
all in arms at the Seraglio, taking the alarm at the meddling with their Aga,
rescued their Captain and the rest, and demanded the head of the Vizier,
whereupon he fled, and order was given to kill him where he could first be
found; the Viziers house was sacked, and infinite treasure taken, so that the
soldier was quieted for a day or two by making a new Vizier Mustapha Bassa,
who was of a soft nature, and scarce durst do justice for fear of offending any
man. Now a new faction was made between Mustapha and Morat, and it was expected
hourly, when there would be some great slaughter or Massacre in the City; for
of necessity one side must fall.

There was then no security for any man, when the King, All from the greatest
to the least at the courtesy of the Army.
and Viziers, and all Officers held their lives and Dignities at the courtesy
of the mutinied soldiers, who had tasted the sweet of Rebel^ion, and cast off
all awe and reverence, and could not easily be reduced to order without much
blood and hazard of the whole. Therefore the WISER MEN retired from OFFICE, and
the insufficient did cause their own daily change and RUIN. The soldiers
adhered to the King of their own Creation; for he was in effect their creature,
and they did wholly govern him. Against whom the Lawyers and Churchmen unite
for the public good.
The Lawyers and Churchmen made secret conventions, and feared not to say
openly, that the foundation of their State was dissolved, their King unlawful,
and all that adhered to him lapped into heresy, having despised the
institutions of Mahomet.

The soldiers still continued in their mutinies at Constantinople, and grew to
that height of insolency, The soldiers demand the Churches Revennes, and all
Offices of gain.
that going in Troops to the Court, they demanded all Offices of Game; to be
Stewards to the revenues of the Churches, which are great; to take Farms of
Customs, and committed many other outrages which are unsufferable; the Viziers
themselves durst deny them nothing: if complaints of any insolences or
injuries were made to the chief Vizier or Magistrate, they answered, none durst
meddle with them, that had murdered their own King; and desired the
Complainants patience, and that they would bear a part with the general
sufferings.

By this time the wickedness of some of the chief Leaders in these commotions
was ripe for vengeance, and their day is come. The great Vizier Georgi envying
the authority of Daout Bassa brother in law to the Emperor, Mustapha who had
been the Counselor and the instrument to murder Sultan Osman, scorning that
he should underhand Govern in his Reign, he therefore practiced to put him to
death; but not daring to do it by his own Authority, and knowing it to be in
vain to think to procure it from the Court, he stirred up the Spahies to
demand justice upon him for the death of the last King. The Spahies set on by
the present Vizier, demand justice for the death of their King, though
occasioned by themselves.
This looked further then the first assent; for the subtle Vizier, who was
faithful to his true Lord, knowing the rage of an unguided multitude, aimed at
a by-revenge upon others, who he hoped would be involved and accused of the
order. The soldier soon raised and mutinied in the Seraglio, demanded Daout,
he fled. But now that the business was on foot, if he were no found, the
Vizier himself is in danger: but the poor man was taken, and brought to the
Divan, and there being called to public Justice, he must excuse himself upon
some greater person; wherein the Emperor and his Mother ran a new hazard,
which was the secret end. Therefore both of them forsook him and left him to
the Law, and without any trial, he was brought before the soldiers, stripped,
and his Turbant taken off, and on his knees ready to receive the stroke of
death. Upon which the Army is divided into two Factions, and ready to light.
But suddenly the Janissaries came to his rescue, and carried him away to their
Chambers. The Spahies who began this action, took it in ill part, and followed
with great out cries, that they would have him die; the others demanded that he
might be heard in public Justice. Thus those two mutinied faction were ready
to come to blows. Daout Bassa now in some hope of life bribed the Janissaries,
and that day distributed forty thousand Chequines of gold, and they promised
to protect him. Who did not now think but he was taken away for safety? But the
Spahies followed their first resolution, To prevent them, he that mu^thered the
King is delivered to justice.
and to appease the dissension, it was agreed he should die. They that meant to
save him, could not, but reserved him for a greater example of Justice. They
would not let him now loose his head in the Court, that death was to honorable
for him, that had murdered his Prince. Therefore they put him into the same
Couch wherein he had sent Sultan Osman to Execution. Twice in the way, being
dry, with sorrow he drank at the same Fountain where his late Master begged
drink: and so was conveyed into the same Chamber, wherein he had murdered him.
The Executioner beginning to tie him, himself showed the very corner where he
had committed that foul fact, and desired that there he might, if possible,
expiate it. And so at last he was miserably strangled.

An here observe the justice of God even for the wicked, who seldom suffers
the blood of any, scarce (if at all the blood of Kings) to pass without an
exemplary retaliation; the same Couch, the same Chamber, the same Corner, the
same Death. And observe again, the power of conscience, even in a mohammedan,
able to make him, if not his own Executioner, yet almost a voluntary sacrifice
to the Ghost of his murdered Prince.

Which yet is not so appeased, The Army abroad under the conduct of a great
Commander, rise to avenge the death of their King; who calls a general Council.
but must and will have yet more sacrifice; and to demand them, comes the Bassa
of Arrivum, with a great Army toward Angria, marching the direct way to
Constantinople. He held a general Counsel in his Camp, and sent to the Port to
desire the presence of the Mufti, Cadees, Bassa's and ancient Beghs to take
knowledge; and to punish the Traitors that murdered the late King; and to
settle a New one lawfully that should be able to govern, to reduce the
mutinied City soldier to obedience and discipline, and to place about the
Emperor some great Vizier chosen by the State, Makes Declarations of his
honest intentions.
able to direct and apply remedies to the diseases then grown to a Crisis.
Complaining, that every three or four months, by the change of the Vizier, the
Provinces were destroyed; for they placed and displaced the Governor according
to their own Factions, and so contrary orders were s^nt abroad daily, insomuch
that no man knew whom they should obey. Against whom the Governor, set up by
the mutinied Army, guilty of Osmans blood* proclaim a War.
These were his pretenses; and if the present State would not assent to this
Assembly, he then resolved to come to the Port, and settle all things at his
pleasure by the sword. The Great Officers in possession of the Emperor and
Government, loath to be called to account by the soldier, took a worse
resolution to make a War, and make choice of Cigala Bassa for General, which
he refused upon the same pretense, that in his absence alterations would be so
frequent, and that he should not please, or at least uncertainly and according
to interpretation. Therefore he would have an absolute Dictatorship for the
time, equal to that of the great Vizier, or else he would not stir. This was
granted him, and money given out, and order to pass the water, speedily
enrolling for his Army 15000. Janissaries, and 30000. Spahies. But the mutiniers
demur, and pretend loathness to fight against their brethren, held
consultations, refuse to march,
But those did demur, and allege it was a War against their own BRETHREN, and
sought any excuses, rather then come to blows. But the secret was, it was then
Ramazan, or their holy Lent, at the end of which they were to receive their
pay, and therefore they would not move, but pretended Religion. Next day after
their Feast, when they should march, they showed themselves careless (having
first held many consultations) and would not march at all, unless the Emperor
or great Vizier would go in person: so every day brought forth new trouble, and
the Empire to a great deal of hazard and danger.

That State, for fifteen months after the death of Osman, was a stage of
variety, the soldiery usurping all Government; placing and displacing as the
wind of favor or disfavour moved them. In that time there were three
Emperors, seven great Viziers, five Agaes of the Janissaries; Two Captain
Bassaes, three Treasurers, six Bassaes of Cairo; and in proportion, as many
changes of Governors in all the Provinces. Every new Vizier making use of his
time, displacing those in possession, and selling their honor to others, so as
the whole Empire was in a manner fined four or five times over. Hurein Bassa
the last Vizier of them, consumed the public treasure so fast, and exacted
money of private men so violently to maintain his Faction with the Janizari^s,
that even the receivers themselves were afraid and weary, and the wisest of
them foresaw their own ruin in the general consumption; when there was any
murmr against him, he presently silenced it either by gifts or blood.

Yet at length persuaded to move;
As Soon as he had dispatched away Cigala Bassa with his Army against the Bassa
of Arrivum, whom they termed the great Rebel in Asia, which he did rather to
disburden himself of fears hy sending the Spahies out of the way (who were his
opposites) then for any love to the public state; But upon new discontents the
Spahies mutiny again.
he sent privily to strangle Halil Bassa, Georgi, and Mustapha, late Viziers,
hoping thereby he had removed all competitors; whether this gave the occasion,
or that his sin was ripe for revenge, the Spahies suddenly gathered head, and
the old wolf sled to his trusty Guard the Janissaries. The City was almost
divided, but the Spahies sent their resolution plainly, being the weaker in
number, that they were loath to come to blows with their BRETHREN, but if the
Janissaries would protect him, they should keep him Constantinople and Greece.
But they themselves would depart, and disposed of Asia, which was a bold
profession, but easy, the forces of the Rebels being of their society. The
wisest foresaw the peril, and they all agreed to change him, and so the Seal
was given to Ali Bassa, Which quieted They march,
a man reputed honest, but melancholic and unexperienced for so great a charge.

The Army for Asia arriving at Nicomedia five days journey from Constantinople
showed little obedience, But no mind to fight.
many disbanded, and the rest having no desire to fight with these of the same
Profession both in Religion and in humor. News came daily to the Port of the
taking of Forts by Abassa Bassa, the Head of the Rebels, The Council at
Constantinople at their wits end.
and other defections and combustions in those parts, and that that quarrel was
taken up against the Janissaries and the present Government, of whom he slew all
that came into power, as guilty of the blood of Osman. This sudddenly waked and
ripened the project of those who had plotted an alteration. Hereupon the new
Vizier Ali, with the Counsel of the Mufti, They consult.
and some Captains of the soldiers of both Orders laid their foundation. They
SHOWED the imminent PERIL, Resolve upon the only expedient for safety.
and difficulty to resist or prevent it by Arms. The Janissaries saw that they
alone must, as the mark of Envy, bear the whole burden; and therefore ALL
RESOLVED that THE EASIEST and SAFEST WAY TO APPEASE THEIR TROUBLES WAS TO
RESTORE THE TRUE HEIR; hoping that they who pretended their rising for the love
of his brother, and in revenge of his cause, would obey that Prince, Which is
to declare for the right heir, and make him King, which is also done;
and quiet themselves; upon this resolution they assembled at the Seraglio
without any tumult, and desired to have Sultan Mustapha come forth and speak to
the soldiers, and to answer to some questions which he refusing as truly
unable; they took out Sultan Morat, and declared him King with universal joy
and acclamation, insomuch as the Janissaries (but the day before his opposites,
so easily can God turn the heart of a multitude) being showed the wants of
Treasure, and the necessity of the State, were content to remit their Donative,
and increase of Pay usual at every change, Vade tu O miles Anglicane and fac
Simile. Go then O English Soldier, and do likewise.

Asia was in this new settlement of Affairs, either forgotten or neglected.
The Army that was marching thither was stayed from proceeding. For it was
believed that Abassa Bassa depended upon the new Emperor, and would make his
submission: But they had proceeded too far to make any safe retreat, although
they were the indirect (if not direct) occasion of the raising of the new
Emperor. Besides there rested still another difficulty, to introduce the awe
of Majesty, which had been trampled under foot (and it was a great one) when
people, like the sea, had made a breach into ancient Reverence, and prospered,
the taste of wickedness was not so easily lost.

Yet the Janissaries mutiny again for their pay.
In the midst of this appearing calm, the Janissaries, some repenting, and some
denying that ever they consented, to remit the Donative or increase of pay, did
now sharply demand it with threats of innovation, so as they were forced to
content them. About this, Abassa Bassa began to discover, that he had some
further game to play, then the setting up of the Brethren of Osman; for
notwithstanding all pretenses of obedience to the new Emperor, The Army in
Asia still prosecure their pretenses. Cruel to the Ianizaries, but just and
friendly to all others.
he suddenly assaulted and took the Castle of Tocat, which is the Mint of Asia;
seven B^glerbegs, and sixteen Sanracks, being joined with him, all that part of
Asia obeyed him; for he oppressed none, only executing his wrath upon the
Janissaries. This advice being brought by a Captain of that Order made much
rumor at the Port; the soldiers rising in tumult at the Seraglio, demanded to
be led out to fight, and to have these of Asia declared Rebels; a Counsel to
this end was held, where they received so cold an answer, that they grew into
some rage, Whereupon the Ianizaries demand to be led out to fight them.
accusing two Bassaes, by name, Hali and Georgi to have correspondence with
them; and seeming to doubt that the whole State did connive with this action,
to prosecute the first design of Osman to root out the Order of the Janissaries;
insomuch as they openly professed, if we be true Musulmans, and the Emperors
slaves, let us go out and fight with his Enemies and ours; if not, and that you
maintain them against us, we are resolved to die together, and not to be wasted
by pieces. Therefore to satisfy the soldiers, War proclaimed, the Army to
march within four days.
the Banner was set out at the Gate of the Court, and that of the Aga of the
Janissaries at their Gate, and War proclaimed. That all the force of the
Empire should be ready to march within four days; when they saw this
resolution in the great Ones (whether dissembled or in good earnest) that ^ay
being October. 18. 1623. The Janissaries and Spahies held a Counsel, and changed
their minds, alleging, Whereupon the Army held a Counsel, and change their
Minds.
that Winter approaching, and no provision made, they would not move. The
Viziers were glad, respecting their own ends, and so all Asia was lest to the
courtesy of the Rebels and Winter. In the mean time Abassa Bassa advanced, and
took the City of Angria, which was surrendered to him as soon as he came before
it, By which news all Asia's left to the other Army.
but the Castle held against him; and it is reported, That he wept at the Gates
thereof, publishing the cause of his taking up of Arms, which he said was
only in revenge of the blood of Osman, desiring such as favored him to come
on his side, the rest to depart in peace every man to his own house. He did no
harm, nor took the value of a penny: His Army was very great, and every
Janizary that he could catch, he sacrificed to the Ghost of the dead Emperor.
The Astrologers publicly augured his prosperity; and every man's discourse was
full of fabulous fears and Prophesies. It was said he would come to the Port
and demand audience by justice. And it was generally thought from the
coldness, both of the Emperor, and of the Viziers, that he was secretly
maintained by them, and that he came to fulfill the design of Osman, to wrest
the Government from the mutinied soldiers, and to root out their Order. For
all the Lawyers and Churchmen smiled, and rather rejoiced then feared. The
Janissaries openly murmured, that they were betrayed, and accused many, yet they
escaped, and now few spoke against him as a Rebel; yet the first of November
(whether for color or in earnest) the great Viziers Tents were passed over the
water in haste with these of the Aga of the Janissaries, and all the force which
could be then made at the Court, to Winter on the other side in Brusia, to
amuse the rebels, and stay them till the Spring, being willing the blow should
be taken on the other side to save the City from a General sack.

The Bassa of Asia taken into the Emperors favor;
It was afterward considered, that to prevail against Abassa Bassa with Arms
was a doubtful matter, and therefore the Sultan sent to him a Capigi Bassa,
with a Vest, a Sword, and a Letter, giving him thanks for the love showed to
his brother and his Blood: But that now the Revenge belonged to him himself, of
which he would take care; and therefore desired him, If he were a true subject
to return to his Government of Arrivum, and to dissolve his Armies, and there
to rest until further occasion of service. Promises to lay down Arms.
Upon this Order from the Emperor he excuses himself; That the incommodity of
Winter would not suffer him to retire, but promised to live in peace until the
Spring, and then he would return in obedience to his Government.

About which time, namely, March 24. 1624. Ali Bassa the great Vizier was
beheaded, New Vizier chosen at the Port.
and Cerques Mechemet Bassa advanced to the place, a man of an honest and
sincere nature (for a Mohammedan) and one too good for those times, and that
people, who after he had enjoyed his place (one of the greatest Dignities in
the world) but a short while, by an example scarce to be paralleled, labored
to surrender it as unable to support or content the insolency of the Spahies in
their unreasonable demands of impossible benefits. In the mean time the
preparation for the War in Asia (which had been once again impeded) was
advanced, though the resolution to set forward was deferred upon hope, that
Cherques Mechemet Bassa, and other new Ministers might by their persuasion and
authority reduce Abassa Bassa, looked on, they having undertaken to endeavor
it; though it appeared very difficult, being that he yet continued the siege of
Argria, and that his scattered Army that Wintered abroad began to return to him
from all Parts, and it was concluded he would be loath to trust his life upon a
pardon, though the Grand Seignior had sent him another.

Yet suddenly (contrary to the fears of many, And withdraws his forces.
and the expectations of almost all) Abassa Bassa rose from Angria, and
departed Eastward, having done no spoil at all to the City nor Inhabitants,
but left behind him a far better fame then any Governor sent from the Port;
he had now accepted the Grand Signiors pardon, and in obedience to his Command
and show of submission was now marched away to unite his Forces with Achis
Achmet Bassa against the Persian; yet whatever might seem to be between the
Port and him, there was not so much as a seeming reconciliation between him and
the Janissaries: for after this the Janissaries coming over into Asia with
Cerques Mehemet Bassa against the Persian, put a whole Garrison of Abassa
Bassaes to the sword, man, woman, and child, though they had set open their
Gates to entertain them as friends. In revenge whereof Abassa Bassa falling in
upon the quarters of the Janissaries, slew 3000. of them, and had done further
execution, if the whole Army had not come to rescue.

This was the strte of affairs abroad; The Spahies again mutiny, And
in the mean time at Constantinople the Spahies assembled in the Hippodrome,
discontent with the Government of the old Chimacham, Georgi Mechemet Bassa, who
had the Authority of the great Vizier in his absence at the War, Cause the
old Chimacham to be put to death
and in great fury ran to the house of the Mufti, and demanded of him to
donounce sentence of death against him, and that he would rise and inform the
Grand Signior of Their Will; which if he refused, they threatened a general
revolt, and to do their own justice; There was no remedy, the Emperor being
informed instantly, displaced him, and gave the Office to Regeb Captain Bassa,
and his to Imbraher Bassa, hoping thus to quiet all the matter: but this gave
them no satisfaction, they demanded in greater fury his life. The poor old man
was retired into the Grand Signiors protection, who used all means to appease
them offering to banish or confine him; but nothing would content, or separate
them, until he had delivered him up, who the next day was strangled, and thrown
into the streets; where the Barbarians vented their spleen upon his dead body,
cutting off his ears and nose, and carrying them in triumph to their fellows.
Presently they demand the life of some others, principally of Moret Chians the
Customer, whom when they could not find, they sacked his house; within a day or
two after they begin to be quiet, upon promise, that if he could be found, he
should be rendered to them, and others be brought to Justice. That great
Minister the Chimacham was ninty six years old, had been forty five years
Vizier, their Chimacham; when the sentence of his condemnation was delivered to
the Bostangi Basse, he came to the lodging of the Chimacham in the Kings Garden
(where he thought himself in Sanctuary) and for reverence to his age and
place, held it, being written in his hand, rather to intimate them to be the
Messengers. The poor old man perceiving it, desired one hour to pray, and
conjured him to warn the Grand Signior hereafter not to be so ease to consent
to shed innocent blood, which within a few days he would repent. The
Executioners, whether for fear, or for want of skill, could not dispatch him in
one hour, so great was his old heart.

But see how God, to whom vengeance belongs, avength the blood of his
enemies, and wicked men unjustly spilt, to preserve his image even amongst them
that study to destroy it. The Janissaries either envious that they had no part
in the last sedition, The Ianizaries rise,
or being innocent, unwilling to participate in the infamy, or rather it was
their fair to do somewhat, forced the Boats of the Galleys which lay above
Constantinople in the channel, and came down to a Garden-house upon the Sea in
the night, where the Emperor privately reposed, and began to exclaim against
the death of the innocent, Declare against this act of their fellow soldiers,
the Spahies.
protesting they had no share therein, but as obedient slaves, they desired the
peace of the State, and that JUSTICE and QUIETNESS miget return to the City:
and requiring revenge upon diverse whom they accused as the Authors of these
Tumults: They named their own Segmen Bassa as the principal, and eighteen of
their own Officers more, and diverse others of the chief Spahies, Desire
justice against diverse o^ their own Officers, and the Officers of the Spahies,
as men that had debauched the Army, and led them into, and encouraged them in
all their mutinies;
who held Counsels together, and were become heads of Factions; which until
they were All cut off, there was no hope of good Government and peace. The
Grand Signior gave them mild words, and promised to do Justice, and to punish
all such as should be found guilty, but nothing was done to satisfy them; and
being conceived that the new Chimacham connived, and had been a party to all
their Counsels (at least his preferment made him obnoxious to that suspicion)
and it was true that Segmen Bassa and his faction were the contrivers of the
fall and murder of Georgi Mechemet Bassa, and very probable that he of
favored, if not practiced by the new Ministers: the Janizari^s rose again, and
by force brought down the Galleys near the City, and landed, Accusing them of
Factions, and holding Conventic^es and Counsels.
and held a Counsel very secret in their Chambers. This bred much suspicion and
fear. But the day of public audience being come, according to the custom,
they repaired all to the Seraglio, and waited in their Order; their Segmen
Bassa only did not appear, and it was thought he absented himself purposely,
by agreement with the Chimacham, lesr there should be some occasion offered to
examine the past business which would not endure the light. The Divan being
finished, the Viziers and Cadeleschers coming toward the Gate, they were
stopped by the Janissaries, and told plainly they would speak with the King;
such persuasions as were requisite were used; but there was no remedy, they
would deliver their own message. The young Emperor at first was afraid, and
retired; but to avoid greater inconveniences resolved to come out to them.
Order was instantly given to send for the Mufti, and the ancients of the Law,
The Ianizaries come to the Port and desire Peace.
and many Santons; for the Segmen Bassa, and others of quality to be present at
this action. In the mean time a Throne was brought out, and placed in the great
Court, and the Grand Segmen came forth and sat in his Majesty, attended and
assisted by all the great Officers and Ministers of his Empire, to strike a
reverence and fear into his soldiers, whose purposes were not yet discovered.
All the Grandees of the Empire assemble together. One in the name of the rest,
delivers first a speech, then a Petition
Contrary to all expectation, an Electo spoke for them; In all humble manner
professing their obedience, and lamenting the sickness of their State, and the
daily insolences; and declaring that as they were not guilty of the last
mutiny, so they were ready to spend their blood in defense of their PRINCE. And
for the Reformation of those disorders, to which there could be applied no
remedy, but by the sword of Justice to cut off all those heads, that held
Conventicles, and plotted daily alterations, Both sitter for Stat^s men then
soldiers, for Christians then Turks.
only to govern the whole Empire at their Will. They desired their Petition
might be accepted, and those disturbers of the Peace sought out and executed,
in which they would assist; and that new Names and Titles might be forbidden;
which many had taken up as heads of Factions, and the Soldiery reduced to
their ancient Discipline; which if his Majesty would grant, and speedily put in
practice, they were ready to die in his service; otherwise, as there was no
hope of quietness, so they did foresee greater mischiefs daily, which they
would oppose as they were able. At the end of this Oration, which might have
become a Cato (yea, a Christian, Vade tu Miles Anglicane, and fac Simile, Go
thou English soldier and do likewise) they delivered a brief Petition in
writing wherein they modestly accused the new Chimacham of confederacy, and
connivence with their Segmen Bassa, whom they anew appealed and gave up the
Names of their Officers and Spahies, upon whom they laid the burden of their
daily tumults.

The Emperor gave them a short but satisfactory answer, yielding to their
request, yet mingled with some admonition, such as became a Prince. The Segmen
Bassa, the man principally accused, hides himself, but being found is put to
death, with some 2^. others of both Orders.
And so they departed every man to their own rest. But the Segmen Bassa having
some intimation that his name was renewed in that list of death, took the first
opportunity, fled and hid himself, and diverse others conscious of their own
merits retired, and thereby condemned themselves. With much diligence the
Segmen Bassa was apprehended and brought to the Court, he was examined rather
to find his own Treasure, which was infinite, then to discover other men. The
Grand Signior sent for him, and after a few words, gave sentence to have his
head struck off, which was instantly done before the door; afterward diverse of
both Orders (that is Janissaries and Spahies) were taken to the number of twenty
two, were taken, After which the Army returns to their duty, and peace to the
Empire.
and privately stangled and thrown into the sea; these (principally branded)
were hidden or fled. And suddenly, as if peace were risen out of the old
Chimachams grave, there was an end of the tumults and disorders among the
soldiers; the Spahies shrunk, not one revenging Spahie to be seen in all the
City; and the Janissaries, as their glory, took upon them an austere
Reformation; and all things were so calm as if Astrea had come down from
heaven among them.

THe reading of History having in it no recompense but delight, unless it look
forward to use and action, either to correct errors past, or direct ways for
the future: it will not be unprofitable upon the foregoing discourse to raise
some Observations, First Theological, Secondly, Moral and Political.

First, Theological. There are in this discourse several things of God
discovered, worthy our taking notic of.

As first the absolute and uncontrollable Sovereignty of God over the greatest
Monarchs and Emperors of the world. Behold one of the greatest Monarchs of the
earth, suddenly turned out of all, by his own Vassals, who at their first
rising intended no such thing. He cuts off the spirit of Princes; he is
terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.12.

Secondly, observe here the infinite wisdom of God, who can by the Passions,
and lusts, and furies of men accomplish his own, wise, and just holy ends. This
Army in all their mad fury did not what themselves plotted and intended, but
what God decreed.

Thirdly, behold here the exact justice of God (in revenging first the blood of
Osman, then the blood of Georgi, though wicked men) to his Enemies; shall he
not much more avenge the blood of his Elect?

Fourthly, observe here the wonderful power of God over the spirits of men; how
soon can the Lord calm their greatest rage and fury? and none can do it but
he; he stilleth the raging of the sea, and the tumults of the people.

For Moral Observations take these.

First, how dangerous a thing it is for any supreme power to stand in need of a
constant standing Army; they do but bestride an unruly Camel, which they cannot
manage, as this unfortunate Osman dreamt, before his death.

Secondly, what a dangerous thing it is for the Civil Power, to permit the
soldiers and Officers of the Army to hold their Counsels and Conventicles.
These were the root of all these troubles in the Turkish Empire.

Thirdly, how much better it is to be under the worst of Monarchies, then at
the courtesy of a mutinied Army, appears by this story.

Fourthly, that the common soldier having been debauched by their own
Officers, may at last prove honest, and delivering their misleaders to Justice,
may return to their duty and obedience. Amen.

FINIS.

