R. BAXTER'S Sense of the Subscribed ARTICLES OF RELIGION.
I Take not this Form of Words called, The Articles of the Church of England,
to be essential to the said Church; nor any thing in them to be essential to
the Christian Religion, which was not so from its beginning, and in the first
Ages of Christianity, yea and in every following Age: nor do I take such Form
or Matter to be instead of the Scripture and the ancient Creeds, a necessary
Rule of Divine Faith, or necessary to the Being of Ministry, Membership, and
Communion in the Church of England: But that they were, subordinate to the
Scriptures and the said Creeds, a laudable Profession of this Church at the
Reformation, that they misexpounded not the Divine Rule by any Heresy, thereby
to promote our Communion with other Reformed Churches, and to guide Novices at
home in the Exposition of the said Rule: Far be it from us to be of a Religion
and Church which is no older than the said Articles or Common Prayer. But
holding, with excellent Augustine, that Contra Rationem nemo sobrius, and
contra Scripturam nemo Christianus, so also that, Contra Ecclesiam nemo
pacificus; (the Church still being supposed to be for Reason and Scripture,
sober and Christian) and wishing that God's own Word were taken for the
sufficient Terms of our Consent and Concord in order to Union and Communion,
and knowing that the Ambiguity of words, and our common imperfection in the Art
of Speaking, do leave an uncertainty in the sense of most humane Writings till
explained, and yet supposing that the Authors of these Articles meant them
Orthodoxly, that I may not seem needlessly scrupulous, I subscribe them, and
that I may not be unconscionably rash in subscribing, I here tell all whom it
may concern, how I understand the words which I subscribe.

Art. 2. A Sacrifice for all the sin of man, Original and Actual.] Though [
Omnibus] be also in the Latin, [ All] is left out in K. James his Edition. I
suppose they meant not [ for any man's final predominant Impenitence,
Infidelity, Atheism or Unholiness;] but for all sorts of sin, on condition of
Faith and Repentance, actually pardoning them to penitent Believers.

Art. 3. He went down into Hell] That is, into Hades, the state of separated
Souls: Of which see Archbishop Usher's Answer to the Jesuits.

Art. 4 Took again his Body with flesh and bones, and all things appertaining
to the perfection of man's Nature, wherewith he ascended into Heaven, and there
sits, etc.]

That is, He sits in Heaven with the same Body Glorified, which was flesh
and bones on Earth, and catechrestically is by some so called now it is a
celestial, incorruptible, spiritual, glorious Body; but indeed is not now the
same thing which we call formally Flesh, Bones, or Blood, nor will admit of the
same Definition. For, 1. The Scripture says plainly, That Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. There is a natural Body, and
there is a spiritual Body, verse. 43, 44. The Context shows that it is not
moral sinful corruption that is called Flesh and Blood here, but that natural
corruptibility which Flesh and Blood has. See Hammond on the Text.

Christ's Body will not be worse than ours (but ours made like to his, Phil. 3.
20.) But ours shall not be flesh, blood, and bones.

2. When there is not the same Form or Definition, there is not to be the same
proper formal Denomination: But no sober Philosopher or Physician ever gave
such a Definition of Flesh, Blood, or Bones as will truly agree with Christ's
glorified Body: The name therefore can be but equivocal.

3. There is a Symmetry in God's Works, Christ being in his Glorified Humanity
advanced above Angels in Power, is not below them in natural Perfection: His
spiritual celestial Body is congruous to his Soul; and all the Angels obey and
worship him. When we are the Children of the Resurrection, we shall be equal to
the Angels, and neither marry nor die: and so not have bodies of mortal
constitution. I dare not say that the Sun or Light is a more Glorious body than
Christ's; nor encourage those Disputers that ask how many foot long and broad
his body is, or the place that contains it.

4. I dare not incur the guilt of contradicting two General Councils in a
matter of Faith, when they anathematize the Dissenters, and agree therein, though
disagreeing in other things, and pleading the Tradition of the Fathers, and the
Scripture.

The seventh General Council at C. P. under Constable. Copion. condemning
Image Worship, says, (as Binnius translateth it) page 378. Defin. 7. Siquis
non confessus fuerit Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum post assumptionem animatae
rationalis and intellectualis carnis, simul sedere cum Deo and Patre, atque ita
quoque rursus venturum cum Paterna Majestate, judicaturum vivos and mortuos,
non amplius quidem Carnem, neque, Incorporeum tamen, ut videatur ab iis a
quibus compunctus est, and maneat Deus extra crassitudinem carnis, Anathema.

To which says the second Nicene (their Adversaries) by Epiphanius, Huc usque
recte sentiunt and Patrum traditionibus consentientiae dicunt.]

5. The long Church-Divisions, which have for 1300 years followed the rash
Determinations about some dark invisible things, makes me more inclined to
suspend, than rashly to affirm, in doubtful cases, especially about God, and
Jesus Christ.

6. It is not the perfection of Glorified Humanity to be flesh and bones.

7. I cannot say, that Earth (as flesh and bones are) dwells in Ethereal
Regions.

Art. 6. Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation] I
consent: Therefore if the Ministry, Sacraments, and Church Communion be
necessary to Salvation, the Scripture contains all necessary to them

Ibid. In the name of the holy Scriptures we understand those Canonical Books
of the Old and New Testament, of whose Authority was never any doubt in the
Church.] Expos. Not excluding the Epistle to the Hebrews; James; 2 Pet. Jude; 2
and 3 John; Revelation, which diverse Churches long doubted of.

Art. 7. [ The Civil precepts thereof the Law given from God by Moses) ought
not of necessity to be received in any Commonwealth.]

Expos. Civilia sunt praecepta quae dantur ad regendas civitates (seu
societates civiles) God's Laws are the Supreme Civil Laws: Man's Laws are but
Bylaws (such as Corporations make under the Laws of the Land) about things
mutable, left undetermined by God, and subordinate to his Laws. God has two
sorts of Civil Laws: First, such as are universal or common to all Christian
Nations at least: As, That there shall be Rulers and Subjects; That Rulers obey
and promote the Laws of God and the Kingdom of Chrst, and do nothing against
them; That they seek the common Good, and rule in Righteousness, and be a
Terror to evil Works, and encourage Piety and Virtue and Peace; That they
restrain Blasphemy, Perjury, Profaneness, Murder, Adultery, Theft, false
Witness, and false Judging, etc. These Civil Laws bind all Nations, as the Law
of Nature; and all Christian Nations, as the Law of Christ: But not as the Laws
of Moses promulgate to the Jews. 2. But there are also particular Civil Laws
that were proper to the Jews Commonwealth in specie: I suppose the Article
means these, and includes the former in the word [ Moral Laws] though indeed
they be the most eminent Civil Laws.

Art. 8. The three Creeds, viz. Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed ( omino.]

Ex^^^. 1. Rightly understood; viz. 1. That by [ God of God very God of very
God] be not meant two G^ds: 2. Nor the damnatory Clauses taken for part of
Athanasius Creed, (though they be part of the Liturgy assented and consented
to.)

Art. 9. This infection of Nature does remain even in them that are regenerate.

Expos. That is, in a mortified, subdued degree, but not predominant, or
unpardoned.

Art. 10. We have no power ( nihil valemus[ viz. Our natural Powers or
Faculties are not sufficient without Grace.

Art. 11. We are accounted righteous before God only for the Merit of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, and not for our own works or deservings: wherefore
that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, etc.]

Expos. Though he that does righteousness is righteous, and the Scripture
throughout and frequently mentions an inherent personal Righteousness
necessary to Salvation, yet this is no Universal Righteousness, nor such as
will justify us according to the Law of Innocence or Works; but is merely
subordinate to the Merit and Efficacy of the Sacrifice and Righteousness of
Christ, which only meriteth for us as a Price, out Faith being only the
requisite (yet given) moral qualification for the reception of the free gift of
Pardon, Justification and Adoption, and has not the least part of the Office
or Honor of Christ; yet are Christ's words true, That by men's words they shall
be justified or condemned: And all men shall be judged according to their
works: And James truly says, that by works a men is justified, and not by
faith only: Not by works of perfection or of Moses Law, nor any that as a price
or commutation do make the reward to be of Debt, and not of Grace; but by a
practical Faith or Christianity: such Acts as Faith it self is, and prove our
Belief to be such as Christ has promised Justification and Salvation to; such
as by justifying Belief to be sincere, do justify the person against the
Charge of Infidelity, Hypocrisy, Impenitence and Ungodliness, Christianity is
that Faith which Paul opposes to Works.

Art. 12. Good works spring out necessarily of a true and lively Faith,
insomuch that by them a lively Faith may as evidently be known as a tree
discerned by the fruit.

Expos. 1. It is a Hypothetical necessity, that is here meant, consistent with
freedom. 2. And a Truth of Evidence, and not an equal degree.

Art. 13. Works done before the Grace of Christ and the Inspiration of the
Spirit, are not pleasant to God; forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus
Christ: neither do they make man meet to receive Grace, or as the Schools say,
deserve Grace of Congruity, yea rather they have the nature of sin.

Expos 1. No good is done before all common Grace. 2. Preparatory Grace usually
goes before special Grace; and those that resist it, are farther from the
Kingdom of God, than they that have it. And to him that has(by improvement)
shall be given: And in every nation, he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him. Believing that God is, and that he is the
rewarder of them that diligently seek him, is better than nothing, and than
mere sin.

Art. 14. Voluntary Works, besides, over and above God's Commandments, which
they call Works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogance and
iniquity.

Expos. I suppose they meant not that voluntary Canons, Impositions, Oaths, and
Church-Offices are so bad.

Art. 16. Expos. I suppose this Article means only the unpardoned Sin against
the H. Ghost, and of a total departure from common Grace, and some degree of
Habit and Act from special Grace; but determines not the Controversy, whether
any totally and finally fall from such an unconfirmed Grace as else would save.

Art. 18 They are to be had Accursed that presume to say, that every man shall
be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to
frame his life according to that Law and the Light of Nature. For holy
Scripture does set out to us only the Name of Jesus Christ whereby men must be
saved.]

Expos. Some Sects contradict the Light of Nature: They worship Devils, and
offer their Children in Sacrifice to them, and murder the just: This will save
none. But if the meaning be to curse all that hope that some are saved, who
never heard of the Name of Christ, and that his Spirit and Grace go farther
than the knowledge of his Name, I will not curse such. All were not accursed
that hoped well of Socrates, Antonine, Alexander Severus, Cicero, Epittetus,
Plutarch etc. There is no Name that is, no other Messiah to be saved by but
Christ. But, 1. God judges men by no other Law, but that which they were
under: And the Law of Grace made to fallen Mankind in Adam and Noah, was not
repealed by the Jews peculiarity. 2. God had more People than the Jews and
Proselytes of old. 3. The old Jews knew less of Christ than his Apostles before
his Resurrection. 4. The Apostles then believed not his dying for our sins, his
Resurrection, Ascension, heavenly Intercession, etc. 5. It Is no Christianity
now that believes not these. If I durst curse all the World who now believe no
more than the old Jews and the Apostles then did, yet durst I not curse all
Christians that hope better of them.

Art. 23. Those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and
called to this work by men, who have public Authority given them in the
Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lord's Vineyard.]

Expos. Given them, that is, by Christ in his Scripture-Institution, and by
those that Christ authoriseth under him.

Art. 25. Sacraments be certain sure Witnesses and effectual Signs of Grace,
and God's good Will, etc.]

Expos. They signify what God offers: They invest the true believing
Receiver in the Right of Pardon, Adoption, and Salvation. They are morally
operative Signs of exciting and increasing inherent Grace in Believers.

Art. 26. [Nor is the Effect of Christ's Ordinances taken away by their
(Ministers) wickedness]

Expos. Sacraments are not void, because a bad man administered them; but
Prayer, and Preaching and Example are usually more effectual from able godly
men, than from the ignorant and wicked. The blind man could say, God hears
not sinners; but if any be a Worshipper of God, and do his Will, him he
hears. Psalm 50. To the wicked says God, What have thou to do to take my
Covenant into thy mouth, etc. It is a sin to prefer a bad man before a better.
And it is dangerous to encourage men in daily sin, who usurp the Sacred Office
of Bishops or Pastors, having neither the Qualifications essentially necessary
thereto, nor that which is essentially necessary to a Call.

The excepted Articles, and those that need no Exposition, I pass by. If I have
hit on the true meaning, I subscribe my Assent: and I thank God that this
National Church has Doctrine so sound, and pity them that write, preach, or
practice contrary to the Articles which they subscribe, and accuse them that
refuse subscribing them; and take them for Sinners, who take them not for their
Pastors, because that their Wickedness nulleth not their Sacramental
Administrations.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Ben. Cox, next door to the Dog-Tavern in Ludgate Street.
1689.


