Mr. BAXTERS Rules and Directions for Family Duties. Showing how every one
ought to behave himself in a Christian behavior, suitable to that Relation in
which God has placed him. Wherein is set forth the duty of Parents (required
of God) toward their Children; likewise Childrens duty to their Parents.
Husbands to their Wives, and Wives to their Husbands. Masters to Servants, and
Servants duty to their Masters. A work of great use, the serious practice
thereof would establish peace and prosperity in all Families, and promote the
power of godliness throughout the Nation. And necessary to be set up in every
House.

Josh. 24. chap. 15. ver. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord,
Psalm. 50. 23. To him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the
Salvation of the Lord. The Obligations and duty of Parents required of God
toward their Children, in their Educating of them in godliness.
BE sure in the first place, that you do your part in entering them at first
into the Baptismal Covenant; 1. See that you be true to your Covenant your
self, for the promise is made to the true Christians and their Seed, Ephesians. 2 Chapter
13. Genesis 17 Chapter 4. 13. 14. 2ly, Do not think that his Bare being the Child of
godly Parents, is his full condition of Right to the benefits of the Covenant,
that is but the Fundamental part; but you must Actually dedicate him to God in
Baptism, (Deuteronomy. 29. chapter 11. 12. ver. Romans 11 chapter 16, John 3. chapter 2. 5.) The
child of a Believer actually offered or dedicated to God, is a rightful
Receiver of Baptism and its benefits. 3ly. Teach them therefore to know what
Covenant they have made, and then cease not till you have brought them heartily
to consent to it at Age themselves: and then bring them to the Minister of the
Church, that he may Solemnly own the Covenant made in his Baptism, and so may
be Admitted into the Number of Adult Communicating Members in a regular way.

Teach them the words of the Covenant, 2 Timothy 1 chapter 13. and also the Creed, the
Lords Prayer, and the Commandments, and the Catechism, teach them the meaning
of them, and the way of practicing all labor to possess them with the greatest
Reverence of God and the Holy Scriptures: then show them the Word of God, for
all that you would teach them to know or do. 2ly. Never speak to them of God
and Holy things, but with the greatest gravity and reverence: for if they are
used once to slight, or jest, or play with Holy things, they are hardened and
undone. Use often to take an Account of what they know and what they do, both
in their open and secret practice; leave them not carelessly to themselves, but
narrowly watch over them. 3ly. Use all your skill and diligence by word and
deed to make a Holy Life appear to them, as it is the most honorable,
profitable, safe, and pleasant life in the world, that it may be their constant
delight; make good things pleasant to them, keep them from feeling Religion as
Burthensom, or unpleasant, or a needless thing.

First, begin with the easiest parts, as Scripture Histories, and then Church
Histories: let them read the Lives of Holy Men, written by Mr. Samuel Clark and
his Martyroligy, and the Lives of Mr. Bolton, and Mr. Joseph Allir, Mr.
Janeway; Dr. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments, speak much to them of the praise
of Ancient and latter Holy men; be much in opening to them the Riches of Grace,
and the joys of glory: exercise them much in Psalms and praising God; let your
discourse with them be much in the disgrace of Sensuality, Pride, and
wordlyness: tell them how Pride is the Devils sin, which cast him from Heaven,
when others tell them of Riches, Honors, and Preferments, do you tell them
these are the Devils baits to allure and steal thy Heart from God that they
may be damned, make them often read, Luk 12 chapter 16. 18. ver Jam. 14 chapter 5. ver.
Romans 8 chapter 12. ver. Matt. 5 chapter 21. 6. ver. Wisely break them of their own
Wills, and let them know that they must obey and like Gods Will and yours.

Let their Apparel be plain and decent, not gaudy; be sure when they come to
years of ripen, that you keep them from opportunity, nearness, or familiarity
with tempting Persons of another Sex. Be sure you engage your Children in good
Company, and keep them as much as possible out of bad: wicked Children will
infact them before you are aware, as to drink, to swear, to game, to talk
filthily, to lying, and to make a mock of godliness and Sobriety. Teach them to
know the value of precious time, and the shortness of this Life, and to set
death still before their eyes; use them to read good Books, let your correction
of them be wisely used as they need it, not too severely as to disaffect them
to you, nor so little as to leave them in a course of sin and disobedience, let
it be always in love.

Pray earnestly for them, and commit them by Faith to Christ, into whose
Covenant you did engage them. Go before them by a holy Life: let your practice
tell them what you would have them be, especially in representing godliness
delightful, and in living in the joyful hopes of Heaven. Choose such Trades for
them that have least dangerous temptations, and when marriagable, provide such
for them as are truly Suitable, and stay not till Lust and Folly insnate them.

These are the Counsels which I earnestly recommend to you in this important
work, for your Childrens Souls are so precious, and the difference between the
good and bad so great, that all this must not seem too much, for I take the due
Education of Children for the needfullest and excellent work in the world,
especially for Mothers.

The duties of Husbands to their Wives, and Wives to their Husbands.
THe Common duty of Husband and Wife is to love each other, (Ephesians. 5 chapter 25.
ver. Husbands love your Wives even as Christ loved his Church,) and therefore
choose one that is truly, lovely, and proceed in your choice, with great
deliberation, and avoid all things as tend to quench Love. 2ly. Dwell together
and enjoy each other, 1 Cor. 7 chapter 29. ver. and faithfully join together in the
Education of your Children, the government of your Family, and the management
of your worldly business. 3ly. Especially to be helpers of each others
salvation, to stir up each other to Faith, Love, and Obedience, and good works,
to warn and help each other against sin and all temptations, to join in Gods
worship in the Family and in private, to prepare each other for the approach of
Death, and comfort each other in the hopes of life eternal.

4ly. To avoid all dissentions, and to bear with those Infirmities in each
other which you cannot cure: to assuage, and not to provoke unruly passions,
and in lawful things to please each other. 5ly. To keep continual Chastity and
fidelity, and to avoid all unseemly and immodest carriage with any other, which
may stir up jealousy, and yet to avoid jealousy which is unjust. 6ly. To help
each other to bear their burdens (and not by Impatience to make them greater)
in poverty, crosses, sickness, and dangers, to comfort and to support each
other, and to be delightful Companions in Holy Love and Heavenly hopes and
duties, when all other outward comforts fail.

The more special duties of Husbands are to exercise Love and Authority
together, (never separated) to his Wife. 2ly. To be chief teacher and governor
of the Family, and provider for its maintenance, to excel the Wife in
Knowledge and Patience, and to be her Teacher and guide in the matters of God,
and to keep up the Wives Authority and Honor in the Family over inferiors.

The special duties of Wives are, to excel in Love, and 2ly. Be obedient to
their Husbands, and examples therein to the rest of the Family, submissively to
learn of their Husbands, (that can teach them) and not to be self conceited,
talktive, or imperious, to subdue their passions, not to tempt their Husband to
satisfy their vain desire in Pride, Excess, Revenge, or any evil; not to rob
God and the poor by a proud wastfull humor. 5ly. To govern their Tongues, that
their words be few, and grave, and sober. 6ly. To be contented in every
condition, to avoid the Childish vanity of gaudy Apparel, and following of vain
fashions of the prouder sort. 7ly. To help on the maintenance of the family by
frugality, not to dispose of her Husbands Estate without his consent. 8ly.
Above all to be constant helpers for the Holy Education of their Children; for
this is the most eminent Service that women can do in the world; she must daily
Catechize them, and teach them to know God, and mind them of the world to come,
and teach them to pray.

The duty of Children to Parents
IS to love them dearly, and to be thankful for all that love and care which
they can never requite, 2ly. to learn of them submisively, especially the
Doctrine of salvation. 3ly. To obey them diligently in all lawful things in
obedience to God. 4ly. To honor them in thought, words, and actions, and to
avoid all appearance of slighting, dishonor, and contempt. 5ly. To be
contented with their Parents Allowance and Provisions, and willing and ready to
such labor or employment as they command them. 6ly. To take patiently the
reprooffs and corrections of their Parents, and to confess their faults with
humble penitence, and to amend. 7ly. To use such company as their Parents
command them, and not to run into the company of vain and tempting persons.
8ly. To be content with such a Calling as their Parents choose for them. 9ly.
To marry by their Parents choice or consent only. 10ly. To relieve their
Parents if they need. Genesis 9. chapter 22. Prove. 30 chapter 17. 13. 24. Prove. 6 chapter 20
ver. Col. 3 chapter 20 ver.

A short prayer for Children.
LEt thy blessing O Lord, be upon my Parents and Governors, cause them to
instruct and Educate me in thy fear, cause me with thankfulness to receive
their instruction, and to love, honor, and obey them in obedience to thee:
keep me from the snares of evil Company, Temptations, and yotuhful pleasures,
and let me be a companion of those that fear God; let my daily delight be to
meditate on thy Law, and let me never have the mark of the ungodly, to be a
Lover of Pleasure more than of God; furnish my Youth with those Treasures of
Wisdom and Holiness which may be daily increased and used to thy Glory. All
this I beg and hope for on the account and merits of Jesus Christ my Savior,
saying, as he has taught me, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy
Name, etc.

The duty of Masters toward their Servants.
IS to rule them with that gentleness as becomes fellow Christians, and yet
with such Authority, as that they be not encouraged to contempt. 2ly. To
restrain them from sinning against God. 3ly. To instruct them in the Doctrine
of Salvation, and pray with them, and go before them by the example of a sober
life. 4ly. To keep them from evil company, and temptations, and opportunity
(...) sinning. 5ly. To set them upon meet labors, to keep no idle Serving men,
nor yet to over-labour them to the injury of their Health, nor command them any
unlawful thing. 6ly. To provide them such Food and Lodging as is wholesome and
meet for them; and to pay them what Wages is due to them by promise or desert.
7ly. To bear patiently with their daily infirmities, and such frailties as must
be expected in mankind, Ephesians. 6 chapter 9. 10 ver. Col. 4. chapter 12. 3. ver.

The duty of Servants to their Masters.
FIrst, to honor and reverence them, and obey them in all lawful things
belonging to their places to command, and to avoid all words and carriage,
which savor of dishonor, contempt, or disobedience. 2ly. To perform all
labor willingly which they undertake, and is required of them, and that
without grudging: and to be as faithful behind their Masters backs as before
their faces. 3ly. To be trusty in word and deed, and abhor lying and deceit,
not to wrong their Masters in buying or selling, or by stealing any thing that
is theirs, no not meat nor drink against their Will: but being as thrifty and
careful for their Masters profit, as if it were their own, not to murmer at
the means of ^ood that is wholesome, nor to desire a life of fullness, ease, and
idleness. 5ly. To be more careful to do their duty to their Masters, then how
their Masters shall use them, because ^in is worse than suffering. 6ly. Not to
reveal the Secrets of the Family abroad, to Strangers or Neighbors. 7ly.
Thankfully to receive Instructions, and to learn God's word, and to observe the
Lords day, and seriously join in public and private worshipping of God. 8ly.
To bear patiently reprooff and due correction, and to confess faults and to
amend. 9ly. To pray daily for a blessing on the Family, on their labors and
themselves. 10ly. To do all this in true obedience to God, expecting their
reward from him, 1 Pet. 2. chapter 18. Tit. 2 chapter 9. ver. 1 Timothy 6 chap. 12 ver.
Col. 3 chapter 22. 2^ Ephesians. 6 chapter 5 ver. Matt. 10 chapter 24 ver.

The Servants Prayer.
O Lord, as thou have made me a Servant, make me co^sionable and faithful in
my place, trusty and careful (...) my Masters Goods and business, as I would
be if it (...) my own; make me submissive and obedient to my govern^^ (...)
keep me from Self-will and Pride, from murmuring and (...) iterant speeches,
from falsehood sloathfulness and all deceit, that (...) be not an Eye Servant
pleasing my Lust and fleshly Appetite (...) may cheerfully and willingly do my
duty, as believing that (...) art the revenger of all unfaithfulness and may
(...) not only as unto man, but as unto the Lord, expecting from (...) my chief
reward. All this I beg on the account of the (...) of my dear Savior Jesus
Christ, concluding in the (...) has taught us, Our father which art in Heaven,
etc.

Printed by (...) for J. Conyers in Duck lane, (...)

There is lately Printed a most exellent sheet, called Si^^s Groans, or The
distressed State of the (...) Church.


